Story_ID: 10059
Speaker 1: Ramsey Emanual Lewis Jr.  R-A-M-S-E-Y,  E-M-A-N-U-A-L,  L-E-W-I-S Junior.  My birth date is May 27, 1935.
Speaker 2: And today's date?
Speaker 1: Today's date is the--I don't know what it is.
Speaker 2: It's December 12--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Today's the 12th of December 19--Today's the 12th of December 2001.
Speaker 2: And the location we're at?
Speaker 1: The location is 1900 S. Michigan Avenue.  The HistoryMakers office.
Speaker 2: That's very good.  And then I also want to have your birthplace.
Speaker 1: I was born in Chicago.  Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 10060
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Oh!  My favorite fruit--food is any leafy green vegetable.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You can tell.  (Laughing) .
Speaker 2: (Laughing) .
Speaker 1: I haven't had that response yet (Laughing) .
Speaker 2: (Laughing) .
Speaker 1: In my 150 [interviews] I haven't had that one.
Speaker 2: (Laughing)  Really?
Speaker 1: (Laughing)  Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Ah!  Favorite color.  I don't know if I have any one favorite.  Probably--.  Mmmm--that's difficult. Various shades of gray.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year.  Living in Chicago there is no favorite time of year.  'Cause I--I like all the seasons.  And that's the way I was brought up.  So I like spring, I like summer, I like fall.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)  (laughs).
Speaker 2: And of course, the holiday season.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Paris.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I try not to have any repetitive phrases or sayings.
Story_ID: 10061
Speaker 1: I wanna start out by asking you--you've talked some about this.  But your mother Pauline [Richards Lewis].  You said that she was born in Jackson.
Speaker 2: Well in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: In Mississippi a little outside of--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) yeah, yeah.  Near Jackson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell me did she--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I think Rosedale, Mississippi.  I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Did she ever talk about growing up and her family and can you share some of that that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well Mom didn't talk a lot about, as she'd say the past: "There's no point in talking about the past a lot."  But we would sort of say, "Yeah but how was it when you go--when you went to school?"  And she'd say, "I didn't go to a lot of school."  Mom was always reading and self--and educating herself though.  The thing that comes to mind when I think about Mom and where she lived:  I was very young.  I don't know.  I must have been somewhere between six, seven, and eight years old.  And we took a train down to Jackson [Mississippi.]  And this is more about her dad, my grandfather.  Grandpa Willie met us at the train station.  And you could see the African in Grandpa Willie.  He was a very dark man, very muscular, strong looking man.  And I just thought the world of him.  And I'll never forget the--someone looked at him as we got off the train.  Looked at him and said, "Go do this, that, or the other."  Or, "Don't do this boy."  And that--That confused me to death.  How this--Somebody could call this man, this person that I'm looking at, my Grandpapa, "boy".  But of course, I soon later on found out what that was all about.  I just didn't know at the time.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  Did she talk a lot about growing up?  You know, you said she didn't really talk about the past.  So her family.  Do you know--I mean whether it was Grandpa Willie or, you know, other relatives--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well she--you know, relatives stayed in touch with Mom.  I recall she was talking about--She would talk about Uncle Jesse and Nancy.  They still lived in Jackson.  And he was director of a funeral parlor.  And she talked about relatives and she corresponded with relatives.  Until later on they would pass away.  But no.  Mom never talked a lot about "when I was three or four.", "when I was ten" or "when I was 15", or these things.  It --Usually when she would talk about her past it was about hard work.  It was about from noon--I mean from getting up 'til the time she was going to bed it was hard work around the fields, aound the home, the house or whatever.
Story_ID: 10062
Speaker 1: Now your father Ramsey Lewis Sr.  Where was he from?
Speaker 2: Dad was from Georgia.  And I think was not far from--I was about to say Albany, Georgia.  But he too was out in the country.  They lived in counties.  He too was a farm man.  A farm boy when he was growing up.  And he as well as my mom [Pauline Richards] came to Chicago relatively early looking for work.  And in fact, that's how he met my mom.  In church.  Not looking for work, but in church.  And he too was self-educated.  And he had a limited amount of education.  Living on a farm down there.  When he got to Chicago it was about finding a job.  And he didn't talk a lot (Laughing)  about--It seemed that hard work was--and going to church.  Mom and Dad yes.  Hard work and going to church were the things that they talked about most.  And I think Sunday afternoons dinner and such after church with the extended family was sort of like their pleasure time I guess.
Story_ID: 10063
Speaker 1: Were they [parents, Pauline Richards Lewis and Ramsey Lewis, Sr.] raised AME [African Methodist Episcopal]?  I know that--I found that--you know, not the Baptist tradition, but AME?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  They--I don't know if they were raised AME.  But I know here in Chicago they always sought out AME churches.  In Dad's church work and Mom's church work was in the AME church.  And I'm a part of the AME church and of course, my sister Reverend Lucille Jackson is a minister of James Memorial AME Church in Maywood here-- in Maywood, Illinois here in Chicago.  But yeah.  They were always active in the AME Church.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And let's--your siblings.  You had talked about them.  Where do you fit?  Are you the...
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Middle.  I'm the middle child and the only boy.  I have a sister younger, Gloria Lewis.  Who's now William Johnson's wife, Gloria Johnson.  And of course, my older sister Reverend [Lucilla] Jackson.
Story_ID: 10064
Speaker 1: What were some of your earliest memories of growing up?  Or do you remember the earliest memory?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I remember the earliest.  I mean I remember little pieces of things.  You know, I remember walking down Cambridge or Cleveland in the 1100 block [in  Chicago, Illinois] one Christmas eve.  And some guy was taking me from one place to another.  So I must have been very young.  And it stayed with me.  He said, "Look up! Quick, quick!"  And I looked up.  And he said, "Oh you missed it."  I said, "What was it?"  He said, "It was Santa Claus."  Now I don't know why I remember that.  To this day I remember that.  I also remember waking up one Christmas morning and we were still living on-- I don't know if it was Cambridge or Cleveland 1100 block.  And what that was all about--As I look back now it wasn't a lot of stuff under the tree.  But whatever was under the tree was just great.  Just simply wonderful.  And I remember when my dad [Ramsey Lewis Sr.] first said, "You're gonna start playing for our church."  [Wayman African Methodist Episcopal Church] And it wasn't a big deal to me.  Later on it started using up a lot of time.  But earlier than that, as I recall now when I first started taking piano lessons.  I was around four years old.  And I wasn't chosen to be the one.  My sister Lucille [Lewis Jackson] was because she was the oldest.  And because Dad said he could only afford one child for--to take lessons.  She was the one that started taking lessons.  And that was something that I thought was super, super special whatever it is.  "If she gets to do it.  She's the only one.  How come I can't do it?"  And I wasn't too nice about it (Laughing)  from what I hear.  So Dad finally (Laughing)  said, "Okay.  You can go.  You can take lessons too."  And I'm fortunate there.  Because the teacher who was at that time Ernestine Bruce, the organist that played in church before Eleanor Carter.  We'll talk about that later.  She was a piano teacher.  And she said to my parents after a few lessons, "Ramsey's got talent."  But I didn't like it.  Because you had to practice. See I thought you just got to go once a week for 20 minutes and you get to tell the whole neighborhood, "I take piano lessons."  I didn't know (Laughing)  about this practicing every day business.  When I found out about that, I wanted out.  But Dad said, "No good.  You started it.  When you start something, you finish it.  And you're gonna hang in there."  And that was bad news, then.  Now it's the greatest thing.  The gift that he gave me.  The greatest thing in the world.
Speaker 1: Now how old were you at that point?
Speaker 2: Well I started taking lessons when I was four.
Speaker 1: At four.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: But you're saying so you begged at four.
Speaker 2: Well only because--Not necessarily because of music.  It's only because Lucille my sister was getting to go.  I guess if they had said, "Lucille you can go to a movie, but Sonny you can't."  They called me Sonny.  Or "Lucille you get to buy a new pair of shoes, Sonny you can't."  That's the only thing.  "Lucille you get to take piano lessons, Sonny you can't.  Because we can't afford it."  "Well wait a minute--!"  That's all that was about.  It wasn't--I didn't start loving music--I must have been 11, 12, 13 when I started loving music.  Shortly before then Ernestine Bruce told my parents you--I have talent.  And she taught me all that she could.  She told them.  "I suggest you take him down to Conservatory."  Well, Chicago Music College [Preparatory School] is where I ended up with Dorothy Mendelsohn.  And I think the fact that my parents started me at four years old and the fact that I ended up with Dorothy Mendelsohn at 11, 12, somewhere in there are two important periods in my life.  Because Dorothy Mendelsohn--up until then I was learning techniques.  Scales and arpeggios and that kind of stuff.  And Dorothy Mendelsohn said, "Yeah you're gonna continue that.  But you're also gonna only use your technique to an end.  As a means to an end."  I didn't know.  "Means to an end.  Okay."  And she said, "We're gonna teach you how to listen with your inner ear."  "Hmm."  And she said, "You're gonna learn how to make the piano sing."  "Right, 11 years old and I'm gonna make this piano sing."  Well it piqued my imagination.  And I started to love it.  And I never to this day saw myself as this piano player who would be successful and making a living of it.  I only knew that I wanted to practice.  I only knew that after practicing I enjoyed performing.  Although to this day I love practicing almost as well as performing.  Not quite, but almost.  I just love the adventure of practicing.  And I--Those early teens 13, 14, I just got into the music so much that it got to the point where instead of my parents saying, "You need to practice more in a day."  They would say, "Haven't you practiced enough?  Don't you have homework?  You should go to bed."  These kinds of things.  That's it.
Speaker 1: How many--I have one question.  I wanna go back after this one question.  But do you remember the time that you first were able to hear your inner ear?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't know I was doing it.  But Dorothy Mendelsohn had ways of saying, "Listen and make the line longer."  Now the piano is made of hitting separate notes.  But you can play legato and sort of connect the notes together.  And if you'd think in a longer line, you'd make the line sing.  You know what I'm trying to say?  So as I look back now what Dorothy Mendelsohn was saying to me and I learned to do was to feel the music.  To feel the music.  When she said, "With your inner ear."  Your soul. She didn't use the word soul or spirit or--She said "Your inner ear."  But I think what she was saying is I'd learn the notes.  Now after you've learned the notes, forget the notes.  And just feel the music.  And when did I start to realize that was happening?  I don't know.  I don't remember when I--I was young.  Maybe teens.  Surely late teens, early 20s you learning to just become a part of the music.  And the music became a part of me.
Story_ID: 10065
Speaker 1: I wanna take you a few years back before this period of  [age] 13.  And I'd like you to recount a little bit more about what home life was like.  You're the middle child.  You're the only son.  And I'm just wondering what was home life like?  You have two strict parents [Pauline Richards and Ramsey Lewis, Sr.].  It's a disciplined household.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They weren't strict in the strictest sense of the word.  I guess in some ways my life was maybe sort of like their early life.  In that we went to church  [Wayman African Methodist Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois]  a lot.  And we went to school.  And when we were old enough, we all got part-time jobs.  And after the part-time job and going to school and homework and practicing and going to church and having dinner (Laughing)  that was kind of it.  But you know something?  What you don't know don't hurt you.  'Cause it was fine.  Because they did let us go to movies and--But we had to get our own money.  See now if--If you could get your money--Every now and then they'd give us show fair.  We'd only go to the show on Saturdays by the way.  Could not go on Sundays.  You got to go to church on Sunday.  But Saturday noon, 1 o'clock, 2 o'clock we'd go to the movies.  If we--So I got in the habit of a group of guys we'd go out and sell bundles of newspaper or scrap iron and raise our show fairs. "Mom I got show fare."  "Okay. But be back here by whatever.  'Cause you know you gotta go to Gospel Choral meeting tonight."  Or, "You know you have the Nights of Music rehearsal tonight."  Or on Saturday.  So in all I--Even now as I look back I wouldn't call life strict.  I wouldn't call my younger life super-conservative.  I'm grateful for the way that, you know, Dad said, "You gotta stick with it."  Dad said, "Education is where it is."  Dad said, "You gotta practice."  Mom said, "You gotta get your rest."  Mom says, "You gotta eat healthy food."  And they were like, "Well now you gotta go to church."  And there's nothing wrong with church.  I mean when you're young, maybe you don't know everything there is to know that's going on.  But you know, you--Some'n good going on there, you know.  And you get to meet--In those days a lot of young kids were in our church.  So you get to mingle with these younger kids who were kind of doing the same thing you're doing.  And as I look back, I didn't hang on the corner.  See.  But I knew some friends, "Man!  You should've been with us last night.  We got to--" And they would say--I said "Really! You guys did that."  "Yeah.  And after we got through that it was about 11:00."  And these are guys like thirteen, fourteen (laughing)  years old.  "We went and did this and that."  And I was like, "Wow!  Wow!  I never get to do that."  Well (laughing)  I'm glad now that I wasn't able to do that.  So it was a good household.
Story_ID: 10066
Speaker 1: What did the young Ramsey want to be?  And I'm talking about before the age 13.  You know how we, you know, sit and sort of--Were you? I mean what kind of child were you?  Were you quiet and sort of--Or were you introspective?  Were you gregarious?  Were you--
Speaker 2: I was in my own world.  As I look back now I'm a late bloomer.  I was kind of--I don't know if it was an imaginative world or I guess got involved in reading or playing with things or doing whatever.  But I knew as long as I did certain things at home, whatever that was; I could just be whatever I wanted to be.  And--Oh, you know what we did?  There was a group of us in Cabrini [Green Housing Project, Chicago, Illinois], in the Cabrini Homes that we--guys.  Now let's see--Leroy, The Kennards, Claude Kennard, Tom--Tommy Kennard.  There was about five of 'em.  Buddy Boy.  So about five of us that played what?  Ten, 11, 12 we played ball.  Now I don't know when I had time to play ball.  I do remember playing ball and Dad [Ramsey Lewis Sr.]--I seen my father coming with his belt out.  And you know what?  Mom [Pauline Richards] had told him, "Sonny didn't practice before he went to play ball."  So I guess I did have time to do some things like that.  I forgot the question.
Speaker 1: So that's--I was saying that--What were you like?  And you were saying that you were introspective.  But, you know, then you went on.  You said, "I would--"
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: "Create sort of things.  You know I would--"
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 1: That "I'm a late bloomer."
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 10067
Speaker 1: I want to talk a little bit about the neighborhood. [the Near North Side of Chicago, Illinois]  What was the neighborhood like?  'Cause a lot of people have come out of that neighborhood.  You know, usually you hear in Chicago, the South Side.  You know?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Or the West Side.  But there was this--
Speaker 2: Well I was born on the South Side.  But at a very early age w--Very early, I mean two, three, four we moved to the North Side.  And this is--Now this is before--This is before the [Cabrini Green public housing] high rises.  But we didn't move to the low rises.  We moved to the neighborhood.  So we moved in an apartment building.  And I keep losing the question.
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  I was just saying what was the neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: Oh.  The neighborhood was like.  The neighborhood at the time that we moved on the Near North Side was predominantly Italian.  I mean they still had feasts and parades and the statues and people pinning money on the statues and feasts with fruit stands all up and down the street.  Italian sausage and ice cream.  And we really looked forward to their feasts.  'Cause there was St. Phillips Church on one side of the neighborhood and St. Dominics Church on the other side of the neighborhood. And they were always doing something.  The neighborhood was relatively safe.  I mean "rough" was when some guy punched some guy.  If a guy had a switchblade or a knife, that was like somebody having an AK, AKA.  I mean like, "That guy had a knife!"  That means it's something terrible.  When we finally moved into the Cabrini [Green] Homes, it was temporary.  I don't think it was more than a short amount of years.  Maybe--I'm guessing here.  Three or four years. Maybe not even that.  Because it was geared to earnings.  And so you had to say how much you earned.  You had to qualify to live there.  And after a period of time Dad [Ramsey Lewis Sr.] earned too much money.  So we moved out.  And I think we moved to the west side for a minute.  No.  We moved to 1142 N. Orleans.  In fact, that was the last building they tore down before they finished putting up Seward Park, as we know it today.  And we lived there for quite some time.  But we played ball at Seward Park.  We played basketball around the corner at Seward Park.  Now I'm 14, fifteen years old.
Speaker 1: Now one other question I wanna ask about.  And I'd like you to just sort of think back.  What sights and sounds do you associate with growing up?  Or smells?  Sights, sounds, or smells.
Speaker 2: Hmm.  What sights, sounds and or smells do I associate with growing up?  Do I associate with growing up?  That's a difficult one.  'Cause I think living in my own world I just--I didn't really retain more than those things that I was immediately involved with.  You know.  Whether it was playing ball at the moment.  Whether the church at the moment, whether it was practicing piano at the moment.  Whatever it was at the moment I was into that.  So I don't recall like the neighborhood leaving a particular feel with me. Or a particular place in the neighborhood that fascinated me.  Or a particular smell.  No.
Story_ID: 10068
Speaker 1: When you went to school at Edward Jenner [Elementary School], were there other things--You've talked about going to school there.  But were there any influence there?  Or were you attracted to any people or subjects or--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Edward Jenner School.  Very interesting there.  I probably got away with more than I should have.  Because I could play the piano.  So it was not usual for some kid that could go--walk in with a note.  And especially now--once I got to sixth, seventh, eighth grade to walk in with a note.  And the teacher would say, "Ramsey, they want you down in the auditorium."  Or, "Ramsey they want you--"  'Cause I had to go play the 'Star Spangled Banner' or whatever.  And because of that, you know, if I was late turning in the homework, I didn't probably get as much detention or whatever I should have gotten.  Because of the ability to do that.  Well I must have done pretty well.  'Cause I didn't miss a grade.  And I passed and went on to Wells High School.  But it was good. I mean at the time, of course, it was not overcrowded and the teachers were attentive.  And we were exposed to reading, writing, arithmetic, history etc.
Speaker 1: Were there any subjects you gravitated to more than others?
Speaker 2: For some reason mathematics comes to mind.  I don't know why.  Some reason until 11, 12, 13 years old when I fell in love with music.  You know, when you're real young, you think you might be a fireman or a policeman and all this kind of stuff.  Fly a plane.  But then--and not that I was super great in math.  But just the idea of math, algebra, geometry.  Yeah.  Calculus.  "Oh I can't wait to get to calculus."  But it fascinated me for some reason.  Until 11, 12, 13 and then it's like, "Music!  Here I am."  And music only because of music.  Not stardom, not naming lights, not records, not traveling, performing.  Just music.  Classical music, pop music, music, music, music.
Story_ID: 10069
Speaker 1: The thing that struck me when I looked at--you know, when you know, when we were going through the pictures is the baby grand.  And I wonder when that was actually acquired?  I mean we grew up--my mother was a piano teacher (Laughing) .
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) (groan)
Speaker 1: But we had a upright (laughing) .
Speaker 2: (Laughing)
Speaker 1: And I just was struck by that.
Speaker 2: Well my daddy Ramsey Lewis, Sr. was a frustrated piano player.  He taught himself do, re, mi, fa, so, la, ti, do.  And he would sit at the piano and pick out notes.  And he could play hymns and he could pick out things.  So we had an upright.  We had a Spinet.  Spinet upright.  And one day Dad came home and I heard him talking to Mama [Pauline Richards Lewis].  "I found this piano, blah blah blah blah."  And later on this piano was delivered and it was this baby grand.  And he was so proud.  And, of course, we were like, "Wow!"  And I think it was by and large 'cause Dad was a frustrated piano player.  He always--and, you know, I'm glad that--I can't say this.
Speaker 1: You can't say what?
Speaker 2: (Crying) Well I'm glad that Dad was able to check me out before he checked out. And he enjoyed that. He really enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 10070
Speaker 1: We were talking about your father [Ramsey Lewis Sr.].
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah.  In fact one of the high points I know in Dad's life was we were playing a jazz festival in Atlanta.  And he loved Count [William] Basie's band and Duke Ellington's band.  'Cause he always brought those records home.  And Count Basie was on the festival.  So I got to introduce Dad to Count Basie.  And that was like, ah!  So I was really happy about that.
Speaker 1: Do you know--you know, I'm just--Do you know if music--If he like heard it as a young boy?  I mean why do--And he couldn't do it. Or if he couldn't afford it and, you know, he was sort of fascinated with it?  Or it comes from the church, you know?  And--Was he in the choir at all?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I'm not sure.  But I think he was always in the choir.  I'm not sure when he was in Georgia.  But I think he started working in church music early on when he came to Chicago.  And you know, I don't know why.  But Dad loved--As a matter of fact, he was into gospel music.  And he would listen to in those days WNIB-FM [Chicago].  So he'd listen to classical music.  And then he said, "Sonny, come here.  Listen to this."  And it was Art Tatum.  And I'm like "Is that four piano players or is that two?  Art and Tatum."  I mean this guy's playing so much piano, (Laughing)  you know.  So Dad was-- Now where'd he get this from?  He used to work on a farm in a county out in Georgia somewhere.  And he comes to Chicago and he's doing maintenance work and going to church.  So where'd this talent come from?  I don't know.  I would love to have known.  But I'm glad that I picked up on a little bit of it.
Story_ID: 10071
Speaker 1: And I didn't find it so surprising that you were-- I thought that was going to be your answer about math.  Because there's a lot of correlation between math and music.  'Cause they--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah, yeah.  You know, sound and acoustics and overtones and there's math involved in it.  So technically, mathematically.  And many scientists, you know, play violin or they play musical instruments and mathematicians and such.  But math is the last thing on my mind when I sit down to a piano.  I guarantee that.
Speaker 1: (Laughing)  Okay it's--(Laughing)  that comes out--.
Speaker 2: (Laughing) .
Speaker 1: But now.  You said your first piano teacher [from age four to eleven].  Her name was?
Speaker 2: Ernestine Bruce.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what do you think you learned from her?  I know you said at one point she said you had outgrown her.  But--
Speaker 2: The first lesson wasn't too bad.  The second lesson Miss Bruce sat there with a ruler.  And if you hit a bad note, she'd pop you with the ruler.  And I didn't think that was too nice.  What did I learn from Ernestine Bruce?  Well you better practice or you're gonna get hit with the ruler. So I practiced.  Not all the time.  I think I was just too young .  And they saw the talent there.  And it hadn't ignited itself in me yet.  Okay.  So Ernestine Bruce would say "Go home and practice this."  And I would put a minimal amount of time in.  And most times I tried to get out of practicing.  So I don't know if I gave my all to Miss Bruce.  As we called her in those days.  And she was the one who passed me on and moved me on.  And thank God.
Story_ID: 10072
Speaker 1: Dorothy Mendelsohn was at Chicago Musical College?
Speaker 2: Right.  Which is now part of Roosevelt University.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh!  That's where the connection.  I was wondering what the connection was with you and Roosevelt.  Okay.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you didn't go there to college.  And that's why I was just trying to, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.  Chicago Musical College became the music section or the coll--music college of Roosevelt University.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: So that's what that connection is.
Speaker 1: So was Dorothy Mendelsohn sort of representative of the types of people, the faculty, that they were attracting at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Rudolph Ganz, Felix Ganz, Dorothy [sic, Mollie] Margolies and others.  Mary Sauer.  I mean high-powered classical people who went on to concertize and do all sorts of great things.  And when Wallace Burton said, "Come join the Cleffs."  My parents had to check with Dorothy Mendelsohn.  'Cause I forgot which one.  One of my parents said, "Well, you know, playing jazz.  Is that gonna mess with his classical training?"  Now that's interesting.  Because gospel piano playing is very emotional and it's very rhythmic.  But when it--You know, jazz, they're like, "Uh-oh.  Hold it!"  So I remember them coming down to--I think my mom [Pauline Richards Lewis] came to that lesson.  And she asked Dorothy Mendelsohn.  "You know, Sonny's thinking about  playing with a jazz band.  You think that's gonna affect his classical training?"  Dorothy Mendelsohn said it would not.  In fact, she would encourage it.  And the reason she encouraged it and I heard her tell my parents, my mother that, "He's talented.  But there's no guarantee that he will find a way to earn a living playing classical music in this day and time."  I didn't understand it then.  Later I understood.  You know, a black person in the '40s, [1940s] '50s [1950s] earning a living.  You know.  I mean it's difficult no matter what color you are to earn a living performing classical music around the world.  But in those days it's almost, "Forget about it."  I mean look what happened to Marian Anderson and Paul Robeson and others.  I'm not, you know, as old as they are.  But those are the kind of things  that were still going on.  So Dorothy Mendelsohn helped propel this career of mine.  Not knowing.
Speaker 1: Do you think that she recognized immediately your talent?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I think so.  'Cause as I also look back if we were preparing for a--She put me in a lot of competitions.  You know.  It was always preparing for a competition, preparing for a recital.  We were always preparing for something.  And she was quite proud.  Sometimes on Sunday afternoon she'd say, "Come up to the house and play for me."  "I just had a lesson two days ago."  "Yeah.  But I wanna hear how this piece is coming.  That was two days ago."  So I'd had to go up there on Roscoe on the North Side and perform for her.  Yeah she had a notion.  Because of the kind of--I mean I was playing the [Johannes] Brahms B-flat Major piano concerto [Piano Concerto No. 2 in B-Flat Major].  Okay.  And you don't give a student that work when you're a teenager, unless you have some kind of talent.  I didn't know that then.  She didn't tell me, "This is difficult."  She said, "Here, check this out."  So yes.  She must have seen something there.
Speaker 1: And do you--What is the Ramsey Lewis at this point like?  I mean this--you're 14, 15.  No you're six--Right.  Are you-- Well no. Oh, you're older than that at that point.  No.  But you went to... I have you going Chicago Mus--From 12 to well 19?  You lived there--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh I thought I kept--I kept--
Speaker 1: Oh!! Oh you thought I was at the musical college at that point?  Or you--Is that where you or you (Laughing) .
Speaker 2: Well not quite.  It was during my preparatory--See Chicago Musical College, I started going there at
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) you went at 12.
Speaker 2: 11, 12.
Speaker 1: right, right.
Speaker 2: Because they had a prep school that you went to--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) right.
Speaker 2: on Saturdays.  And you spent most of the time there taking music history or ear training or things of that na--Theory.  So Chicago Musical College was in my life before I started going to college.
Speaker 1: But when you--I'm just asking what were you like once you--I mean you said--Do you remember what happened when it really grabbed a hold of you?  You know, where you said, "This is--I really like this."
Speaker 2: No, no. It was gradual.  It was gradual.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) It just--
Speaker 2: I didn't wake up one day and say, "Hmm this is it." No.  I just found myself being more involved, caring more about what it sounded like.  Enjoying practicing.  Enjoying just being at the piano. Enjoying playing the piano, and what that was all about.  The 88 keys became friends of mine.  So it was over a gradual period.  It wasn't a revelation.
Story_ID: 10073
Speaker 1: Wallace Burton.  You were telling that story.  I'd sort of like to have you retell it now we're on camera.  But 'cause I thought--you know, when I read the material, I thought he was actually older than you.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well Wallace is by what?  I was 15, 16.  Wallace was already in college.
Speaker 1: So he--
Speaker 2: Wallace was in college.  [Isaac] 'Redd' [Holt] was in [pause].  I don't know if Redd was in college.  Eldee [Young] was in high school.  So Wallace is a few years older than me.  I don't know how many years older.  Maybe two or three.  But he was very instrumental.  As was Daddy-O Daylie.
Story_ID: 10074
Speaker 1: Talk about the fact that here, you know, you were in the church. He came out of your church.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Wallace Burton was the pianist at Mount Carmel AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church.  Dad [Ramsey Lewis, Sr.] for whatever reason left Wayman AME Church to become the choir director, gospel choir director at Mount Carmel AME Church.  And, of course, he takes family with.  And they already have a piano player.  Dad decides, "Well they're gonna have two piano players."  And so I started playing Sunday morning service.  One piano on one side of the stage--. Stage--one side of the pulpit and then the other piano on the other side of the pulpit.  And after Sunday service one day Wallace said, "You know, I have a band and we play for dances on the weekend.  And we play for fashion shows or whatever.  And our piano player just left to be with Sarah Vaughan .  To show you the caliber of the band it was.  Kirk Kinch-  I forgot the name of his Kirk Kinslow (ph.),or--Kurt Stewart! was his name he took later.  Anyway.  And that impressed me--he left to go with Sarah Vaughan?  Anyway. "You wanna play with the band?"  "Yeah."  "Show up Friday night at Southwestern Temple.  We have a--I think it starts at 7:00 or 8:00 whatever."  I left Chicago Musical College, it was then on Van Buren, and got on the bus or whatever and went out there.  And I was sitting.  I know I got there early.  'Cause I got there from school.  And when Wallace got there, "Oh you're here."  "Yeah."  "Okay."  "Good.  We'll just take it easy tonight.  And we'll talk about arrangements and stuff another time." So I said, "Okay." I mean I was so naive.  And I went up on the bandstand and it was a seven-piece band. Eldee [Young] bass player, Eldee, [Isaac] Redd Holt was on drums and other musicians.  And Wallace said he had his horn.  The reason he wanted a piano player--'cause he also played piano as he played the piano in church.  But he had more fun playing horn.  So he said, "Well we'll just start out with something easy."  And it was a blues, a Charlie Parker song based on a 12 bar blues in F.  How easy, you know.  What else.  He said, "Okay Ramsey you start."  Well the only music I heard when somebody says blues up 'til this, Dad had brought home some Meed Lux Lewis records and that was Boogie-woogie.  Okay.  So he says blues.  I said, "AH!"  So I struck out in the mean boogie-woogie.  And Wallace looked over at me.  And he was like "Uh!  Uh!"  (Laughing) So he came over to the piano.  And for the rest of that night, he played the piano.  And there were two, there were two other saxophone players Dinky and Oh I forgot his name.  I see his--Booker.  Booker Porter.  They played the saxophone parts. And he says, "You can sit it out."  I thought that was the end of it.  You know.  No big deal.  I-- But afterwards he says, "Come over to my house tomorrow and I'll show you a few things."  Had not Wallace Burton said, "Come over to my house tomorrow."  And I did and he did.  He said, "Study this.  Buy these guys' records.  Check it out.  See what they do.  Ba-ba-blue."  If he had not done that, I wouldn't been in jazz.  I mean, it wasn't a big interest to me at the time.  I liked it.  But I was so much into Brahms, Beethoven and Thomas A Dorsey and with all the other things that I was doing, that things would have turned for a different, gone a different direction.  I don't know where I would have gone but--thanks to Wallace Burton, I'm sitting here with you.
Speaker 1: So you talked--I mean he got you to come over.  You start doing that.  You continued playing gigs with them?
Speaker 2: Yeah!
Speaker 1: Okay in the group.  You became a member of the group.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah, yeah.  He says, "Come over.  We're gonna rehearse."  And so we'd go over his house and rehearse for what we were gonna do that weekend.  And he would have the music written out.  He knew I read very well.  I learned to read chord changes.  'Cause up to then, classical music, you're just reading notes.  But in other kinds of music, pop music, jazz, you put chord symbols instead of writing out the F chord and F, A, C and whatever.  You just put F7.  And everybody's supposed to know what notes go in F7 chord.  So he said, "Now here's what that's all about."  So I learned to do that.  And he said, "Now listen to the way Earl Garner or Oscar Peterson or Bud Powell plays this song.  And don't play it like them.  But this gives you an idea of where you can go with this."  And I started listening to these guys and imitating them a little bit.  And I said,  "Hmm.  I kind of like this."  And he would say, "Now go do this.  And go do that."  And it developed into what I am today.
Story_ID: 10075
Speaker 1: You graduate from Wells High School and then you--? Do you--? So you enrolled--? Well see this is the thing.  I've got you at Chicago Musical College, U of I.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Together.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You see before Chicago Musical College joined Roosevelt University, you could only take music subjects.  So if you wanted to graduate, you had to have academics. So I took academics at University of Illinois at Navy Pier.  So, you know, Tuesday and Thursdays I'd go to Navy Pier, University of Illinois and the Monday, Wednesday and Friday and then sometimes even, sometimes Tuesday or Thursday some part of the day, I'd end up back over at Chicago Musical College.
Speaker 1: And then why did you switch to DePaul?
Speaker 2: Dorothy Mendelsohn left Roosevelt University/Chicago Musical College and decided she was gonna teach piano at DePaul.  Well by then I'm out of college and I'm doing other things.  But I still wanted to keep taking piano lessons.  If not every week, surely quite often. So she said, "Well come over to DePaul."  So that's how I ended up at DePaul University.
Story_ID: 10076
Speaker 1: How did you and Redd--I mean I know you met with Wallace Burton.  But how did you end up getting together?
Speaker 2: Well [Isaac] Redd Holt was the drummer that first night.  And Eldee Young was the bass player that first night.  As well as--Well there were seven musicians in all.  A guitar player and three horns.  And that group continued on until the Korean War broke it up.  All the guys went to the war except Eldee and I. Redd eventually went and Butch McCants (ph) played drums with our trio while Redd was away.  And it was that trio Eldee Young, Redd Holt and myself and I. What were we 19, 20?  I don't know--were playing at then was Stelzer's Lounge. It's now Lake Meadows--the lounge is gone.  It eventually became Lake Meadows Lounge. And we were playing Friday and Saturday nights there.  And it's funny.  The piano was off in a corner.  There was no stage light.  I don't even know if there was a microphone.  And when I would open it to perform, waiters would pass by.  And I looked over there one--Waiters were putting like knives and forks in the end of the piano down there because it was near their wait station.  I said, "You can't do that."  Anyway one night Daddy-O was in there.  He came there quite often.  You know.  And he was like, "Hey you guys," [Holmes] 'Daddy-O' Daylie, of course.  "You guys are pretty good."  "Well thanks, Daddy-O."  And right next to it was a coffee shop.  You could go out of the lounge in the one door and never go outside.  He said, "Come over here.  Let's have some coffee."  I didn't drink in those days.  And eventually he said, "I'm gonna introduce you to Phil Chess.  That's Leonard Chess' brother.  And they're thinking about doing a jazz label."  And he did.  And he came back the next week.  "They want you to audition.  They wanna hear you."  He set up the audition and I'll never forget that audition.  The Chess brothers on 48th and Cottage Grove owned a stationery shop that sold cards and stuff.  And they had a piano back in the shipping room.  So we set up back there and we played two or three songs.  And Phil Chess was there with his pipe kind of doing that.  And I found out now he didn't know quite what we were doing.  So he called Sonny in from the shipping room. He said, "Sonny what is the name of this?  Y'all play another." So we play another song.  Sonny said, "They're pretty good."  So Phil says, "Yeah."  So we left.  And they signed us.  But Phil Chess, Daddy-O Daylie, and Johnnie Pate--he's unrelated, are the only three people in the world today who call me Ray.  Wanna know how that happened (Laughing)? When I was going to school, I was working part-time at Hudson Ross Records.  And the manager of the store had nicknames for everybody.  And he just couldn't bring himself; I don't know why to call me Ramsey.  So he (Laughing) started calling me Ray.  And on various occasions  Daddy-O came in the store and he heard these people calling me Ray.  And then he thought, "Oh this must be in.  This must be the in thing.'  Johnnie Pate and, and Phil Chess and so to three people in the world I'm Ray Lewis.  Do I look like a Ray Lewis?  (Laughing) I don't think so either.
Story_ID: 10077
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer, and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  And observing is Justine, J-U-S-T-I-N-E, Nagen, right, N-A-G-A-N.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us.
Speaker 2: Ramsey, R-A-M-S-E-Y, Lewis, L-E-W-I-S.  But I have a middle name.
Speaker 1: Give your middle name.
Speaker 2: It's Emanual, E-M-A-N-A-U-L [sic].  And I have a last name that's after Lewis.  I'm a Junior.  J-U-N-I-O-R.
Speaker 1: Very good (laughter).  And can we have your--today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 29th of June, 19--29th of June, 2004.
Speaker 1: And let's say it's two and a half years after we started our first interview [on December 12, 2001].
Speaker 2: I'm a little tardy.
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: Is Chicago, on [1900] South Michigan Avenue.
Story_ID: 10078
Speaker 1: You coming to meet Daddy-O Daylie or him coming to meet you.  And so I'd like you just to start from that point.
Speaker 2: Well, Eldee Young and [Isaac] Redd Holt and I were playing at Stelzer's Lounge.  Stelzer's was a restaurant bar--one side was a restaurant and the other side was a bar in Lake Meadows [at 35th and South Parkway on Chicago's South Side].  At that time, Lake Meadows was sort of the upper end of black community, nice building and so the nice little shopping mall.  And we were privileged to play there, nice people came there too.  They were nice people, but the waiters used to put their silverware in my piano.  I mean they used my, my piano as a way station.  So I guess we didn't much respect.  But they must have liked us because they kept us a long time.  [Holmes] Daddy-O Daylie used to come occasionally, and he said, "You guys are pretty good."  And a couple of times, he said, "You recording for anybody?"  "No."  "You should have a record date, a record label."  We heard that so many times, we were like, yeah, right, okay--Not to his face, but, you know, 'cause he was Daddy-O Daylie, but to ourselves, like, yeah, right.  But in a couple of weeks, he came back and he says, "I got you an audition."  And he took us over to 48th and Cottage Grove on the corner.  And the Chess Brothers had a correspondence, paper, cards and paper goods.  But in the back, they had a piano.  So Phil Chess was there that day.  We went back and we played 2 or 3 songs.  Daddy-O Daylie was there, Phil Chess and Phil had his pipe and he just kind of did like that as we were playing.  So we got through and Daddy-O looked at us.  What do you think?  And he was like--so he said, "Sonny!" -Sonny worked up in the shipping department--"Come in here a minute."  So he says to us, "Play, play something again.  Play, play that last tune again."  So we played, and he asked Sonny, "What do you think of these guys?"  So Sonny said, "Yeah, they can play."  So Phil said, "Yeah, we like them." So he said, "We probably want to sign them."  We left there, and we didn't hear anything for a while.  And it comes to, we come to find out that Daddy-O--they didn't know, they were--Phil Chess and Leonard Chess had made a lot of money doing blues, cause that--they kind of had a feeling for what blues was all about.  Jazz was, they didn't know what they would do with it.  So Daddy-O convinced them they should record.  They recorded us.  And then, oh, you know, Leroy Winbush did our cover.  He did our first cover.  Yeah, so we got it recorded, got the cover done.  The disc sits on the shelf.  They didn't know how or what to release.  It's not a blues album.  What do you do with it?  Once, again, Daddy-O said,--at the time, Daddy-O was, he was big on radio.  He said, "If you release it, I'll play it.  I guarantee I'll play it."  They released it.  He played it.  And we began to get noticed here in Chicago, so much so that they released it in Washington, D.C. and in Philadelphia and a couple other places where there were black communities, jazz communities.  And we began getting more and more popular.  It came time to do another album, and they didn't know quite what to do.  Once again, Daddy-O stepped in and said, "Well, they've got these songs that they've put together."  And we did--I think the first album was called 'The Gentlemen of Swing,' second album ended up being 'The Gentlemen of Jazz.'  And I think Leroy Winbush did the cover on that one too.  'The Gentlemen of Swing' was--the cover of that one had the piano keys on it.  It was, it was really wonderful.  'The Gentlemen of Jazz,' we were in tuxedos and tail, with tails, with high hats.  And as I look back on that cover, I smile.  Sometimes I break out and laugh.  I, I think it was a nice cover.  We were gentlemen.  I guess that was the whole idea with the top hats, you know, and the white gloves and well, anyway.  Daddy-O stayed involved with us I think through another album or such, the first 3 or 4 albums, I think he was involved with us.  Eventually, we ended up with John Levy.
Speaker 1: Well, let's go back to what year that was?
Speaker 2: Oh, 19--let's see I graduated from high school, college.  That had to be around middle '50's, '54, '55, '56, somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: You had graduated from college?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I graduated from high school in '53 [1953]-'54 [1954]
Speaker 1: Right, so you (unclear) --
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Then I went on --
Speaker 1: To Chicago Musical College.
Speaker 2: To Chicago Musical College.  I was in school.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, at Navy Pier.  That's the University of Illinois for my academics.  Chicago Musical College for my music during that period.
Speaker 1: But you weren't at DePaul at that point, Mendelsohn hadn't gone over--?
Speaker 2: No, that was after.  That was after.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 10079
Speaker 1: Can you talk about Daddy-O Daylie and what, you know, what he was like at that point and what he was doing, his significance sort of?
Speaker 2: [Holmes] Daddy-O [Daylie] had a strong personality.  I never thought I would ever smoke a pipe.  At the time Daddy-O was smoking a pipe, and it just looked masculine, just like the thing to do.  So I got a pipe.  But Daddy-O was very influential in that he got us a job at the SRO Room on Wells and Goethe or Clark and Goethe [streets, North Side of Chicago].  I know it was Goethe.  In those days, the '50s, [1950s] I'll never forget, he says, "Now, when you come down off the stage, people are gonna want to talk to you.  And it's okay to sit down at the table if there's a man at the table.  If it's a white lady or white ladies and there's no man at the table, do not sit down at the table."  And I'm going, "Well, wha-, well--?"  "Just listen to me." And, of course, he explained what that was all about.  But I'll never forget--and also drink orange juice.  If you must, maybe a little vodka in it, but you don't want to walk around the club with liquor on your breath.  And, I mean these, these kinds of things.  And when you interview, you guys do good interviews, but make sure you bring out these points and these points.  So--and dress well.  Now, in those days there was a store called Bond, I think Bond something on the corner of State and Jackson because they had clothes that didn't cost a lot of money.  And he said, you can go down there--and dress alike.  Get 3 suits alike.  I mean he was into looking good on stage cause, you know, Daddy-O was exposed to the greats.  I mean he was exposed to Duke Ellington and all the--and, and how they dressed and carried themselves.  So he really got us on the right path in terms of protocol and how to and how not to.  But he took us as far as he could because in Chicago we came this, we became this big--we went from the SRO Room to, the next thing was Cloister Inn.  When we got to the Cloister Inn--the SRO Room, we were working 3, 4 nights a week.  He says "Don't quit your day job."  So I was playing at night, and I was going to school.  And I had a job after school.  Now, we're getting into the late '50s [1950s] and he got us a job at the Cloister Inn, in the Maryland Hotel on the corner of Rush and Delaware downstairs in the basement.  And we were like the house band.  We got to play a set of our own.  Then they would bring in people like Herb Jeffries, Fran, Fran Jeffries, I'm sorry, Herb Jeffries' wife.  Dick Haymes, Anita O'Day, singers, Lurlene Hunter.  And we became more popular, and they signed us to a long-term un-ended, open-ended contract.  Daddy-O finally said, "If you want to, if you can afford to, you can quit your day jobs now."  Boy that was a glorious day, making a living doing what you love to do.  I didn't really learn to appreciate that until a little later on in life.  You know, I was too young to really know what that meant, getting paid to do what you'd probably do for nothing and, in fact, we had done it for nothing for a while.  From that job, now we're talking very late '50s, early '60s, [1960s] London House.  Now.  The London House in Chicago was the "The" piano room.  There was the Blue Note that had big bands and sextets and that, that kind of thing, but for piano trios, the London House was it.  I, when I was going to high school and I used to take the bus that would down--well, it was the streetcar in those days, go down Wabash Avenue and cross the Wabash Avenue bridge, going south.  And you'd look to your East, towards the corner of Wacker and Michigan and there was this sign, 'The London House, Make a Date with a Steak Tonight.'  And then underneath that, they would have 'Oscar Peterson' or 'Earl Garner' or 'George Shearing.'  And it was like, wow, you know, that must be heaven over there.  One, one of these days, maybe.  So that came to pass, that we became the off-night group at London House.  Eldee Young, [Isaac] Redd Holt and myself.  I think we were playing Mondays and Tuesdays.  I'm not sure--or maybe just, yeah, Mondays and Tuesdays.  And in a very short period of time, it flip flopped.  We became the off-night band, regularly, 5, 6 nights a week [1960].  During this period, we became more nationally known because records--each year, you know, every 6, 7 months, in those days, we put out a new record.  So by now, we've got 7, 5, 6, 7 albums out.  And we're becoming more and more popular.  I'm trying to remember when we went to New York first because at some point Daddy-O--we, we broke off.
Speaker 1: Now, was Daddy-O, was he officially your manager during that time or was it sort of an unofficial, sort of mentor relationship?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he was, he was unofficial.  He--we didn't have a piece of paper cause I, I don't think it was a propos for, and from his position [as a radio announcer disc jockey], to have a group.  So he was like our mentor.  And unofficially our advisor, our manager.  He was more of our advisor cause I don't think he made any money from us cause we weren't making that much money.  And then when we began, becoming more nationally known, and we needed somebody who knew their way around New York and L.A. and this one and that one and each city and then the business itself, who were the right agents?  Who were not the right agents?  He called John Levy.  John Levy was the only black manager at that time.  John Levy played bass with Billie Holliday and others.  John did, started playing Bass with the George Shearing Quintet.  He became the manager, first the road manager for George Shearing, when he was playing bass with him.  Then he became the manager of George Shearing.  And on the heels of that, he started managing--and I don't know what order, but he ended up managing at one time in his stable, George Shearing, Joe Williams, Nancy Wilson, Wes Montgomery, Ramsey Lewis--and I'm missing 2 or 3.  So Daddy-O called him and he became our manager.  Now, where are we?
Speaker 1: Well, I want to go back a little back.  So in the, in the whole, you've, you know, with Daddy-O Daylie at that time, he was, he was big on radio.  Did he have his bowling allies at that time?  Was he--was it, or was that a little later?
Speaker 2: Yeah, let me see.  I remember the bowling alley.  And let me see if I can compare it to --
Speaker 1: I know he had his bowling allies in the '60s.
Speaker 2: I think that might have been a little later.
Speaker 1: So he, okay, so he was just really big in radio.
Speaker 2: He was big on radio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right, no bowling allies at that time.
Speaker 1: But he had not really found and sort of managed a group before like you, no.  So this was, he found you; he mentored you.  You were a group of young guys, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And is it Redd, Redd is older, no?
Speaker 2: Red is older.
Speaker 1: He's the oldest.  Okay, right, right, right.
Speaker 2: And Eldee is the youngest.  He's a few months younger than I.
Story_ID: 10080
Speaker 1: Do you remember the first recording session though?  Was the, your first recording session was at, do you remember that?
Speaker 2: The very first recording session  [in 1956 for Chess/Argo Records] was at Universal--was it at Universal or was it at Chess' own studio?  No, couldn't have been at Chess' studios because the first recording session, they were still out on 48th Street.  So it must have been downtown at Universal Studios.  Right.  And Phil Chess was the producer.
Speaker 1: And Universal was located where?
Speaker 2: Universal was located on Walton between Michigan and Rush Street, upstairs on the North side of the street.  It was "the" studio, I mean Duke Ellington, Count Basie, everybody that came through Chicago recorded there.  So that's where we recorded our first, our first album.
Speaker 1: So this is a big deal.
Speaker 2: It's a huge deal.  I mean--but, you know, as I recall, it was a big deal, but it didn't overwhelm Eldee [Young] and [Isaac] Redd [Holt] and I.  See, in, in those days, a record career was part, I mean making a record was part of an overall career.  I mean, you made records, you wrote music, you performed--performance was the big thing.  Record, yeah, you know, it's great.  I made a record.  But performance was the big--I tell my kids now and wherever I speak and talk to young people. "I want to get a record deal. He got a record deal. I'm gonna--"  "Well, let me hear you play."  "Oh, what do I--?" "Anything."  Performance is what's happening.  So when we got the first record deal, it was fine.  But we were more concerned with, where are we playing next week?  Week after?  Next month?  And we were always rehearsing and getting new songs.  I think it wasn't until after we put the record out ['The Gentlemen of Swing'] and the record company or [Holmes] Daddy-O [Daylie] called and said, you know, Washington, D.C. is interested.  Washington, because that, we were local boys, Washington, D.C., Philadelphia.  And then, and by then, I think we were with John Levy, when we got an invitation to come play Birdland in New York.  This is the result of the record.  So the record serves to get your name out there, but still performance was the important thing, and coming up with new arrangements, new songs was the important thing.
Story_ID: 10081
Speaker 1: Who was the person coming up with the songs and arrangements within the group?
Speaker 2: Well, being that I had the most education, I was able to write out stuff easier and quicker.  So I would say that 75, 80 percent of the--in fact, I was the Music Director.  We kind of said, "Who's gonna be what?" And I was the Music Director and Eldee [Young] was--he had his duties, and [Isaac] Redd [Holt] was Travel.  And so everybody had their own duties.  But as I've saw re, re-releases, the compilations and then my publishing company, of course, most of the writing and arranging was done by me.  But we --
Speaker 1: Okay, in those early years though, you weren't the Ramsey Lewis Trio, were you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The Cleffs, but --
Speaker 2: Oh, you mean before that?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Oh, you're going back.
Speaker 1: Oh, (laughter) okay.
Speaker 2: The Cleffs.
Speaker 1: The Cleffs.
Speaker 2: When I first met Eldee and Redd, that's right, they were the rhythm section for a band called Cleffs.  Wallace Burton was the leader.  And he was also one of our church musicians.  And it was at the church one day that Wallace Burton said, "We need a piano player.  Our piano player has gone off to play with Sarah Vaughn."  That's how good their band was.  I mean those kind of people.  At any, and, and he said, "Come and play with our band."  And who should be there, but I didn't know them, but he said, this is Eldee Young, bass player, and this is Redd Holt, drums, and there were saxophone players in the band.  So it was after that band, the Cleffs, broke up because of the Korean War, that we were left with a rhythm section.  In fact, there was a, a two-year period, year and a half period where Redd was in the Army, and we used Butch McCance on drums until Redd got out.  That was the understanding.  Butch knew that.  And Redd got out, I think that's when we were playing at Lake Meadows [at Stelzer's Lounge, 35th and South Parkway, Chicago]  And that's, of course, after that when [Holmes] Daddy-O [Daylie] heard us.
Speaker 1: So then how did the name--how did the Ramsey Lewis Trio come about?
Speaker 2: Interesting because it's happening to my, my, my son has a group, and the same thing has happened to them.  They were looking for a name.  You can't call yourself the Cleffs cause that's that group.  Well, what about the Door Knobs?  Nah.  What about the Robins or the--and we were, everybody was nah, nah, nah.  We must have gone through a hundred names from Daddy-O and each one of us and our friends.  "Here's a good name for you!" Finally, Daddy-O said, he said, "It's a piano field.  He plays the piano, Ramsey Lewis Trio.  I mean it's" he, said, "it's natural."  I said, "Well, all right."  And at that point, everybody was like, "Whatever, fine." 'cause we had been trying to find a name.  And that makes sense, piano trio.  He plays the piano, which means most of the time he's leading the group.  And that's the way the name came about.  Of course, years later, that name caused a lot of problems.  It was not a good thing.
Speaker 1: After the group started getting--but I, I mean you operated with that name for how many years?
Speaker 2: We operated with that name --
Speaker 1: Before there were problems.
Speaker 2: -- until 1965, fall, the fall of 1965 began the fall of the Ramsey Lewis Trio, interesting, interesting.  From 19--from the middle '50s until the first hit record, we were as tight as three peas in a pod.  All for one and one for all.  In fact, the first time we went to New York, we rented an apartment that had a bedroom, a dining room and a living room.  One guy slept in the living room and put a pull-out bed or a couch in the dining room.  Another guy slept in the bedroom.  I mean we just shared the apartment.  We were family.  It was this way, except that, coincidentally, in the last 2 or 3 years before we broke, it'd gotten to the place where--once again because of my name being the name of the group, interviewers would call, I want to interview Ramsey Lewis.  Somebody's wife would say, well, why come you aren't interviewing him?  Okay, in a minute.  Wives, whoa!  Anyway, it got to the point, "Well, why does he always get the phone calls?"  And, well, much before that, the decision was made by our group, being that I did have to go out and do interviews and I had to do all these other things.  I was spending a lot of time and therefore, expenses, so that they, they started paying me $50 or $75 a week more than the other--we split everything 3 ways, it was a partnership, except besides my flat fee that we all got, I got another 50 or 75 bucks a week because I'm running around and stuff.  Well, that's fine.  Somebody's got to do it.  And that's the way it was until 'The In Crowd' was released.  And, of course, that was 1965, in the fall.  It's amazing, the record came out in April.  By October, we didn't like each other any more.  I mean, we're on national news.  We're on the charts.  More work is coming.  We didn't even know that you can make this kind of money.  We thought, you know, it must be counterfeit money they're giving us, it's so much money.  And all of a sudden, what's wrong with your socks?  Well, your breath.  Well, what's wrong with your tie?  Well, well what wrong--everything was wrong.  So we, by--and then people started walking off the bandstand.  I mean it got to the point where we're playing and one of the members would leave the bandstand, in the middle of the song.  Then that one come back and then later in the gig or next week, the other member, while we're playing the song, 'I'm in with the in crowd'--and I look up and somebody else has left the bandstand.  So I said, "Wait, this can't go on."  So I chose to quit.  I said, "Well, I'm out of here guys."  And it was, "Wait a minute, you, you can't do that."  "Well, we're, we're--we're not in love any more.  You know, it's like a marriage, you know, it's time for a divorce.  We're not happy.  It's not fun coming to work.  We're arguing all the time.  The wives are like, why is he, why is he?  You know, what are we doing?  So who needs it?"  Well, there's always money to be made.  So we talked to some advisors, and they said, "Okay, it'll be the Ramsey Lewis Trio.  Ramsey, it'll be your group, but you will hire them and pay them a very handsome sum.  Okay.  But at least now, the buck stops here."  That went on for about 3 or 4 months, 5 months.  I don't remember how long it went on, and it just didn't work.  And we ended up in court.
Story_ID: 10082
Speaker 1: I want to go back just a little bit to 'The In Crowd', and if you could tell the story about how that song even came to be.
Speaker 2: We were about to record an album.  As I said earlier, in those days, for whatever reason, jazz musicians put out an LP every 6, 7 months.  So this was our seventeenth album.  So if we started recording 19--in the middle '50's [1950s], whatever.  Seventeenth album.  And we had developed a little formula on our albums, that is, we had songs that I kind of refer to as the meat and potatoes of the song, those songs that show that we really knew the jazz language and we could really play.  And we--but that's the meat and potatoes.  But then we would kind of say, well, there should be like a little dessert song, something that's not as demanding or--and this started with our 14th album, I think.  On this album, we got to that point, and I said, I don't know what that song should be.  We were sitting in a coffee shop.  The coffee shop had a jukebox; waitress says, "What are you guys doing?"  "Trying to figure out this last song"  "What's, what kind of song?"  "We need, we need like a pop song or R&B song, something happy."  "Have you heard 'The In Crowd'".  They had, Eldee [Young] and Redd [Holt] had heard it.  I had not.  She said, "Well, it's on the jukebox."  She put the nickel in it or the dime, whatever, and played this song, Dobie Gray.  Yeah, that's, that's upbeat.  It's got a nice--it's simple, you know, nice melody, people can remember the melody.  We can do that.  So I went out and brought the record.  In those days we also took, brought--had phonographs that we'd carry on the road with us.  And I put the record on and wrote out quickly the, what we were gonna play.  It was just a simple sketch because it was that kind of song.  And we rehearsed it a couple of time.  We were playing in Washington, D.C. at the Bohemian Caverns.  Bohemian Caverns in Washington, D.C. was sort of the jazz Mecca.  I mean Johnnie Griffin, John Coltrane, Thelonious Monk.  Substantial Jazz people played this club, and the people who came to the club, the patrons, were serious jazz people.  So they came to check out this new, young group from Chicago that's supposed to be such a much.  And we handled the room.  We did well.  We finished our first set.  We were about to stop.  I said, let's play our dessert song.  I didn't call it that.  I said, "Let's start on 'The In Crowd.'"  We were surprised that these jazz aficionados started moving their shoulders and moving their head.  Some of them start--stood up and started dancing and singing the words.  And we kind of looked at each other like, they like it I guess.  They responded so well that we closed every set with that, as we were recording.  I think we recorded Thursday, Friday and Saturday nights.  And we were doing 3 sets a night.  And Edward--Esmond Edwards was the producer at that time.  Phil had long since stopped trying to produce jazz, Phil Chess, and hired Esmond Edwards to be the producer.  And he says, people really like that song you guys --nave we are.  What do you mean nave?  Well, we figured the meat and potatoes songs are the important songs.  And those are gonna be the songs that will carry the album.  And this little song, it's just to balance the album out.  So we put that song on the album.  And it was, and the album was released I think April or May.  And it was August maybe, yeah, 'cause it was very, very hot, and we, I think we were in Atlantic City playing when we got the phone call that it had become--it was becoming a hit.  People were going in stores asking for it.  That was August of '65 and by, by October, November of '65, we were already getting bored with each other.
Story_ID: 10083
Speaker 1: The group has this tremendous success with 'In Crowd', I mean tremendous--
Speaker 2: Through the roof.
Speaker 1: Even though you've had--this is your 17th--
Speaker 2: Seventeenth album.
Speaker 1: --album.  And so you're pumping them out, really--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --almost, you're doing--
Speaker 2: Two a year.
Speaker 1: Two a year, okay.  And so what, what is happening though within the group?  I'm just saying like, you say, John, you know, that he--John Levy was your manager.  Was he still nurturing you along?  I mean are you guys--
Speaker 2: Well, by, by that time, by that time, John had hired someone just to help him field all of the, the offers that were coming in.  I mean by then--just picture this.  Billboard Magazine, the top 200 pop albums--the Beatles, Elvis Presley, Barbara Streisand, the Ramsey Lewis Trio.  I mean when we broke up, Huntley [and] Brinkley [on television news]: "The Ramsey Lewis Trio broke up today."  Hello? Jazz group on national news?  That's, that's, I'm trying to give you an idea how big it was.  And our money, I don't know.  We, we went from  2,000 dollars a week to 20,000 a week in, in just weeks and months, in 3 or 4 months.  It just (mimes rocket taking off).  Then offers started just coming in and not night clubs--now concert offers started coming in.  And that's what John Levy had to deal with it.  And it was just wonderful.  In fact, I told, I told the guys in the band, Eldee [Young] and Redd [Holt], I said, "Look at, look at all this, what we've been working for.  Here it is.  Here it is.  Television offers.  We're selling tons of records.  And they want us to play everywhere, and they're paying us all kinds of monies--money, here it is.  What are we doing?  Why are we fighting each other?"  But the human, the human spirit is strange, you know, jealousy, whatever else.  And we broke up.  And John Levy was like, "You guys are crazy."  Daddy-O [Daylie]:  "You guys are--what's wrong with you guys?"  And I forgot, I don't know if it was John or Daddy-O that had said, well, you got to stay together.  I mean you got to enjoy this success in some way or other.  You know, that's when we formed a relationship, not as a partnership, but I was the leader and it was my group.  But I was paying them almost as much as partners, not quite, but almost as much.  And so I felt, I felt with that, surely, just to reap the benefits of 17 albums and 10 years or 12 years of work.  But it still didn't help.
Speaker 1: So what are you saying?  You're saying that you--the structure changed.  And this, in a, you said, it was for like a 6-month period, you tried to keep it.  And what, you became a, what are you saying, you formed your own entity or you formed a partnership and (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No, we were a partnership.
Speaker 1: Okay, up to that point, you were partnership?
Speaker 2: To that point, and then we dissolved the partnership cause partners have to agree to be partners or they don't have a partnership.  And for 3 or 4 weeks, I remember Joe Glazer and ABC, Associated Booking (unclear) started calling us.  They had these jobs.  These people wanted us, but I, I didn't take any jobs.  And then I don't know if it's, like I said, I don't know if it was Daddy-O or John Levy said, "You guys, you got to do something."  I said, "Okay, but it's got to be my group.  I can't go through what I just went through.  But I'll pay very, very good money".  And everybody agreed.  I think it was based on money that everybody agreed.  But the money didn't--if you don't deal with the basic problem, I mean I think that's true in any relationship, money and whatever else, can't eliminate communication problems and other baggage that needs to be dealt with.  We didn't deal with why, why now?  We, we weren't mature enough, and those around us didn't say--you know what they should have done?  They should have sent the three of us to a shrink.  They should have sent the three of us for counseling.  "What's wrong with you guys?  Come down here, talk about it; bring the wives, send the wives for counseling.  Then each guy, each wife and each one of you guys come separate.  Now, what is the problem?"  But that didn't happen.  So consequently, we solved our own problems by not solving the problem, just breaking up.
Speaker 1: So you said it ended up in a lawsuit.  So who was accusing who of what?
Speaker 2: Eldee and Redd accused me of using their name, that they had a interest in the name 'Ramsey Lewis'.  And that I cannot use that name professionally.  And their lawsuit was unsuccessful.  Then there was a lawsuit regarding--all our songs were in one publishing company.
Speaker 1: And who, what publishing company was that?
Speaker 2: Iraci, I-R-A-C-I.
Speaker 1: Who owned that?  Was that--
Speaker 2: We did, as a partnership.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you owned--okay.
Speaker 2: So all our songs.  And most of the songs were in that publishing company.  So after the group broke up, it was up to me to make sure they got paid for songs that they wrote out of the publishing company.  So they sued me again and said that I wasn't paying them the fair, right amount that they should have been paid.  And the judge said, "Once the group broke up, you should have kept their monies separate.  As monies come, came in, you shouldn't have put the money, threw them into that account.  So they've got you on commingling of funds cause you had your money with their money," and so we settled.  I don't know what it was.  It was a few thousand dollars.  And that was the end of that.  Occasionally, somebody, I don't know if they represent Redd and Eldee or not, but occasionally, every 10 years, some lawyer calls my lawyer or sends something, says, he's using their name.  And we kind of chuckle.  It's sad actually.  It's sad.
Speaker 1: So it ruined friendship cause you all had been friends.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean when we met, I was 15 years old.  When we broke up, I was 30, 31.  But as we got older, we got together again.  In fact, in 1984 we made another album and toured again.  But it was never the same.
Story_ID: 10084
Speaker 1: Do you remember your performance at Birdland?  Can we go back, you know, the time that you did that, the first time?  Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we, we got to New York.  And some of our friends had, had left Chicago and gone to play in New York.  Bill Henderson, a singer.  He was already in New York, and he came out to Birdland the first night and brought some of his friends that he'd met in New York.  And it seems that the fashions in New York had moved beyond the store that we brought our clothes.  And Peter Long (ph.), I'll never forget his name, Pete Long was a friend of Bill Henderson's--he said "I want you to meet him."  And Pete stepped back and looked at us and started (giggling) in fun, you know.  It was--he said, "You guys are flooding."  Well, what do you mean flooding?  Well, it seems he thought our pants were too short or something.  We thought we were a fashion plate out of Chicago, got to New York.  It seems like we were 2 or 3 years late.  But, I won't forget that first, that first appearance at Birdland because we were on--we're a trio--with the Buddy Rich Big Band and Art Blakey and the Jazz Messengers.  You know what I mean? First time in New York City, Birdland, but youth--we didn't realize.  You know, now you look back, we just figured, they do what they do; we do what we do.  So we went up and played our, what we play, the same way we would have played in Chicago.  We were a hit.  Well, during that engagement we were invited to play the Randall's Island Jazz Festival.  We were invited to play the Prelude Jazz Club,  Supper Club up in Harlem.  We didn't play the Village Vanguard at that time, but we were invited to come back and play the Village Vanguard.  So what was to be three weeks in New York, I think we ended up staying longer because we got over.  I think if, if we weren't young and innocent and somebody really explained, do you know that this is the Buddy Rich Big Band, 18 swinging guys and Buddy is only one of the greatest drummers that ever lived.  Oh, and over here is Lee Morgan, Wayne Shorter, Bobby Timmons and Art Blakey, you know, we would have--we knew who they were--but we, we had that kind of confidence in ourselves that, well, we can only do what we do.  And thank God we did because we did very well.
Speaker 1: So what did the critics say of you then?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't remember.  I don't remember.  I really don't remember.  I'm sure they must have said something.
Story_ID: 10085
Speaker 1: Talk about even how your style developed and who were the people that you looked up to?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, now that you mention that.  I don't know what the critics said about that particular job [the Ramsey Lewis Trio at Birdland in New York,  1959], but in general, in those days as we began, began being bigger and bigger, critics were confounded because until then most jazz groups set lists recordings were based on Charlie Parker tunes, Duke Ellington tunes, Thelonious Monk tunes.  And here we come with original tunes that were influenced by European  classical music.  Here we come with songs that draw heavily on black gospel music.  Here we come with a pop song that we arranged called, 'Betcha, By Golly, Wow' whatever.  I don't remember exactly what it was.  It wasn't that song because that came later, but one that we just liked to play.  And so the critics just didn't know.  Well, what is this?  Are they jazz?  Well, what are they?  Not all of them.  The majority of them were positive, but I think what really kept us going was even with,[Holmes]  Daddy-O [Daylie]--Daddy-O used to bring people down to here us at the SRO Room.  Duke Ellington complimented us.  Dizzie Gillespie complimented us.  Clark Terry, I mean I can't remember--I can't name all the people that we looked up to that, that encouraged us during those early, early, early days.  So when we got out and started getting these reviews from these people, and it's like, well, what instrument do you play?  You know, what gives you--if Duke Ellington and Dizzie Gillespie say what we're doing is valid, who are you to say what, say whatever?  So we carried on.  And, you know, the critics and the reviewers remained that way by and large for some time to come.  When 'The In Crowd' became popular, oh, that's when they really went crazy.  Now, on that record there were jazz songs except this one song.  And I would say that, until then maybe 85--80 percent of our reviews were good reviews.  The other 20 were like confused.  'The In Crowd' was the nail in the coffin.  And, and now that I look back, it wasn't so much that that one song was on the album because we had put one song on many albums that were reviewed by jazz reviewers saying, "breath of fresh air" and all these wonderful things.  You know what it was?  Jazz people, even to this very day, are very possessive.  And it's like a club, it's a small club and they, they have this, these groups that they love and amongst each other--and "the, the 'plebeians', the average person out there, doesn't know about but we do. They're square."  Now, wait a minute--here comes somebody to work the next day that they know is not a big jazz fan and they say, "I just bought a record by the Ramsey Lewis Trio called 'The In Crowd.'"  Ahhh! (Gasps)  Now, the 'jazz club' were like, "Uhh! Gotta get rid of all my Ramsey Lewis records!  They know about 'em now." But I was talking with Wes Montgomery, [Dave] Brubeck, Cannonball Adderly, people who've had big hit records.  And they say that it happens to anybody that becomes 'pop'--
Speaker 1: But you were considered pop-jazz, in some respect--
Speaker 2: Once, once you get that, once you sell a ton of records, and people who ordinarily don't buy jazz or go see jazz, they become your fans, "Well, you're on your own buddy."  It was great though.  It was wonderful.
Speaker 1: And you know what's interesting, so you, were you really the--I mean this sound that emerged, you know, that, that's definitely your background, and I mean gospel was in all three of your backgrounds.  Classical was more in your background.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so I'm just wondering how do you think that sound really emerged?  Was a combination of all three of you--?
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely a combination of all three of us because the common denominator between Eldee [Young] , [Isaac] Redd [Holt] and I was the gospel and the jazz, mainly the gospel, because I was learning jazz when I met them.  I--when I met them, I hadn't even, I hadn't played a lick of jazz at 15, 16 years old.  Eldee, although he's a little younger than me, had already started playing jazz.  And Redd had been playing jazz already.  So I think what really brought us together was the gospel feel that we all shared.  And we developed out of that.  And then I brought the classical field that, that the music that I had studied and dearly love to this day.  And even at 15, 16 years old, one of the groups, one of the first groups that I started loving as I listened to music, one of the first, was the Modern Jazz Quartet, who, as you know, used classical devices, John Lewis, in his arrangements.  And so there we are with gospel and, and the classical influence.  And that's why sometimes we would chuckle when people would say music was funky or music was R&B or bluesy because actually it was the gospel feel, the gospel influence cause, you know, I started playing for our church when I was 9 years old.  So I was definitely gospel music.  At the same time, playing Bach, Beethoven, there it is.
Speaker 1: Well, Dorothy Mendelsohn [Lewis's piano teacher and mentor as a young adolescent], where is she in all of this though?  I mean, in this--she, I mean I know she was the one, but where is she in your early career?
Speaker 2: Okay, 4 years old, I start studying piano.  I'll be brief with this part of it, very--because of my sister, and then I wanted to stop.  And my father wouldn't let me stop.  He made me keep going.  At 9 years old, I started playing for our church [Wayman African Methodist Episcopal Church].  Eleven years old, and when my local piano teacher [Ernestine Bruce] said to my parents, "I've taught him all I can.  I suggest strongly that you take him downtown to the Chicago Musical College."  They took me downtown to the Chicago Musical College, and I was assigned to Dorothy Mendelsohn, thank God.  And it was Dorothy Mendelsohn who really piqued my interest in music, in piano in particular.  And she taught me as if I were going to play classical music for a living at some point.  I mean she, she entered me into contests and competitions and learning all of the, the right music to compete.  And at 15 years old, between 15 and 16, I started playing jazz.  My parents [Pauline Richards Lewis and Ramsey Lewis, Sr.] were concerned.  "How's this--how's he gonna play Bach, you know, if he's playing the blues?"  Well, it's interesting now that I look back on it, they didn't look at gospel music--I mean gospel music is rhythmic and emotional as you can get, right?  When I started playing jazz, it was like, uh-uh  So they both went down and talked to Dorothy Mendelsohn and said, "Should he really do this?"  And she said, "Yes, yes."  But her reason--the reason was, she said, "If he's to earn a living [at classical music], there's no guarantee, no matter how good he is, that he'll be able to do that because of his skin color".  America at that time wasn't used to seeing other than white people play classical music.  Well, Marian Anderson, let's talk about that, if you want to get into it.  And, but then she went on to say, "It's difficult for the average white student, no matter how good he or she is, to earn a living, much less being a person of color.  So let's not close the door on any opportunities."  If she had not said that--I mean if she had said, "He shouldn't play at this music.  He should only stick with Bach and Beethoven," I don't know if we would be talking today.  I, I don't know.
Speaker 1: So did she--was she around during your early career when Daddy-O Daylie had taken over or did she sort of fade out of view?  Was she--?
Speaker 2: I, I kept taking lessons from Dorothy Mendelsohn until I was in my early twenties.  I, it wasn't every week any longer, every--I would just go three, four times a year just to--and she was more of a coach.  So, yeah, at some point Dorothy Mendelsohn and Daddy-O were both in my life, but Daddy-O more so than Dorothy Mendelssohn now.  I do remember taking her an album.  I do remember taking her an album.  But by the time I started recording, I wasn't seeing her that often.
Story_ID: 10086
Speaker 1: The other thing I want to touch upon is Chess Records.  And remember how you've said, you know, when you first, you recorded your album with them, they didn't know really what to do because they had been blues.  But can you talk about your relationship, you mean, I mean the Ramsey Lewis Trio's relationship with Chess Records and the role sort of you played in their, you know, their--'cause Chess Records did, I mean they did Blues and they did R&B, you know.  And so I'm just wondering where you fit in the whole, you know, in their history as, you know, as a--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  Well, Chess Records were a huge success with Muddy Waters, Howling Wolf, I can't remember all the blues names that they were--and what happened, some way, they got their hands on a Gene Ammons master, of a single record.  And it was called, 'My Foolish Heart.'  And it sold very well in the black community, and that sort of opened their eyes to the possibility of this jazz thing.  So they treaded very lightly in terms of going in that direction really until they signed me.  And they saw how this built.  A year just before or just after, they did an album called "Ahmad Jamal at the Persian", which sold untold thousands.  And being businessmen, they said, Okay.  We'll stay in the blues field, but we'll also go into the jazz field.  Shortly after these records, my first one, first one or two, the trio, and Ahmad Jamal's was around that time, they started bringing in other producers.  I think Dave Usher from Detroit came in and took Phil's place cause Phil [Chess], I mean the most Phil would--he'd be in the studio.  And we're playing, and we'd listen back.  And all, he would say things, "You should play in a higher register of the piano more, play up there more, up there," cause he didn't really know.  But he was trying to be helpful.  So after a minute or two, they said, "We'd better get somebody in that knows what this music is all about."  So Dave Usher and he was followed by Es, Esmond Edwards.  And by the early '60s [1960s], they had a staff of people that were just for jazz, Dick LaPalm and others too.  And they were signing jazz people.  Daddy-O helped them with that.  In fact, now that I recall, there was a few records that came out called "Daddy-O Daylie Presents."  In fact, Daddy-O made it possible for me to play on a record with Max Roach and Kenny Dorham.  Wait a minute.  I mean this young dude--and, and Sonny Stitt--I, I played on a record with Sonny Stitt.  Never would I be so pleased and elated when the record was reviewed--it was re-released 10 years ago on a, on a LP, on a CD.  And they said they didn't list the--they weren't sure who the client--the musicians were.  They're not sure about the piano player.  And I knew that I was on there.  So they, they figured it was Barry Harris.  Now, Barry Harris was probably one of the greatest be-bop piano players there ever was.  And for somebody to figure, it must be Barry Harris, that made me feel very good.  But because, because of Daddy-O, I got to play with Sonny Stitt, Clark Terry, Max Roach and others due to this "Daddy-O Daylie Presents." cause see, he would tell these guys, "Hey, you know, I want to hear--I want you guys to listen to this new young piano player.  I want you--what do you think about using him on your date?"  " Yeah, we'll use him."  Daddy-O. Great man.
Story_ID: 10087
Speaker 1: Who were the people you were looking up to at the time in terms of, you know, other musicians or pianist?  I mean who--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, Dad [Ramsey Lewis, Sr.] brought home Art Tatum when I was 11, 12, 13, scared me half the death.  Fifteen, sixteen, I started with the jazz band [the Cleffs], and that's when Wallace [Burton] said, "You should, gotta listen to more jazz records, you know, Rubenstein and Horovitz are fine, but--."  And so his--it's interesting.  He liked Oscar Peterson, and I'd heard a little bit of Oscar Peterson, but I went out, and he said, "Pick up some Oscar Peterson."  So I picked up some, and I loved it.  So in those years, at 15 and 16 years old, I started listening to Oscar Peterson, George Shearing, Earl Garner, Charlie Parker, Sonny Stitt, Lester Young, Modern Jazz Quartet and others.  But at 15, 16, as I look at that now, I had a fairly sophisticated Jazz taste at that point.  So those were early influences. And every now and then, when I got up enough courage, I would put on an Art Tatum records.  But it was, I think I must have been well into my 20s before I figured out that there was not two people playing when Art Tatum played.  You know, it wasn't 'Art' and 'Tatum' on the same piano, 'cause up until then, it was frightening.  It was actually frightening.  Nobody could do that.  Now, I listen to it, and I still believe nobody can do it, but at least I don't faint.  But, of course, now I have favorites forever.  And I mean the list is unlimited.  But those early influences.  Miles - did I say Miles Davis?
Speaker 1: Un-um, you didn't say Miles Davis.
Speaker 2: Well, Miles, early on, only because he was playing with 'Bird.' [Charlie Parker]  It wasn't until Miles started - I think it was maybe late, yeah, late '50s when he started doing things with, with - middle '50s maybe, when he started with Coltrane under Prestige, Coltrane and Red Garland and those guys, because 'The Birth of the Cool' album, when I first listened to it, it was too cool for me.  But then when Miles Davis started doing things with Red Garland and, and Coltrane, I began to love him.  And then, of course, by the time he got to Gil Evans in the late '50's, definitely important person.
Story_ID: 10088
Speaker 1: The other thing I just wanna ask you about, like 'Hang on Sloopy', can you talk about how that, you developed - you talked about 'The In Crowd', but how did --
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Hang on Sloopy'. (Pause.) The summer 'The In Crowd' was released we played Atlantic City [New Jersey].  And we drove, I drove with my then wife and two close friends, Bob Holmes and Edwina Holmes, Gerri [Geraldine Taylor] Lewis was my first wife's name.  And we drove to Atlantic City.  During the drive, the radio was on.  And this song came on, "Hang on Sloopy, Hang on."  I paid no attention to it.  However, Edwina Holmes, Bob Holmes wife--"Ramsey, you guys should record that."  I'm like, "Right.  I don't think so."  And that was the end of that.  We went on to Atlantic City.  Shortly after that the,--oh, after Atlantic City, we played Howard Rumsey's Lighthouse [Hermosa Beach, California], I think this is October, November [1965] before we broke up.  And we recorded that set 'cause we've recorded the one in Washington, D.C. ['The In Crowd'] live and the--it came out, and it was a hit.  So the record company [Chess-Argo],"You've got to record live again."  And really, it was either [Isaac] Redd [Holt] or Eldee [Young] said, "Why don't we--let's just see what happens with 'Hang on Sloopy'? " And so at rehearsal we tried it.  Easy, and it was the fun song on that album.  Okay.  Same thing happened.  Howard Rumsey's Lighthouse, West Coast and it was like the Birdland of the West Coast, more or less, I mean Shorty Rogers, Chet Baker, Shelly Mann, you know, the West Coast guys.  And the East Coast guys when they came that way, played Howard Rumsey's Lighthouse.  And Howard Rumsey was a bass player himself.  So once again, it was a bastion of pure jazz lovers.  And the house was full.  And we played this song.  A lot of people think that we overdubbed voices on the, on the record because everybody started singing - when we got to that part, "Hang on Sloopy", like a choir.  I mean I didn't even know that these pure jazz lovers knew 'Hang on Sloopy', right?  I barely knew it.  But we played it, and we got to the, the chorus part, and they--not only were they, they started singing it, but they, once again, they were dancing and carrying on.  And they released that, and that became a very big hit.  It seems like many of the hits that I have had were songs that were almost like afterthoughts, I mean not songs that you've said, "This is gonna be a hit."  It's very difficult to predict hits.
Story_ID: 10089
Speaker 1: Was there a song that you had hoped or that, you know, that you hoped would be a hit or is it your favorite song, but --?
Speaker 2: Let me see, is there a song? Not in those days.  You see, in those days record companies did not say to you, "What's gonna be the single on the album?"  It wasn't until well into the late '60s [1960s], well into the '60's and the early '70s [1970s] that record companies started saying to jazz artists--it was even well into the '70s before I can recall any record company saying, "What do you think will be the single?"  Jazz artists just went in and recorded albums.  Whatever, you recorded albums.  And you didn't say this is for the single or this should be the single or whatever.  There was one time that we thought we knew what the single was going to be.  This is in the middle '70s now.  After--I got to go back a minute.  After Eldee [Young] and [Isaac] Redd [Holt] left the final time which is early '66 [1966], I hired a drummer named Maurice White and a bass player named Cleveland Eaton.  Cleveland Eaton went on to play with Count Basie and others, but he stayed with me for several years.  Maurice White stayed with me 3 or 4 years.  And Maurice decided to start his own group which I thought was gonna be a jazz group.  He says, no, no.  He says, "We're gonna do magic, we're gonna do pop, rock, jazz, R&B."  Right.  He did that, of course [with the band he formed, Earth Wind and Fire].  Now, in the middle '70s and he's out doing his thing, he, he would call me once or twice a month, tell me where he was and there's 20,000 people in the--and this one time he called to say that they were the West--East Coast and on their way to--and then he moved to, he was in Chicago, but he moved to the West Coast.  He was on the way back home.  "What are you doing?"  I said, "Well, actually, I'm in the studio, but I've got to go to Washington to play a concert.  I'm coming to the studio, doing an album."  He said, "We just finished an album, and we ended up with a couple tunes we didn't use, but they're great songs.  They're more instrumental than they are vocal, and we're doing a lot of vocals now.  But they--somebody should do them.  Do you want to do them?"  I said, "Well, if you think that highly of them, yeah."  He says, "One of them is a hit record."  He says, "One of them is your next 'In Crowd'--no, is bigger than 'In Crowd.'"  I said, "Wait a minute, The In Crowd, bigger than In Crowd?"  He says, "I promise you."  And I said, "Come on with it."  He didn't say two songs.  He said just that one.  He said, he was gonna do that one.  And so, he says, "When are you going back?"  I said, "In a couple days, whatever."  He says, "Well, if you want, we'll stop in Washington--I mean in Chicago--"  He was going, he was going from New York to L.A., and stop in Chicago.  I was going from Washington back to Chicago, "--and show you that song.  And I'll help you do it if you want."  "Yeah, I want."  So he came to Chicago.  He brought, let's see, Maurice White--who'd he bring?  Oh, Al, Al McKay.  Al McKay, Philip Bailey, Phil, Phillip Bailey.  I think the 4 of them, Maurice, I think the 4 of them came.  And he stopped in Chicago.  So we, we spent about 3 or 4 days on this song.  And we got through, and he says, "There it is.  That's, it's your next, your next hit record."  Name of the song was 'Hot Doggit.'  We were about to tear things down and call it a day.  And I thanked him so much cause I--the song was really good.  I mean we really--they sang on it and it was really--and he said, "Wait, wait, wait, wait.  There's this other song that I've--" he's been liking for a long time, no name.  But there's a really nice melody.  And there's sort of an R&B, Brazilian feel to it, instrumental, mainly for taking solos, you know.  And so we state melody a couple of times.  And the saxo--oh, Donald Myrick was with them.  "Donald Myrick, take the saxophone solo.  You take a piano solo.  And just go back to the melody, take it out.  It's a nice song, this is--cause you got your hit record."  So we went back in and recorded that song in a matter of hours.  And then he said, "may need voices."  And it was just--"All right." So he and Phillip Bailey went in the--and they put voices.  He says, "But you have no lyrics."  So Maurice was like, "Don't worry.  We'll just say, way oh, w-a-y, way, oh."  And that's what they did.  And he says, "Don't worry.  Just put this one on the album.  That's your single."  Well, long story short, we put 'Hot Doggit 'out.  And I think my mother bought a copy, a couple of my relatives bought a copy.  And, but the album was moving out of stores.  Now, the single is not selling.  Radio finally stopped playing it.  And the album is moving out of stores.  I, shortly after that, I was in Washington, D.C. and they called me and said, "Come down, can you come down and sign some records?"  I said, "Yeah."  The L.P., literally, I mean they had stacks of L.P.'s--in those days, L.P.'s were like $2.98 or $3.98, and people were coming in buying them, and I was autographing them.  I must--e must have sold a hundred of those albums in a couple hours because of 'Sun Goddess', because of this song.  And he couldn't--he didn't have a name for it.  So Granny White's son, Maurice White, interesting cause Maurice White, Maurice White, said something about Sun--Goddess of the Sun or something.  And Maurice White said, ah, 'Sun Goddess.'  So once again, you can't predict the hit.  'Hot Doggit' fell on its face.  The song that you just put your heart into, and you just play normally, naturally and you give it your all, it's a nice melody, I don't know 800, 900,000 copies.  Not bad.
Story_ID: 10090
Speaker 1: I want to go back to how you first knew Maurice White, how--cause, okay, the group [the Ramsey Lewis Trio, with Lewis, Eldee Young and Isaac 'Redd' Holt] splits apart [1966]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're, suing each other and all that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we're in court.
Speaker 1: Do you think, I mean do you have any moment of reflection like we shouldn't have done this or are you just like, everyone's pissed off at each other?
Speaker 2: Every time I would have a feeling of we shouldn't have done this, I would recall those moments of being on stage and somebody walks off the stage during the performance.  Now, this is no respect for the audience.  This is no respect for your group.  This is no respect for yourself.  This is no respect for the music.  And I would talk myself out of it.  You know what, I remember that, at the end of a night, I was so exhausted and just beat up emotionally that all I wanted to do was just get away, get away.  So, no, I never considered it to the point where I got on the phone, "Guys come on."  Other people did.  That's how I re-- would reconsider because other people, "You guys can't do it."  I forgot your question.
Speaker 1: No, my question (laughter) was, did you have any moment of--or were just fighting.  And then I had --
Speaker 2: Oh, Maurice White.
Speaker 1: Right, the question about Maurice White because he had been, he was a session drummer, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: By now, the Chess people had bought a building, 2130 [sic, 2120] South Michigan Avenue.  And they had their own studio now.  And they had their own staff band, staff arranger and staff engineer.  I mean they had this--and on the--one of the staff musicians was a, a little drummer.  His name was Maurice White, quiet, quiet man, quiet man, very soft spoken.  And we didn't get to know each other really well cause he didn't talk a lot.  But he would say things--he'd always have a question about the business.  "So what is a publishing company?  What's that all about?  What's a manager do?"  But I knew he could play those drums.  So when I had need of a drummer, I called him, and he said, "I'll do it."  And then we got to know each other because when you're traveling on the road, you get to know the people in the band.  So that's how I got to know Maurice White.  And we needed a bass player, so--I don't know how I met Cleveland Eaton.  I don't remember the first time that we walked up to each other and said hello.  I don't remember that first time.  I just remember I called him.  I knew I needed two musicians that I wouldn't have to teach or rehearse a lot, two musicians that just had their thing together cause, you know, we were hotter than a firecracker [after just having had a major hit record several months before the band broke up]  So we had to go out and do this thing.  And both of them just listened to the records, and they learned the music.  And we went out and took care of business.
Speaker 1: So you had, through the lawsuits, preserved the right to use the name, I mean the Ramsey Lewis Trio, right?
Speaker 2: Well, the judge threw it out of court cause he said --
Speaker 1: He threw it --
Speaker 2: --you can't sue somebody for not to use your own name.  What name is he gonna use?
Speaker 1: That's right.  So you--but was there any, I mean because you had worked sort of as a family, you know the group, so how, did it take much time for you, Maurice White and, you know, Cleveland Eaton to develop your, you know, the same sort of feeling or the pacing?
Speaker 2: No, it was different.  I don't think--I think what Eldee and Redd and I had, only the three of us could have that sound.  So I didn't even try to have that sound.  With, with Maurice White and Cleveland Eaton, it was a different sound.  And we had to find that common ground that we would use to spring from, which we did, which we did.  Once again, Maurice White had done some gospel, lots of gospel.  Once again, Cleveland Eaton came from a gospel home.  In fact, in those days, not so much these days, but in those days, most entertainers, if not all, had some way or other came through church.  So there was always that common ground.
Story_ID: 10091
Speaker 1: Maurice [White] went, went on to found Earth, Wind & Fire.
Speaker 2: Earth, Wind & Fire, right.
Speaker 1: So were you surprised, I mean because, you know, they were, you had mentioned sort of, you said, I don't know what you had mentioned, but they were a very theatrical, you know, group.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I think what made Maurice White's group, Earth, Wind & Fire, unusual was, while they were theatrical, they backed it up with great music.  I mean if they were theatrical only, it would be a joke.  You know, you'd laugh at them or they'd last for a year or two, and then, well, what's new?  What's next?  But Maurice surrounded himself with great musicians, and he wrote really well.  And he had some writers with him, Charles Stepney from Chicago must be mentioned here because Charles Stepney was influential in my career, very influential over at Earth, Wind & Fire, with Verdine White and, and Maurice White.  And they did a lot of writing and producing together.  And they developed this wonderful sound, and the horn section.  I mean these guys, after hours, could play a jazz session, and you'd figure they were out and out straight ahead jazz band.  So with all the magic and whatever, and it came down to making music, they made good music.  And, of course, it was that, it was that era where pop music was classic pop music.  We didn't know it.  We didn't know during the '70s, you know, that we were coming, that pop music was classic.  I mean it was the songs, the lyric, the chord changes, the melodies.  We, we look back now, and some of us long for a song that you can remember the, the melody and, and the beautiful harmonies and such.
Story_ID: 10092
Speaker 1: Talk about Charles Step-, Stepney, he came on as your producer, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Charles Stepney.  If Charles Stepney had lived--he died early, he was 40, 40-something years old when he died--Quincy Jones would have had a run for his money.  Charles wrote original music--beautifully.  He arranged any and all songs, wonderfully.  He produced.  He was a piano player.  And he was one of these beings that was totally blessed with the ability to pull music from the universe at that spur of the moment because he needed something.  I mean "Charles, we need 8 bars of this."  Well, you knew that if Charles brought 8 bars, it was gonna be wonderful.  And he could--he was one of these guys that could sit down with, with the manuscript, not at the piano.  He would sit at the piano sometimes and compose, but he could sit down and write out the 8 bars.  And he'd give it to you, and it was like, "Ah, that's what we needed."  And when he got with Earth, Wind & Fire, they needed what he had, and that is the vast knowledge of classical music.  He, he studied at Roosevelt University, played with Eddie Harris.  He played vibes with Eddie Harris; a vast knowledge of, of classical music, the ability to write and arrange and use classical devices as well as traditional jazz devices in an R&B way.  And Maurice White knew how to incorporate all that into his arrangements.  Charles Stepney was, he recognized the talent in Minnie Riperton right away.  Minnie Riperton was one of the staff singers at Chess Records.  And Charles said, "You should have your own album."  So he told the Chess brothers, I'm gonna (unclear) album on her because that album that people heard Minnie Riperton.  And, of course, she had a magnificent career of her own, the Rotary Connection, the Dells.  He did a wonderful album on the Dells.  I had been recording with the trio and, and someone suggested you should do something with a group other than the, along with the trio.  And Charles Stepney came aboard and did an album called --
Speaker 1: Mother Nature's [Son] --
Speaker 2: That was second.  The first one he did was Maiden Voyage.
Speaker 1: Maiden Voyage, right.
Speaker 2: But after that, he called me, and he said, "You should do an album of Beatle songs.  I want to hold your hand."  I said, "I don't think so", whatever else, you know, because at that point, I don't think 'Michelle', those really nice Beatle songs, and they hadn't come out yet.  They were still doing those bubble gum songs.  Little did I know, they had a White album.  They called it the White--cause the cover was White.  And he had these songs in it.  He says, "No, I've got some songs that you'll really like."  Well, he let me hear the album and the way--see, I love Beatles' music, some of it.  That early bubble gum stuff, forget about it.  But some of the later stuff, wonderful stuff.  But I always liked the way they played, you know what I'm saying.  So on this particular album, there were some nice songs on it.  I can't remember the names of them, but it was some nice songs.  But their performance of the song were rudimentary.  They were so--I don't know, I couldn't.  He says, "But I hear something.  I hear something that could be done with these songs.  And you could do it."  He says, "look, can I do--trust me on this."  "Well, Charles Stepney, I trust you."  He came back with 10 or 11 arrangements of songs.  And we called the album 'Mother Nature's Son.'  And to this day, it's one of my most popular albums.  We get requests on it.  One of the songs he arranged was 'Julia.'  And the arrangement that he wrote, the string arrangement that he wrote for that song was just magnificent.  And what he did with the chords.  I mean the chords were simple and very rudimentary.  But what he did with the harmony to make it very interesting.  But that was the talent that he had.  Had he lived, I'm sure I would have used him many, many, many more times.  But Charles had high blood pressure, diabetes and other things.  And for whatever reason, he didn't always take his medicine like he should have.  So he died early.
Speaker 1: And he--well, had you really worked with a producer up to that point?  That's what I'm wondering cause it didn't seem --
Speaker 2: Well, you see --
Speaker 1: Because it --
Speaker 2: It's a good question.  Up until that point, most producers, Dave Usher, Esmond Edwards would make suggestions--in fact, it was Esmond Edwards that suggested that I do 'Wade in the Water.'  But they kind of sat back and let--it's jazz.  So you do your thing, you know.  "This song's too long or you need another song.  You need a ballad, you know.  Let me see your list of songs."  But they pretty much--but, Charles Stepney and Richard Evans, as arrangers--see Richard, see Esmond Edwards wasn't an arranger.  He was a producer.  He would suggest certain things as an, as an arrangement, but he wasn't an arranger.  And neither was Dave Usher.  Richard Evans, Charles Stepney were arrangers.  So, when they were also the producer and the arranger, not only did they have ideas a producer, but they would come with arrangements.  And certain parts of the song you had to put--stay pretty close to what they wrote because the strings are gonna come in here or the horn is gonna come in here.  So you couldn't be off in Flat 13 heaven or Sharp 11 heaven and the strings weren't playing that.  But fortunately, both of them were sympathetic to what my style was.  So it was a great marriage, the songs and the albums that Richard Evans and Charles Stepney arranged.
Story_ID: 10093
Speaker 1: Well, my career, the '60s, middle '60s are red hot.  Early '70s, plateaued off at a high level.  I mean we started out here, and by the--kind of leveled off here.  But then that's when I got the phone call from Maurice White.  It was 1974.  And we put out the record 'Sun Goddess', and it took off again.  And I did a tour with Maurice White.  That was an experience.  Jazz trios are not to play in stadiums of 20,000 people.  So I hired some more people, but still the music that we were doing, it's not for 20,000 people.  It was an experience though.  I mean the energy in that place.  And that was my first time to, you know, these rock acts they'd--Maurice White had his own plane and 10 limousines and 4 buses and 10 trailers and oh, catered meals at midnight.  And--it was nice, a nice tour.
Speaker 2: Now, you had, up to that point though, you had been starting to play with orchestras and things like that--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Ah--Charles Stepney.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously)--and we need to talk--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)--Charles Stepney.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 1: This is late '60's, and we got a call from the Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra, "Would like you to play with our orchestra?"  I don't have anything.  "Chuck Stepney, I'm going to play with the Minneapolis Symphony Orchestra.  What can you do?" And he wrote a piece called Cohesion.  And it went over really well.  Seiji Ozawa was with the Toronto Symphony Orchestra at that time.  They called.  So, yeah, we started playing symphonies, and much of the music we played was Charles Stepney's music.  And then, later on though, Charles passed, of course.  James Mack is an arranger who writes for symphony orchestras really, really well, probably one of the best string writers in jazz, actually, or any music for that matter.  So we did a lot of those, and those are fun to do.
Speaker 2: Now, do you think that--was your first one, was it in Minneapolis or was it in Washington?
Speaker 1: Oh, in Washington National.  It was the Washington National Symphony Orchestra was the first one.  That's the one we did 'Cohesion,' Charles Stepney's piece, you're right.  You've done your homework.
Speaker 2: But when you did that, I mean it's a different thing playing, you know, in a club or, you know, even giving a concert.  And then, you know, with the symphony orchestra.  And so I'm wondering what that was like for you from, you know, from--as an artist.  What was that like?  What was that experience like, and was it--I know it wasn't just performing.
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  Playing with the symphony orchestra is totally different than playing with just the trio because now, instead of three people, communicating with, you've got to communicate with 80, 90, 100 people.  Not really, because the conductor is there to be the middle man, you know, so you've got to conduct--communicate with the conductor.  But symphony orchestras typically don't swing.  So the writing has to be such that they're not asked to swing.  And there's, there's, there's sections where the symphony orchestra shines and you sort of support them.  And there's sections where they support you, and, and it's your chance to shine.  But it's not total freedom because the music is written.  If they're all jazz musicians, it's freedom because jazz musicians know that you're not gonna do the same way.  And they're on their toes so that if you make a right turn this time and you didn't make it last time, they're prepared to follow you around that right turn and know that you're gonna get them back to home base before it's too late.  You can't do that with symphony orchestra because they're sitting there.  And they could care less about anything except "At Bar 44 I'm coming in with this D Flat.  I don't care where you are, but I'm coming in big and strong."  So you've got to be aware of that.  You've got 44 bars, 88 bars, whatever amount of bars to solo in.  And you--the only thing good about having your own conductor, and I must say this, and, and James Mack has conducted many symphony orchestras with me, is that we would get signals.  And if I'm ready to stop, he could tell.  And 8 bars after, at a certain period, he would bring the orchestra in.  We do--we developed how to signal each other.  So I would have some freedom.  But the experience of having that energy and that power on stage with you, the experience of, of doing these beautiful segments, having the strings and the cello and the, and the, the violins and it's like none other.
Story_ID: 10094
Speaker 1: What happened that you went with Columbia Records, you know, in 1971?  What made you want to sort of change there?  Now, this is in this period before you do 'Sun Goddess.'
Speaker 2: 'Sun Goddess,' right.  Well, the Chess family decided they were going to get out of the record business.  Leonard Chess passed away [in 1969].  And they sold the company to GRT, that's the tape company.  And then something else happened.  But I wasn't happy with the way things were being run.  I guess I'd just been used to being able to pick up the phone and call Leonard at his house in Glencoe and complain if I wanted to.  Now, this conglomerate company in New York or whatever, and you don't even know who the CEO is, you know.  Of course, that's the way of the world these days, but in those days it wasn't.  So I wanted out.  And I owed them one more album and found out that Columbia Records, if I were free, would be, might be interested in me.  So I hired an attorney that found a way where if I gave them one more record--or did he find somewhere along my history of recording that I'd actually fulfilled my obligations?  I think that's what it was.  They looked back over my history, and I think the record company--GRT was saying, no, and we were saying yeah.  Went to court.  It cost me some money, but the judge ruled in my favor.  And I signed with Columbia Records.
Speaker 1: And Columbia Records, they're a jazz label?  Who did they, who did they have at the time?
Speaker 2: By the time I went to Columbia Records, Clive Davis was running the company and Bruce Lundvall was the General Manager of the company and the head of jazz.  It was heaven.  It was heaven.  These are music people.  Clive Davis, Bruce Lundvall, it's all about the music.  It's all about the musicians.  It's all about the song.  And it's time to do an album, and they, they would just say, "Well, we want the best conditions.  Where do you want to record it?  Who do you want with you?  Or what songs are you gonna do?"  And their whole idea was if you're happy and content and you're in, in the right situation, if you're creative, you're gonna come out with some great stuff, whatever that might be.  And Bruce Lundvall loved, still loves jazz music, music in general, jazz in particular.  And he was always encouraging in terms of, what are you gonna do for us this time?  Have you written any new songs and, so he's encouraging the writing the music and trying new ideas.  This is before the bean counters took over.  I think that's what's happened to music these days.  The bean counters and the lawyers were looking at the shareholders and the bottom line and not at--they should have taken note that, you know, when the industry first started, the--it was built on the music.  And it got to the point where the music was not that important.  It became a commodity.  So those first years with, with Columbia Records was, were just wonderful.  And, in fact, it stayed that way.  I was with Columbia Records for 19 years.  I was with Chess Records for 15.  I think Columbia Records for 19 years, and did all sorts of records; two piano records with Billy Taylor, the London Philharmonic, the London Symphony Orchestra, forgive me--no, the London Philharmonic, with James Mack as arrangements.  And, of course, with Earth, Wind & Fire.  So it was a wonderful relationship with Columbia Records.
Speaker 1: Now, your first album there though was done, what was--
Speaker 2: 'Upendo Ni Pamoja', 1971.
Speaker 1: Now, how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well, they just--now, that we, we signed to them--
Speaker 1: It was 1972, but 1971--
Speaker 2: Maybe we signed in '71, and did the album in '72, okay.  And the question was, what are you gonna do?  And this, this young writer, violin player, lived in Chicago.  His name was Green, Ed Green.  I had heard him, some of his songs.  And he came over and brought this song, 'Upendo Ni Pamoja'.  And it means "love is together", Swahili.  And I knew I was gonna do that one.  And I think that's the album we did the 'Concierto de Aranjuez', the, guitar concerto.  But we just got together and put together a, a group of songs.  And the so-called "dessert song" on that album was 'Slippin' in the Darkness', that did very, very well.  And they--it totally surprised them because the first album out, I think we did nearly 2,000--200,000 units.  And that was very, very good.
Story_ID: 10095
Speaker 1: By the time you did 'Sun Goddess' [1974], was that your third--was it the third or fourth album, I mean you were selling, you sold a million copies, right with--
Speaker 2: ['The] In Crowd.'
Speaker 1: 'In Crowd', right, and then also with--
Speaker 2: 'Hang on Sloopy.'
Speaker 1: Hang on Sloopy, and didn't--
Speaker 2: 'Wade in the Water.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then the next one was 'Sun Goddess.'
Speaker 1: 'Sun Goddess,' okay.
Speaker 2: But over the course of time, we've had huge sales on the Christmas album that I did in 1961, '62.[1962]  It has sold, it sold continuously over about 15 years.  And it's, by now, approaching huge numbers.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that--and 'Sun Goddess' is 1974, but then you, didn't, in 1975 you join up with [Morris] 'Butch' Stewart or-
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And Bren- Well that--Joy--now they're Joy Art [Music production company]
Speaker 2: Right.  After, after 'Sun Goddess' and the voices that Maurice [White] had put on--
Speaker 1: Which is strange--so you said, with those voices, he just said, add it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was an instrumental piece.  And since he wrote it, and he came to record it and he, he said, "You know, I think voices would sound good."  I said, "All right," you know.  So the next album after that [Charles] Stepney [producer and arranger] suggested, "Maybe you should put voices on the, a few of your next, some of the songs."  He says, "I know some people who can do it for you."  Well, Butch Stewart had been working with (unclear), doing commercials.  And he knew Brenda [Mitchell Stewart] could sing and he knew Butch could sing.  And that's how I met them.  They came in, the album was called 'Don't It Feel Good.'  And 'Juaacklyn' and 'I Dig You'.  I forgot some of the other songs, but Stepney produced that.  And that came out really, really well.
Speaker 1: And they also had strong gospel background, too, right?
Speaker 2: Once again, once again, strong gospel background.
Speaker 1: And then, then what happens after that?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Because you're, are you working--you're not working so much in the trio format, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, right, now--starting with 'Sun Goddess', I ended up being a quintet.  It went as--I went as big as a 9 or 11-piece band. (Grimaces)
Speaker 1: Now, why did you--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Why did I do that? (lowers his head on his hand then looks up and laughs)
Story_ID: 10096
Speaker 1: Why [did you go with a larger group starting in the mid 1970s], was it because, you know, you liked working with the orchestra or it was Earth, Wind & Fire and those twenty thousand--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, it was because of, it was because of 'Sun Goddess'.  Because of 'Sun Goddess' and the voices on there, that I, in my mind, I said, people are expecting more than a trio now.  And then on the next album with [Morris] Butch [Stewart] and Brenda [Mitchell], when we put voices and we also overdubbed some guitar.  We overdubbed some percussion.  It's, it's definitely not a trio.  And then the acceptance of those albums was so big, I mean 'Don't It Feel Good'album, I don't know, that was three or four hundred thousand units.  So people expect to hear you do those things in person.  So Br-, Butch and Brenda are now going on the road with me.  And I've got a saxophone player and guitar and-- (waves hand)
Speaker 1: And you're going like this because it was more to manage.
Speaker 2: Yeah, expensive.  And I'm leaving more of the money on the road now, airplanes and hotels and salaries and per diems.  But life was good, you know.  I, I do that with a smile.  It was by no means negative at all.  But when you're a trio and you're making "X" number of dollars, you take more home than when you're a quintet or septet or 11 pieces.  You're making pretty much the same money.  But, but life was good.  You know, I don't want to be, really to say that there was problems there.  No, way.  The next album I think was when, where Stevie Wonder came to down.  And we did an album called 'Love Notes.'  And he recorded with us.
