Story_ID: 227401
Speaker 1: So [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Alfred] Liggins [III] we're going to begin, and we begin with me slating the tape just simply saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer, Scott Stearns is the videographer.  And Katia [ph.]--
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Stitt.
Speaker 1: --Stitt is observing, today's date is Wednesday, October 20, 2004, and this interview is taking place in Lanham, Maryland.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now if you would please for the record, please tell us your full name and spell it.
Speaker 2: Alfred Charles Liggins, III, A-L-F-R-E-D, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, L-I-G-G-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  And would you please tell us your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm the CEO and president of Radio One, Incorporated [Lanham, Maryland] and the chairman of TV One [Silver Spring, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay, and the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born January 30, 1965, in Omaha, Nebraska.
Story_ID: 227402
Speaker 1: Now the next couple of questions are just some People magazine-ish type questions so if you could just give us short answers to these that would be great.  Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Chinese food.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Good question, probably fall.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Don't have one.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Don't have one.
Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase or saying do you have one (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Favorite, I have one I use a lot which everybody does.  And I'm tired of using it: at the end of the day, you know, it's often used it's actually abused, yeah.
Story_ID: 227403
Speaker 1: Let's begin talking about your mother (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Starting with--and just like don't take for granted everybody knows this.  Starting with your mother's name and where she was born and where she grew up and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Catherine Liggins Hughes [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes], and she was born in Omaha, Nebraska.
Speaker 1: And did your mother ever talk about what life was like for her as a little girl growing up in Nebraska?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's talked about it--she didn't harp on it, but she's talked about it.
Speaker 1: What kinds of things did she tell you?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, they grew up in a tough environment my mother and her, her siblings.  They--Omaha is probably got, you know, I don't know 7, 8, 9, 10 percent black population.  It's a small city to begin with, and then the black population is, you know, just about 10 percent probably and it's out in the middle of nowhere.  And they grew up poor, you know and spent some time growing up in the projects.  Then moved to, you know, small house where they all, you know, lived in and I think my mother lived in the attic.  And she the oldest and had to taken care of her brothers and sister and, and, you know, it was trying times very trying times.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Strong-willed, compassionate, passionate, honest, hard-working.  And she just has a, a very strong belief in herself and in her ability to affect the outcome of things.
Speaker 1: And did she ever tell you things like what she enjoyed doing as a girl and that kind of thing and just how spent her time?
Speaker 2: Not as a young girl.  We never talked about was she like to do as a, as a young girl.  But I sort of kind of, you know, picked up on, you know, kinda my mother's history, you know, post my birth, you know what I mean, and so prior that other than, you know, spent time at her grandfather's school in Mississippi never really talked about the details of that stuff.
Speaker 1: And do you often find that you like discovered things that you didn't know about your mom like when you read an article about her or something like that?
Speaker 2: No absolutely not, I mean, you know, it's a sad day if I have to discover things in the press about my mother.  Or that there things in the press that I don't know about my mother.
Speaker 1: Oh no just about like, you know, things like you know, how things she enjoyed doing as a girl that kind of thing just, you know, more things about her childhood that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: I've never read any press articles that talked about, you know, things about her childhood.  You know, I haven't seen every press article on Cathy Hughes but I--generally the press articles start with, you know, her, you know, her background and her career--
Story_ID: 227404
Speaker 1: Let's talk now about your father starting with his name and where he was born and where he grew up.
Speaker 2: He's Alfred Charles Liggins, Jr. and he was born in Omaha, Nebraska as well and he grew up in Omaha.
Speaker 1: And did he ever share any stories with you about, you know, what life was like for him growing up in Omaha?
Speaker 2: No, no, not really.
Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: I do not know how my parents met.  I know they met when, you know, they were in high school.  I don't remember exactly how they met, no.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: My father was a quiet man that worked in the packinghouse.  The packinghouse manager.  Very bright man.  We weren't--we didn't have an extraordinarily close relationship.  And so, I don't know a lot about, you know, him growing up.  What I know about my father is basically, you know, from my mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes].  I grew up with my mother, you know, I lived with my father for only short periods of time.  And he, you know, he lived in--he, he ended up dying of cancer in Omaha.  And, and he lived in Kansas City [Kansas] for a large part of that time, yeah.
Story_ID: 227405
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestry?  Do you know if your family came from free people, slaves?  How far back can you trace your ancestors?
Speaker 2: I have not a clue.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's talk a little bit about your grandparents.  Did--and starting with your maternal grandparents did you spend a lot of time with them?
Speaker 2: When I was in Omaha [Nebraska], my father's [Alfred Liggins, Jr.] mother took care of me while my mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] worked.  You know, sort of like, you know, from a very young age up until, you know, about seven.  So I spent a lot of time with her then.
Speaker 1: And what was her--what's her name?
Speaker 2: Lucille Jacobs [ph.].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And my mother's mother lived in Omaha as well and so I would see her, you know, and spend some time with them.  And then as--well once we moved away from Omaha I spent more time with my mother's mother.  I would--we would see, you know, them, you know, or see her, you know, once or twice a year.  And then as I've got older, you know, we probably, you know, we probably see grandma, you know, two to three times a year.
Speaker 1: And what's your grandmother's name your mother's mother's name?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Helen [Jones] Woods.
Speaker 1: And what about your grandfathers?
Speaker 2: My mother's father [William A. Woods] died when I was young, so I don't remember much about him.  My father's father was estranged from; you know, from his children.  And my grandmother my father's mother got remarried again and so I had her husband's name was Spencer Jacobs [ph.].  I spent time with him when I spent time with her early on.  He was a he was he was a big guy who liked to fish (laughter) a very stern and gruff personality.  But I was young I mean, you know, he was, you know, five times my size, so I was scared of him.  And then my father's natural father was also kind of a quiet guy and I, you know, only spent a little time with him, not a lot I'd see him every now and then.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your grandmothers and tell us which one you going describe first, sorry?
Speaker 2: My mother's mother is, you know, has got a fiery personality people refer to her as a pistol.  And she's, you know, very animated.  You know, she was--she believes she was adopted.  And, you know, and still, you know, I don't, I don't know how much--I don't dig that deeply into sort of the family history.  But, you know, she'll tell you that she was adopted [by Dr. Laurence C. Jones].  She grew up, you know, at the Piney Woods Country Life School [Piney Woods, Mississippi] and she was in the band.  And she ran the band and ran away when, you know, she was fourteen, and they became International Sweethearts of Rhythm, so they traveled the world playing music.  And so she's had a very interesting life and then she ended up settling in Omaha where she's remained.  And but, you know, she had, she had a tough life, you know, growing up, and I think, you know.  As a result, her personality her tough, fiery personality reflects that.  My other grandmother Lucille was always really, really quiet.  You know, sweet lady but a caretaker the best cook in either families; great caretaker, you know, stuck by her husband and took care of her children all the way, you know, up 'til the end.  I mean, when my father, you know, died he was, you know, at home living with his mom, so that's Lucille.
Speaker 1: And do you know how it was that the families ended up settling in Omaha?
Speaker 2: I have not a clue.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It's all interesting stuff that I probably need to find out.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 227406
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?  Your earliest memory.
Speaker 2: Living--staying with my grandmother Lucille [Jacobs (ph.)] and playing in the neighborhood on Evans Street with all the neighborhood kids.  Going to the swimming pool, my cousins would come and visit.  My father's [Alfred Liggins, Jr.] sister had three kids: two boys and a girl.  And, and those are really my earliest memories and where we lived, you know, in, in Omaha [Nebraska], yeah.
Story_ID: 227407
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about what holidays were like in your house.  Like were they like very festive times, Christmas, Thanksgiving, Easter, were those--what were holidays like in your house growing up?
Speaker 2: For most of those just me and my mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes], you know.  I mean, you know she's a single mom she always took great care of me.  And I always had, you know, you know, plenty of, plenty of presents.  And, you know, I'm thinking, you know, most at Christmas, you know.  But most of the time being an only child I, you know, woke up, you know, you know, by myself.  It would just me and my mom.  Thanksgiving was probably--it kinda rotated most of the time we'd, you know, do it at, you know at, at her house where we always would spend Thanksgiving together.  I think sometimes now, you know, most of the time we still spend Thanksgiving together but sometimes I might be, you know, off on vacation but that's kinda rare.  And it's a time when we generally try to get together with the family somewhere and obviously there's those there are those off Thanksgiving when you decide to go over a friend's house.  You know, but I wouldn't say that I, I wouldn't say that they've been sort of carved in stone as a tradition that we always do one certain thing.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Story_ID: 227408
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about the community in which you grew up; and do you remember the name of the street that you lived on?
Speaker 2: I think it was North 39th Street.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and can you kinda describe your community for us?
Speaker 2: It was North Omaha [Nebraska], and you know what I was young I was, I was seven years old, you know, and before we moved [to Washington, D.C.].  So I mean it was, it was a black neighborhood, you know sort of small, you know, kinda wooden framed houses.  If you'd see it too--you know, I was talking with my mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] the other day.  And there is a picture in my office of the house that I grew up in, and she was telling the story about how excited she was when she and my father [Alfred Liggins, Jr.] bought that house.  And, you know, but if you see it today, you know, you'll like you can't believe you grew up there.  You know, it's plain, you know, what I mean it's, you know, in a, a in a rundown neighborhood.  But also back then, you know, thirty plus years ago, you know, that was, you know, it was probably, you know, a great step up from, you know, where we were which was a garden apartment.  You know, 'cause my mother and my father, you know, both had good jobs and, and made good money.  So that was--what did she tell me?  She said they paid $5700 for the house if you can imagine that.
Speaker 1: Wow, was there like a corner store or what were some of the other things?  And do you--and I know you were very young but do you remember any of the--your neighbors and your friends in that neighborhood?
Speaker 2: I remember, but I wasn't really close to, you know, a lot of them.  I mean next door to my grandmother there was a kid who lived with his with his grandparents name Carl Horn [ph.] and his sister Kelly Horn [ph.] and they were friends.  And in my neighborhood--because my grandmother [Lucille Jacobs (ph.)] lived probably two miles from us.  In my neighborhood, there were kids next door and across the street but I wasn't really close to them; I'd play with them but I wasn't really close to 'em.
Story_ID: 227409
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up and remind you of your childhood.
Speaker 2: Sights, sounds and smells--when I think about Omaha [Nebraska].  There was all--there's this little taco place that my grandmother [Lucille Jacobs (ph.)] used to take us to--she used to love like fast food tacos.  There was a swimming pool she would take us to; I used to love to go swimming whether it was the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] or the outdoor pool I like the smell of chlorine I still like smell of chlorine actually.
Speaker 1: What sounds?
Speaker 2: I can't recollect any sounds.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 227410
Speaker 1: And do you have any other memories of growing up that you'd like to share with us?  Like what was--do you remember, what was daily life like for you?  You'd wake up in the morning and then what?
Speaker 2: I don't know I haven't really thought about it, I mean, you know, I'd get up in the morning and go to school.  You know, or go to my grandmother's [Lucille Jacobs (ph.)] and sit around and I'd watch television and I'd, you know, go run her errands with her.  You know, I remember when I started preschool and, you know, remember hanging out, you know, on the playground.  I remember the playground some of the schools I went to, you know.  Not something I spent much time and thought to, though.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: This is the first time I've ever, you know, thought about this kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school you attended?
Speaker 2: Monmouth Park [School, Omaha, Nebraska] was one I went to I started off at a preschool or kindergarten I forget which one it was; maybe it was a preschool called Landon Court [Day Nursery, Omaha, Nebraska].  Then I went to an elementary school, or I think it's kindergarten.  Yeah, it's public it was called Monmouth Park.  And then I went to a Catholic school called Sacred Heart [School, Omaha, Nebraska] and then we moved to Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: At Mammoth Park and Sacred Heart do you remember any of your teachers there?  And did any of them have a particular influence on you?
Speaker 2: No don't even remember 'em--
Story_ID: 227411
Speaker 1: When you moved to Washington, D.C., do you remember like your mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] talking to you about the move and what the move was like?  Do you remember that at all?
Speaker 2: Remember I was driving cross country and, in her green Chevy [Chevrolet] Nova.  And I remember like being in the back on top of all of the stuff (laughter).  And it was fun.
Speaker 1: Were you excited about Washington, D.C. what, what did you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I was excited about moving.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: And what did you what did you know and what was your impressions of Washington, D.C. before you got there?
Speaker 2: I didn't have any.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I mean, yeah, I just know it was where the president lived.  You know, I just imagined that it was better than Omaha [Nebraska].  I don't really I; I don't have fond memories of Omaha not that Omaha is a bad place.  But I was young, you know, I don't, you know, I don't, have fond memories of Omaha.  Like, you know, there weren't great friends, and we didn't, you know, that I left behind.  And I was sad, you know, I was probably as excited to get out of Omaha as, as my mother was.
Speaker 1: And why were you all moving?
Speaker 2: Why did I think we were moving when I was seven or why did we really move?
Speaker 1: No, why did you move?
Speaker 2: I think we moved because my mother, you know, wanted to seek a better life outside of Omaha.  She was dating a guy, you know, name Dr. Milton White at the time who was a Ph.D.  And he got a job at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] as a, as a professor and, and they moved together.  And I think this was a good opportunity for my mother to go to a place that had more opportunity for black people.  And I don't remember exactly how she got the job at Howard University 'cause again I was young.  But I'm assuming that it was somehow connected to the fact that he was working there, and she ended up working in the School of Communications.
Speaker 1: And do you remember what it was like when you first got to D.C.?  Do you remember seeing the [Washington] Monument [Washington, D.C.] and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: I don't remember seeing the Monument what when we first got there.  I remember like my first time going when we first moved to Gaithersburg, Maryland, in this apartment complex called Londonderry [Apartments, Gaithersburg, Maryland].  And they had an indoor swimming pool which was great 'cause I love to swim I always love to swim.  And it's was like a suburban, you know, area we were the only if I don't remember very many black people there at all.  I think that complex is all black now but when we were there, it's hardly any black people.  In fact when I went to the elementary school there I think I went to first grade there a place called Summit Hall [Elementary School, Gaithersburg, Maryland].  You know, I was, you know, one of the only black kids in class.  And that's where we lived I don't remember exactly how long we lived there but then we moved down into the Southwest Washington, which was in the city, not the suburbs.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And then, you know, we started to do things like go to the monuments and, you know, go to museums, and it was all great.
Speaker 1: And how old were you when you all moved to the city?
Speaker 2: I was going into second grade, so I don't know, I must've been about nine.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I was either eight or nine.
Story_ID: 227412
Speaker 1: So when you moved, do you remember the name of the elementary school that you went to in [Washington,] D.C.?
Speaker 2: The first elementary school--I went to several--the first one I went to was [William] Syphax [School, Washington, D.C.] I did the second and third grade there.  And the second one I remember, I don't remember if it was--D.C. the way their schools they had first and second grade.  And then third and fourth grouped to a different elementary school.  So that how--it was either second or third grade at Syphax this is in Southwest Washington.  And then there was another elementary school called Margaret M. Amidon [Elementary School; Amidon-Bowen Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], and I went to--there for--to Amidon for the fourth grade either the third and fourth grade.  Or the fourth and half of the fifth and then we moved--oh no we didn't move, but then I started going uptown to an elementary school called Shepherd Park Elementary [sic. Alexander Shepherd Elementary School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you remember were, were there any particular teachers doing your elementary school years who had a particular influence on you?
Speaker 2: I don't remember what the influence was the first teacher that I remembered noticing, you know, and build a relationship with was a woman I think her name was Barbara Harris [ph.].  And she was my second-grade teacher at Syphax. I think it was Mrs. Harris; I liked her.  And then at Amidon there was a, a librarian I think her last name was Mosley [ph.].  That this pretty woman I, you know, I liked and took an interest in me.  She's actually I think at the time dating Congressman [HistoryMaker John] Conyers [Jr.] believe it or not way back when.
Speaker 1: Oh (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite subjects in elementary school?
Speaker 2: In elementary school?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I have not a clue; I don't remember.  Recess, yeah.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you in elementary school?
Speaker 2: I was never a great student ever.
Speaker 1: Were you an average student?
Speaker 2: I was always an average I mean, you know, sure I never really got Fs that's throughout, you know, my history.  Yeah I, I rarely flunked a class, you know, I'd occasionally get, you know, a D.  You know what I mean, but I was basically a C student I was basically a C student.  And, you know, if I, you know, I had some classes that I really liked, you know, I'd get Bs and, you know, I'd get the occasional A, but I was never a great student.
Story_ID: 227413
Speaker 1: What type of child were you during the elementary school years?  Were you mischievous?  Were you very obedient?  What type of child were you?
Speaker 2: I think both, you know, I think, for the most part, you know, I had an amiable personality.  But I was certainly, you know, I certainly got into my fair share of trouble.
Speaker 1: And how were you liking your new life in Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: Loved it.  Yeah, a lot better than Omaha [Nebraska] just more stuff to do.  You know, a lot more stuff to do much more interesting.  And I was, you know, I'd ride my bike around, you know, down to Mount Vernon [Virginia] and, you know, round to the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.] stuff like that which is interesting.  And my mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] was working out at the university [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]; she started working the radio station [WHUR-FM, Washington, D.C.], so her job was interesting working with the radio station.  So I get drug with her to a lot of those events.  And that was interesting concerts, you know, we'd be down at the [National] Mall [Washington, D.C.] for fireworks, you know, that kind of stuff so.
Speaker 1: During your elementary school years did you have dreams and aspirations like what, what did you want to be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: I want wanted to be an oceanographer at one time.
Speaker 1: Because you enjoyed swimming so much?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yes so during elementary school years I wanted to be an oceanographer.  Then as I probably got into kinda junior high [Alice Deal Junior High School; Alice Deal Middle School, Washington, D.C.] and high school I'd say junior high I wanted to be a doctor and a lawyer 'cause, you know, that's who I saw was making money.  You know, in the black community doctors and lawyers that's, you know, what all the rich kids' parents did.  And then as I got into, you know, high school I wanted to be in the record business 'cause, you know, we had been in the radio business.  And I saw the record business as exciting.  And then by the time I graduated from high school and I moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and I started to--I sold direct mail advertising at first.  And then I started to get some jobs in the record business.  One at a gospel record company that I'm working for a producer out there as a production coordinator.  I still wanted to be in the record business.  But then I also had this, you know, dream about building sort of an entertainment, an urban entertainment company along the lines of, of what MCA Universal was back then.  And that was early on; that was probably eighteen, nineteen.
Story_ID: 227414
Speaker 1: Let's go back a little bit.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: To junior high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of your junior high school?
Speaker 2: I went to Alice Deal Junior High [School; Alice Deal Middle School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like at Deal?
Speaker 2: I was there for seventh and eighth grade; I enjoyed Deal.
Speaker 1: And.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I had a good time at Deal.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of your teachers there?
Speaker 2: Remember the principal Mr. [Reginald] Moss was a good man.  I remember--don't remember any teachers.  In junior high seventh and eighth grade, I remember one I don't remember whose home that was in I don't remember her name.
Speaker 1: And at this time were you starting to develop like a particular interest in any subject?  Were you starting to have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: No, you know, academics never really played a large part in my life.  I mean I wanted to read well, you know, I was always a, you know, pretty good writer; never a great math student.  But, you know, I can I can do the basics, and I can do them quick, you know.  But it just never was, you know, it never would have thrawled me, you know.  I was probably more interested in sort of the social parts of life.  You know, more interested in, you know, culture and sports and stuff like that, you know.
Speaker 1: What about like art class?  Were you--
Speaker 2: Don't have an artistic bone in my body.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 227415
Speaker 1: Did you and your mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] attend church growing up?
Speaker 2: I was baptized Catholic and yeah we didn't necessarily do it on a regular basis, but we did definitely, you know, I've seen the inside of a lot of churches (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What were your experiences like at church?
Speaker 2: You know, they weren't personal experiences I mean, 'cause, you know, you know, we're Catholic.  And Catholic Mass is kind of staid, you know, and it's--you go there because that's what you were supposed to do you worship God.  But I think I would spend, you know, more times reflecting on myself and my own personal experiences.  And, you know having my own personal conversation with God as opposed to absorbing the church culture.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know it was, it was a house of worship it wasn't, it wasn't a cultural center for us.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: We never involved in church in that way my mother's, you know, probably more spiritual than, you know focused on organized religion.  But, you know, Catholic church is, you know, how she grew up, and so it's how I grew up.
Speaker 1: Now did you do first communion and confirm (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was baptized and never got confirmed.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 227416
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about--so we're still like around junior high school age.  Who was influencing you at this particular point in your life? So, you know, pre-teen, early teen; who was influencing you?
Speaker 2: I mean, probably beside my mother, you know, we had--when I was in elementary school living in Southwest Washington [D.C.].  There was a guy living across the hall that was a good friend of my mom's that, you know, sort of acted as a surrogate father for me.  Named [Isaiah Thornton] Tony Creswell [Jr.] passed from cancer some years back, and he took me skiing, you know, took me on a glider one time.  I mean, you know, I used to feed his cats, and I spent a lot of time with him.  And, and then my mother got married to a guy name Dewey Hughes that's how she got the last name, [HistoryMaker] Cathy Hughes.  And--
Speaker 1: How old were you when your mother remarried?
Speaker 2: I don't know I think I was in seventh grade [at Alice Deal Junior High School; Alice Deal Middle School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think I was in the seventh grade--seventh or eighth grade--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --one of the two.
Story_ID: 227417
Speaker 1: So we ended right around junior high school [Alice Deal Junior High School; Alice Deal Middle School, Washington, D.C.].  What were some of the things that you enjoyed doing in your spare time?
Speaker 2: Playing basketball, hanging out with my friends, going to parties, going skiing.
Speaker 1: Did you get to ski a lot?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] made sure that I got exposed to that early.  I think started learning how to ski when I was like eleven.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so I mean, I'd go, you know, twice a year it was fun.
Speaker 1: Where would you go skiing?
Speaker 2: At first I started going skiing with Black Ski [Incorporated], the big ski organization and they take bus trips from Washington [D.C.] up to Pennsylvania.  I think the first place I went to was Roundtop [Mountain Resort, Lewisberry, Pennsylvania].  I think that was the first time I ever went skiing; it's a resort in central Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 227418
Speaker 1: What was the name of the high school you attended?
Speaker 2: I went--after I left Alice Deal Junior High [School; Alice Deal Middle School, Washington, D.C.], that's seventh and eighth grade, I went to a place called St. John's College High School [Washington, D.C.] I went there for ninth and tenth grade.  I went to St. John's for ninth and tenth grade.  And then I left there and went to live with my father [Alfred Liggins, Jr.] for--I went to Woodrow Wilson High School [Washington, D.C.] for eleventh grade and then I went to live with my father for part of the eleventh grade.  And then I came back and went to Wilson for my senior year.
Speaker 1: Let's go back to St. John's was St. John's still a military school?
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: And now did you--back then like I know now you can either do the academic or military which would you was it like all military?
Speaker 2: No, no, everybody wore a uniform everybody had to be, you know, do whatever military (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, activity they have taken a military, you know, take a military class, you know, go through inspection the whole parade thing.  And I went there 'cause a lot of the kids in the neighborhood were going there, and I wanted to play basketball.  And I thought I was going to make the basketball team, but I never did, and but I end up hating it I didn't like it at all.
Speaker 1: Was it just too regimented or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: And so from I'm sorry from St. John's you went to live with your father or did go to Wilson?
Speaker 2: From St. John's I went to Wilson, you know, for a few months and then I ended up going to live with my father in the middle of the school year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Kansas City [Kansas].
Speaker 1: Well the time that you were at Wilson how did you enjoy Woodrow Wilson High School?
Speaker 2: Better than St. John's it was much more fun.  Yeah, but my eleventh-grade year got interrupted 'cause I ended up going to Kansas City, but I had a great senior year.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Freshman year also was great.
Speaker 1: And so why did you go and live with your dad?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) 'Cause I was a bad boy, yeah, I was a bad boy.  And I think that there were trying times in the in the Hughes household.  Personally and also from a business standpoint and I probably didn't understand that, and I wasn't cooperating as a teenager so.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So this was actually around 1982?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a beginning of my eleventh grade year.
Story_ID: 227419
Speaker 1: So actually let's talk about 1980 when your mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] first bought WOL [WOL-AM, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what that was like and did you spend a lot of time at the radio station?
Speaker 2: I remember getting in trouble when they were taking over, and I was sleep.  And wouldn't get out--I didn't want to get out of bed to go take over 'cause, you know, she and my stepfather [Dewey Hughes] were excited it's her dream.  But I really wasn't focused on it, and so they get mad at me 'cause I didn't want to get up and go.  And, you know, once they bought the station I--they wanted me to work in it I mean this is a family business, you know.  And, and I think my friends thought it was interesting the whole bit and at first I thought it was interesting like, you know, I was doing sportscast while I was in high school.  Which isn't, you know, looking back like it's a great experience for a kid.  I didn't really like doing it; I really wasn't good at it.
Speaker 1: Would you like actually go out and do interviews and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: I, I would read the sports (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Only on, on the show and like I did a couple of interviews like I interviewed Sugar Ray Leonard one time.
Speaker 1: Was that exciting for you as a teenager?
Speaker 2: It was okay yeah I mean, it really was.  I just never was like, you know.  I, I never really wanted to be in front of the camera or I just I don't--that's not what drives my personality, you know.  Some people like that notoriety and that recognition I've always been probably somebody who, you know, I want to be respected, and I want have recognition, but I'd rather be more, you know, low key and in the background--
Story_ID: 227420
Speaker 1: And I also did a talk show [on WOL-AM, Washington, D.C.] on Saturday mornings that was a couple hours long.
Speaker 2: What kind of talk show was it?
Speaker 1: You know, youth perspective, you know, teenage point of view and I hated it because that means I couldn't do anything.  You know, If I had to do a talk show at 7 a.m. on Saturday morning, that means I could do anything Friday night.  And I'd have to prepare for it and all that sorta kinda stuff or end up going on unprepared.  And then, you know, my, you know, you know, my stepfather [Dewey Hughes] would critique me.  And all that kind of stuff and I just wasn't into it, you know.  But again my friends thought it was cool; it was great to talk about, you know.
Speaker 2: And did you have like friends saying, "Oh, you know, I have this great idea for your show.  You should have me on and talk about this," that kind of thing?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's not what, you know, eleventh graders talk about they talk about like, you know, what party they're going to next.  What sneakers they have like, you know, where they want to go to college and, you know, what girls they're into.  I mean, that's, you know.
Speaker 2: Well what types of things you talk about on your show?
Speaker 1: You know, I don't even remember like, you know, driving age (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Should it be, you know, raised, you know.  Sometimes, you know, political issues.  I hated doing that show I mean, I really did, you know.  You know, I've never been--I've never been the one that thought the world needed to hear and understand, you know, my personal views or opinions.  You know, on sort of global or domestic issues that just not, you know.  I kind of believe in life and let live people do their own--I have opinions about stuff.  I have opinions about a lot of things.  But I don't feel the need to espouse, you know, those to, to others or to push them onto others, you know.  So therefore I didn't really get much out of, you know, doing a talk show.
Speaker 2: Did you feel though that it wasn't important to get the teenage perspective out there?  And that it, it was good to hear from teenagers on these particular issues?
Speaker 1: You know, my stepfather did a--he I think he probably imminent because he was the--before he, he bought the radio station with my mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] he worked at MBC.   MBC television station here [Washington, D.C.] as a, as a producer.  He produced a show called 'Youth News,' that was really popular.  And it was very well done and the kids were great on it.  And, and so I think that's, you know, I'd see it on television.  I'd get excited about yeah that's cool but once I started doing it, I didn't get it I mean I didn't get it I didn't like it.  I didn't, you know, I didn't sort of thrive on the interact, it was just like I was doing something.  And because I had to do it I was talking to these people about something I didn't really care about because I had to have a topic, you know.  And I hadn't really sort of formed, you know, what my direction in life was gonna be, you know.  And so, you know, it's great, you know, essentially it was like, you know, I was always articulated.  And, and (laughter) could carry on a lively gregarious conversation.  And so for me it was more like hey here's this intelligent kid, you know.  I mean talk to this intelligent kid, but, you know, what that's great but there's not really that much substance there.  It wasn't like I was, you know, some, you know, math prodigy or anything like that, you know, I was just a black kid who could carry a conversation.
Speaker 2: And but when you look back on it now do you feel like you did lend a voice to the voice this and that.  It--and that it was important to get the teenage perspective out there when you look back on it now.
Speaker 1: I, I think we're, we're in the media business and what media business does particularly black media business it should represent or reflect the various different points of view that are out there in the African American community.  And so from that perspective yeah.  Here's a perspective of, you know, an eleventh grader, you know, on, you know, these particular issues.  You know, but, you know, was, were they earth shattering points of view it was, you know, yes, I think it was importing, but it's certainly it was Saturday morning at 7 o'clock it wasn't so important.  I wasn't in morning drive or afternoon drive it was Saturday at 3 o'clock if that of telling you anything (laughter).  So even, even my stepfather and my mother didn't feel (laughter) that it was that important to give.  They probably felt it was more important for me to get a taste of this to see if it was something I wanted to do as a career and to learn the radio business than anything else.  You know, and it was probably good discipline for me (laughter).
Story_ID: 227421
Speaker 1: So in 1982 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Middle of your junior year you go live with your dad [Alfred Liggins, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In Kansas City [Kansas].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Kansas City, Missouri or Kansas?
Speaker 2: Kansas.
Speaker 1: What was that like for you coming from Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: Eighteen hundred kid high school, was probably one of seven black kids, you know, living with my father at the time was tough.  We didn't get along, you know, I was going through my own teenage thing, and I was in a stranger house and I hated it.  Yeah, I made the best of it, though.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I mean yeah that's one of the things I always try to do is, you know, make the best of it.  And actually didn't even end up living with my father all that long there.  We get in an argument and I moved out and moved in with a kid that I went to school with and stayed with his family.  And then I finished my eleventh-grade year, and I went to live with my aunt and uncle who lived in Houston [Texas].  I worked there for the summer, and I ended up going back to D.C.  And I was very happy to get back to D.C.
Speaker 1: And what was Houston like?
Speaker 2: They lived way out in the suburbs, and I just worked, I mean--
Speaker 1: What kind of work did you do?
Speaker 2: I was a salesperson at, at a sporting goods store and I basically strung tennis rack.  You know, ran the tennis department and strung tennis racks, and so I made good money 'cause, you know, people would people would show up and say, "I want a tennis racket; how long is it gone to take string it?"  And I'd say, "Two weeks."  They'd say, "Well I need it tomorrow," and that cost them extra twenty bucks so, you know.
Speaker 1: And this aunt and uncle was, was it your (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: It's my mother's [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] brother.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And his wife.
Story_ID: 227422
Speaker 1: And so you come back to [Washington] D.C.--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to finish up your senior year at [Woodrow] Wilson [High School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Glad to be back?
Speaker 2: Happy, really happy to be back.
Speaker 1: And what was happening (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) D.C. is a great place to grow up, you know, just, you know, good time lots of stuff to do fun stuff.  I had good friends, yeah.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: Andre Banks, Chip Ellis, Stadra Smith [ph.], Kern Jackson [ph.].
Speaker 1: What kinds of things that you guys do?
Speaker 2: Play basketball at the playground, you know, went to parties together, hung out at each other's houses.  You know, it was just normal, you know, teenage stuff; hung out in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.], you know, sneak into the movies.
Story_ID: 227423
Speaker 1: What was happening at the radio station [WOL-AM, Washington, D.C.] when you came back in 1983 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Same stuff I mean, you know, I mean, I was, you know, I'm trying to think did I go back to doing sports or was I doing sports in my senior year [at Woodrow Wilson High School, Washington, D.C.] I don't remember.  You know, just struggling I mean, you know, they bought WOL in 1980, AM station first time they'd be in business for themselves.  Economy was horrible, interest rates sky high, and they were attempting, you know, a new format: black talk.  And, you know, I'm sure that they and the community thought it was a noble and much-needed format but advertisers didn't necessarily see the value the, the value of it at the time.  And, and listeners were also migrating from the FM--from the AM dial to the FM dial.  So, you know, things were tough.  And but, you know, my mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] and my stepfather [Dewey Hughes] were always probably pretty good at sort of keeping from me and maybe I just wasn't all that interested.  You know, how tough things were I think so when I get back I was more interested, you know, in, in being a good son.  So I didn't have to go back to Kansas (laughter).  But, you know, what I mean, I was turning eighteen I didn't know what the hell I was gonna do.  I hadn't gotten into any colleges I just knew that everybody else was going to college and doing something.  I needed to do something, and my stepfather was moving out to California.  And so sounded good to me, so I was ready to go to California too; that's what I did after high school.
Story_ID: 227424
Speaker 1: And so well--when you were in high school what were some of your thoughts about college were you did--were you thinking, you know?
Speaker 2: I would have gone--I applied to--I wanted to go to college, you know.  But, you know, I had a 2.3 or 2.4 grade point average, and I applied to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia], Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts] and University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And (laughter) oddly enough, I got waitlisted at Williams College and UVA.  I didn't know if I was gonna get in and obviously got turned down at Harvard and University of Chicago.  (Laughter) I thought I'd get in on the strength of my essays regardless of what my grades were, and, and I was wrong.  And in this California opportunity came up and I figured I'd go out there and I'd work I mean, I always worked.  I always, you know, I had jobs ever since I was twelve or thirteen, and my stepfather [Dewey Hughes] was gonna to be out there.  So I didn't, you know, figured I'd go out there and I'd figure it out.
Story_ID: 227425
Speaker 1: Let's go back a little bit just to--when you first came back to [Washington] D.C.  Which, you know, I had read somewhere that, you know, you spend a lot of time with your mom [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] as she would like to drive guests back and forth that kind of thing do you remember--?
Speaker 2: I got to meet all kinds of people (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Patti LaBelle, Roy Ayers, you know, Donald Byrd gosh, you know, [HistoryMaker] Tim [Reid] and [HistoryMaker] Daphne [Maxwell] Reid way back when.  I got to see all the concerts, you know, Earth, Wind & Fire.  And I would I go to the boxing matches, the pay preview.  They'd have--I remember when, you know, when Muhammad Ali or Sugar Ray Leonard would have their fight, you know, go to the close circuit at the Cap Centre [Captial Centre, Landover, Maryland].  I mean, she was running a radio station, WHUR [WHUR-FM, Washington, D.C.] so I got involved in all that stuff which was great; it was very exciting.  So hanging out with my mother was fun.
Story_ID: 227426
Speaker 1: And so you graduated from [Woodrow Wilson] High School [Washington, D.C.] in 1983.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And then you go out to California--so why was your stepfather [Dewey Hughes] going out to California?
Speaker 2: You know, stated reason was that, you know, the radio business was tough he didn't really want to do this any longer.  He want to be in the record business he wanted to, you know, do some more creative things.  And so he was going out to California to sort of, you know, set up West Coast operations.  The real reason was, you know, they didn't tell me, it was the start of their breakup, you know.  And it just wasn't officially I guess it was a separation.  You know, which is what it was, you know, and, and, you know what, he was a he had he had a good influence on me had a big influence on me.  And, and he, you know, really sort of, you know, treated me as his own.  So I thought, you know, I think my mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] saw this as, you know, "Hey the marriage isn't happening.  [HistoryMaker] Alfred [Liggins, III] doesn't know what the hell he's doing, you know, doing anyway this could be a good experience for him.  Dewey can watch out after him while he's out to there and, and he'll figure it out," you know.
Speaker 1: And so when you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Plus her brother was out there also at the same time my Uncle Bobby [ph.] was there as a resident at Martin Luther King Hospital [Martin Luther King Jr./Drew Medical Center, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: So when you get to California (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I drove out to California cross country with my buddy Chip Ellis.
Speaker 1: What was that like?
Speaker 2: That was great we had a blast.
Speaker 1: Did you guys stop a lot along the way?
Speaker 2: A lot we stopped four times where we stop we stopped in Columbus, Ohio.  Stayed in the Travel Lodge motel he, unfortunately, caught some, you know, disease that you get from dirty sheets (laughter).  And so that tell you about the places we were staying in and then the next stop we went from Columbus, Ohio I think we went to Kansas City [Kansas].  We stayed over there I saw some of my old friends that I went to--well the guy that I lived with his family.  We stayed over there and went out that night, so that was kind of interesting.  Then we--trying to think where we stopped the next time--we're in Colorado somewhere--did we stop in Colorado?  But I remember driving through Colorado, around Colorado--racing Colorado River it was fun.   And then I think we stopped in Utah, and it was blazing hot.  We went through the, the desert we had this--I had this station wagon that I had in high school.  That would overheat all the time, and we had a case of oil in the back 'cause it was burning oil, but it had a killer sound system.  And, and it was a lot of fun and then we stopped in [Las] Vegas [Nevada] and I lost all the cash that we had.  And we had to sleep in the car in the parking lot of the Sands Hotel [and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada].  And then the next day we ended up in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].
Story_ID: 227427
Speaker 1: And so what were you thinking you were gonna do in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]?  You knew you were gonna go out there and get a job; you're still--
Speaker 2: I was gonna get a job, and I was gonna go to night school.
Speaker 1: And you're still--are you still interested in the record business at this point?
Speaker 2: I'm interested in the record business I don't have any idea how to get in.  You know, I mean my stepfather [Dewey Hughes] was trying to figure out how to get in he didn't, you know.  He didn't have, you know, an idea how to get himself in.  So, I got a job selling direct mail advertisement that was my first gig.  But it was three hundred dollars a week on the draw plus commission and, you know, I was a decent seller and (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What, what kind of direct mail was it?
Speaker 2: It was a--it was a book of coupons called 'Super Centives.'  And essentially we would go out to advertisers that, you know, be, you know, they, you know, come up with offers that go on this coupon book.  And then we'd mail them out to houses in different neighborhoods.  And people would call in and, you know, redeem them.  And so I made, you know, good money doing that.  And then, then I got a job at--I got into--I ended up going to this to the after party for the premiere of 'Staying Alive' which was the sequel to the 'Saturday Night Fever,' the John Travolta movie.  And then I met Andrae Crouch, the gospel singer and started talking.  And, you know, told him my family was in the radio business and we exchanged numbers.  And so I got to know him and, you know, became friends with him and his sister Sandra [Crouch].  And then they helped me get a job at their record company, Light Records.  And I was in the sales and marketing department doing telemarketing calling out selling out sheet music, you know, hymn notes.  And, you know, occasionally, you know, the Hawkins family or Andre and Sandra put out an album and, you know, I'd get to sell that too but, you know, it was the job, and I was making money.
Speaker 1: And what-was--so you in the record industry now so to speak and was it all that you had expected?
Speaker 2: I wasn't in the record industry how I wanted to be in the record industry.  I wasn't working for, you know, Motown or, or Capitol Records I was working for Light Records out in Newbury Park, California, which was way out.  So it was totally different experience but it was the start.  And I, you know, also a singer who just recently passed away good friend of the family this guy name Carl Anderson was a good friend of my stepfather's and my mother's [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes].  Was recording an album he's on CBS Record[s] at the time, and there is a guy who is producing, a producer named Patrick Henderson.  He was producing and my stepfather would go, would go to the studio.  Patrick and I became friends, and then I started working for Patrick as a production coordinator.  So I, you know hire the musicians, take care of paperwork, book the studio time.  All that kind of stuff so that was a lot more interesting, 'cause I was doing, I was doing real album projects.  We did the Carl Anderson album, we did the very famous Mr. T rap album (laughter).  I had to drive Mr. T back and forth between the studio and his house and he never said anything (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Not one "I pity the fool."
Speaker 2: Not one "I pity the fool."
Story_ID: 227428
Speaker 1: What was happening back home with your mom [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] and the radio station [WOL-AM, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know what I talked to her every day, she--I talked to her more than every day.  I think I called her--I mean, I did work and called two or three times a night.  And, and what was happening she was doing the morning show, was she doing the morning show by herself by then.  I think she was--she and my stepfather [Dewey Hughes] used to do the morning show together prior to when I came back.  You know, they were doing--actually for most of high school they were doing the morning show together then he left.  And then she stayed off the air for a while but then I think she went back on the air to do it, you know, by herself.  'Cause she couldn't afford to have anything, you know, body else to do it.  She couldn't afford to have anybody else to do it.  But she kept a stiff upper lip, you know what I mean, she never really sort of, you know, lead on what was going on but, you know, the radio station was in, you know, very much in financial distress.  We lived in a nice rented house on MacArthur Boulevard when I was in, in high school.  Which is one of the, you know, upper--the Palisades [Washington, D.C.], it's upper crust neighborhood but she, you know, she moved out of that.  She moved into the radio station.
Speaker 1: And did, you know, she was living at the radio station?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she told me it didn't sort of register, you know, that, you know, this was, you know, such a negative.  I mean, you know, I mean at the end of the days she was absolutely living in the radio station. And, you know, the radio station space what we had was much too big for, you know, for what the station actually needed.  So, you know, oppressive rent she, you know, couldn't afford, you know, the keep the house up and stuff like that.  So it made sense so she moved in there.  I don't know I wasn't there for when she actually moved in there by the time I got there she'd built it out.  You know, such that it was the little apartment, you know.  Tiny little kitchen (laughter) had a hot plate, but, you know, it just didn't really register, and she didn't complain.
Speaker 1: So you weren't worried about her because it didn't sound like--
Speaker 2: Well put it this way I--it wasn't registering because I wasn't conscious I wasn't worried, you know, if I'd been conscious at that time and known that, you know, hey they were about to lose the station. Because, you know, they can't service their debt, and they are got their dream and their money tied up into it and how worried and stress she was I probably would've worried about it.  But she never really--she's, she's never visited that, you know, back then she never visited that, you know, upon me and sort of those financial issues.  And, and so no I wasn't worried, I knew it wasn't going well, okay I knew it was tough.  And she would say, you know, she would tell me things were but she always was, was a believer she was always optimistic that she was gonna make it happen.  And, and turn it around, my stepfather wasn't; that's the reason that he went to, to California.  And when they got a divorce that's the reason, he signed over his share of the company, and, you know, didn't think about it.  And, you know, and was gone.
Speaker 1: And were, were you spending a lot of time with him when you were in California?
Speaker 2: I forgot how long I lived with him, but I probably live with him, you know, for three or four, five months.  And then I got my--I moved in with the brother of my buddy whose family I lived with in Kansas [City, Kansas].  His brother was out there, so I moved into his apartment with him; he was my roommate.  And then we end up moving out into the--that was West Hollywood [California] and then we moved out into Van Nuys [Los Angeles, California].  And so, you know, I'm, I'm, transitioned and moved out on my own pretty quickly.
Story_ID: 227429
Speaker 1: And were you going to night school?
Speaker 2: For a little while, yeah.  I probably went for about three, four months.
Speaker 1: Where were you going to night school?
Speaker 2: UCLA [University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: And how, were you juggling all that, working during the day going to night school?
Speaker 2: Going to school at night, yeah.
Speaker 1: How were you managing that?
Speaker 2: Not well I wasn't interested in school, you know, I wanted to have fun.  L.A. [Los Angeles, California] was a--an awakening for me.  It was a very fast city with, you know, lots of bright lights, fast cars, pretty girls.  And I had, you know, you know, I started to make friends, and I was going out to night clubs, you know, six, seven nights a week having a blast.  Had a great time, and trying to figure out how to get out of the gospel record business into the real record business and kind of make my mark, you know.
Speaker 1: So you're still wanting to get in the record business?
Speaker 2: I mean I knew I needed to have a career.  I had to support myself.  I wasn't interested in the radio business, never was interested in the radio business.  And my skill had always been that, you know, I was a good salesman.  You know, people liked me, I can tell a story.  I knew, you know, how to--I knew how to prioritize things economically.  You know, what's important where's the money and, and I figured that I could employ that in the record business somehow and--
Speaker 1: Just a matter of getting a foot in the door.
Speaker 2: And I thought I had my foot in the door, my stepfather [Dewey Hughes] had a friend, Iris Gordy who was [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy's niece and worked at Motown.  And I got to know her, and she was gonna hire me and, and I, and I quit my job at the gospel record company, thinking I was gonna go work for Motown.  And I was all excited.
Story_ID: 227430
Speaker 1: Here's your big opportunity; you're gonna get this job at Motown.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I was going get the job at Motown; [Iris Gordy] offered it to me but it was gonna take some time for it to come through and (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was this job gonna be?
Speaker 2: I don't even remember.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I think I was gonna work in the A&R [Artists and Repertoire] department trying to find acts working for her I don't know if gonna be her assistant or whatever.  And, and it never came through, you know, and, and so I was out at the--I was out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and I was unemployed at this time.  My mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] had sent me $10,000 to, you know, for mad, you know, money emergency money.  I had it in a CD [certificate of deposit], and I hadn't, you know, I hadn't touched it.  And, and so I was unemployed, all I was doing was partying, I didn't have that job and, you know, I had talked to her every day.  And she, she convinced me and our friend, Carl Anderson, also who I was close to out there told me he thought it was a good idea she convinced me, you know, to come back home.  And get in--work at the radio station, you know, get into school finish school.  And then go back out, you know what I mean and so, you know, I did, you know, she had a job for me there.  And, and the one thing that I could always, you know, do is I've always been a, you know, good salesman.  And so I was like, "Well I'm unemployed so this kinda makes sense right now" (laughter).  I was apprehensive of about coming back because, you know, I, you know, I've always sorta wanted to, to go out and do my own thing, you know.  But the realities of life, you know, are you need a job you need a career.  And at that time I also still was, you know, I thought I was committed to the fact that I needed to get a college degree and finish school.  So I came back, and I moved into the radio station with my mother.  You know, my bedroom was the old conference room (laughter).  And, and I started selling air time, radio time for WOL [WOL-AM, Washington, D.C.], and she did the morning show.
Speaker 1: And so this is in 1985?
Speaker 2: January of 1985, I was twenty-one years old.
Speaker 1: And you enrolled in school?
Speaker 2: I enrolled in the University of [the] District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] went to school at night, and I don't remember how long I went I may have gone there for about a year.  And my mother taught me the radio business, you know.  And it was, you know, then once I get there, I saw, you know, how tough, you know, that things really were.  The station was probably billing $600,000 a year, you know, down from one million plus.  Couldn't keep good salespeople she was on in the morning.  The station was located in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] where the rent was oppressively high; we couldn't afford it.  And we made a, a big transition in that we had to move the radio station.  So we moved the radio station she moved the radio station over to 8th Street in the hood in Washington, D.C., 4th and H [Street] NE into a little shoebox little building on the corner.  You know, was digging out the cellar to build studios.  And there was, you know, syringes and all kind of stuff; this was a rough neighborhood.  And then we moved from the radio station back up to an apartment building that she owned and bought when I was, you know, in the sixth grade [at Alexander Shepherd Elementary School, Washington, D.C.].  And she lived in she lived in the upstairs apartment that, that I, you know, kinda grew up in before we moved to MacArthur Boulevard.  And I lived downstairs in a one bedroom and we moved the station to H Street.  And after we got to H Street, you know, so I was learning the ropes.
Story_ID: 227431
Speaker 1: You know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Were you enjoying and appreciating the radio business at this time?
Speaker 1: At--when I first got there [Washington, D.C.] no, okay.  I was very happy to be back with my friends and loved hanging out with my friends.  And, and I started to appreciate the radio business after I started to have success, economic success, selling it, you know.  So after the very first year, you know, we had moved down to H Street, you know.  I had my own apartments we move back down, so I have my own apartment.  And I think my first year in selling radio I made $36,000 which is more money that I had ever made.
Speaker 2: Right, and we're also talking about what 1985?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986], '85 [1985], '86 [1986]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was twenty-one years old.  So I was, you know, so I was very happy.  And then, you know, she [Liggins' mother, HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] was doing the morning shows always been, you know, sort of, you know, of firebrand and lightning rod for political issues.  And, and racial issues, you know, on her talk show and she, you know, start getting a lot of notoriety as the voice of the black community.  And, and so you could feel that the station even though it didn't have a big listening audience had a very active listening audience.  And, you know, we were able to translate that into, to dollars.  I was able to sell that, you know--
Story_ID: 227432
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about the process by which you sold advertising.
Speaker 2: You know, we were, you know, a one share AM radio station up against FM so we was sort of like an afterthought to all the major advertisers.  But there was just so much money out there that we weren't, we weren't getting none of it that we weren't getting that, you know.  One of the things I quickly figured out was that a) there was a lot of money there and b) if we could tell a good story give good service, you know.  Anytime she [Liggins' mother, HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] would get any good salespeople they would leave and go to a bigger radio stations bigger companies, you know.  She trained, you know, half of the sale reps in, in the market that started WOL [WOL-AM, Washington, D.C.] and then move on.  Well, I was a sales rep who wouldn't go anywhere, you know.  It was, you know, our company; I stayed.  So therefore I ended up handling all the big accounts.  They weren't necessarily big monetarily for us, but it was McDonald's.  And so, you know, McDonald's was spending, you know, I don't know who knows they were spending, you know, $15,000 in a year.  You know, with WOL and it was all out of the black budget they had, you know, money set aside for black-owned media.  And we'd get that but then, you know, I found out old McDonald's has this other budget that's $2 million a year.  And, you know, what they're buying fifteen radio stations on it.  And so, you know, I'd go out and then build a relationship with the client.  Bring my mother in so they could see the mother and son team and see that my mother doesn't--didn't actually bite.  And explaining to them that WOL, you know, while might not be their cup of tea it serves, you know, a real purpose for the black community.  And you need to put us on this, you know, this bigger buy.  And the reality is, is that we go from fifteen a year to thirty-five a year 'cause we get on the bigger buy.  It's still no money to them, but it's increasing it's, it's a big increase for WOL.  And so, you know, you do that, you know, with McDonald's and you do it, you know, with, you know, the, the beer companies.  There was a gentleman named Fred Brown [ph.] who was a, a longtime executive at Anheuser-Busch he was based here locally.  He was a good friend of the family's, a good friend of myself and my mother's; who took an interest in us.  And, you know, saw to it that we got, you know, more money than we deserved 'cause he liked us.  You know, and we built a lot of relationships like that, you know, end up building a relationship with First American Bank.  You know, 'cause they wanted to do college savings programs and convinced them to do a radio with my mother.  And she did a remote at a local first American branch like a thousand people came up and enrolled in this college saving, you know, program.  So they're excited, so we got on the first American bank business continuing.  And so, so it's building those kinds of relationships, and it was a--it, it took a long time.  Actually it took a couple of years to get it going in the right direction.  And all of a sudden, you know, the--and she was, she was the GM [general manager] and, and doing the morning show and I was by that time the, you know, top salesman, the sales manager.  And so, we probably go from billing $600,000 a year to like one million two.  And we actually made money on that we probably made, you know, three or $400,000.  And, and her investors, you know, company called Syndicated Communications [Syncom Venture Partners, Bethesda, Maryland].  Herb Bookings [sic. HistoryMaker Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.] and [HistoryMaker] Terry Jones, you know, a pioneering black venture capital communications fund said, "Oh shit, you know, she's actually starting to make money, can pay interest."  I mean they probably by that time thought that they were gone have to write this off.  And they probably would've, they probably would've put her out of business if they had anybody to sell the radio station to, but they didn't, you know.  It was probably two-fold: one they didn't have anybody who was probably ready to come and say, "I'm gonna take you out for what you have in it."  And the other part was they probably, you know, weren't relishing the thought of having to coming in and tell Cathy Hughes that they were going to put her out of business.  That was not a conversation there was gonna go down easy (laughter).  So she bought herself a lot of time 'caused by this time its 1986 so she six years into this, in you know into the WOL thing, you know.  And six years into it, you know, you--it's starting to see signs of life, you know, again.  And then and that was--those were great times.  I mean, you know, I learned, you know, the radio business.  Had a lot of fun building the business with her and learned, you know, and learned it.  And when you start to get, you know, I've always been more so, you know, of, of a monetary animal then, then she is.  Not that she's not, you know, a very, you know, savvy business woman.  But I think she really got into this, and she'll tell you she got into the radio business so, you know, to serve the community and, you know.
Speaker 1: And give people a voice.
Speaker 2: And give people a voice.  And, and I told you I got into radio business 'cause I needed a job, you know what I mean.  And when I got most excited about it in the radio business was the fact that I started making money.  And so my first year may $36,000 my second year I made $60,000.  I'm twenty-two years old making $60,000 a year, you know, selling radio this is good, you know.  You know, my third year I made $100,000, you know, I'm driving a BMW; things were working.  And, and then I started to view WOL as a platform to launch sort of my wider dreams, you know.
Story_ID: 227433
Speaker 1: And do you still have the record company dreams at this time or have they been modified (laughter) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They've definitely been modified although--they've been modified and, you know, my mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes], you know, has a small record label that's got one artist it's a guy named Jeff Majors is also her significant other.  And he's a brilliant harpist and composer does great music and, and so, she works on that the company supports that.  But we're not in the record business.   I wouldn't rule it out, but it's not a great business.  The radio business is a better than the record business.  The cable television business is a better business than the record business.  So I think we should stay focused on the things that are, you know, give us the greatest returns.  But I did--but at the time I saw, you know, radio as a way to--as a platform to springboard into the record business or the entertainment business.  And so I started, you know, thinking of ways to expand the company.  And the most obvious way was that we had to get out of a young radio business because everything was on FM.  I listen to FM radio.  I listen to all the FM stations.  I mean, I would listen to ours 'cause I had to, but it wasn't exactly my cup of tea at twenty-two years old, you know.  And we had to figure out a way to buy an FM, and my mother's obviously gung-ho about that.  And we went to talk to our investors, you know, Herb [HistoryMaker Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.] and [HistoryMaker] Terry [Jones] they were like hey great list try to figure out a way to do it.  And so we started hunting for an FM radio stations.  And all of them were way too expensive, you know, for us to figure out how to buy.  And for Herb and Terry to finance at the time but I kept track of stuff the in the industry.  Read all the industry way trades, you know, found out who owned the stations in the market.  And then--
Speaker 1: And what was the market like in the late '80s [1980s] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You can only own one AM and one FM.  There's probably $100 million in the market maybe, maybe not even a 100 maybe $80 million.  All-black radio stations had the same format, James Brown, the Sugarhill Gang, you know.  And, and this company called Outlet Communications owed the big news talk station.  Actually the all-news station WTOP [WTOP-FM, Washington, D.C.] and they had an FM, WTKS Majic 102.3.  And it was the weakest of all the area signals.
Speaker 1: What was the format of that group 102.3 at that time?
Speaker 2: Soft adult contemporary Melissa Manchester, Barry Manilow.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And they wanted to buy a bigger FM station they wanted to buy this was, you know, a 3000 watt FM station.  They wanted to buy 50,000-watt station.  So a station called WASH [WASH-FM, Washington, D.C.] came up for sale Metropolitan [Broadcasting Corporation] John Kluge's company was selling off their radio assets.  And so they wanted to buy this big FM, and they were gonna pay $32 million for it.  And they agreed to do it, which mean they had to sell their smaller FM.  And that was the station, you know, that was probably going to sell for a price that, you know, was more in our price range instead of a 30 or 25 or 50 million dollars.  This station started off at four but ended up at seven and so I, I identified the station told my mother about it.  And I remember, and she knew the station 'cause it used to be this station call WHFS [WHFS-FM] was an alternative rock station.  Owned by this crazy guy Jake Einstein, who was always super friendly to my mother and myself because they were broadcasters and came up and he was just a, you know, left to center kinda guy.  His family worked at the station and, you know, he's a great old broadcaster.  And, and so, we knew the secret but never, never paid much attention to it.  But then what we kinda figure out 'cause we drove--we got in the car I remember with her one day, and had a little, you know, boom box.  We were riding around in the car is that even though it was 3000 watts it covered up most of the black people in the area.  'Cause black people lived in Washington [D.C.] and Prince George['s] County [Maryland] and plus, we could afford it so which was number one.  And we desperately needed to get out of the A--get into the FM radio business I mean, just no matter what.  You had to do it.
Story_ID: 227434
Speaker 1: And so, you know, she [Liggins' mother, HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] and [HistoryMaker] Terry Jones, you know, start negotiating [for WTKS Majic 102.3; WMMJ Majic 102.3, Washington, D.C.].  I started off the process, but then they started negotiating with Outlet Communications on, you know, trying to buy this radio station.  Outlet kept jacking up the price, and finally we got an agreement.  And one of the ways we got an agreement 'cause Outlet was also owned by a venture capital firm called Wesray Communications [Company; Wesray Capital Corporation].  At that time, it was this guy name Ray Chambers, who's a big financier out of New Jersey, New York, New Jersey.  And the guy who was running Outlet, Bruce Sundlun, who later who, later became the governor of Rhode Island.  You know, wasn't such a nice guy, but Ray, who's a, you know, great philanthropists now does all kind of things, you know, for Newark [New Jersey] and in inner-city constituents.  Somehow I think my mother had a friend who knew him, and the friend took my mother, and I think Terry Jones went with her to Ray and said hey we're trying to buy this radio station he keeps jacking the price up.  And, and Ray, you know, told Bruce Sundlun stop it and sell it to her.  You know, stop jacking the price up just selling it to em.  And they did, and it was like seven and a half million dollars and then (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-seven [1987].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, so then Terry Jones had to figure out how to finance it, you know.  And, you know, he went out to, you know, the MESBIC [Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Company] community which were these like, you know, you know, minorities focused venture capital firms backed by the SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration].  And, you know, brought in for five other, you know, investors raised $4 million equity and had to go get a bank loan.  I think at that time it was DC National Bank [Washington, D.C.], and they were able to finance it.  But the bank wanted to, you know, have us keep the format the same because the format had revenue on it and ratings and, you know, and stuff associated with it.
Speaker 2: The format again is adult contemporary?
Speaker 1: Soft adult contemporary.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah and, and we were like well we, you know, we want to change.  It's not what we do but anyway we wanted the radio station, so we agreed to anything, you know.
Story_ID: 227435
Speaker 1: And so we bought it [WTKS Majic 102.3; WMMJ Majic 102.3, Washington, D.C.], and it was funny because we had black talk radio in one hand.  And then we had this white suburban soft adult contemporary station, and so I came up with--I was the sales manager at this time.  And I came up with the sales position that's the perfect combination for Washington [D.C.] it's black it's white.  And then we had zebra mugs, you know, what I mean and that's how we that's how we sold it.  And we actually started making some money with it.  You know, we hit our first-year business plan, but we didn't know what we were doing in this format, and it fell out of the Arbitron book.  It stopped it--the audience level dropped off so much that it, it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) An Arbitron is like--
Speaker 1: Rates the.
Speaker 2: --performance rating?
Speaker 1: Rates the radio stations then our audience had dwindled so much 'cause we didn't know what we were doing that it failed to get a large enough audience to be rated.  And so we finally went back to the bank said look we need to do something that we know how to do.  And we'd research different formats and stuff, and we knew it had to be different.  And so that's where this whole urban adult contemporary idea came from and basically it was just like, you know, just don't play any rap music play, you know, '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s], '80s [1980s] stuff.  And splintered the audience just like, you know, the general market stations do for, you know, you know, for white listeners.  And we did that, and it was a huge hit; it was a big hit ratings were.
Speaker 2: 'Cause was there a void was it, was?
Speaker 1: Wasn't being done, wasn't being--actually we--that's what we wanted to do in the, in the first place that's one of the biggest arguments my mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] and I had was she actually want to take her show and put it on the new FM.  Because at that time she was thinking, you know, she wanted to be, you know, a big talk show host.  And I, you know, had a different opinion and I ended--me and the, and, and [HistoryMaker] Terry [Jones] and her boss also had a different opinion in that, you know.  Hey, there's this void for this music format, you know, and, by the way, your talk show is what keeps the AM alive, you know.  So if we take you off of that put up some do we end up killing the AM, you know.  And she was very disappointed, you know, and I felt guilty about that, you know.  I'm--I've gotten over the guilt, but I felt guilty about that for long time 'cause I, you know sort of felt like I derailed her, her radio career.  And she could be Oprah [Winfrey] on radio.  But she's done pretty good, you know, she, she's done just fine, you know, being the founder and chair (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Despite having a new role.
Speaker 1: Despite that and, you know, what it was a huge hit.  I mean, it was a huge hit, and we made--that was 1987 we bought it we changed the format probably in '88 [1988].  And within four years we probably had $5 million dollars of operating profit, you know, on $10 million dollars of revenue, you know.  And, and so, you know, and we only pay $7 million dollars for the radio station.  And so by, you know, 1991 started looking for other stuff to buy.
Story_ID: 227436
Speaker 1: 'Cause were you thinking at this point you wanna continue to buy more radio stations (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely I was, you know, I was, abso--
Speaker 1: And that's how you grow the business?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I--the way our relationship is, you know, worked is I've always been the one who, you know, has pushed the expansion.  And, you know, she's [Liggins' mother, HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] always been the more cautious one.  I mean, yeah at the end of the day, you know, my mother, you know, probably would have been very content.  You know, with, you know, a very successful AM and FM radio station.  I mean my mother used to--the way she would manage the radio station.  She'd go and relieve the switchboard I mean that's, you know, that's her thing.  And you'd walk in the door she'd be on the switchboard, you know, and she's very happy having that level of interaction.  That's never been me, you know, and, and so I was always, "Hey let's buy this let's buy that," you know.  And Ragan Henry another black broadcasting pioneer owned a bunch of stations.  And he was selling some stations in Baltimore [Maryland].  And so I convinced the investors and, you know, my mother hey, let's go buy these stations.  And, you know, she was apprehensive about going to Baltimore at first.  We were gonna pay I forget how much money (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) These were FM stations?
Speaker 2: One AM and one FM.  WWIN, AM, and FM another class A.
Speaker 1: And were you thinking the same format in Baltimore?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause they were sort of doing it by then but they weren't doing it well.  And I figure that we can go in and do it better and do a better job selling it. And they was right up the street you could drive up there it was a great, you know, near, near close to expansion market.  And, and so as we were going to closing the economy was kinda crappy, you know, you know.
Speaker 1: 'Cause this is early '90s [1990] at this point right?
Speaker 2: Yeah economy was crappy, and the other thing is that, you know, my mother and I have always had differences.  She, she's--but even though she has, you know, let me do my thing, you know what I mean, it's, it's not without comment or opinion.  And so you know we've got (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: As any mother (laughter).
Speaker 2: It--you know what, it's (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It just so happened that you all happen to be in business together.
Speaker 2: Exactly, and so, you know, she always things that, you know, I don't want to say always, but a lot of time seeing that.  You know, I should be doing things a different way.  And so--and I was young back then I guess this was 1991 so if I was 21 in '85 [1985] that's six years later you know I'm 26, 27.  You know, she's not necessarily agreeing with my management style.  People I've got working for me 'cause I'm probably the general manager of the station by this time or maybe even the president of the company.  And the economy was bad so she wouldn't let us buy stations, she said, "No we're not gonna do it."  And I think it's 'cause she was nervous she didn't wanna--we were successful she didn't want to lose what she had.  You know, which often times is the single biggest hurdle that entrepreneurs, particularly black entrepreneurs, have to get over.  Because they've had nothing for such a long time that when they get something they covet it, you know.  But in order to grow you got a risk, you know.  And, and so, she didn't let us buy these stations, and it actually turned out to be a good thing because the economy was crappy, and we bought the stations for like $1 million less, you know, a year later.  But we ended up ultimately buying them 'cause I stayed on it, you know, what I mean I was like okay.  You know, I forgot what happened, you know, I think we had management issues or what she perceives as management issues, and they probably were, you know what I mean.  But I looked at them as like just normal course we'll get, we'll get through it.  So I spent that year fixing, you know, whatever issues that she felt that, that we had.  And, you know, what, you know, she was, you know, she was largely right about it.  We would fix them anyway, you know, what I mean, but I fixed them then because, you know, she, you know, thought they needed to be fixed.  And that was sort of the prerequisite for going forward, and then by the time we went for where we got the stations cheaper.  So it all worked out, we, you know, had a better management structure moving forward.  And then I was managing both properties, I was the GM [general manager] of both properties.  And those properties turned out well from a standpoint, we weren't able to fix the ratings were right away, but we definitely made a sales impact right away.  And, you know, we hit--we exceeded our business plan.
Story_ID: 227437
Speaker 1: And then deregulation happened, and it's called the duopoly rule so now you can own an AM and an FM, two AMs and two FMs in a market.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did you see that as an opportunity or?
Speaker 1: I've always did, every time there was an opportunity--I've always wanted to make the company bigger. And, and always, you know, looked for opportunities to, you know, times to do it.  And so, you know, when that happened started looking around Baltimore [Maryland] to see if we could buy--we had two competitors at the time and, and one was the leading black radio station owned by Summit Communications called WXYV or V103.  It sold, and we didn't buy it but we end up buying our other competitor was owned by United Broadcasting they own WERQ [Baltimore, Maryland], 92Q is the station, and we bought that for $9 million dollars.  And, and there was a big home run, and we actually squeezed the other guy out of the format and that was that was huge.  Because when we once we squeezed, once we got ERQ, and really put the pressure on we started doing really started doing well in Baltimore [Maryland], making a bunch of money.  And then we focused on buying our competitor in Washington [D.C.].  The station WKYS [WKYS-FM, Washington, D.C.], which was owned by Burt Lee and Skip Finley and those guys' 'cause NBC, had sold it to a minority group when they had some big merger, and they had to divest.  And we knew Skip, Skip was a good friend of the family's and they, you know, needed to sell at the time, and they did the right thing and decided they were going to sell it to somebody black.  And so they called us we're the competitor.  Washington our first station WMMJ [Majic 102.3, Washington, D.C.] was still doing great, and so we bought WKYS four $34 million dollars, which at that time was the biggest deal ever done between two black people.
Speaker 2: And what year was this?
Speaker 1: Ninety, 1995.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 227438
Speaker 1: And while all this was going on I'd also decided to go back to business school.  'Cause I was--ninety, 1995 was the year I graduated from Wharton's [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] executive M.B.A. program.  And, and my mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] is always had this thing about degrees.  No matter how much money I made it's sort of like, you know, I really wouldn't be accepted or, you know, complete unless I had a degree.  'Cause I dropped out of even the University of the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], 'cause I was making hundred thousand dollars a year.  I wasn't going to go to school at night I was gonna go out to dinner.  You know what I mean, and I do to--I was reading in the newspaper about this, you know, in The Washington Post about Wharton's executive program.  So I called up and said well do you need a college degree?  I have found out you don't need a college degree to get into Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts].  By that time, I had great management experience I had a bunch of employees, was running a good-sized company we had, you know, you know, millions of dollars in revenue.
Speaker 2: Did you agree with your mother, did you think that in order to obtain that respectability in the business community that perhaps you would need (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, what if my mother believed it [HistoryMaker] Terry Jones and Herb Wilkins [HistoryMaker Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.] believed it, I did it 'cause it would make my mother happy.  And acctually I did it also because it was Wharton, and I thought well if I can get into Wharton and graduate from Wharton without a college degree then I would've accomplished the Ivy League thing.  I--'cause I always had this dream about going to an Ivy League school, but that's the reason I applied to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] I didn't get in so this is another way to get in.  So I was sort of like well how ironic is this, you know what I mean.  It's a great little shortcut, and so I was able to do that.  And, and I graduated in '95 [1995], and that was also the year that we bought WKYS [WKYS-FM, Washington, D.C.] and bought our competitor in Washington [D.C.]--
Story_ID: 227439
Speaker 1: All right so, in 1995 you get your M.B.A. from Wharton [School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Yeah, get--got my M.B.A. from Wharton.  It's also--I didn't go on the senior--I didn't go on the, the class trip which was to Hong Kong because we were closing the KYS [WKYS-FM, Washington, D.C.] transaction.  But also prior to that about a year prior to that '94 [1994], you know, in '93 [1993], '94 [1994] I'd been nosing around trying to get in the Atlanta [Georgia] market.  Because Atlanta was a very under radio market.  Big, you know, growing city black mega great place to be in the radio business.  And, and I--there, there were a couple of construction permits that were or licenses that were--that a bunch of people had applied for, and they were litigating over it.  And I was in there trying to, you know, buy 'em out and stuff like that.  And that was very long and complicated but then while I was down there doing that, I found a, a station that was for sale.  Actually I got turned onto it by, you know, a woman who's our chief operating officer Mary Catherine Sneed.  And--'cause she was also our competitor at the time in Baltimore [Maryland].  And I met her when we looked at buying when we looked at buying their Baltimore radio station.  So we became friends and she was leaving that job, and she says, "Hey did, you know, about this, you know, one station?"  It was kinda moving from Griffin, Georgia it was gonna move closer to Atlanta.  And she told me who the broker was, so I call the broker.  And there was this station that was moving in that wasn't on the air yet.  But you look on the map it was gonna cover South Atlanta which is where a lot of black people live. And so, you know, not a lot of broadcasters, you know, everybody wants the great signals.  You know, but we just look for signals we have this strategy we're looking for signals where we can cover our audience.  'Cause we can generally buy them cheaper and ended up this station we could buy it for four and a half million dollars or something like that.   And first we were gonna buy it for three, you know, and a half but then the guy jacked us up because there was another bidder that came on.  And we at--also in '95 [1995], we're buying our competitor WKYS in Washington [D.C.].  And we were also giving our investors these MESBICs [Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Company], you know, these minority venture capital firms a liquidity of that.  We were buying, you know, a big portion of their equity, you know, back because the investors like we been in deal since 1980, you know, it's 1995, you know, we want some money.  You know, and so we said fine, you know, I found more venture capital out there, a company called Berg & Delliage [ph.].  They came in and provided some additional capital to buyout, you know, the old in investors.  And so when I brought them in the Atlanta when I brought the company the Atlanta opportunity the company didn't really want to do the deal.  The, the investors didn't want to do the deal because they couldn't tell what this thing was gonna be it was risky.  We had just, you know, leveraged the company up.  And so the investors who were also the board of the company gave me the okay to do it myself.  So I bought the Atlanta radio station outside it was, you know, the deal that I, you know, my first deal outside of Radio One [Lanham, Maryland].  And then I ended up building our Atlanta cluster which I ultimately sold back to the company over time but (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when you bought the Atlanta station it wasn't a Radio One station?
Speaker 2: No but I called it Radio--I called the company Radio One of Atlanta, but it was, it was my company--
Story_ID: 227440
Speaker 1: People are always confused about Radio One [Lanham, Maryland] and, and the nature of the relationship between me and my mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes]--economic relationship between me and my mother.  You know, although she founded the company I mean, I've been here since there was one AM radio station [WOL-AM, Washington, D.C.], you know, was--I certainly, you know, didn't have the vision and the gumption and the guts to, you know, start out being an entrepreneur like she did to just, you know, just roll the dice.  But yeah, once I got into it, and I had this platform I did have the vision to grow the platform.  And, and my mother still owns all of the shares that she's ever had in Radio One 'cause along the way when we bought the first FM WMMJ [WTKS Majic 102.3; WMMJ Majic 102.3, Washington, D.C.] in Washington [D.C.] that became such a big success.  We had, you know, borrow, you know, like eight or $9 million more.  So she also had the guts to take the dilution to do it.  So she went from owning like 50 percent of the company and the investors owned the other 50 percent to owning like only 25 percent of the company in order to buy that FM.  That's something a lot of black entrepreneurs just will not do, and it's a mistake for some of them, you know.  There's a it's probably a mistake for a lot of them because you have to have capital to grow.  Particularly if you're, you know, if you're acquiring stuff.  But she had the guts to do that and then as we started to expand and do well, you know, I was smart enough to go to the investors and say, "Hey, my mother owns 25 percent of this company but I don't own anything." And their first response was, "Well aren't you two one and the same?"  And I was like, "No," and so I, you know, I put them in the position where they had to create, you know, an opportunity for me to earn equity in the company which would come from them, right.  If they wanted me to continue to drive the growth and expansion and the results of the company.  So two things happened one they agreed to do that, and I ended up earning, you know, a lot of equity in the company which is why that liquidity event happening in 1995.  'Cause one of those ways I earned equity was I had to give them their money back.  And so I offered to buy everybody out caused also by that time I'd figured out the capital markets.  Hadn't figured out the public capital markets yet but I'd figured out bank debt and other venture capital.  And, you know, realize that they're, you know, you can get money from a number of different places.  And how to put financing packages together and tell the story and get people, you know, excited about it and so I came back to them and said all right we'll buy everybody out.  And when I made that offer that would trigger me earning all my equity, and most people stayed in, but we bought about a third of the company back, right.  So people got their money, you know, back that they started with probably some return and then they rolled over in the new acquisition of WKYS.  But at the same time they were like hey you just leveled up Radio One we're not sure about this Atlanta [Georgia] thing.  And so they gave me the permission to do that outside of Atlanta.  So I did Atlanta myself.  I did that actually with [HistoryMaker] Terry Jones and I did at Syncom [Venture Partners, Bethesda, Maryland] they put up money.  I found the station, you know, I put together the management team actually I--the woman who turned me on to the station Mary Catherine Sneed, who's now our chief operating officer.  I brought her in to become my partner down there and be the general manager of the station.
Story_ID: 227441
Speaker 1: And then three things happened--what happened?  We ran our competitor out of format in Baltimore [Maryland], and the cash flow exploded just exploded.  I mean we started printing money like, you know, it was great.  We turned WKYS [WKYS-FM, Washington, D.C.] around because it had been historically the number one station in the market and got beat by a station called WPGC [WPGC-FM, Washington, D.C.] and it had like a three share, you know, when we bought it.  And it took us a couple years but we were able to get KYS turned around (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) KYS is the Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 1: It's one of our Washington, D.C. FMs, our second Washington, D.C. FM, and ended up getting it up to, you know, number one, number two in the market.  There was a two-year period in there where it--KYS was slow to turn around.  But Baltimore was cranking, you know, so hard that, you know, you know, from a finance, you know, standpoint we were in the leverage standpoint we were fine. And then KYS turned around big home run there and the Atlanta [Georgia] the first Atlanta station that I bought for four and a half-million dollars ended up going from a zero to a four share.  And that was a huge home run, you know, so all the state--that station that I paid four and a half-million dollars for is now billing $12 million dollars in cash flow and six million dollars.  So we're making more, you know, each year then we even paid for and then I was able to piece together two more FMs, you know, in that market and (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the Atlanta market?
Speaker 1: In the Atlanta market and built a nice cluster which ended up becoming worth, you know, $150 million, you know, actually started out the, there were two stations that we ended up acquiring in Atlanta.  And then we were going to go--and I kept them outside and I rolled them into the company when we went public in '99 [1999].
Speaker 2: Right--
Story_ID: 227442
Speaker 1: Let's talk about that why, why did you think it was time for the company [Radio One, Lanham, Maryland] to go public?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd always been--I was focused on taking the company public back in 1992, you know, 1992, '93 [1993], when I first started talking to investment banks.  I start talking to this; this bank investment bank called Oppenheimer's [Oppenheimer & Co., Inc.] this guy name Mark [A.] Leavitt.  And, and because I just always watched what people did so I was like all right who's buying these radio stations.  And, you know, and, and, you know, how are they doing it and I would ask questions.  And it was, you know, these public company there are out snapping up these stations until they had unlimited access to capital.  And by that time I also knew what it was like to be in bed with venture capital.  And venture capital are great but it's expensive money and they have lots of controls.  So I was focused on a couple things 'cause by this time once we bought the venture capitalists back, you know, in '95 [1995].  I think, you know my mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] and myself ended up owning close to 49 percent of, you know, radio--maybe it was slightly over 50 percent of Radio One.  But still, you know, investors own the other 50 percent.  And, you know, we weren't completely absolutely autonomous.  I mean, you know, general in those scenarios the investors ultimately controls the company.  They tell you when to sell, tell you whether you can buy.  You know, tell you how much debt you can take on so on and so forth. And, and so I knew that the public capital markets where we really needed to go to get more money at a cheaper price that was less restrictive.  So I've been focused on it the first time we tapped the public market which was actually the public debt markets in 1997 when we issue, you know, high-yield bonds.  And I loved that because we wanted to buy a station in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]; we didn't want to borrow we didn't want to take in anymore venture capital and delude ourselves.  And so (laughter) I found out just talking to some bankers this how your debt is, you know, you can borrow hundred million dollars pay interest only, and you have to pay it back ten years, you know, what I mean sounded good to me.  You know, as long as I didn't have to give up equity in the company.  So we bought this Philadelphia radio station.  And we had some banks that were complaining because KYS was being a little slow to turn around.  You know, and we paid off all the banks and now we had this public bond issue.  And then KYS turned around, you know, so KYS was turned around doing well.  Baltimore is killing it, you know, we're still a small company, and the banks were always, you know, well you've got they wanted diversification all your cash flow is in two markets.  You're not a big enough company this that and the other but we, we always seem to be able to find somebody to do a deal.  But there was always only one person or one bank or one entity that would do it, you know, there was never like five or six choices, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Never a choice (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Never, never a choice (laughter) there's one person we could convince to do it never a choice.  And so and so I've been focused on going public.  We did the high-yield issue and then we start thinking about going public.  And the other reason to go public is we can get an exit for our venture capital folks and ultimately end up--that was the way we ultimately ended up controlling the company. You know, because they don't, you know, tell us that we got to sell; they're out; they got their liquidity.  And we can get more money to grow.
Story_ID: 227443
Speaker 1: So in 1999 we [Radio One, Lanham, Maryland] were about to go public, you know, the public markets don't like you to have a bunch of different entities.  So the banks convinced me that it'd be better to move the Atlanta [Georgia] stations inside Radio One.  And so me and my Atlanta partners which was Syncom [Venture Partners, Bethesda, Maryland].  And then also, you know, Berg & Deliage [ph.] also in Atlanta to we, you know, ran a process with the company came up with the fair evaluation, and I rolled in Atlanta which gave me an additional equity stake, you know, in the company.  So in the end I actually end up, you know, I'm the single largest shareholder of the company.  My mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] and I have a, a dual voting arrangement where we agreed to vote, you know, in each other's--we agreed to vote each other to the board of the company.  Basically, essentially we control the company together and if we ever disagree then one of us could buy the other out.  But we always work through it.  We never disagreed, but she still has her original equity stake.  I have my original equity stake my equity stake in the company.  And, you know, and on the outside people, you know, you know, look at this and they think that, that I'm sitting around waiting for her to, you know, you know, leave me something in the will and that's really not the case.
Speaker 2: Was 1999 the right time to go public?
Speaker 1: Absolutely it was the height was it the height close to it.  It was right before the height of sort of the stock market media, the Internet bubble, valuations were sky-high.  And we went public, and we got the highest valuation of any public radio company at that time that had gone public.  And in the valuation went higher and then Clear Channel was buying AM/FM and they had to divest all these stations.  And there was a Democrat [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] in the White House [Washington, D.C.] and Bill Kennard's [William E. Kennard] at the FCC [Federal Communications Commission].  And it was politically correct to sell stations to minorities and so they were gonna sell a bunch of stations to the minorities.  We were the best capitalized, only public, you know, minority company out there in the radio business.  And so we went out and sold even more equity to the public to get ready for this.  And ended up buying, you know, $1.3 billion worth of radio stations but we had been buying all along we'd been buying stations and turning em around.  The company always been very methodical on, you know, buying opportunities.  I mean shortly after Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], we bought Detroit [Michigan], we bought the Bell [Broadcasting Company] family stations in Detroit WJZZ [WJZZ-FM, Detroit, Michigan] and WCHBA [WCHB-AM, Detroit, Michigan].  And then we bought an FM in Cleveland [Ohio], and an FM and AM in Cleveland.  And then we bought in Richmond [Virginia], and so we always expand, you know, been methodically expanding.  And then Clear Channel decided to sell, and we make a big acquisition doubling the size of the company, you know, in, in terms of revenue and class flow and one acquisition.  But by the time we bought Clear Channel we already had fifty million dollars of cash flow and we bought fifty more from them.
Speaker 2: And what year was this when you bought Clear Channel?
Speaker 1: I think we did Clear Channel in 2000.
Story_ID: 227444
Speaker 1: One thing I wanted to ask you is do you think your going to Wharton [School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--do you think that made you a better businessman?
Speaker 2: That's a good question I think that the whole Wharton experience was sort of like getting your validation your ticket punched.  People impressed by it, you know, ah this a smart guy.  He's got an Ivy League degree, you know, but at the end of the day no it's didn't make me a better businessman it gave me credentials.  But, you know, everything that I done--that I'm doing which is really kind of an aid, you know, what I mean, I do it out of ambition.  You know, you know, I probably have my own secret yeah desires, insecurities or whatever you have that, you know, make me ambitious fear of whatever.  You know, and then I'm curious as to how you make things work or become successful, so I asked questions.  And I mean I'm not saying I didn't learn anything at Wharton, you know, I mean I actually think Wharton cost me money.  If I hadn't been in school, I would've bought WDAS [WDAS-FM, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] from Gene Jackson for twenty-three and a half million dollars.  It's now worth, you know, probably 250, you know, 'cause I had it under--I basically had it under letter of intent and was about to go to contract but I, you know, I got cold feet.
Story_ID: 227445
Speaker 1: What do you think about college, in general, do you think it's important?  Especially for African Americans (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  I think it's critical.  I mean, I just do I mean, at the end of the day I went back and got my degree.  And I'm glad I did it I mean, I just I just am 'cause net-net it's been much more helpful.  If I hadn't had gotten it, I don't believe that much trajectory would've been different.  But you know my mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] says it would've, you know, [HistoryMaker] Terry Jones and Herb Wilkins [HistoryMaker Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], you know, who have been our partners, you know, and really sort of mentors for me.  And helping, you know, understand how to, you know, finance deals and things like that were much more excited and impressed, you know, when I did that.  What it probably did was give them more confidence in continuing to ride with me, you know.  But if I had a kid that I saw was just, you know, blindly ambitious and knew what the heck they wanted to do I, I wouldn't tell him slow down and go back to college.  I'd tell him I mean, if you, you know, it's like you tell Michael Dale [ph.] oh don't drop out of college, you know, you know, stay three more years stick with it--you'll be happy.  I mean if you if, you know, you got an idea, or you got a desire to do something and you've got the ambition and the drive, you know, you need to move and, and take advantage of that opportunity.  You can always go back to college, you know, you can go to college on the Internet, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: For by and large what would you recommend to more particularly African American young people?
Speaker 2: It--by and large I would suggest (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At the end of the day what would you recommend?
Speaker 2: At the end of the day I would suggest that they go to college.  Because not many people know what they want to do at 18 or 19 it takes them--it took me to 21 or 22 to kind of get a handle or, you know.  Actually probably 22 to get a handle that radio was something that I really wanted to build my career in, you know.  Yeah, I was like 22 years old, and so if I had not have had that radio opportunity, I would've, you know, been trying to start whatever career I was into.  Let's say I ultimately decided I wanted to be a doctor I would've been behind the curve.  I would've have gone back to school get my college degree then go to medical school.  And so I say get your college out of the way all right because that's sort of just a basic building block.  You know, college degree now is like a high school diploma, you know.  But by the same token there are some people, you know, who just know what they want to do and if they have an opportunity, you know, they should do it, you know.
Story_ID: 227446
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit now about TV One [Silver Spring, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: So, doing great in the radio business.  Why did you think it's time to expand and move into television?
Speaker 2: Because, you know, the ambition, you know, since, you know, 18, 19, 20 is to build you know a big urban or African American focused media company and we were a big radio company.  And we can we can and will get bigger but, you know, television is a very lucrative cable networks particularly business.  I've had a ringside seat watching BET [Black Entertainment Television] success and growth and the impact that it's had on African Americans.  'Cause we're both based in Washington [D.C.]; Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] is a close personal friend.  And there was only one option there was no competitor (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For African Americans.
Speaker 2: For African--very difficult business to get into very difficult business to succeed in and so now I understand why there is only been you know one.  But I felt that if we could figure out a way to get into that business not only would it be, you know, a second network that ultimately became successful.  Would be very valuable it'd be a great compliment with the radio stations and I felt that the radio stations could give us leverage to be more successful in that business than we might otherwise be if we was just trying to start from scratch.  So not only did we have capital we had radio we had an audience the cross promote all that stuff.  And so, you know, I focused for four years trying to figure out a way to get in that business.  And was finally was able to convince Comcast to be our partner and they, you know, been very supportive.  It's a huge niche; we're approaching it from a different perspective black adults it's sort of like WMMJ [WTKS Majic 102.3; WMMJ Majic 102.3, Washington, D.C.] back in 1987.  BET mostly focuses on music-oriented programming, but they try to be all things to all people, you know, at times because they're the only one out there.  But for bulk of the programs is more youth the program is more youth-oriented.  And so there was an opportunity coming and do something different satisfy a different, you know, a more adult audience.  And, and I think we have a piece of that market and so that's what we did.  And, and we're excited about it--we think it's gonna be a whole new--it's gonna take the community to a whole new level in terms of its reach as a media company, not just radio company.  And we think is gonna make our shareholders a lot of money and also solidify our position for the future in the long term. You always have to be careful not to miss the strategic moves that can make your company irrelevant, you know.  And, and that was a move that we couldn't miss.
Story_ID: 227447
Speaker 1: Do you think you were very lucky to be able to get [HistoryMaker] Johnathan Rodgers who just did phenomenal things at Discovery [Channel]?
Speaker 2: Extraordinarily lucky, you know, I was nosing around; we invested in another company called New TV that ended up going bankrupt.  And when I was nosing around you know, thinking about putting more money into that and taking control of it.  I started talking to, you know, people about where who do you get to run this because I run Radio One [Lanham, Maryland] I don't, you know, I'm not going to run the cable network too.  And [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones said, "Well if you want to get the best, you know, you gotta call Johnathan Rodgers."  And I just remember reading about Johnathan the trade when he got his promotion to CBS.  When he was run in the stations, and then when he came to Discovery and so then it triggered that hey, you know.  The biggest name in black television is actually in Washington [D.C.].  I didn't know that, you know, it didn't I mean it didn't register at first.  But then I was like okay great so I call em up out of the blue.  He knew who we were he had a passion for serving this niche, you know, as well a real passion.  And he's a television guy I don't fancy myself a TV Guide, you know, but Johnson is a television junkie who loves it, it's his career.  So he probably had, you know, even more passion about the need for this channel then I did just because it's in his industry, you know.  I, I had a passion to do it because I'm growing, you know, a big media company.  He had a passion to do it because he wants to do something new.  And different and landmark in television for his people, you know.  He's, he's sort of, you know, looking at--he's sort of like the [HistoryMaker] Cathy Hughes of TV.  You know, they come at, you know, their industries in a, in a similar manner.  You know, and thirty years of big-company experience, you know, growing cable (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Varied experience, at that.
Speaker 2: Growing cable networks, you know, budgets of hundreds of millions of dollars if not, you know, I think Discovery, when he left, was doing a billion dollars of revenue.  And the luckiest part was he was coming to a window in his contract where he walked away.  You know, he could walk away with, you know, a, a bunch of money and start a new career.  And he had it, so we got lucky on that, and even luckier where we got is we have personalities that fit together.  Yeah, I mean he's got--he's, he's a pleasure to work with; he's a true professional.
Story_ID: 227448
Speaker 1: And what are your expectations for TV One [Silver Spring, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: My expectations are that it is going to be a highly successful cable network more successful than people actually think it's going to be.  It, it will have a programming culture which over time will be one that people recognize as high quality.  I suspect we will win awards we I think BET [Black Entertainment Television] has gotten a bad rap over the years because it's been the only thing out there.  So because they played music videos people look at it, you know, very negative.  Well, they were serving their audience.  And they were they were building a, you know, a business Bob [Robert L. Johnson] has always stated that.  I'm a businessman that's what I'm doing.  Well, he had first mover advantage so he just he can be wildly successful just being first in this space.  We're going to have to be wildly successful by becoming the black network that has a different programming niche that offers really, really, really good programming.  We have to be known for our programming 'cause there are more competitors: UPN, WB, Lifetime.  Black adults don't just watch BET, in fact, I would tell you that a forty-five year-old black woman is probably not watching BET hardly at all, you know.  She's watching Lifetime or she's watching Home and Garden Television [HGTV] or the Food Network.  So in order for us to be successful we have to draw her away from Lifetime and HGTV, and we'll do that.  Radio One [Lanham, Maryland] has built its reputation on the radio side it's been a great program of radio stations.  And we're not gonna be able to be successful just going in and, you know, be the second guy in and, and, you know, and putting on, you know, low-quality inexpensive programming and just say, "We're the second black network; give us money."  There's too much competition out there.
Story_ID: 227449
Speaker 1: And what's happened with the record company dream?
Speaker 2: It's on hold (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Deferred?
Speaker 2: Deferred I mean, you know, it's not I mean, if we become a force in television and continue to be a force in radio and pushing into the network into the Internet.  I'm not saying we won't ever be in the record business, but Warner Music Group [New York, New York] just got sold.  Forbes [New York, New York], Warner Brother [Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc., Burbank, California] records with prize Atlantic Records [New York, New York] just got sold for $2.7 billion which is roughly the valuation of, of Radio One [Lanham, Maryland].  So that, you know, so, you know, why am I going to go into the record business, you know?
Story_ID: 227450
Speaker 1: Any regrets?  Anything you wish you would've done differently?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wished I would have bought more radio between 1992 and 2000.  I wish I would've bought every radio station that I even that was for sale.  That I could even possibly afford 'cause valuations just went through the roof.  I would've definitely done that differently.  I probably would have spent my California years right after high school doing something much more interesting and productive than hanging out in, in night clubs.  Like backpacking through Europe, you know, or, or something, you know, really taken more time.  One of the things that happened has happened to me as an entrepreneur is I've been doing this, you know, again my mother [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes] founded the company [Radio One, Lanham, Maryland] in 1980 I joined in '85 [1985].  So I've been doing this almost twenty years now nonstop.  I've never really had an opportunity to stop and not just do anything.  And figure out what I want to do, you know, next in my life or who I want to be or who I wanna evolve to because life's not just about all of your professional identity, you know, but when you're an entrepreneur, it can become that.
Story_ID: 227451
Speaker 1: And I know that you still very young but how would you like to be remembered?  What is it, you know, at the end of the day what is it you want people to say about [HistoryMaker] Alfred Liggins, III?
Speaker 2: You know what I'm not sure yet.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: I mean I'm thirty-nine, I'll be forty in January.  January 30th, I'm not sure, I do know that, you know, I don't want my legacy to be that, you know, Alfred Liggins, you know.  I don't want my legacy to be Alfred Liggins, you know, built, you know, a multi-billion dollar company and made, you know, good gobs of money that's, you know, that's a) not enough.  And becoming less and less important I mean it's important but it is becoming less and less important as I get older and older.  But I haven't quite figured out what I want, you know, my legacy to be and what to and what I want to be remembered by but, you know, I, I know it's not I know it's not that.
