Story_ID: 39498
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewing today with the HistoryMakers.  Our Videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Yes, my name is Jennifer Karen Lawson, J-E-N-N-I-F-E-R, Karen, K-A-R-E-N, Lawson, L-A-W-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Sure.  My date of birth is June 8th, 1946, and I was born in Fairfield, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay now where is Fairfield in relationship to say, Montgomery or Birmingham?
Speaker 2: Fairfield is one block away from--it's really a suburb of Birmingham.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am currently a Broadcast Administrator.  I'm a Senior Vice President with the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is May 2nd or 3rd, May 2nd, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time
Speaker 2: We're currently in Washington, D.C. at my residence.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now in the Adams--
Speaker 2: In the Adams Morgan--
Speaker 1: Morgan area, okay.
Speaker 2: The historic and very wonderful Adams Morgan area of Washington.
Speaker 1: All right I thought I'd throw that in there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 39499
Speaker 1: But before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm-up, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: So do you--I thought you were going to tell me all five questions at once.
Speaker 1: No, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: No problem.  My favorite, oh gee, my favorite food is paella, I absolutely love paella.
Speaker 1: Okay and do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite color.  I love so many different colors, I don't have a favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring time in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Barcelona [Spain].
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Story_ID: 39500
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's [Velma Lawson] side of the family and your father's side, but separately so we don't get them mixed up, and then we'll put them together.  So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sure.  My mother's name was, my mother passed away years ago and my mother's name was Velma Teresa Foster Lawson.  Velma, V-E-L-M-A, Teresa, T-E-R-E-S-A, Foster, F-O-S-T-E-R, and her married Lawson, L-A-W-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what was her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know her exact date of birth, but she was born in Louisville, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I would say that her approximate date of birth was December 28th, 1912.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright now, now what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: I can't trace them very far back, but my mother's father, whose name was Garfield Foster, then lived during part of my childhood, lived right in Fairfield and that he was a businessman.  So he owned property, he rented houses, he owned several houses in Fairfield, and he had also at one point had a business where he did wallpapering and painting, house painting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a tall, very elegant man.  And he had a safe which made us think that he was wealthy, but we discovered that he--once he invited us over and that he asked if we'd like oranges.  And we said yes and then he went into the safe and pulled out the oranges and so I changed my mind about his great wealth.
Speaker 1: Could he keep them cooler in the safe or what?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Story_ID: 39501
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay but is there--are there any stories on that side of the family about where the family was situated during the Emancipation or Reconstruction?
Speaker 2: There aren't.  Sadly when I was younger, when they were alive that they didn't talk about it much and that so I didn't know the history of that part of my family at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so now did your mother grow up in Louisville [Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: My mother grew up between Louisville and the Birmingham area of Alabama.  It appeared that her parents, her mother's name was Nellie Griggs, G-R-I-G-G-S, and Nellie, N-E-L-L-I-E.  And Nellie Griggs who I never met, lived in Louisville and there was one point at which my mother went to visit her mother and then shortly thereafter my grandmother Nellie Griggs, passed away.  And so I don't have any memory of her really as a person.  I wouldn't be able to tell you what she looked like or anything.  But it was my sense that my grandparents had been--were married and then divorced, and that my grandfather had a subsequent marriage and another family through that.  And so the--my sort of-I guess those would be my aunts and uncles, some were full blooded and some were half and you know that kind of complex family.
Speaker 1: Okay so, so your mother, she lived in, okay so--
Speaker 2: She lived in both Louisville and in the Birmingham area, and grew up between both places.  She had a brother John Foster, she was a Foster, and she had a brother John Foster who then grew up and spent most of his life in the Louisville area, who I did meet as an adult.  I met him later, and that he had served in World War II and then passed away, but he left, he very kindly left me some of his photos of--from his time in World War II.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so did your mother go to high school in Louisville or in Fairfield?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know.  I know that she, for college she went to Alabama State in the Montgomery area and she studied there and got a degree and became a school teacher.  And she taught for a while in Marion County before we were born, before she met and married our father.  She was--taught for a while in Marion County, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then at some point she moved to Fairfield, met my father and married.
Story_ID: 39502
Speaker 1: Okay now, all right, so let me go to your father's side then.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His full name was Willie, first name Willie, W-I-L-L-I-E, his middle name DeLeon, D-E, upper case L-E-O-N, and Lawson, L-A-W-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: And his date of birth was December 27th, 1899.
Speaker 1: Eighteen ninety-nine, okay so he was a little older than your mother.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's correct.  He was older than our mother and that he--older than my mother and that he was born in what is now Bullock, County, B-U-L-L-O-C-K, Bullock County, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Now where is Bullock County?
Speaker 2: Bullock County is in central Alabama, not terribly far from Tuskegee, Macon County is I think an adjacent county to Bullock County.  Macon County is where Tuskegee University is located, and that's an adjacent county.  So I think it's perhaps only about thirty or forty miles now from Tuskegee.  I say now because in the time that he was born I think they didn't have the interstate highway system and so travel probably took a bit longer.  But he was--Bullock County was in central Alabama is what is called the Black Belt of Alabama.  His parents, I know a little bit more about his side of the family.  And that in Bullock County, he grew up in an area that was called Three Notch, that's right outside of Union Springs, Alabama.  And there are many of my family members who are buried in a church, the Hardaway Church there in that area.  And many of the family members, they now have they, they have the last name Perry.  My father was the 14th of 15 children.  And his parents were Eugenia [ph.] Hall and James Walter Lawson.  And Eugenia Hall, and I'm incidentally named after her, they called her Jenny and my mother decided to formalize the Jenny into Jennifer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But Eugenia Hall, my grandmother, I don't know where she was born.  But I do know that both she and my grandfather were both born prior to the time of Emancipation.  They were born in the, I think it was like the--around the--I've forgotten the exact dates.
Speaker 1: Okay 1863 was the Emancipation Proclamation and the Civil War was 1865.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So they were born prior to say 1865.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: To be sure.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 39503
Speaker 1: Did, did they have any memories of slavery?
Speaker 2: Yes and that they, they themselves were born as slaves.  And that the, the plantation owner was apparently a man named John Lawson.  And that he was the father of James Walter Lawson, but I don't know more about that part of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this may or may not go anywhere, but when I heard the name James Lawson, you know of course I thought of the--
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  But no we're not related to my knowledge, yes.
Speaker 1: To the great Reverend James Lawson of the Civil Rights Movement, right.
Speaker 2: Exactly, yes.  Right, not that's what--exactly, but no I don't know of any relationship there.
Story_ID: 39504
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay so, well that's interesting are there any--do they have any stories from that period of time when, when you know at the end of slavery as kids?  Do they remember when the armies came through or did they remember what happened on Independence Day [June 19th, Emancipation Proclamation]?
Speaker 2: They didn't--again, it was an odd thing where people didn't talk.  And part of it was in our particular case, my father's [Willie Lawson]--by the time we were, you know by the time I was like five years old, which would have been like 1951, they were so--many of them were dying off.  His sisters and brothers, my aunts and uncles, were so elderly that many of them were dying, you know had passed away or--and so there weren't many stories of the family's history aside from the one thing that my father used to talk about very proudly was there was a, a family home.  And that this was a plantation house, an antebellum house that still is somewhat standing.  I say somewhat standing because it's not in very good shape in this area that I've mentioned to you.  And the house now belongs to the family.  It's the Perry family, it's on the land belonging to members of the family that are the Perrys.  And the Perrys were--they were my bro--my father's sisters--several of them married Perry men and that's the reason for this big connection to the Perrys.  But the old house has this fleur de lis glass around the window, around the doorframe.  And it was great pride, it was, you know, a thing of great pride within the family that these glass panes were imported directly from France, and that at one point the Alabama State capital had sent someone to try to buy the panes from the family and the family refused to sell because you know, they wanted to keep this always within the family.  But the, the house my father took great pride in and when we were children, would take us on tours of the house where we'd go underneath it and all over it because he wanted to show us his--his point was not a single nail.  All wooden pegs.  And that he was very proud of the handicraft with which the place had been built.  And said that our family had built that with their own hands.  That this place had been completely built by our family when they were slaves.  And that somehow during Reconstruction, the house had come into our ownership.  The house and the land.  So the Perrys then still own a large portion of land in that area.  So this was, you know, something of great pride to him.
Story_ID: 39505
Speaker 1: Yeah there's a story in here somewhere now.
Speaker 2: Yes there is, yes.
Speaker 1: About the plantation owner James Lawson giving this land or losing this land.  I don't see how he could lose it to them, so he probably given this land to his offspring, who were black.
Speaker 2: I, and I don't--that's one--
Speaker 1: Or selling it to them.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  That's one of those stories that I hope that I will at some point be able to explore.
Speaker 1: Yeah it's something that's probably within, you know--our means to find out.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  It's an interesting story.  So, so did your father [Willie Lawson] grow up near the, this area with the plantation house?
Speaker 2: Yes, my father grew up in the Union Springs, Alabama area, and that when he was fifteen years old, which would have been 1914, he left and on his own, and came to the Birmingham [Alabama]--he went to Birmingham.  And this was a time where the coal mines and the steel mills were beginning to become active and that he then as a young boy then left the farm and left apparently an abusive father, to, to come and seek his own fortune there.  And my father had at that point, he had only a third grade education.  He had had to quit school to work on the farm.  And his father apparently was a really harsh person who insisted upon, you know sort of working the kids from morning till night.
Story_ID: 39506
Speaker 1: He [Willie Lawson] remembers where he comes from.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Who his father was.
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah.  Right, so my father then, you know at fifteen years old, comes to Birmingham and starts working in the coal mines.  And he was a very industrious person because then he also left his work at the coal mines and found an independent seam of coal where he could then dig himself.  And so in essence had his own little mine.  And he saved money and bought a car.  And he took the car apart and put it back together again.  And he started a repair business.  And he worked both as--in the coal mines, steel mill, and then had Lawson's Repair Shop.
Speaker 1: This is, this is resourcefulness taken to the nth degree.
Speaker 2: Yes very definitely.  And that he had good-one of his friendships with--was with a man A.G. Gaston.  And at one point he and Gaston were partners in--he worked with Gaston in the funeral home business and also worked with Gaston for a while on a partnership on a soda business, on what they call the bottling business, selling soft drinks.  And the soft drink business apparently did not go anywhere.  And my father decided that he didn't want to stay in the funeral home business, but continued to strike out totally on his own with his repair business.  And he eventually left the steel mills, coal mine work to devote himself purely to his own business.  So he had a, a really strong entrepreneurial spirit and was a very, very hard working person.
Story_ID: 39507
Speaker 1: Now this is two things, two little notes here.  Union Springs, Alabama is where John Henry Clark was born.
Speaker 2: You're kidding me.  I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah he was born there in 1915.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: And the idea--I've heard this story before about people taking a car and taking it completely apart, every screw and everything, and then putting it back together.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then establishing.
Speaker 2: A business on the basis of that.  And that became--
Speaker 1: --a couple more times, that's the way people--you know, if you didn't have--
Speaker 2: An education and if you didn't have a place where you could easily go to vocational school or a place and a way to learn, but you were, you wanted to get ahead, that was a way.  He [Willie Lawson] did the same thing with tractors.  He did it with washing machines and refrigerators.  So he became, you know, a purely, a repair business.  And his--he had business cards at one point where he had--I don't think this was original to him, but that he had found some slogan that he put on his business cards that said Lawson's Repair Shop, repairs everything except the crack of dawn and broken hearts.
Speaker 1: That is good.
Speaker 2: But he was the--known throughout the neighborhood.  We were known as Mr. Lawson's kids.  And he was--we just thought he was quite a character.  We thought the experience was--we called it the--my brothers and I, I have two brothers.  And we sort of say it was somewhat like what you'd imagine being Einstein's kids in some ways and we said, could you imagine if he'd had an education he'd really be dangerous.  And when we said he'd really be dangerous, we meant it because we survived, I survived three minor explosions as a child, where some of his experiments went a bit wrong.  So I have a few sort of little scars and cuts on my face that to this day that, you know my memory is oh, yes.  I remember the Easter when I went to ask him for a nickel.  And poof, my beautiful little curly bangs suddenly were, you know, burned off.  My eyebrows were singed.  I looked a bit different that Easter because I had been--and I was thrown some distance by the explosion, the thrust of the explosion.  And this was when he would--I think that what he was doing then is that he would weld things for repairs or to create things.  So he had an acetylene torch and he would think about these things and decide well why was he buying acetylene from someone else when he could perhaps make his own.  And that was not a good idea.
Story_ID: 39508
Speaker 1: Well you know did he [Willie Lawson] ever get hurt himself?
Speaker 2: He never did.  He did get--he was injured, but he never did.  And it was one point at which there were people who remembered us for the big fire in the neighborhood when his business blew up and caught afire and you know, there caused a power outage in the area.  So it was a nice bit of drama there, and that happened when I was probably around seven years old.  So that was, those were some of the dramas that came with it, but on the other hand, it was an incredible sense of--he gave us a sense of ability and of can do spirit because he taught me how to wire motors.  So that for, you know for example he'd say let's--here's a motor, let's take it apart.  And then your job is to make the copper, to wind the copper that creates--the copper wire that is the heart of the motor.  So I'd have to actually wind copper wire to fit within and really build a motor from scratch.
Speaker 1: An electrical motor?
Speaker 2: Yes an electrical motor.  And his goal for me was transmissions.  And he kept thinking that if I could build a transmission, if I could rebuild a transmission, I'd be set for life.  I could go anywhere in the world.
Story_ID: 39509
Speaker 1: That is something.  Now did your mother [Velma Lawson] continue to teach?
Speaker 2: My mother taught until she then gave birth to us and then she became, she became really a housewife.  And I think that that was at a stage where it was somewhat prestigious to show that you were making enough money that your wife didn't have to work.  And so she was a stay-at-home mom, but she would then sometimes substitute and do substitute teaching at the school.
Speaker 1: Okay now was she or your father involved in civic activities?
Speaker 2: My father was.  My mother really stayed sort of--was somewhat shy and stayed very much home focused.  But my father was involved with--he was a Mason, he was involved with the church, he was a Baptist and involved with the First Baptist Church.  And I don't recall whether he was a deacon or not, but he was very active and played some official role within the church and would sometimes go to the church conventions.  He was a Republican and was active in the local Republican party.  And they would--there was one point at which he and a group of the neighborhood men went to a Republican convention.  And he would describe his adherence and his allegiance to the Republican party as being one of you know, that it was the most sensible to thing to do and be at that time and that that was the party of Lincoln.  But it was also quite understandable to us because at that point the Democrats were aligned with what were called the Dixiecrats.  And so you thought of the Democratic party as the group that was aligned with the Citizens Counsels and the Klan.
Speaker 1: So it made a lot of sense.
Speaker 2: It made a lot of sense.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the--from what I understand you know, it wasn't until the Depression that Black people in the urban areas started switching to the Democratic party, you know, under FDR [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], and FDR was President because of the activities of Eleanor more than anything.
Speaker 2: Right.  My father's association with the mines, particularly the mines more than the steel mills, but with the mines, also gave me an understanding as a child of unionism and so there was one point where I think, but I'm not absolutely sure, I want to research it.  But I think that he took us to hear John L. Lewis speak.  We went to hear some famed union leader speak.
Speaker 1: He would be the big one then.
Story_ID: 39510
Speaker 1: And there were the-he [Willie Lawson] did work.  After he left his work with the coal mines and steel mills, he did work for people who lived in company towns.  Birmingham was fringed by these company towns.  There was a big steel mill, Bessemer, Alabama, where they had the Bessemer plants.  And there were other towns, Powederly [Alabama] and a few others, Pratt City [Alabama], were these places and that some of them were true company towns where it was only one road in and out.  And that everything they did--the people were not paid in money, they were paid in script.  And it was a company store.  And my father would, we would go there because he would have done a repair for someone there.  And that they would have paid him in script and so we'd have to go to the company store to cash in on what they'd paid him.
Speaker 2: By script meaning the currency of the--
Speaker 1: Of the company, yes, exactly, yeah.
Speaker 2: I think it's illegal to do that now.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that--
Speaker 1: I mean these were places, they were odd, you know even from my child's eye that these were very odd places.  And I never saw a similar place until I became active in the Civil Rights Movement and lived for a while in Gee's Bend and Wilcox County, Alabama.  And that, that was one that had similar geography and architecture, but for different reasons.
Story_ID: 39511
Speaker 1: Yeah we were off camera talking about Phenix City, a place between Union Springs and Columbus, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was just--and I think Phenix City [Alabama] and Columbus I believe, Columbus, Georgia are adjacent.  That they are suburb--they have a suburban relationship to each other.  And now I think that it's a pretty benign place.  But when I was back in the '50s [1950's], I think it was a, sort of a real hotbed of criminal activity, believe it or not.  And there was--that a number of people from the Union Springs area migrated to Columbus, Georgia and the Phenix City area, and I think they did so because there was a military base nearby and that provided jobs.  So I think people went there for employment.  And that over time, there were all of the kind of criminal elements that sometimes come adjacent to a military base.  So prostitution, bootleg liquor, and there was sort of a mob atmosphere there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So there was a big scandal, the Phenix City story.
Story_ID: 39512
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay now when you, when you think about your parents' personalities and their dispositions, their talents and their looks, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I'm a real mixture of both my parents.  My mother [Velma Lawson] was a--my mother was a very kind hearted person and that from her, she was the neighborhood, informally the neighborhood social worker, psychologist and so from her front porch she helped young people in need.  She would you know, had an open door for somebody who needed help.  For example, there was a young woman who--we had sadly a Catholic priest who was molesting kids and molesting young women.  And this young girl came to my mother and talked to her about the fact that she was sure that she was pregnant.  And thought that the priest was the father and that she was in a panic because she just felt that that was something she couldn't tell her family.  And that I don't know you know, whatever happened to the girl.  I think that she, you know, went away to another place, or something but she came to cry on my mother's shoulder as a first step.  And my mother would sort of really bring people into the house, that we were one of the first families to have television in our neighborhood.  We were the first in our immediate community to have a television set.  And so the week or two after the arrival of the TV set was a great party like atmosphere because every night then while the broadcasts were on because at that point in those early days, you didn't even get TV all day.  I think they had TV only during set hours.  But for the evening prime time hours, then my mother would pop popcorn and we'd have--you couldn't get everybody inside the house, so some people would be on the front porch looking in through the window.  And so it was just great to have all of these people come over to the house and they're watching our television.
Speaker 1: And what size screen was the television.
Speaker 2: The piece of furniture, the TV itself was huge.  The screen was probably, you know, nine inches or something, it was a tiny little thing that had this, you know, sort of ghastly green/gray color when it was off.  And which looked odd in the midst of this big piece of mahogany furniture.
Story_ID: 39513
Speaker 1: Okay so this is interesting.  Now you had a career in television and here's your first TV.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  And I remember--
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: --very vividly the day my father [Willie Lawson] was--the thing was so big that my father had two other men helping him bring it up the front steps.  And I remember saying Daddy, what's that?  And him saying, this is television.
Speaker 1: Okay so how old were you at that point?
Speaker 2: I, probably about eight years old.  It would have probably--I would have probably have been about seven or eight years old.  That would have been about, you know, sort of early 1950s.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right and you said that the, the broadcasting was limited.
Speaker 2: Yes the broadcasting was limited.  And all broadcasting was at that time, that even with the radio, that a lot of the radio stations went off at night.  And so our local stations went off at night, which then as I grew older, as I moved toward my teenage years, then I began to listen to one of the few that was on at night, and that was that famous station from Gallatin, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: WLAC, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, that then had all of the great blues and Elvis Presley and so it became my--and to this day my musical tastes are very broad and I think it's owing to the fact that I heard everything from country western to blues to jazz during my childhood.
Story_ID: 39514
Speaker 1: But we grew up in a place where the--my immediate neighborhood Fairfield [Alabama], was demographically quite interesting because at that time, and I think that this is so true of most African American communities of that era.  And that is that you had--it was a segregated community.  There was white Fairfield, there was black Fairfield.  There was white Birmingham, there was black Birmingham.  And we like you know, going through Apartheid, South Africa, you could go from black Fairfield easily to black Birmingham or black Ensley, and--without, and you'd pass through these white neighborhoods.  But you knew that those were places you passed through, they were not your community.  But there was this kind of, sense of cohesion to what was your community.  So if I had wanted to, for example my aunt wanted to sponsor me to be a debutante in black Birmingham.  You know which was the larger metropolitan, sort of really the urban center in that metropolitan area.  I took piano lessons in downtown Birmingham from a black music teacher, and this was in a building that was sort of on Fourth Avenue and it was all of the major black businesses of Birmingham.  Fairfield had its own little black business district.  And we had our--the doctor who gave, who attended my birth, attended the birth of everybody I knew.  You know so that was, he was our doctor.  The same was true of the dentist, the pharmacist.  So you had these black professionals who were very much a part of your life.  A.G. Gaston, who I mentioned earlier who was our black millionaire, that we'd go swim in his swimming pool.
Speaker 2: Really?  Well he was a friend of your father's, right?
Speaker 1: Right.  But he would also--he and his wife were rather generous about you know, opening up their mansion to a whole group of us little urchins and we'd go over and they'd serve us food and she would be talking about the dresses that she'd just gotten from Paris [France] and you know so there was this broader world that you were exposed to even in the midst of that circumstance.
Speaker 2: Okay so you had an extended black community that extended from Fairfield into Birmingham.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: The rural town.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 39515
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Now you're actually answering most of the rest of the questions already.  But I, but well tell me about your siblings, your brothers and sisters and where do you rank in--
Speaker 2: Okay.  My father [Willie Lawson] had been married.  My father had married, had a first wife.  And his first wife very tragically died of cancer.  And from that marriage, he had two daughters.  One who he named--and it was interesting that he--the sort of family story was that he also had had a son, a first child who was a son, whose name was Sylvester, Sylvester Lawson.  And when Sylvester was two years old, my father apparently took him riding in his convertible.  Sylvester became ill and died of pneumonia or something, and that the family story was that this was so troubling for my father and he so wanted a son, that he named his next two children--he gave them men's names, even though they were girls.  So my sister, my older sister who was a half sister really, her name was Willie D. Lawson, she was named after him.  So she was Willie D. Lawson, Willie DeLeon Lawson, and we called her Dee.  That's how she referred to herself as Dee.  My--the next in line was a sister who was Frank Lawson, who called herself Frankie.  And that they then--they both have passed away, since passed away and were they alive that they would be, Dee would be now in her, she would have been in her mid eighties.  So she was approximately twenty years older than I.  And Frankie would be in her early eighties had she you know, lived.
Story_ID: 39516
Speaker 1: Now there's a--for anybody watching this in the future, it does seem to be a pattern from Alabama in terms of doing this.  There are a lot of Alabama people in Ohio, and those, you know, I know people that grew up with Clydes.  I, I know a Clyde who's a woman.
Speaker 2: Yes and well there's a southern tradition too of naming women, and this is something that goes with white southerners as well as black.  But mostly with white southerners of naming a person by the mother's maiden name.  So a girl would be named Madison or Carter and that really was the mother's maiden name.
Speaker 1: Right, right, and sometime a May is added, like Frankie May.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And Willie May, or--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Bobbie May or Bobbie Jo or something like that.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Which could be--
Speaker 2: And you can sometimes tell the sort of age of a person by the nature of the names, like there were what I call the older names, like Beulah, the older Biblical names.  And then the version that my mother [Velma Lawson] had, Velma, you know there are no young Velmas running around.  It may come back, but haven't seen it lately.
Story_ID: 39517
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  Okay so now you have two older sisters.
Speaker 2: Two older sisters and--
Speaker 1: And you had a brother that passed.
Speaker 2: Right, two older sisters and a brother who I never knew, who had passed away long before I was ever even thought of.  And so after their mother died, after my sister's Dee and Frankie, after their mother died, my father married my mother Velma, and they subsequently had a son.  And their first son is James Walter Lawson, III.  And he is James Walter Lawson, III because I had--my father had a brother who was James Walter Lawson, Junior, and a grandfather, my father's father who he apparently disliked enough to run away from, but subsequently named his first child.
Speaker 1: After.
Speaker 2: Right, after him.  And I've lost all of the family photos of the James Walter Lawson, the original James Walter Lawson, but that he was a--the photo that I remember was of a man who looked more white than black, and who was a distinguished looking man and who was well dressed.  And it was very interesting that he was so light skinned and that my grandmother Eugenia [Eugenia Hall], who I was named after, was a very dark skinned woman.  Eugenia Hall, so that was the, the combination that then produced my father.  And my father--and I have photos of my father.  But that he was someone who he took pride in the fact that he could pass for Mexican.  And, and that was important to him because we would sometimes--we went to Mexico.  We would go to Mexico often.  And so in addition to the eccentricity of him having taught himself this work, he was a very curious man about the world and loved to travel.  And he then--and I'll come back, I know we started this with my, about my siblings, and so I'll come back to them.  But I do want to tell you that my father then--we would in the summers, we would take very long trips.  And that he would, you know, take one of his cars, cause he would repair these cars and then claim--he'd get a car and sort of create a car for us and we would then go to either New York and Canada, we'd go a northern route and that would go up and so I saw--by the time I was a small child, I had gone to Niagara Falls, I had been to Canada, been you know into Canada.  Or we would go the western route where we would go to California.  And we on going to California, we'd go sometimes down and dip into Mexico.
Story_ID: 39518
Speaker 1: That's really great.  I mean in those days with--there was--was a lot of trepidation about travel amongst black folks because we--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --were afraid of how people would react, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.  And we had those incidents.  We--I thought--we had a Coleman stove, we had camping gear.  I thought this was so much fun.  We'd camped out, we liked camping.  And I just thought oh, isn't this great, camping is just so much fun.  And then later in life it dawned on me that we were camping because we couldn't stay.  There were no hotels where we could stay.
Speaker 1: Do you remember, there was something called the Green Book or something.
Speaker 2: Yes I didn't know of the Green Book as a child.  I did not know of it, but I know we, we had relatives in Youngstown, Ohio, we had a route where we would go and sometimes we'd visit and stay with relatives.  We stayed with people in Akron, Ohio.  We'd, we had, my brother, my father had a sister, Maddie Lawson, who then lived in Chicago [Illinois], who had a large apartment in Chicago.  And we stayed with her.  So we would-Detroit [Michigan], there were relatives.  So we would stay with people in various cities as we traveled.  But there were other times when we'd camp out.  We camped out in Sedona [Arizona], I have pictures somewhere of me and my brother swimming in Oak Creek Canyon in Sedona long before Sedona was as hip as it is.
Speaker 1: Yeah before it became the spiritual home.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  Yeah we were like about eight years old and there we are out in Sedona.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we had these, you know, really great travels.  So I have the older brother whose two years older than I, James Walter Lawson, III.  And he lives currently in Atlanta [Georgia] and is married.  And I have a younger brother whose four years younger, and his name is Schuyler Foster Lawson, S-C-H-U-Y-L-E-R Foster Lawson, and he lives in Birmingham.
Speaker 1: Now was he named for George Schuyler by any chance?
Speaker 2: I don't know the origins of his name.
Speaker 1: I know the famous black writer George Schuyler who was a member of the Harlem History Club, who wrote articles and wrote a couple of books.
Speaker 2: And he was born, my brother was born in 1950 and so I don't know whether--and there was also a Phillippa Duke Schuyler I think.  Cause I--
Speaker 1: And that was his daughter.
Speaker 2: Right cause I tried to, I was trying to wonder who was famous sort of at the time to, you know, tried to think about who might, what might have been the influence.
Speaker 1: They would both have been famous--George Schuyler interviewed Malcolm X on New York radio once.  Phillippa was a world known piano prodigy.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So that might have been the influence for my mother in his name because it's not a family connection there, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, wondered.
Speaker 2: And he lives, Schuyler lives in Birmingham [Alabama] with his family.  He's married and has a child, Schuyler, and they live in Birmingham.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is that, those are your--
Speaker 2: Those are my siblings, yes, those are my siblings, yes.  That's my brothers and sisters.
Story_ID: 39519
Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question and you've done such a good job of talking about growing up.  You've covered some of this already, but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The, that's an easy one.  That's an easy one.  The, the sights of growing up where I lived in a suburban area so that it was on one hand a real urban grid of house and a real sense of neighborhood and community.  I knew who my neighbors were, we played together as children.  We had played ball in the streets and all of those activities and I drove across their lawns when I was learning to drive.  So there's a real sense of neighborhood community, green grass lawns, true 1950s suburbia with lawns and flowers and the lawns and trees in the yards, and the smell of cut grass.  The heat, the sort of asphalt smell of summer because Birmingham [Alabama] could be hot and steamy in summer.  Very, very hot and steamy, and so it's that, that mixture of smells.  It's lovely summer nights as a young person growing up, with fireflies and the, you know the number of fireflies that you'd have at that particular time, you don't see anything like that now.  But as dusk would come on, you know the--the twinkling all around you was just wonderful, absolutely wonderful.  You'd be surrounded by fireflies.  And that we as children would then in the summer, we would go and the shrubbery, we knew the flowers, we knew the plants, and we knew honeysuckle.  And we could stand there for hours literally, taking, going through a honeysuckle bush and pulling the little stamen out.  And if you touched, you pull it up and you touched it with your tongue and it was one drop of nectar.  One precious little drop of nectar.  And you'd do this, you'd go through a whole bush just for those little, little tastes of, precious tastes of sweetness.  And the trees, you know you had pecan trees and so your pecans were just falling right there.  You had figs, fresh figs that were readily available to you.  So it was just all of this sort of abundance of things that you could get from the, the natural world.  And we would go into what we called the woods, the wooded area that was beyond the suburban limit, and we'd find turtles and bring those home as our pet turtles or you know, if you were--I didn't like snakes, but you could get snakes and you began to know which snakes were poisonous and which snakes were relatively harmless and--so it was that sort of world of both having an urban edge to it, but also this rural, suburban side of it.
Story_ID: 39520
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Church was an interesting part of growing up.  Church was very definitely a factor in defining who I am in complicated ways.  When we were small, we went to my father's church, the, the Fairfield Baptist Church, and it was a, a big Victorian building that was dark and had a humid feel, and that had down in the basement of it, a full Baptismal font, a pool for dunking because these were Baptists, you had to go fully under the water.  And the church given its size and that old Victorian architecture, was a spooky place to me, it was a scary place to me.  It had a balcony, and the balcony was the favorite place for us children to sit because then it gave you the feeling of being in the theater.  You could sit and look down upon all that was going on and if you happened to sneak in some candy or gum or something, you could sit there and have your little snack while you watched was happening down below you.  The church though was a place where it was spooky and scary to me for a number of reasons.  One was there were funerals there.  And I hadn't quite come to grips with what it meant to be truly dead.  And there were--and people liked to tell ghost stories.  My father [Willie Lawson] liked to tell them and we'd sit, we had fireplaces in our house and we would sit sometimes in front of the fireplace and he would tell ghost stories and scare the daylights out of me and so the church was spooky in that way.  But the minister who weighed probably about 400 pounds and had his special Cadillac to accommodate him and his equally 400 pound wife, they had an act that was pretty good.  So he would--his sermons all came and the only verses he knew were from Revelations.  So it was all the fire and brimstone and the mystery of the seven horseman and dah, dah, and he'd hit his rhythm and she'd get down on the bass keys on the organ and ooh, and so she was, you know the backup music to this--your life was one of sin and that you were going to burn forever in hell.
Story_ID: 39521
Speaker 1: And this was this burning in hell was very real to me because Birmingham [Alabama], another sight and sound that I didn't mention, the blast furnaces were belching out--they were going day and night and at that time.  And they made the sky red.  At night the sky was glowing and it was glowing red.  So you had this orange and red glowing sky that you grew up with and it was always putting out this, this dust which was I guess the, the ore, red ore.  But it was--you'd end up--if you had a white car, you had to routinely do this thing of, of simonizing off this coating of pollution.  So and occasionally there would be explosions or you know, flare ups down at the blast furnace just even when they poured the steel, there was all this--and you'd hear these awful stories of the injuries.  You know sometimes a person would fall into the molten steel and so these everlasting fires of hell seemed very real to me.  And so the church was a spooky place.  We were liberated from that though when we were about, when we were about twelve years old I guess.  When I was about twelve years old.  My father [Willie Lawson] came to us and told us that he--it was his belief that as a parent the responsible thing to do was to introduce you to religion.  But it was for you to choose which, what your own beliefs were.  Made sense to me.  And so after that I became a tourist to other churches.  And I went to, I'd ask a friend, so what are you?  And they'd say Methodist and I'd say oh, can I come to church with you next weekend?  So I'd go to a Methodist, Lutheran, I just--Pentecostal.  I sort of was shopping around.  My older brother came to me one day and said I know what we should become, we should become Catholic.  And I said why.  And he says we should become Catholic because they have the Mass really early and we could be back home in time to watch cartoons.  And that seemed like just as good a reason as any to me and so we then all converted to Catholicism.
Story_ID: 39522
Speaker 1: Okay now, now--
Speaker 2: My mother was an avid reader and she read and we would discuss the books that she was reading or the magazine articles that she was reading.  So she kept us really engaged with the world.  She read the newspaper, we'd talk about things that were happening.  And our community, there were things that were happening around us.  I don't know what year, one of--I want to research and find out what year this happened, but there was an awful case in Birmingham [Alabama], in the area, where a man was, a black man was castrated.  And that he survived though, because to torture him further, they poured turpentine or something on the wound and inadvertently that actually caused the bleeding to stop and that so he survived this, you know, horrific thing.  And that but to hear, to be a child and to hear the adults talking about this was something that definitely made an impression on you.  To know that the Klan [Ku Klux Klan] was doing something or we'd hear stories of lynchings.  We, we subscribed to the regular white newspapers, the Birmingham News, but we also subscribed to--there was a black paper and I think it was called the Birmingham Mirror or something.  So we subscribed to the black press.  We also got the Pittsburgh Courier.  So we'd get these black publications, we got Ebony and Jet and so you, you had that.  You knew who, you know, the Chicago Defender.  We got these other papers and were well aware of this circumstances of black people around the country, you know so through those publications, we knew things were happening, awful things were happening.  So we weren't living in a vacuum even though we had this kind of cocoon of this black community.  But even in that cocoon of a black community, you knew very definitely what was going on.
Story_ID: 39523
Speaker 1: Was there special attention paid to the Emmett Till case?
Speaker 2: Very definitely, oh no question about it.
Speaker 1: You would have been I think nine I think.
Speaker 2: Yes probably around that, and the photographs were haunting.  You know those were--caused me to have nightmares for a while afterwards, after seeing the--you know the photo from the magazine.  But those were things that we very definitely knew about and my father had white customers.  And that you know, you would see then this man who was this very proud man in many ways, and hear these people who go Boy, when's my car going to be ready?  You know, boy.  You know you do a pretty good job of, you know, repairing these cars, boy.  So you know you--this was a world that you saw and then we also had a--our house was right on a corner and across the street from us was the little neighborhood store.  And the neighborhood store was run by Italian Americans.  And that these were either, they were either form Sicily or from southern Italy, but there was this family, and the--when we were little children, we all played together.  And then there was the point at which we became--it was time for us to go to elementary school and our older relatives, you know my brothers said, told me that we, I wouldn't be able to play with Teresa anymore and her older sister was telling her the same thing.  And we at first couldn't understand why we wouldn't be able to play together.  And so there was this whole time where there was almost like a summer where she and I would be across the street from each other and she would--we'd be talking across the street to teach other.  She would be saying I got a new doll, want to see it?  You know or something.  And she'd say you sure you can't come over to my house?  And I would be saying no.  She's well can I come over?  And I'd say no you can't come over to my house either.  And we, so we'd have this little conversation across the street with each other and eventually we knew that we had to retreat into our own communities in that way.
Story_ID: 39524
Speaker 1: Well were there many Sicilians or Italians around in those days in Birmingham?
Speaker 2: There were.  That most of the--in the same way that you now have Korean Americans that will have stores in a neighborhood that--in an African American neighborhood.  Then in that particular part of the world you had a lot of Italian Americans who had businesses there.
Speaker 1: Did, did they, they work in the mills, you know, a lot?
Speaker 2: I don't know whether they worked in the mills, but I know that they too were treated, they were treated like second class citizens as well.  And you had Syrians who were vendors, who would come through.
Speaker 1: Syrians, okay.
Speaker 2: Selling bolts of cloth and who were tinkerers, who would repair watches and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And sell items, you know they'd be sort of itinerant, just sales persons who'd come through.
Speaker 1: Was there a significant Jewish community?
Speaker 2: There was in Birmingham.  I don't think there was in Fairfield, but there was in Birmingham.  And there was an area that was adjacent to a prominent African American community where Angela Davis, Condoleezza Rice grew up, that there was in a Jewish community, and a Jewish cemetery.  And that was near an area that was frequently bombed.
Speaker 1: They called--
Speaker 2: Bombinghill.
Speaker 1: Bombingham and Dynamite Hill.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 39525
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I started school, I went to a few blocks from my house, I walked each day to Robinson Elementary School in Fairfield [Alabama].  And afterwards, I went to Fairfield Industrial High School, which no longer exists, but was the segregated school.  In white Fairfield there was Fairfield High School.  My older brother and I and all of--and my sisters all attended Fairfield Industrial High School.
Speaker 1: Now what was the significance of the name Fairfield Industrial High School?
Speaker 2: It was my understanding that the industrial was to symbolize the notion that blacks should be trained to be productive with their hands as well as their minds, and so you had a vocational school as a huge component of the school.  The majority of the students were really on a vocational track and the school taught auto repair, dry cleaning, cosmetology, home economics and the majority of students took those courses.  There were a smaller number of us who were in the academic track.  We didn't use the term track then or college prep, but there was that smaller number of us who were not in the vocational side of the school.
Speaker 1: Okay now did you have middle school, though?
Speaker 2: No.  It was the--elementary school went through from first grade to eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Now did, did you attend kindergarten at all?
Speaker 2: I did and the kindergarten was one that was just run by a neighbor.  It was a nursery kindergarten run by a neighbor, Mrs. Stewart.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we had, she had probably about twenty kids there.  I'm sure it was an unlicensed endeavor, but she was a very well meaning and good hearted and professional person about this.
Story_ID: 39526
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you, did you learn how to read early in life?
Speaker 2: I did.  I learned how to read through my parents.  I learned how to read at home.  My father [Willie Lawson] and mother [Velma Lawson] both valued education very highly.  And I picked up reading when I was three.  And there was an article in the black newspaper with a photograph of me sitting on a pile of books.  And it was about the wonder of my having learned to read so early because I could read and apparently interpret what I was reading from college books or encyclopedias.  And I joyfully remember the day my father took me downtown Birmingham [Alabama], all dressed up, to the photo studio to sit on the stack of books and have my photo taken for this.
Speaker 1: That sounds like a great photo.  Do, do you have a copy of it you can send us?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't and I have been trying to track down the photographer because I did know the photographer.  My brother dated his daughter, so I was trying through her to see if I could get a copy of it.  But I have not had any success.
Speaker 1: Yeah that really sounds great.
Speaker 2: Yes, no it was--
Speaker 1: It said something about the paper too and the message that, you know the black community was trying to, the business community as trying to get to this black youth.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: So I read and read profusely, and as a consequence, and my father had this approach to life which was that he, he thought that there was--you should never be idle.  And that, that you should--there was always something to learn.  And as a consequence, he bought this sort of cheap encyclopedia which was a one volume book, but it was a huge book.  And so we called it the "big book."  And his notion was that I will bet you that if you just turn anywhere in the "big book," you'll find something really interesting.  And he was right about that and so I would then read.  I'd just randomly look through the book and read and to this day I, you know the Internet now serves as a, a great way to continue that with stumbled upon and googling just random things.  But that's something that I started as a child with his encouragement.  And when I went to elementary school, they said that I already knew what was being taught in the first grade and that they would--I didn't need to attend first grade and they tested me and said that I didn't need to attend the second grade either and thought that they would put me directly into third grade.  But then they thought beter of it because they worried about what affect it might have on my brother, my older brother who was two years older.  And they worried that moving me into the same classroom with him might not be a good idea.  And so they, so I skipped first grade and went into second grade.  And was angry with him because I kept, my brother because I kept thinking were it not for you, I could have skipped that one too.
Story_ID: 39527
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  So did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Possibly biology.
Speaker 1: Okay now this would be in high school, right?
Speaker 2: This was, I, well as a child I liked, enjoyed learning and I enjoyed learning about things and I kept feeling that--I thought about becoming a doctor partly because I thought that anatomy was an easy topic in a sense.  That math to me was harder because there was sort of infinite possibilities there.  But with the natural world, with botany or biology, that it's limited, that there are only so many bones and once you know them, you've got it.  Same was true with the parts of a plant.  There are only so many parts.  But when it came to math, you could just keep going and there were too many unknowns.  But with--and the same was true of physics or astronomy.  But biology, to me that was pretty easy because it was a limited universe of things that you could, or as I felt at that time.  Now of course I know far more.  But I felt that that was a much more limited range that one needed to know.
Story_ID: 39528
Speaker 1: Okay, okay now were there favorite teachers in grade school?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really, not in grade school.  In, when I was in high school there were people who weren't necessarily favorite teachers, but who were, who were very--they were kind towards me.  Because by now, by the time I was in high school my mother had become ill, very ill.  And then eventually she died.  And my father given his eccentricity, they knew what I was sort of going through.  Now when I talk about the eccentricity of this, and the reason I use that term, is that he would decide things--for example, he would have these ideas that he would present to us as a family meeting, which was a nice thing.  I liked the fact that he'd call us kids together and sort of say let's talk about this.  So I liked the idea that he encouraged us and brought us into the conversation.  He would say I have an idea.  And he thought that we had been to Disneyland and we had all loved Disneyland and he thought that, he thought about what about having a merry-go-round in the backyard.  Now so he then had commissioned me to do designs for the seats.  So I was doing drawings for swan cars and things that would--and horses that would be on this merry-go-round.  Meanwhile he then dug a big hole in the ground and took a car axle and [laughs], you get my drift?  You put it, one side down and the other side will rotate so that was going to be the [laughs], that was the driving force for keeping this thing going round and round.  That one never quite got off the ground, thank goodness.
Speaker 1: He put the axle in the ground.
Speaker 2: He put the axle in the ground and did the test run to make sure we'd have the, the circular motion.  So all that needed to be done next were the platforms to attach to it, then the, the cars and the, the seats and the poles and the canopy.  But he also decided around that time that our house was on a corner, and he said you know you paint the house, these were neat little bungalows and people took pride in them and painted them, usually white with black or green trim around the windows and the shutters.  He says you know our house is on a corner and two sides are visible to the street.  The other two sides aren't visible to the street.  So you really paint for the public, you don't paint for yourself.  So he stopped painting the other two sides.  So we had two sides of our house that looked as weather beaten as a shack [laughs] in the rural South, and the other then that were painted.  So it was all these kinds of things that you'd go oh, yeah, what next?  That, you know you just worried about what he was going to come up with next.
Speaker 1: Now did you, at the time did you think this was kind of crazy, or did you--
Speaker 2: Thought it was kind of crazy, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay did you ever--
Speaker 2: I wanted to be normal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wanted to be like the other kids, especially as you move towards being a teenager, you know you don't want to be this sort of odd person.
Story_ID: 39529
Speaker 1: Did, did his ideas embarrass you in front of your classmates sometimes?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And because everything that you had we--I just wanted a regular bicycle, you know just an--cause he--I'd wanted a bicycle and that he made a bicycle for me out of plumbing pipes.  It worked, but it was the heaviest bicycle known to humankind.  The thing was made out of lead pipes.  I mean it was heavy as all get up.  I mean now I would probably have it hanging, you know, over the sofa or something as a work of art.  Same was true where he decided that, that our front yard, that the flowers looked so beautiful to him that he thought that he would make some permanent ones.  So he got out his welding tools and just welded up a whole, you know, sort of slew of bed of flowers, metal flowers that then we proceeded to paint.  We helped him paint them and so we had these flowers and of course the whites driving through the neighborhood would stop and want to buy them cause it was folk art.  It was like folk art.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you didn't want that when you were [laughs], you just wanted to be a normal person.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so, so yeah this is, yeah he was interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's an interesting thing.
Speaker 2: And there's an article that I have not been able to find, but in family lore they swear that there was an article about him in Life or Look Magazine.  I have not been able to find any reference to it.  But that he in 1945 I guess it was, apparently drove from Birmingham to Toronto and back using one gallon of gas because he had created an engine where he only needed gas to start the car.  And he could really burn low grade fuels like kerosene, all you know, for the actual trip.  And so they apparently did a story of Birmingham man goes to Canada on one gallon of gas, you know.  And that he then did--moved towards applying for either applied for the patent for this, for this engine that he had created to do that.  So as you can see, the bottom line is that my father looms large in my life because of the approach that he took towards his own life and towards encouraging us to do things.  So he would, if he was going to add a room to the house, he'd say you kids design, you know, give me your thoughts about a design.  And so we'd start sketching out designs.  And that many cases he'd use them.  So we actually had then a, a floor added to our house where--to our design.  We had one room which was my room, the boys had another room in between us, in between us we had a giant playroom with skylights for our train set where you could go up under.  We had the whole Lionel trains and so you had a nice, raised platform where you could then do the landscaping.  I was big into the landscaping for the trains.
Story_ID: 39530
Speaker 1: It sounds as if on some levels it's like living with Mr. Wizard.
Speaker 2: Right, that's what I mean, yeah.  Yeah it was really quite wonderful in that way.  And so it gave me--there was a, a sense of that I could do things.  And I moved towards art eventually because then there were times when I wanted--some friends got a Monopoly set and I wanted a Monopoly game.  We would play with theirs and I begged him to buy me one.  And he said no.  And so I borrowed theirs and I copied it and made my own Monopoly set, including the box and everything.  So when I did my--all of it, I made the little money and everything.  The only thing that I needed was the dice.  And so I had my own Monopoly set.  And that led me to feel that if I wanted a painting or something I could, I could make it.  And so I started painting, and that led to teachers asking me to decorate their boards and their classrooms, so I would do this little, you know sort of a little bit of, little business in a sense, of doing the turkeys for Thanksgiving and the--had pumpkins for Halloween to go and decorate a classroom.
Speaker 1: Now here as we sit in your home, I'm looking around.  I was thinking when we came in, said this is, this is very neatly designed.  Did you play a role in designing your home?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  We worked with an architect, but yes.  I had the idea that I didn't want, I wanted to preserve the original features of the house at the front side of it.  But that I wanted--so we preserved the original wood.  The house was built in 1908 and we preserved the original architecture there.  But I wanted it to transition into a loft-like space with then lots of light and the large windows in the back.
Speaker 1: Right, okay I thought about that, actually.  Now I can see the origin of it.  That's something.  So this is, this is quite a legacy that your father is leaving.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now did he have a, a favorite one of you all to help him with these experiments?  I ask because you said you were blown up three times.  So I don't--
Speaker 2: He was hoping my older brother would take over the business with, you know, would inherit the business and would keep it going.  So that was his hope, and that he actually was hoping that my sisters and I would have careers in medicine.  I think that he really hoped that we would become doctors and my older sisters, Dee [Lawson] and Frankie [Lawson], Dee moved--they both attended Hunter College in New York.  They moved to New York, lived in New York, attended Hunter and eventually settled and lived in New York.  And when Dee got a job at, as a Medical Technologist at Sloan Kettering Cancer Research Center, and after Frankie finished college, Frankie worked there as well.  And Sloan Kettering in 1963, they invited me to come to New York.  I had never spent any real time with them, but they invited me to come to New York and to spend the summer there and attend a program that Sloan Kettering had, which was a paid internship in cancer research.  And so I did.  So I went there and worked at Sloan Kettering that summer and did so as well the summer of 1964.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which was a wonderful experience.  And I loved biology and chemistry and I worked in a physiology lab there doing blood chemistries, urinalysis and assisting with medical experiments, most often with dogs or with rats.
Story_ID: 39531
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in high school, now were you a, a popular high school student?
Speaker 2: Somewhat.  I had a, a core group of friends and everybody knew me and my brother because of this kind of--that they knew our father [Willie Lawson] and our father had done business with their families and so they, we all knew each other in that way.  Or my mother [Velma Lawson] had been very kind and generous to some of the poorer kids in the school.  So we all knew each other and I had a, a nice core group of friends.  I was thin, so I was bullied by some kids as being that--there were things I wanted to be, a majorette and I was told that I was too skinny to be a majorette.  So I joined the band.
Speaker 1: That's the '50s [1950's] for you because now I don't think you can be too skinny.
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah, yeah.  But you know then it was the fine black woman with those big legs and--
Speaker 1: Okay so you, you joined the band.  What did you play?
Speaker 2: I played the glockenspiel, so I [laughs].
Speaker 1: You may have to explain what that is.
Speaker 2: The glockenspiel is the, it's the, it's the vertical band version of, of what do you call it?
Speaker 1: The vibraphone?
Speaker 2: Yes exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Xylophone.
Speaker 2: The xylophone, that's what it is, yes.  It is a carry, a portable version of a xylophone.
Story_ID: 39532
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So going back to my high school years that I had, I didn't, I loved the sciences and biology and chemistry and that served me well for then the future where they work at Sloan Kettering was--I really enjoyed that very much.  And the--my interest in the sciences also led to my served a real purpose in getting me into college, and that was at--while I talk about my father with great delight, there were other sides that were not so fun.  And one element of that was that in one of those let's gather to talk meetings, he then said you know I think it would be just great if you went to college, but that I don't have any money and I haven't saved any money for you to go to college.  So if you kids want to go to college, then you'll just have to figure out a way to get yourselves there.  So that was sort of harsh to hear, but it was also something that I was undaunted, I was determined that okay, I will find a way.  I will educate myself, I will go to college.  And I then, I knew that some of my friends would be going away to college and that I thought that if I could, couldn't afford to do any better, I would be able to go to the local college, Miles College [Miles College, Fairfield, Albama], which was, I think it was an AME [African Methodist Episcopal] school.  But it is located only about three blocks from my house, where I grew up.
Story_ID: 39533
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so you thought about going to Miles College [Miles College, Fairfield, Alabama].
Speaker 2: I thought about going to Miles College because I knew that if--that I couldn't afford to go away to school, I could then take courses at Miles College, which was located just a few blocks away.  And one of my best friend's father was the President of Miles.  This was a woman, Daphanine [ph.] Pitts, and her father then was the, at the time Lucius Pitts was the President of Miles College.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had the good fortune though of competing in a science fair.  And I created a project for the science fair that was one on demonstrating sound, how sound waves would look and the difference between say bass and treble in a graphic way using water.  And I was very fortunate because--and I won the contest.  I won that year's science fair and the prize was a full scholarship to a school in Alabama because this was a time of segregation, this was now 1963 and things were still segregated, so there was a white price and a black prize and the black prize was black colleges in Alabama.  So I had my choice of Alabama A&M [Alabama A&M University, Huntsville, Alabama], Alabama State [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] or Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and I chose Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right now was there, was there any--so when did you know you were going to Tuskegee, how, how late in your high school life did you know?
Speaker 2: I knew the--right before it was time to go practically, so it was the Spring probably.  I must have won the scholarship, say the Spring of 1963, around the time that I then graduated from high school.
Story_ID: 39534
Speaker 1: Okay these are events of such national importance, I thought we would raise--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Birmingham [Alabama] in the early 1960's when I was in high school, became a real focal point for Martin Luther King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  So Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. had a number of pivotal demonstrations right there in Birmingham, and many people identify when they hear the word Birmingham, they think of some of the iconic moments, of the dogs and water hoses that were used by the then Police Commissioner, Bull Conner on demonstrators.  And we were, our lives were very much consumed with that period of, you know the--Martin Luther King being jailed there, or the dogs, the water hoses.  We were--we left school to participate in the demonstrations at that time, and our principal of our high school, E.J. Oliver who was a wonderful educator for what he had to deal with, that he then sort of issued an order that we were forbidden to participate in any of these demonstrations and that while SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] was saying that this would be a children's march and that they were asking for young people to participate, that he said that none of the students could participate and even locked the doors to the school.  And we decided, a group of us, a small group of us decided to defy him and felt that no, this was something that we should be a part of, that we should participate in this march.  We should support Martin Luther King, Jr. and we should go and join these demonstrations.  And we were threatened with expulsion from school.  They never really expelled us, they did put us out of school and we were to return with our parents and their meetings and discussions, and they later decided that we were sort of heroes rather than you know, bad students in that respect.
Speaker 1: So he actually locked the--
Speaker 2: The building, right.
Speaker 1: Into the school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: To prevent you from going over to Birmingham to join the demonstration.
Speaker 2: Right, right, exactly.
Speaker 1: And so how did you get out?
Speaker 2: We then--I've forgotten how we got out, but we did get out of the building.  And I don't know whether it was just at the end of the day where he finally had to let us go to go home, that we then all, you know, it was a small group of us who then said we will, let's go, let's go and join in this.  And some of my classmates then were a part of the demonstration.  I was not in downtown Birmingham when the hoses or the dogs were used.  I was not there.  And, but I then went to mass meetings that SCLC was having in some of the churches and at Miles College to talk about, to rally people to participate in demonstrations.
Story_ID: 39535
Speaker 1: Now I think at that juncture when the youth were called upon, Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Wyatt T. Walker and others were already in jail.  So who was speaking to you?
Speaker 2: I don't know, yes I don't remember, you know because this was something that I was looking at through the lens of being a child and I don't remember, and I haven't read up on the era yet again to, you know to sort of--
Speaker 1: I've heard that James Bevel was very active in that, in that regard, but I don't --
Speaker 2: And I don't know either.  I later ended up working some with Bevel in--when I became a part of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], but I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But so I very definitely, that was my sort of first real connection with the Civil Rights Movement.  Now when the buses, the Freedom Riders had come through Birmingham and the bus was burned outside of Birmingham, that was another very visible and visceral moment when the Civil Rights Movement was at our doorstep, but I didn't--I wasn't actively connected to that in any way.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And another--since I mentioned Miles College, another kind of interesting moment was the only moment that I, I remember my mother and being connected--sort of to the Movement in the artist way.  And that was, it wasn't really connected to the Movement, but it was just awareness of racism and race, and that was at Miles College had a special screening of Imitation of Life.  And this was, this was not--I don't know what year this was, but this was the remake, the colored, the color, Technicolor version.
Speaker 1: With Lana Turner.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that it was a--it wasn't, they wouldn't allow it to be shown in the theaters in Birmingham, but somehow Miles College arranged a special screening.  And my mother and I and most of my friends, and it was a whole--most of the neighborhood, our community, went to Miles for this screening.
Story_ID: 39536
Speaker 1: So there was this interesting moment when my mother and all of the--so many of the men and women of the community, the adults as well as us younger people then all gathered for this special screening at Miles College.  And what was, it was special to me and sticks out in my memory because it was this mixture of multi-generations.  It was the older people as well as the younger people, and so the screening then of course triggered for several days afterwards, a real dialogue about race and racism and our circumstances in Birmingham.  So it wasn't a part of the Movement as such, but it was a really interesting dialogue.
Speaker 2: Well what do you think it was about the movie Imitation of Life that created such interest and keen interest and dialogue?
Speaker 1: The, the fact that someone--it was--a sort of slightly oblique way of talking about the circumstances of race that life would so much would be your life would be technically better in a sense, if you were white and why is that?  Because life for a black person at that particular time was just so challenging and so difficult that if you could, you would want to pass for white.  And you know, was that the only remedy to that circumstance, or was there the possibility that life could be made better for everybody and then you wouldn't need to be white in order to have a more equitable and fair life.
Speaker 2: You think it's the--was it the discussion that, that was the real value of the film rather than the film?
Speaker 1: Yes, right, it was the discussion rather than the film itself.  It was the discussion.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right so this happened while you were at, in high school?
Speaker 1: This happened when I was in--probably either late elementary school or in high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay so, so you won this scholarship to Tuskegee, I mean to any school you wanted to choose.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 39537
Speaker 1: Now why--how did you choose Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: I chose Tuskegee because I thought that of the schools that were--I would have access to, that it was the best.  I thought it was the one that had probably the stronger science curriculum.  It had a school of veterinary medicine that was highly regarded, and I thought that for my interest in science that it would be the best bet.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so Spring of '63 [1963] is the science fair.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then, then you said the other--the events started, '63 [1963] started.
Speaker 2: Oh yes there was no question that--and some of these things happened when I was in New York and I've--and the same was true that next Summer when I was--now had gone to Tuskegee and so some of the--there was very definitely, I've forgotten the exact dates, but you had, I think it was '63 [1963] when you had the bombing, the church bombing.
Speaker 1: Yeah that was in I think September of '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Right, and the four girls, and so I would have been at Tuskegee then in September of '63 [1963].  I would have been at Tuskegee and the same was true of the assassination of Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy], I was at Tuskegee at that time.  So the--
Speaker 1: March on Washington in August of '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And I think the murder of James Meredith, I mean not James Meredith, but the head of the Mississippi NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I don't know why I'm blocking on his name now, but--
Speaker 2: Evers.
Speaker 1: Yeah Medgar Evers.
Speaker 2: Medgar Evers, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, murder of Medgar Evers.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 39538
Speaker 1: So you had a number of things happening during that time period and at that point I was making the transition from high school student to New York, to Sloan Kettering, from Sloan Kettering in New York as an intern, to then Tuskegee as a student.  And at Tuskegee I was--I became--started, you know looking--I looked around and became associated with a student group there.  And the student group was the student activists, and these were students who were interested in civil rights.
Speaker 2: Now was there a name for the group?
Speaker 1: Yes, and it was--I'm trying to remember the name.  I'll get the name for you.  I don't recall the exact name now.
Speaker 2: Now was there a particular student who was a leader or a faculty member?
Speaker 1: There was a student who was a, a leader and this was George Ware, George Washington Ware who later became the--he is the Herbalist and Spiritual Healer for Bootsie Collins.
Speaker 2: Okay so now he, he has that role now.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But then he was a chemistry student at Tuskegee.
Speaker 2: For Bootsie Collins, okay now who may have a Alabama root himself, you know.  It's so many people from Cincinnati [Ohio] from Alabama.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and at this time the Tuskegee for off-campus recreation you'd go to a little juke joint where there was a group that was pretty good that was playing, it was called the Commodores.  And the place served great fried chicken and you could see Lionel Ritchie and these folks, the Commodores singing.  So that was off-campus recreation at that time.
Story_ID: 39539
Speaker 1: Okay now do you remember--I've heard people mention a teacher by the name of Robert Gomillion.
Speaker 2: Gomillion was, I did meet Dr. Gomillion and Dr. Gomillion was a--I don't know whether he was actively teaching then, but I met him and met with him several times because he had done a very famous case of the gerrymandering, of Macon County [Alabama].  And he was talked about how the black vote had been stolen, or black people had been deprived of the right to vote by through a complex gerrymandering of the political districts.  And the woman who was very active along with him, was a woman who was from Los Angeles, and I think she, she moved back to Los Angeles [California] and published a paper for Tuskegee from Los Angeles.  And this was--I believe her name, first name was Alma, but her last name was Lomax, and that she is the mother of Michael Lomax, who is now head of the United Negro College Fund.
Speaker 1: Okay, is she related to Lewis Lomax as well?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know.
Speaker 1: And Jones?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay that's interesting, yeah.  So yeah I heard--yeah Robert Gomillion made his mark and--
Speaker 2: And I had an interesting teacher who I, I have to tell you that I thought that she was a wonderful and interesting person, she and her husband were enlightened, very interesting sort of--kind of counterculture black people, and that she invited us to her home.  She taught English there I believe, and her name was Antoinette Handy.  And years later, now I want to skip forward for a minute to tell you this because years later when I was the Director at the Corporation for Public--I was the Director of Arts Programming at the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.  And my boss at that time, a man Ron Hull from Nebraska, that he and I went to a special dinner, an event that was at the Kennedy Center.  And it was about the arts and there was this woman who was a black woman who was the--in a high position over the music program.  She was in charge of the music program at the National Endowment for the Arts.  And there were other people and we were seated around a table.  And somehow we were--the conversation was just going and then she said years ago, she says I taught at Tuskegee and I had a student that was an excellent student and I always wondered what happened to her.  And she said she left to work full time in the Civil Rights Movement.  I was in a conversation with other people, but I caught the glimpse of that conversation and I turned to her and I said, you know Dr. Handy, I'm Jennifer Lawson.  And the people around the table couldn't believe it, that we then sort of discovered each other right there before their eyes like that.
Speaker 1: Wow that is quite a story.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it was just this wonderful moment there for us to both now be in these official positions here in Washington, me with the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and her with the National Endowment for the Arts.
Speaker 1: So she, she was in charge of the music program for National Endowment?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I didn't know until then that she was also related to W.C. Handy, yes.
Story_ID: 39540
Speaker 1: But so I then went to Tuskegee and I studied at Tuskegee and became active in the student group there.  And I was trying to balance my work in Civil Rights and my work as a student.  I declined to become a, you know a member of a sorority because I felt that the sororities were--it--they were talking about black dresses and pearls and pink and green clothing or red and white clothing and I thought how can we talk about these things when right outside our campus you can't--it's segregated.  And you know you can't vote, people can't vote.  And so I was much more interested in then what was happening in that world beyond the campus and Civil Rights [Civil Rights Movement].  And I then went the Summer of '64 [1964], I went back to New York to work at Sloan Kettering because I just thought that was such a great opportunity and while I was there, it was just devastating reading the news of the missing Civil Rights workers.  Cause this was now the Freedom Summer and Goodman, Chaney, Schwerner [murders of Andrew Goodman, James Earl Chaney, Michael Schwerner].
Speaker 2: Yeah that--one of the most dramatic Summers of the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 1: Right, and I felt that I, I felt that I should be there.  I kept feeling that I should, that I had made the wrong--I made a sort of personal and selfish decision almost in going to New York--but that, that I should be in Mississippi.  And so I came back to Tuskegee and then when the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] came through and asked for volunteers to go to Mississippi, I went to Mississippi in the Fall of 1964 to work on the continuing voter rights campaigns and I stayed in Jackson, Mississippi and canvassed of, in the, you know, neighborhoods, black neighborhoods in Jackson trying to get people to register to vote.
Story_ID: 39541
Speaker 1: Now this is an interesting period of time when you're, when you go there.  This is from what I've read, of course I wasn't there, but I read these accounts.  SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] begins to sort of fall apart in '64 [1964].  They--
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: The leadership kind of--
Speaker 2: Not really.  Yeah it was, it was changing but not really.  I mean it didn't fall apart, but the, you know you had--it was Marion Barry had been the Chairman of SNCC and then you had John Lewis, Jim Foreman and so it was--but there was, this was a time where there was a very active work with the Council of Federated Organizations, COFO.  And so CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] and other groups were working then.  And it was mostly a kind of clear voter registration drive towards the--that eventually resulted in the Voting Rights Act.  But it was the Democratic convention, you know the--this was Fannie Lou Hamer's I'm sick and tired of being sick and tired ["Fannie Lou Hamer: Tired of Being Sick and Tired"].
Speaker 1: Now were you there, were you there in time for that?
Speaker 2: No, I was not.  I did not go to, yeah, I did not go to the Democratic convention, I was--I later worked with Fannie Lou Hamer but I did not go to that.  But that was what was, you know in the air during that time period.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And so I went and worked purely in Jackson, Mississippi, you know working on voter registration in that, the Fall, and then I came back to Tuskegee to resume being a student.  And just couldn't just be a student in a sense.  And became even more active with the student group.  And there was, SNCC was coming onto campus more regularly.  People like Stokely Carmichael, this guy William Hall who was called Winky Hall, Charlie Cobb, Ivanhoe Donaldson, a number of people would float through the--and that I just felt that it made more sense to be active in the Movement.  Our student group started getting really caught up in the thing of well the SNCC people want to take credit for doing this, but we should take credit.  And I just thought this is juvenile and silly and that about who's going to take credit for or who's leading what.  There was to me room for everybody to do something and get things done.  And eventually I, I had a classmate, Samuel Young, Jr., who was killed.  He was active with both SNCC and the student, and the Tuskegee group.  And I think that we're now up to 1965, and Sammy was killed.
Story_ID: 39542
Speaker 1: How was he killed?
Speaker 2: He was killed--we were having, planning to have a student meeting and that we were all planning to gather there and that Sammy [Sammy Young, Jr.] was with, in his car with a young woman and that they were driving to--they were going from the campus I think to the meeting, the place where the meeting was.  And he stopped at a gas station in Tuskegee that was owned by a white man.  And that Sammy who had been in the military, he was, had been in the Navy, and that he had had kidney disease and so he only had one kidney I believe.  And he asked to use the restroom.  And the guy told him no.  And that Sammy got into an argument with the man.  And the man started calling Sammy names and Sammy told the man to back off and pulled a golf club out of his car and the man shot him and killed him there on the spot.  And with this, with--then of course then that led some of the students, that was a real eye opener for some of the students at Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] who had not been active in the Movement, to suddenly become aware that oh, you know, this is the world that we live in.  And they became more active for a hot minute.  You know it wasn't, it didn't lead to any sort of sustained activity on their part, but there were vigils and marches and around that time I decided that I--it made more sense to, I just wanted--was going to drop my studies.  And that was a big decision for me to decide to leave Tuskegee and work full time with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].  But I thought okay I, you know, it's a big decision because I don't have, I don't come from a wealthy family.  I'm paying my way through college and I was working.  I worked at the hospital, I had learned these skills in medical technology, so I worked at the hospital, and that I also had gotten a little part time job at a photo studio in Tuskegee, where I was retouching and coloring photos.  This was a time where they would take the black and white photo and then you would use oil paints and you would do this delicate coloring on it.  And the--I had been hired to do that.  And I only later learned that the photo studio had its own sort of place in history, the Polk Studio.
Speaker 1: This is P.H. Polk?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 39543
Speaker 1: All right so you're in Mississippi, 1965.
Speaker 2: So I'm in Alabama 1965, at Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] 1965.
Speaker 1: Alabama, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Samuel Young, Jr. is killed and I decide that I am going to leave Tuskegee and--which means let, letting go of my scholarship and work full time with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].  And I decide that I will do that and for me this is like saying I am going to jump off of a bridge or a cliff because it's--I know that there is--that going back will be difficult because I don't have the money.  In letting go of the scholarship, then I can't just simply say okay now I've worked in the Movement for a little while, I'm going to go back to college.
Speaker 1: You had several different factors with working, I mean that could, you know, make you fearful.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Disapproval of the authorities in terms of that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The uncertainty of whether you would be alive or dead.
Speaker 2: Very definitely, and the, the--interestingly though the uncertainty, the facing the possibility of death was very real but I was not awed by that.  That didn't enter my decision in any way and I sometimes look back and wondered about that and oddly I think that that's where the Catholicism, that little moment of being a Catholic also coincided with a time where there was a--Tom Dooley was a prominent Catholic of that time and the whole notion of sort of activist Catholics and martyrdom and the notion of that it's okay to be a martyr if you are a martyr for the right cause, and that your life, you know if you're giving your life in service, that that can be a good thing.  So that made the notion that if I were to die like Sammy Young had died, that if I were to die through this, that it's not, you know it's certainly not something that I was something, but it is also something that helped me I think, helped make it something that was a little more acceptable somehow or, or a little less frightening I guess I should say.
Story_ID: 39544
Speaker 1: What did your parents think about this?
Speaker 2: My mother had died some years before and my father was beginning to suffer from either Parkinson's or Alzheimer's and so he was becoming less and less sort of a real person in my life in many ways.  But he wrote me a note which was a delightful note.  At one point he--I told him, he knew what I was doing and he then said, he wrote me a note that said you know, in your life if you're going to do something, then you need victories and may you have victories.  And for me that was his endorsement of it, of saying that you know, I don't necessarily approve of what you're doing, but that I hope that you will succeed at what you're doing.
Story_ID: 39545
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, so what happened?  You worked right in Alabama in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]?
Speaker 2: I worked in SNCC in Alabama.  I joined SNCC, became a full fledged, you know, member of SNCC which meant that I actually got a little stipend, I think it was like $15 every two weeks or something.  So I worked at SNCC and I worked at first I worked in Wilcox County [Alabama], which was where Gee's Bend is located.
Speaker 1: Now tell us the significance of Gee's Bend.
Speaker 2: Gee's Bend is a very unusual community and that it was one where the--it's called the Bend because a bend because it is a bend in a river there and the, the whites had prevented a bridge from being built so that to get to it, you had to drive a great distance to go around the passable place in the river to get there.  And as a consequence, it was a more isolated community.  It had been a plantation, and it had been a plantation of the Pettaway family and when I lived in Gee's Bend, practically everyone there, their last name was Pettaway.  So it was the--all of these people were Pettaways.
Speaker 1: This is a legacy of slavery.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  And that though the old plantation had been replaced with a WPA, a Works Project Administration project from the 1930s and that these houses then were--it was a rural housing project in the same way that you'd have like the Pruitt Ego [ph.] or other places as urban projects.  Gee's Bend was a government experiment in a rural housing project.  So you had all of these little white bungalows and you had a community store in the center and community center, kind of in the center of it and so Gee's Bend was an unusual place for many different reasons.  Only later did I learn of the incredibly beautiful quilts that now hang in major art museums that were also being created by the women there in Gee's Bend.
Story_ID: 39546
Speaker 1: That's something.
Speaker 2: But the people were very supportive and they--one group of women wanted to marry me off to their cousin, but they were very, very kind to me and would--they knew that I was going off for my Civil Rights Movement work.  We were living--a family had allowed us to use their vacant house as what we called our Freedom House.  That was the place where we stayed and the place where we'd have our little daily meetings and it was our sort of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] office.  And that they--when I would go to meetings around the county, I'd go--my work was to go out to other parts of the county to, during the day, go and meet with black people, whether they working out in the fields or whether they were in some little community setting, little you know what would almost be the equivalent of a village, to go and meet with them to talk with them.  These were like cold calls.  You'd go and you'd say excuse me, ma'am, mind if I talk to you?  You know, I just--I'm from you know so-and-so, and I used to go to Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and I'd just like to talk to you about registering to vote.  And some people would become--I don't want to talk about that.  You'd, you know try to get pass that with I'm not going to take much of your time.  No, get away from me, I don't want to be seen talking to you.  You know, we live as sharecroppers and the people might take our land.  They might put us out if we talk to your or whatever.  And you'd say I can come back at night then, or whatever.  But you'd try to really talk with people and you'd start out with those cold calls to try to get them to come to a meeting at a church.  The churches were your--the only places where you could usually gather.  And so you'd have arranged with some preacher that the church was going to be the place where a mass meeting was going to be held.  And at the meeting that's when you'd introduce the idea of why it was really important for people in the county [Wilcox County, Alabama], to register to vote, and that how if everybody would register, then the composition of the offices of the county, sheriff and all of those, could be changed because we had the research that proved that blacks were really in the majority in that county.  So that's where these black belt counties, they were called black belt because the soil was this rich, black soil, but they were also called the black belt because they were mostly eighty five percent black in population.  So I worked at first in, in Gee's Bend and at the time, Stokely Carmichael and a number of other--some of the best organizers in SNCC were beginning to coalesce in Lowndes County with a project.  The Lowndes County Freedom Organization.  And eventually they asked me to leave Lowndes County and to come work with them.  To leave Wilcox County, I'm sorry, and to come work with them in Lowndes County [Alabama].
Story_ID: 39547
Speaker 1: Now was that because Lowndes had, had progressed further or something?  To kick it over the edge or whatever.
Speaker 2: No, it was--but I was, it was more that they were, there would be other people.  There was a guy CJ Jones, who had also been, he had been at Tuskegee, who would then take over working in Wilcox [Wilcox County, Alabama], but it was, I was quite honored that they were asking me.  It was, it was like being promoted from one Civil Rights project to the major, the most visible, the most important one.  And so I was quite honored to be asked.  And I moved then, and moving meant that I took my sleeping bag and the duffle bag that I had my clothes in, and that's--those were my possessions at that time.  And I moved to Lowndes County [Alabama] and I lived in this shack, and I have a photograph of it because it was also our Freedom House there, which was the headquarters for it and it was truly a shack.  You could go to sleep looking at the stars through the holes in the roof and it meant that if it was going to rain, you'd want to move strategically to a place where you were not going to get wet.  So Stokely Carmichael, Bob Mants who was another organizer there who lived in Lowndes County until he died this past Summer.  And several of us though then--Ralph Featherstone who passed away some years ago, was killed actually.  But a group of us worked there together in Lowndes County.  And the Lowndes County became, it was the major project.  Lowndes County geographically is located halfway between Selma [Alabama] and Montgomery [Alabama].  And so on the march from Selma to Montgomery, the Pettus Bridge where John Lewis was injured and everything.  And the place where Viola Luizzo, the woman, housewife from Detroit who was killed, that happened in Lowndes County.  And Lowndes County has such a history of its own that there have been books written about it and it's notorious, it's called Lowndes Bloody Lowndes.
Story_ID: 39548
Speaker 1: Yes, exactly, about Lowndes County.  And so Lowndes County was this, you know, notorious place.  And so I then went there to work there and that we would, it was the same kind of work, canvassing, talking to people about registering to vote, and then the meetings.  And that in Lowndes we had the additional work of people who had been sharecroppers having been kicked off the land and that we then worked and the SNCC Office in New York and other places raised money for tents.  And so we then had these white tents that were on the highway, right on the major thoroughfare between Montgomery [Alabama] and Selma [Alabama].  So we had the tents, this tent city where people were living.  And one night, was an awful night I remember when they--people came and shot, started shooting into the tents.  Fortunately, no one was hurt, but you know it just reminded you of what a, an awful circumstance and situation it was.  There were people who were killed during that time period in addition to Viola Luizzo, there was one man, a seminarian, Jonathan Daniels.  And there was a, a woman who had also been one of my Tuskegee classmates, Ruby Sales, and that she was standing right next to him when he was killed.
Speaker 2: We interviewed her about five years ago, yes.  We heard that story.  Going to a store.
Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly, yeah.  So that's the--that kind of world of that time period.  And I then worked there and the--I, because of my skills as sort of an amateur artist and that sort of spirit of can-do, I then worked to do things like create the leaflets and materials that we would use.  There was one point where Courtland Cox and I talked about how the fact that people were illiterate and that it was sometimes difficult to tell the story of why people needed to vote.  And so he and I talked about this and I came up with basically I did, I drew a comic book.  And we printed that up and distributed it and it was--I've forgotten what the name of the comic book was, but it was something that we just sort of, you know, self published and distributed.  And the New York Times did a story and used a page of the comic book as a part of their story.  Another thing that I did then was that we had the whole notion, the Lowndes County Freedom Organization became more known for its symbol, and that the whites there had a rooster, a white party there had the rooster, and this man Mr. Hewitt who was going to run for sheriff, when we asked him what should be the symbol for the Lowndes County, he said we need a mean, old black cat to run that rooster out of the county.  And Ruth Howard, Ruth who's now married to the jazz musician Joe Chambers, Ruth Howard Chambers, was at the SNCC Office in Atlanta [Georgia] and that we told her we needed something for this black cat, and she sent us this image which seemed just perfect.  And that became the symbol, the black panther that we used, and Ruth had just sort of taken that from Clark College, Atlanta.  It's their mascot, their football team symbol.
Story_ID: 39549
Speaker 1: So we took that and that I then--we, we were really concerned about--as we got closer and closer to the, I think it was the Primary.  It was going to be a big election, I can't recall which one it was.  But we were very concerned about people going to the county seat, going to Hainesville and voting and about the potential of violence.  So what we wanted to communicate was pull the lever for the black panther, cause that's the way you would vote and we know people would know how to vote if they pulled the lever for the black panther.  They didn't have to read to do that.  And then go home.  So that was the message that we wanted to communicate.  And I said well you know, the best way that we could do it is if we could put billboards all over the county.  And I said that if I had, if somebody could make them I could paint them.  And so the guys got lumber and we made these billboards.  I painted these billboards, pull the lever for the black panther, and then go home.  And with the drawing of the black panther on them, and we put them up and there's a photograph, and it's a part of the Smithsonian collection, so there's a photograph with a guy with a gun protecting one of those billboards that has already been riddled with a few bullet holes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now things had started to change a little bit in the Civil Rights Movement in the sense that you got a guy with a gun protecting the sign.
Speaker 1: Right, but those were guys from the North who had come down.  They were not people from within this southern movement.  And that was becoming one of the areas of tension there.  You had--there was a, I went to a very, very important conference in New Orleans [Louisiana] that was about blackness, negritude and the role of blackness within this Civil Rights Movement.  And it was you know, and there was the--we had the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] meetings, we had had the--there had been the, you know, infamous SNCC meeting where the whites had been asked to leave.  That had happened before I became a member of SNCC.
Speaker 2: Right, late '60 [1960], late '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Right, that had happened before, but then you still had now this question of directions within SNCC, and that I was there with John Lewis who was still very, very much rooted to the southern movement, and that was a movement of the right to vote, and of demonstrations for the right to vote of these kind of, you know, organizing to get the vote and to do this participation in the Democratic process and that you had other people who were from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and some of the cities who were then sort of say hell no.  You know, we should have our own state.  We should have our own nation within a nation and so the dialogue was definitely beginning to change.  And the, you know that's later you had the folks, the Oakland people, the black Panther party, Huey Newton and Eldridge Cleaver intersecting in that world, but before that you had even people like Rap Brown.  And by the time Rap became the Chairman of SNCC, I left, I had left.  I left when his predecessor was a guy Phil Hutchins.  And Phil was beginning to move more in the direction of well let's, you know forget what we're doing--let's move away from the rural areas and this move to the cities.  And that's where we can make a real difference and-
Story_ID: 39550
Speaker 1: Now I'm trying--okay now in '65 [1965], now were you there when the march from Salem [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama] took place?
Speaker 2: I was at, I was at Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] I believe when that took place.
Speaker 1: When that march, okay.
Speaker 2: I was at Tuskegee.  I, I, I have to remember the dates.  I was in--I can't remember whether I was in jail then or whether I was at Tuskegee getting ready to participate in a march in Montgomery.  There was a big march and they're--this is all documented so we can easily get the dates.  But I know that in March of 1965 I spent a week in jail.  I have a cute little mug shot.
Speaker 1: And this is in--
Speaker 2: In Montgomery.
Speaker 1: In Montgomery.
Speaker 2: In Montgomery, yeah.
Speaker 1: And okay, so was this before the march or after the march?
Speaker 2: That's what I have to--yeah, that's why I have to get the exact--I want to think that it was, I want to think that it was before the march.
Speaker 1: I think yeah, I think [unclear] Pettus Bridge was in '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: This was in '60 [1960], it was definitely--
Speaker 1: March of '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: It was definitely the same, within the same two week span and I can't remember though whether I was in jail when the march across the bridge took place, or whether that was later.
Speaker 1: The massacre on Edmund Pettus Bridge I think takes place in March sometime and then about a month later is the march from Selma to Montgomery to--
Speaker 2: Yeah but this was, I was, I know that I was jailed like you know March 15th or so, you know so and I can't recall where.
Speaker 1: Now what were the circumstances around--now was this the first time you were arrested or jailed?
Speaker 2: This was the first time that I was arrested.  And I spent a week in jail and I was arrested in downtown Montgomery, Alabama in front of the, in the Alabama State Capitol.  And a group of us were picketing, we were doing a protest march there.  And that the Alabama State Troopers were on the side of the Capitol, sort of, you know, creating a barrier there.  And coming up the hill you had the Klan [Ku Klux Klan].  And so the Klan was marching.  They were doing a counter demonstration.  And I think that there was concern on the part of the Alabama State Troopers that the Klan might get out of hand and really do something to us.  And there was a point at which as the Klan gets closer and closer, they then--we're continuing to do our march, and then all of a sudden the State Troopers arrest all of us and haul us off to jail.  And so on one hand, we were arrested, on the other hand I think that they also wanted to avoid what could have been an even more compromising situation for them too, of having to protect us from the Klan.
Story_ID: 39551
Speaker 1: Now this is--unless people actually go to Montgomery [Alabama], they don't know this, but when I went there I was amazed to find out that you got the State Capitol.
Speaker 2: Which is the--
Speaker 1: Within site, eyesight of Dexter Avenue Baptist Church.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And across the street is the Justice Department of the State of Alabama.
Speaker 2: Yeah and that the State Capitol was the former Capitol of the Confederacy.  And there is the star on the balcony to mark the spot where Jefferson Davis took his oath of office to the Confederacy.
Speaker 1: Right.  This is, I mean it's just--I mean all the news reports I heard, nobody ever described this kind of crazy scene.
Speaker 2: Crazy.
Speaker 1: It almost could be put on a stage and you wouldn't have to even change the scenes.
Speaker 2: Scenery, right, exactly.
Speaker 1: The corner, the street corner, I mean you can see everything from a street corner.
Speaker 2: And the demonstration that--and when I was arrested there were waves of other students from Tuskegee who were very active in that demonstration and they were maybe about three days of demonstrations there.  And that--and that's been pretty well documented.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I participated there, participated in Lowndes County, and then after the Lowndes County campaign, I was asked to go to SNCC Headquarters, which was Atlanta, Georgia.  And so I then moved from Alabama to Atlanta and worked for SNCC at the headquarters.
Story_ID: 39552
Speaker 1: Now what, what kind of work did you do?  I know Ruby Doris Robinson was there.
Speaker 2: Yes, Ruby Doris Robinson.
Speaker 1: And Lillian McCray I think was working down there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Faye Bellamy and a number of other people were there.  And that I then would end up--again, I was doing a lot of work with creating flyers and stuff as support to the people who were out in the field.  And that I was elected to what was, I think they called it the Central Committee or something, but it was sort of like one of the coordinating committees.  And so that was a, you know, a very nice thing to be elevated to that position of decision making, but it was a very consensus oriented group.  And that we would spend hours in discussion about these things.  And you had the tensions still within our grouping of what was the right thing to do, which, where the emphasis should be.  And this by now was becoming--this is moving towards '66 [1966] or so, or maybe well past '66 [1966], but became symbolized by a group called the Atlanta Project.  And the Atlanta Project was a group of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] people in Atlanta who very definitely were oriented towards and felt that we should be doing something in the cities and in the inner cities.
Speaker 1: Was this, this is Rap Brown?
Speaker 2: No, this was a group, this was a guy named Bill Ware, no relationship to George Ware.  This was a guy named Bill Ware.  It was a woman who is now based in Philadelphia, Zoharah Simmons, Gwen, Zoharah Gwen Simmons.  A guy named Mike Simmons, so it was, a group, a subset of SNCC people and we'd have many discussions, debates, arguments about you know, the right direction.
Speaker 1: Now had, I know somewhere along the Montgomery to Selma, I mean the Selma to Montgomery March is where Stokely Carmichael makes the call for black power.
Speaker 2: And it really wasn't Stokely who made the initial call, it was Willie Ricks, this guy named, I think now he's Mukasa, Willie Ricks, lives in Atlanta [Georgia].  But he was the person who really was--he said it first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah and Stokely [Carmichael] became the more known person for it.
Story_ID: 39553
Speaker 1: Okay so you're in the office in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: So I worked in the office in Atlanta and worked with people, Karen Spellman, Karen Edmunds who later became Karen Spellman, Freddie Bittle who had been an organizer from Greenwood, Mississippi.  She and her brother George Green were, and she was Freddie Green Bittle, and she and her brother George Green were very key people in Greenwood, Mississippi, and who had been coming over and Freddie was working in the Atlanta office.  Ruby Doris Robinson, Fay Bellamy.  One Christmas I spent my next time in jail, and I think it was New Years Eve that we spent, and that was with Ruby Doris Robinson and Fay Bellamy and Karen Spellman and we were planning to go out on Auburn Avenue and we were just planning to go out.  And these black policemen saw us women, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] women walking along.  We had visible afros at the time, so you could easily sort of identify us in one sense.  But these were black policemen and they started sort of this kind of harassment of, so where are you all going, you know.  And we just kept walking.  And they continued, we kept walking.  And they then pulled their car over in front of us and say you know, when I talk, you pay attention.  And it was one of those and we tried to walk around them.  And then we were placed under arrest for resisting arrest.  And ended up spending that night, and I can't remember whether it was Christmas night or New Year's, but we spent that holiday night in jail.  And Howard Moore, who was an attorney who lives out on the west coast now, who was next to Counselor [ph.] Howard was the most sort of prominent attorney in my little world, and that Howard came and bailed us out and Howard got us out.  Rather he got us out of jail and had the charges dropped and everything, but--cause we really gotten, we got out of jail through the Civil Rights, the Bondsman of the Civil Rights Movement, a man who we all called Pitty Pat.
Story_ID: 39554
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you this.  What was the, what role did, or did women play a vital role or a respected role in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]?
Speaker 2: Very definitely women did.  There was no question about it and there is a book that has been written by a number of SNCC women called Hands on the Freedom Plow, that document that story of women in SNCC and women in the Movement.  And there is absolutely no doubt about it.  Women played a very key, very vital role from the Fannie Lou Hamers, the people like that, Eunita blackwell, local women who then were leaders in their community later became--Eunita became the mayor of Myersville, Mississippi.  You had that kind of indigenous leadership that rose up and that you had people like myself, Karen Spellman, Freddie, Ruby Doris Robinson.  Ruby was in an executive position in SNCC.  Mildred Foreman, you know the list goes on.  Joyce Lautner, her sister Dorrie Lautner, I mean it's a really long, long list.  It was something where we were also women who--that we didn't, you know, kowtow to any notions of male superiority or that we have to wait for some man to tell us what the work is, or that we can only be secretaries or something too.  There was no question about it, that we were sort of moving and sought on our own and saw ourselves as equal partners in the work that was being done.  Judy Richardson was a force to be reckoned with.  So it's--one of the disturbing things and one of the reasons that I left SNCC was as the Movement, as this shift came towards a more urban focus, that it brought with it this northern, not northern because that wasn't the--it was this sort of street machismo that was to me represented by Eldridge Cleaver.  And that that became a part of it and you ended up with these things, you know Stokely's [Stokely Carmichael] throw away line of oh, what's the position of women in the Movement?  Prone, you know.  That--and that it's the whole notions of well you know, women should, black women should understand the role that they should play because you know black men have been so oppressed that they should, that if they don't want to contribute towards the oppression of black men, they should step behind the black man and help the black man, you know, give me a break.  So I felt that it was time to move on.
Story_ID: 39555
Speaker 1: Now before you move, two people I want to ask you about that I think one had already left before you got there.  But the first one is Ella Baker.  Did you have a chance to meet her?
Speaker 2: Yes I, I had a chance not only to meet her, but years later when I lived in New York, Joyce Lautner and I and a group of other SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] women created--we had a benefit in her honor.  We had a birthday celebration for her in New York and raised money to help ensure that she would have a comfortable retirement.  And to do that, it was--in order to organize that then it meant that we had to spend a lot of time with her, and that was a delightful experience.
Speaker 1: And many--I don't know, from what I read it seems to indicate that there wouldn't have been a SNCC without her.
Speaker 2: There would not have been.  She was very definitely, she was, and you know that story probably.  Where she had been working with Martin Luther King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and others and that she then was the person who organized the meeting in Raleigh at Shaw University that led to the founding of SNCC.
Speaker 1: And the other person is Bob Moses.
Speaker 2: And I never knew Bob well because Bob had left.  He was--had moved away from--he wanted to really move away from that kind of visibility and the focus of his charisma that he was shying away from that.  And so he was moving away from Mississippi when I was going to Mississippi, and that later he had left the country and that our paths crossed only momentarily when we both ended up in Tanzania, but I was in Dara Salam and he was out in rural Tanzania near Arusha.  And I visited with him and his wife, Janet, along with Charlie Cobb and we spent like I think a night there at their place.  But I never really knew him.
Speaker 1: Okay, well I had to ask about those two.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 39556
Speaker 1: All right, okay so, so what did you do when you left--now how, did you--I mean was it understood by the other women why you were leaving, or were they leaving too, or--
Speaker 2: Some of them were leaving too, yes.  Now so I left and so we were, many of us were sort of really disenchanted with the direction that SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was taking.  And it wasn't just the issue of women, it was sort of a quality of leadership, quality of the dialogue, and we just felt that the organization was becoming a shadow of its former self.  And there was the kind of thuggery that was represented by Eldridge [Eldridge Cleaver] and the others and they were bullying people like Jim Foreman.  It was, you know really physically threatening him and it was just really awful.  It was--so we left, you know and I then went to--eventually I went to, back to Mississippi with now a group of sort of SNCC veterans, Ed Brown, Rap's [Rap Brown] brother, Rap's older brother Ed Brown who passed away last year.  But Ed was now doing community development work in Mississippi.  Now you have some of the poverty program money after the 1968 and the King riots [King assassination riots, 1968] and you know, that you began to have this sort of urban money.  Model Cities I think some of it was called and stuff.  But you had some of this money beginning to come into a poverty program.  And that Ed worked on a, had created a group of organizations in Clarksdale, Mississippi, and it was called Mississippi Action for Community Education.  And I then thought about what did I want to do next and how was I going to still be useful with my life.  And the issue of literacy was still something that was of concern to me.  The fact that so many black men and women, adults were illiterate and I thought that this was perhaps a way in which I could be helpful.  And Ed had in Quitman, Q-U-I-T-M-A-N, Quitman County, Mississippi, in the Mississippi Delta, had started an adult education program there.  And I then moved there to become the Deputy Director of that adult education program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I spent probably the 1968 there.  And I was, I was paid.  I worked as the Assistant Director of this adult education program.  And I brought teachers from other places.  I brought a woman from here, Washington, D.C. who had been a D.C. schoolteacher, Daphne Muse, I brought her down to do a teacher training program and to teach the teachers there.  And we used churches.  Again the same kind of churches that were used for the mass meetings, were now places where we'd have these classes where people after working in the fields and during the day, they'd come there for these adult education classes.  And it was very meaningful work for me.  It was very heartening to have people be so grateful for learning, the opportunity to learn to read and write.  And they would, you know, read the Bible or be able to add up their pay or something and--or look at bills with new meaning and I felt quite rewarded for the work that I was doing there.
Story_ID: 39557
Speaker 1: Now this is a--I don't know, just reading history, seems like a remarkable period of time when things don't seem to be changing fast enough on one hand, but then you look back at it, this rapid change.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: People are now voting, they're electing officials.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: They're learning, they're doing things that they never did before.
Speaker 2: And we then are still talking about what does black power mean.  And that's what I was still in touch with mostly by you know, letters, can you believe?  I mean this is, you know, the level of communication that you would do in those days.  And so by phone and by letters with people like Courtland [Courtland Cox].  Stokely [Stokely Carmichael] I had--was still in touch with, but Stokely was transforming to Kwame and, but I was still in touch with Courtland Cox and some of the other people.  And that we then started talking about economic development.  Ralph Featherstone was really big into oh, we need economic development.  And so kept thinking that catfish farms in Mississippi were going to be the way.  And that for people to gain some economic strongholds because there were people who owned the land and land in places that was ripe for catfish farming.  That we were talking about the--reading books like [unclear] and others and getting to talk about what black power, how do you take that kind of cultural identity and confidence in identity and turn that over into empowerment and justice.  And what does that mean, how do you do that, how do just even educate enough people to think that way?  And that led towards a group of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] people now were beginning to coalesce here in Washington [Washington, D.C.].  And I would come up, meet with them and there was the discussion about what we didn't have and also about Pan-Africanism.  When I say what we didn't have, how we didn't have bookstores, we didn't have books of our own to talk about these issues.  And that--I in the summer of 1969, I left my job with the adult education program and went traveling in Africa.  And I went traveling at that particular time because there was a festival, a Pan-African festival in Algiers [Algeria].  And I and a woman who is now a medical doctor here, who had been at a SNCC, another one of those really strong women in SNCC, Jean Wheeler, Jean Wheeler Smith, Jean and I, she's now Jean Wheeler Smith Young, Dr. Young, she's a medical doctor, a psychiatrist, that we then went to the festival in Algeria and that Stokely was now with Miriam Makeba and they were living in Guinea Conakry [Conakry, Republic of Guinea] and they invited us to come and spend time with them.  And so we then decided that we would.  And we had this sort of comical trip of going along West Africa to try to get the Visa for Conakry and to go and visit with Stokely and Miriam.  And that we eventually gave up.  But by the time we gave up, we had gone from Algiers to maybe Monrovia [Liberia], and we were like spending a week in each of these places because you almost had to spend a week because that's when the plane came through.  It wasn't--this was not a time of daily flights to anywhere.  So it was like the plane came through on once a week.  So we went to--we spent a week in Monrovia and when we were there, we went up-country and met the black Jews from Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 39558
Speaker 1: Yeah the original Hebrew Israelites.
Speaker 2: Right the original Hebrew Israelites who were living there on a farm complaining about the fact that things grow.  It's a lot, farming is a lot of work.  These were urban people who were now out here discovering that it's a lot of work to farm, and were really glad when we had brought as a gift to them, a big bag of canned goods.  So that was a very sad sight to see.  And we left Monrovia [Liberia], went to Dakar [Senegal] and spent a week there in Dakar and where else did we go?  We went somewhere else, Lagos [Nigeria], and we spent a week in Lagos.  And so it was after this sort of series of these--we'd go and each time it was the same drill.  We were getting, you know, applying for this Visa through the--and we'd never get a response back from Conakry [Guinea].  So we decided to give up and just return to the States because we'd now spent, you know like a lot of time moving around like this.
Story_ID: 39559
Speaker 1: So it was--I came back and when I came back, we then--I started meeting with Stokely [Stokely Carmichael] and Courtland [Courtland Cox] and others to talk about this, again this problem of education and lack of information, lack of books and everything.  And a group here was then forming, and that they were beginning to say they were going to open a bookstore, that would be Drum and Spear Press [ph.], I mean publish, Drum and Spear Bookstore.
Speaker 2: This is a group in D.C.
Speaker 1: Yeah a group in D.C.
Speaker 2: Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Yes, exactly, and then there would be the bookstore, there would be Drum and Spear Press Publishing Company, and there would be separate from all of this, another group was doing the Center for Black Education.  You had also had prior to that, yet another group which was the new thing, which was called The New Thing.  And that was a group of artists and poets and musicians, and that was Lloyd McNeill, Lou Stovall, Topper Carew and Topper Carew was sort of, I think of him as kind of the ring leader and part of the artistic force of that, of The New Thing.  But it was some kind of an artist collective.
Speaker 2: Lou Stovall, yeah, we interviewed Lou Stovall.  I don't think he even mentioned this.
Speaker 1: Yeah well that was, that was the past, you know.  But it was--so we began to talk about this and that I decided that I would move here from Mississippi I would now move to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and work with this group.  And I knew that they couldn't pay me, though.  So I would come here and find a way to make a living and then work on a volunteer basis with Drum and Spear.  And which is what I did.  I--someone told me that there was a, a position open at the Museum of African Art, which was at that time housed in a townhouse on Capitol Hill at 314 A Street, NE.  And that particular house had been the alleged residence of Frederick Douglass.  And there was a man, a diplomat who had been stationed in Germany, Warren Robbins, who had started collecting African art and had come back and had established his museum.  It was a private collection, really.  It was really Warren's collection in this house on Capitol Hill.  And that he was looking for someone to give lectures to all different age groups on African art.
Story_ID: 39560
Speaker 1: Just a--people probably watching this if they are, they are in--D.C. in those days, lot of black people lived on Capitol Hill.
Speaker 2: Yes, right, yes.
Speaker 1: Which is not true today.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And Warren [Warren Robbins] was not black, though.  And that Warren had been a, a diplomat, a U.S. Diplomat in Germany and had amassed this collection of African art.  And I thought okay, I will interview for this job.  And so I did a crash course for myself in African art and managed to be convincing enough that I, you know when I walked into the museum, I sort of looked around and said, oh what a great Bioli [ph.] you have here.  Oh look at the Sunufo [ph.] and you know so there were some pieces that were so immediately recognizable that I could make those comments and Warren hired me.  And I then--so that was my paying job was to work as a lecturer at the Museum of African Art.  And it was a delightful job because then I just kept pushing myself to learn more and more in order to stay ahead of the people that I was going to give lectures to.  Sometimes it would be groups of college students from some of the local universities, sometimes tourists and sometimes school kids.
Speaker 1: So this is 1968?
Speaker 2: This is 1969.
Speaker 1: 1969 now.
Speaker 2: Now 1969 moving towards 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 39561
Speaker 1: And it was during this time in this nineteen, I think I started these conversations with the Drum and Spear people back in '68 [1968], and it was at that time that I met Anthony Gittens who was then--had been a student activist at Howard University and had been one of the leading activists, along with Ewart Brown who's now Prime Minster of Bermuda.  And that Tony Gittens was the manager of the bookstore and also on the board of this holding company we had for these activities called Afro American Resources, Inc.  And that was what we used to raise money for grants and things that would go into Afro American Resources, and that we would then push those resources, push the money that we'd raise into these ventures.  And we were very successful in creating this, the bookstore, the publishing company.  We had two radio programs.  One news program, The Daily Drum, and then another Si Ya Watoto, the children's hour, for children.  It was a children's storytelling program and we'd get together and read aloud and dramatize an African folk tale.  So we'd make the sounds of the rabbits and all the little characters in the story or whatever, you know.  The crocodile was very angry, you know.  So we, we--it was a terrific group of people and we all--it was really interesting.  But through that I met Kathy Hughes who later became the head of Radio One and TV One.
Speaker 2: Yeah I was going to ask like what radio venue did you use?  What station was your outlet?
Speaker 1: I think that it was WOL and then we also--
Speaker 2: Is that Dewey Hughes and Kathy Hughes?
Speaker 1: Yeah and it was, and then there was also Cojo Nnamdi came out of that and Cojo continues to this day to have a very successfully daily weekday radio show in public radio.
Speaker 2: Was he part of the Drum and Spear?
Speaker 1: He was part of this group with the radio program.  And Howard Fuller was over the--and Jimmy Garrett were with the Center for black Education, which was not officially connected, but we were all, you know sort of very supportive of these efforts together.  And Tony was the manager of the bookstore and the woman who had taught in Mississippi with me, Daphne Muse, became one of the staff members at the bookstore.  And I ended up some years later, skip ahead to 1980, '81 [1981], I ended up marrying Tony Gittens who then was the person who--
Speaker 2: Came in a little while ago.
Speaker 1: Came in the door a little while ago, yes.
Story_ID: 39562
Speaker 1: Okay now do you remember Tony Burrows?
Speaker 2: No I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, he worked for Center for Black Education too at one time.
Speaker 2: So we had the--Drum and Spear Bookstore, Drum and Spear Press, Judy Richardson was active with the bookstore as well.  With the publishing company I became the Art Director.  I did the interior design for the bookstore and the color scheme and did an inlaid map of Africa on the floor of the bookstore.  Did the logos of the bags and, you know, all of the brand materials for the bookstore and publishing company.  And we published a book of CLR, The black Jacobins by CLR James and so I had the privilege of spending time with the great CLR James, lovely historian.  We did a book of poetry, of Palestinian poetry at a time when it was definitely not popular to do Palestinian poetry.  And we did several other books, a children's book and a book of children's names, African names for Children.  And the children book, Children of Africa, the children's book was later picked up and reprinted by Free Press.
Story_ID: 39563
Speaker 1: Okay.  This, now during that period of time I was told there were like over forty independent black presses that started up at different levels.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Some Drum and Spear being one of the bigger ones, Third World Press [unclear].
Speaker 2: Yeah, very tragically during that time Ralph Featherstone was killed in a mysterious incident where it was a--he and another man, I've forgotten Che's [phonetic] last name, a guy named Che, they were--Rap Brown was underground at this, this is the backdrop of this.  Angela Davis, Rap Brown, all underground and so there's the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] searches for them and so we're doing the bookstore and then all of a sudden that Ralph Featherstone and Che were killed when a car that they were in exploded between here and Annapolis [Maryland] I believe it was, or--no, it was between here and Cambridge, Maryland.  But it was going towards the eastern shore.  So I think out on Route 50, but they were killed.  And it was, you know, just Ralph had not too--had married, recently married Charlotte Orange Featherstone who's a poet and later became a professor.  But it was a really, just an awful time in many ways.  And there was still all of this sort of FBI searches and questioning around, you know where's Rap [Rap Brown].  That even when I lived in Mississippi because I worked with Rap's brother Ed, then the FBI would come by occasionally and the local police would, you know, come to question me because they would--if they saw us meeting, then they were curious about whether Rap might be one of the people that was you know, coming to the meeting or something.  So this was this kind of time of this, you know, hovering of FBI and others questioning, you know what we were doing.  And it was really interesting.  There's a man Donald Stone came to town and said that he had heard that there was a book that had photographs of us in it and that it was a book about subversive activity in the U.S.   And that you could get it through--that it was a congressional report and that you could get it through your Congress person.  So he says, you know, why don't we go down to Capitol Hill and see if we could get a copy.  And I said sure.  So Donald Stone, we called him Stone, Stone and I went down to the Capitol, went to the congressional, the Rayburn Building, and that we then are trying to figure out, you know, who we should talk to, where we should go for this.  And so we're sort of standing in the huge Rayburn Building being puzzled by--I wonder, maybe they have a--maybe we should go to the government Printing Office instead.  And this man who neither of us had ever seen in our lives, and we, and he had a pronounced limp, so that's why we knew that he was someone who would be more, a little more distinctive and you would have known him if you'd seen him.  He walks up, we just think that he's walking down the hall, but he walks up to us and says Ms. Lawson, Mr. Stone, you're probably looking for the book which can be found downstairs in Room whatever, and that he says and you'll be particularly interested in pages X and Y which is where you are mentioned and where your photos are located.
Story_ID: 39564
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, my name is Jennifer Lawson.  And that's spelled J-E-N-N-I-F-E-R, L-A-W-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born June 8, 1946 in Fairfield, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And what is your title and your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am currently Senior Vice President for Television and Digital Video Content at the Corporation for Public Broadcasting in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date, that's a good one.  Today's date is, I think, July 29--no, June 29, June 29th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're currently in my home in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And is it correct that we're continuing an interview that we started on May 7th, 2012?
Speaker 2: That is correct.  Absolutely.  This is an interview that we began on May 7, 2012.
Story_ID: 39565
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, we, I think we left off in 1969 or thereabouts.  You were working for Drum and Spear Press, simultaneous with working for the Museum of African Art.  And we had, there was an incident that you described at the National Printing Office where you were trying to find a picture of yourself in a book that was published about the Civil Rights Movement.  And that's where--well, we just watched the DVD a minute ago, and it seems like we just kind of--
Speaker 2: Yes, and just one little tiny point of correction.  It was, the book was printed by the Government Printing Office, but we were looking for it in the House office building.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we were up on Capital Hill, this was Donald Stone and I were looking for it in the House office building on Capital Hill.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you did find it, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, we found it in an interesting way since a complete stranger came up to us and told us, and introduced himself to us by, and said, "Ms. Lawson, Mr. Stone, you're probably looking for the report on subversive activity in the U.S.  And you're probably most interested in pages . . ." and he named the pages and said, and your photos are in there as well.  And you'll find those on this page, particularly, and he gave us the names of those pages and then told us the room in the House office building where we could find a copy of the report.
Speaker 1: Now, you all were in the Raven Building.  Now, he's giving you a message, right, by introducing himself (laughter) and calling you by name.  And the message is that--I would think the message is that you're being, he's knows who you are and you're being watched, is what I think the message is, you know, that your government knows exactly who you are and they think you're a subversive, right?
Speaker 2: Well, that certainly would be one interpretation of it, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  He, did he ever introduce himself?  Did he tell you--
Speaker 2: He did introduce, that's what he did, introduce himself.  And I've forgotten who he was and what he worked for, but because we were just so taken aback by the fact that a complete stranger would know us by name and would even have this sense of why we were there, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, I guess the government considered your Civil Rights activities subversive?
Speaker 2: They, the federal government did and also the Alabama, my home state of Alabama.  And I'm sure that there were other places as well throughout the South where Civil Rights--or throughout the country certainly, where Civil Rights workers were considered to be either subversive or disruptive in some manner.  And there was, there were commiss, special commissioners that were sometimes held and where Civil Rights workers were looked at in this way.  Some of the information is currently available through the Freedom of Information Act.
Story_ID: 39566
Speaker 1: Now, this, this probably ran through your mind then, and I'm gonna ask you this question now.  In those days, did you consider yourself subversive?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I considered myself a great patriot in many ways for the activities that we were carrying out, I mean we were American citizens, and that we were working to make, in our view, to make a better America for all Americans.  So, for me, that is certainly nothing subversive about that, to try to ensure just the basic rights of the Constitution for all.
Speaker 1: And being involved in Drum and Spear Press, would you think that would be a subversive activity, to, or to be involved in the Museum of African Art?
Speaker 2: No, definitely not, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, but, you know, this was--
Speaker 2: Interesting times so that we lived in, and, of course, we were very fortunate that this just produced these moments which were ironic, but, and there are many other cases where sadly, very sadly in the case of someone like Fred Hampton, people lost their lives.
Story_ID: 39567
Speaker 1: Right, well, those are the days when people who had braids were arrested or fired from jobs or--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --banned from the military.  These are, you know, symbolism had a lot of, yeah, where people thought when they looked at you, or what they thought you were interested in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, had something, you know, would color what they thought about you.  So this is all leading up to, and I think we talked about your role at the Museum of African Art and how you learned an entire, you know, new body of knowledge basically by working at the Museum of African Art.  So in 1970, now, you get married during this period too, I think, right, or--
Speaker 2: No, later in my life.
Speaker 1: Later.
Speaker 2: Later in my life, yes.  No, in 1970, I was working here in Washington, D.C. with Drum and Spear Bookstore and Drum and Spear Press.  A group of us had founded Drum and Spear, the bookstore, the press.  We had a radio program.  We had two radio programs.  In fact, one, Sa Yaa Watoto (ph.) and another, the Daily Drum, as a news program.  Sa Yaa Watoto, the children's hour was a children's, a radio, weekly radio program oriented towards children.  And we conducted all of these--these were activities that we were doing because at that point, there was a greater interest.  This is a time when black power, the notion of black power was very much a part of the sort of intellectual thought, you know.  So it was, so young African Americans and many African Americans throughout the country from California, people like Ron Karenga in Los Angeles or people in New York were beginning to talk about and write about black power and what did it mean?  What does black power mean?  And that led to questions again about Negritude, about what was happening in Africa, throughout Africa and about Pan-Africanism.  So it was much, very much a time when African American and African history were being discussed as well as a way of saying, okay, how can we talk about what empowered blacks would mean for the future if we can't understand what has happened in the past.  So we began to realize that there were very few books available, and there were no programs for really studying these matters in a much more comprehensive way.  Universities were begin, students at universities were beginning to form an interest in having African American Studies programs.  And, again, it was this need for books.  And so that was one of the, that led to the founding of both Drum and Spear Press and Drum and Spear Bookstore.
Story_ID: 39568
Speaker 1: Okay, what were some of the publications at Drum and Spear Press that, you know, that you remember that--
Speaker 2: We did the, a book.  One of the scholars that we reached out to who was living here in Washington at the time was C.L.R. James.  And C.L.R. James, the late C.L.R. James was a noted West Indian scholar who had written several books on black history as well as a book on cricket, on the sport of cricket, called "Beyond the Boundary."  And we did a republication of his book, "The Black Jacobins" which was one of his classics that had gone out of print.  And that was a book about the Haitian Revolution.
Speaker 1: Okay, anything else?
Speaker 2: We did a children's book which I co-wrote with a couple of other people, and I illustrated.  And that was a book called "Children of Africa."
Speaker 1: I remember a large, a fairly good sized African name book.
Speaker 2: It, we, yes, very definitely.  I did the, illustrated the "African Names" book as well.  So there were several publications from Drum and Spear Press, and those books were sold to Black Studies programs around the country and were also sold through the bookstore, through the physical location of the bookstore here in Washington, D.C.  And the bookstore gained the respect and interest of people, not only here in the United States, but all began to attract people from African countries and from the Caribbean.  So we began to, we had communications with people like the late Walter Rodney who was the author of the "How Europe Underdeveloped Africa" and others, scholars from West and South Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, where was the location of the store, I mean--
Speaker 2: The bookstore was located on 14th, the corner of 14th and Fairmont in Northwest Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I think you were saying off camera that there's a commemorative--
Speaker 2: There's a historical, there's a historical marker, very close to the original site of Drum and Spear Bookstore.  The marker is located on Harvard Street, near 14th Street in the Columbia Heights neighborhood of Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 39569
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so in 1970, now, this, you went to Tanzania?
Speaker 2: In 1970, I went to Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.  And I went there at the invitation of a group there who was--the Tanzanian government had become quite interested in what we were doing with Drum and Spear and had invited a group of people to, from Drum and Spear, to come to Tanzania to help with the organization of the Sixth Pan African Congress as well as to help them think through the potential of developing a similar bookstore and publishing company.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is, Sixth Pan African Congress took place in '76 [1976], so this is in planning for this--
Speaker 2: That is correct, yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --big event.  Okay, and I think it was held in Arusha, Tanzania.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So, so you were, now, how--I think there's some relationship here with East African Publishing House too or--
Speaker 2: There was no formal relationship to East African Publishing House, but the, we then began to--I moved to Tanzania and we worked with a number of the people who were with East Africa Publishing House.  But there was no formal relationship.  There was, we did publish the book "Children of Africa" in a Swahili version while in Tanzania.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And while in Tanzania, I had the good fortune to meet people who later became important publishers in Dar es Salaam.  And this was Walter Bgoya, -B-G-O-Y-A, who now runs a publishing company there and also I worked with the, with one of the newspapers there.  And the, at that time, one of the editors with that newspaper was a journalist, Ben Mkapa.  And Ben Mkapa later became president of Tanzania.
Speaker 1: Ben Mkapa.
Speaker 2: Mkapa, M-K-A-P-A.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was he president in recent years?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was president within, it's been within the last ten, fifteen years that he served as president of Tanzania.
Story_ID: 39570
Speaker 1: The president in those days was Nyerere, Julius--
Speaker 2: Yes, Julius Nyerere--
Speaker 1: --Nyerere.
Speaker 2: --was the president during the time that I lived in Tanzania which made Tanzania a fasci, absolutely, fascinating place because it was, Dar es Salaam lived up to its name.  And the name means "haven of peace."  And it truly lived up to its name and had become the place where a number of people, refugees who were, had sought political asylum from Mozambique or from South Africa were living in Tanzania.  And later people, as it moved towards '71 [1971], '72 [1972], people began to flee Idi Amin's oppressive regime in Uganda and began to come into Tanzania as well.
Speaker 1: I know the, in 1970, when they had the, after the Congress of African People, there was a group of settlers from U.S. that went over to do farming or something in Tanzania.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, um-hum.
Speaker 1: And then Bob Moses was teaching.
Speaker 2: Bob Moses was teaching up near Arusha during that same time period, yes.
Speaker 1: And was Pete O'Neill there at that point, or had he managed--
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: I know he's still there.
Speaker 2: Yes, I know he's still there, and I don't know whether he was there then or not.  I did not meet him while I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I met a number of other people.  There were a number of expatriate Americans who were there at that time and a number of African Americans, but I didn't meet all of them.  I deliberately moved to a Swahili speaking neighborhood because I wanted--I just feel when I travel, why do I, why am I traveling if I'm then just going to be with other Americans.  I won't learn anything about the country in that way.  So I deliberately moved to a Swahili-speaking neighborhood.  There were other expatriates who lived in my neighborhood, but from other countries.  So the writer, Ieqai Armor (ph.), for example, the Ghanaian writer, was one of my neighbors.
Speaker 1: Now, he's interesting.  East African Publishing House published some of his early work, and he became like, in the mid-'70s [1970s], like really widely read here in this country, "2000 Seasons" and the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, "The Healers," yes.
Speaker 1: That's, "The Beautiful Ones (unclear), (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And those were books that were done during that same time period.  He had already published before he came to Tanzania.  He had already become known for "The Beautiful Ones Are Not Yet Born."  And during the time that he was my neighbor, I did the cover photograph of him for his book, "Why Are We So Blessed."
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you're playing the role of a lot of (laughter), historical things.  I didn't realize that you were an illustrator.  So now, you're taking photos too, and, you know, so you're, you have a lot of talent, like your father, very versatile, you know.
Speaker 2: And I had the very good fortune of being a part of a writing group, a group of writers.  Iequai and I were a part of the group.  There were, there was a Kenyan writer, Grant Comenju (ph.).  There was also Walter Rodney, himself, was a part of this group.
Speaker 1: And I have a note here, Philip Oching (ph.), did you know him?
Speaker 2: I knew Philip Oching, and he wasn't a formal part of the group, but he was very definitely someone that I met during the time that I was in Tanzania.
Speaker 1: Now, I can only imagine, see, being in a study group with Iequai Arma (ph.) and Walter Rodney.
Speaker 2: Rodney, it was just incredible, yes.  And then just to have, as a part of that whole group of people that we would regularly see, there were others like Willie Kgosilsile (ph.) who was a South African poet and writer.
Speaker 1: Right, he's here now, yeah.  And Carol Pastay Kgosilsile, right.  Yeah, he lives in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 39571
Speaker 1: So, what was Walter Rodney like?  He had a short life, but he made a tremendous impact with his book "How Europe Underdeveloped Africa" which was the opposite of what you're taught in school.  You're taught that Europe developed Africa--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in some way.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And his book turned the tables.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, and Walter was a brilliant historian.  And he was ahead of his time in many ways when it comes, in my view, when it comes to his approach to history.  Nowadays, it's more commonplace to see historians as looking at things in a broader, much more multi-disciplinary way.  And Walter looked at history from an economic viewpoint as well as cultural.  And he combined all of those so that you ended up with a much more, sort of holistic and rich look at events, at historical events and understood the interconnection of things so much more, I thought.  And working with him in this group of writers, with this group of writers, we were talking about the importance of writing stories and histories about Africa and that he then was the sort of really, our group historian and readily available to us then to talk about or for stories that we were thinking of, either as fiction or as non-fiction, then Walter was the sort of free and available consultant to us, which was just fabulous, really wonderful.  It was very, very tragic when he was later assassinated in his home country of Guyana.
Speaker 1: I--
Speaker 2: And he was a rising political star there, which was, you know, apparently what led to his assassination.
Story_ID: 39572
Speaker 1: And Arma is another figure.  He's still (unclear), like Rodney, looked at Africa--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --through the eyes of an African--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --which is something that didn't occur to people at some point, you know, that we're reading things where Africans are writing about themselves as if they're Europeans.
Speaker 2: Exactly, and that's why this was an incredibly rich and beneficial period for me because, and it pointed out the benefit of my sort of having made what became a very wise decision which was to immerse myself in the culture of Tanzania as opposed to being a part of an expatriate group.  You know, I knew many expatriates, and it was great to be able to get together with people from time to time, socially, but--and to talk about what was happening back in the United States.  But on the other hand, it was really beneficial for me to gain a better understanding of the people right around me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that wasn't, I know there's a group in Ghana back in the day when Alice Windom (ph.) and Maya Angelou and Kojo Morrow and a lot of people were--
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.  My friend, Evelyn Neal, who was married to Larry Neal had, was in Ghana at that point and had worked in Ghana.  Tom Feilings (ph.), a number of people had been a group who had worked, had been an expatriate community in Ghana during that time.  The late, Max Bond, the architect, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a, I don't know if anybody's written a book about them, but there's a, is a book there certainly.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, I would agree with you.  I think that there's really rich material about those communities.
Speaker 1: And the Tanzanian group too, you know, too--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I would think.
Story_ID: 39573
Speaker 1: So, so how long were you in Tanzania?
Speaker 2: I was in Tanzania for two years, from 1970 to 1972.  And I decided to leave Tanzania and to return to the U.S. because I was, I became so excited about the work that I was doing and the, the interactions that I was having with these brilliant writers and historians like Walter Rodney.  And I thought that we were on the, that the one thing that was missing was media, was audio visual media.  I had felt, before coming to Tanzania, I had worked in Mississippi at one point in adult education.  And I had worked in adult education in Quitman County, Mississippi because I thought that it was just criminal that so few African Americans in the rural South were literate at that point in 1969.  And I just felt that it was so critical that our people should be educated and well educated and be, that we should be able to communicate fully with people.  And it was, when I was in Tanzania, I realized that here I was again, now working with the, in publishing, working with this newspaper where I was doing some political cartoons for the newspaper, and we're working in print in a country where a large portion of the people cannot read and write.  And I thought, television and radio were incredi--even more important in those circumstances than print media; that in print media, it's a group of intellectuals talking to each other, but that the larger number of people are left out of the conversation.  So I thought that it was time for me to consider learning film, television as a way of then being able to communicate and that these would be the media of the future.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you know any other black people in the media as film directors or producers in those days?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Not at that time I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: But my focus was still, I really had thought, my idea at the moment was that I was going to learn--I felt that the people of Tanzania, the people with whom we were working, they deserved better.  They deserved to be able to get, communications, to get information through these other means, through radio, through television, through broadcast.  And so I just felt that it was important that then we would have the skills to do that instead of just being limited to the skills that I had, which were print oriented, that--and not that good, since I had never formally studied, you know.  And I thought of myself more as a dilettante in that way, that I owed it to them to go and gain skills to really learn.  And because Tanzania at that time did not have television, that I realized there was a limit to what I could learn there, by remaining there.
Story_ID: 39574
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you came back in 1972.
Speaker 2: So I returned to the states in 1972.  And I traveled, on my way back, I went indirectly.  I returned indirectly because there was the great advantage in those days, if you had an airline ticket from Point A to Point B, you could stop at all of the intervening points without a charge.  And so I had purchased a ticket from Madagascar to San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: So where did you stop between Madagascar and San Francisco?
Speaker 2: Well, I never went to Madagascar but the ticket would have allowed me to do so had I had the time or the money.  But I, what I did is that I left Dar es Salaam, and I went to Nairobi, stayed for a while in Nairobi and then to Karton and from Khartoum [Sudan], I went to Addis Ababa [Ethiopia], stayed for, I stayed longer than I had planned in Addis Ababa because there was a huge sandstorm that started delaying flights.  And in many places in Africa, the flights aren't daily flights.  They're weekly.  And if you miss one, then it's a delay of a week, rather than a day or something.  So I stayed in Dar, in Addis Ababa.  From Addis Ababa, I went to Cairo [Egypt].  And from Cairo, I went on to Beirut [Lebanon].  I went to Beirut and spent a week in Beirut, and then to Istanbul [Turkey], a week there.  And after Istanbul, I went to Paris and spent about two or three weeks in Paris [France].  And then to London [United Kingdom] for a week, and then to New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is on a ticket that takes you from Madagascar to San Francisco (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Seems like you were going in the opposite direction (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, the, it was a roundtrip.  See, it was, I had a roundtrip ticket that would allow me, and so my plan was that I was going to return to the U.S.  And I was eventually going to go to San Francisco, but that I would first go to New York and put in an application at NYU [New York University, New York, New York], Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] and then continue putting in applications at film schools across the country.  And then I'd go to San Francisco, get a job and, and wait to see if I would get into a school.
Story_ID: 39575
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: So I returned to the U.S. to study film, and I was very fortunate, and I was accepted at Columbia University [New York, New York].  And so I studied film at Columbia and got, received a Masters of Fine Arts in film production at Columbia University.  And I finished Columbia in 1972.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers there or were there any special teachers there or activities that really, you know, are significant to talk about now?
Speaker 2: The teachers there, the head of the program at that time was a man, Stephan Shaw, the late Stephan Shaw, and that he had studied under Eisenstein and was very, very skilled in film analysis.  You also had a documentary, a leading documentary, an award-winning documentary produced by Arthur Barron who taught there.  And I studied under Eric Barnell (ph.) who was, has written, who wrote several important books on documentary film.  And just recently, just last week, Andrew Sarris, the film critic passed away.  And Andrew Sarris was one of my professors as well.
Speaker 1: S-A-R-I-S?
Speaker 2: S-A-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: While I was at Columbia, I met an interesting man, an African American man, whose brother was at, there as well.  And this man was a student who I later encountered again at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  But this was Abyi Ford, A-B-Y-I Ford.  And Abyi and his brother were both quite the, Joseph Ford, were both fascinating because they were really African Americans, but African Americans who had grown up entirely in Tanzania, I mean in, I'm sorry, in Ethiopia.  And they grew up in Ethiopia because their mother--they were from Mississippi, and their mother had gone to Ethiopia to work in education and had ended up founding a school and where the Haile Selassie's children and the children of the Ethiopian elite had studied there.  So Abyi was more Ethiopian than he was African American culturally.  And he was fluent in Amharic and just, you know, he, he has since retired to Ethiopia.  But just absolutely fascinating man who then studied film and helped to found the film studies in Ethiopia.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yes, but he was one of my classmates.  He was in a different class, but he was one of the, another of the students in the graduate film program.
Speaker 1: Now, is he known by Haile Gerima whose current head of--
Speaker 2: Yes, he and Haile worked very closely together, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, was he influential in getting Haile Gerima involved in film here?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know.  I don't know.  I don't know who went to Howard [University] first.
Speaker 1: Yeah, just for the record, for those watching this, Haile Gerima is a director of film studies at Howard University now as we speak in 2012.
Speaker 2: And during that, so I studied at, studied there at Columbia, and I, Arthur Barron, the professor who taught documentary film, that he also taught at Brooklyn College [New York, New York] as an adjunct professor.  And later right after I finished, I finished in 1972, and I began to work as a film editor.  I,--
Speaker 1: You finished in '74 [1974]?
Speaker 2: In '74 [1974], I'm sorry.
Story_ID: 39576
Speaker 1: I finished in '74' [1974], and I worked as a film editor after I finished school.  And Arthur Barron who had been my professor, and who was teaching at Brooklyn College as well contacted me to say that they needed someone at Brooklyn because he, himself, had now been offered a feature film and was going, needed to pick up right away and go to Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] and knew that that would create vacuum at Brooklyn College and that he had recommended that they should explore hiring me for, to replace him.  Now, of course, I was quite honored that my professor would then recommend me, and I went out and was interviewed and was hired at Brooklyn College.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is in '74 [1974], still in '74 [1974]?
Speaker 1: That's correct.  And so I ended up teaching film at Brooklyn College from 1974 to 1977.  And one of the courses that I designed while I was there was a course that I called "Third World Cinema," and I then invited Haile Gerima to come and speak (laughter) to my students.  I also invited Bob Vanleera (ph.) who had done the film "Aluta Continua" with Bob Fletcher who I had known from the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] experience.  Bob had been a still photographer in SNCC and had then become a professional videographer-cinematographer in New York.
Story_ID: 39577
Speaker 1: Yeah, what happened to Bob Van Leera?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: We showed this movie in, you know, in cultural centers and--
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: --and college campuses all over the country.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember the name, Bob Van Leera (ph.) and the catalog of New Yorker Films with the bio of him.
Speaker 2: Exactly, and I used to, year, during that time, and during my years in New York, I belonged to a group of filmmakers.  We would gather together.  We didn't have a formal name or anything, but St. Clair Bourne, Bob Vanleera and a number of others of us would meet from time to time.
Speaker 1: What about William Greaves, was he part of your group?
Speaker 2: Bill was not a part of that group.  Bill was of a slightly different generation.  And Bill was not a part of that group, but I know Bill quite well.  I worked for Bill--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --because I also, in addition to teaching, then I worked as a freelance editor and worked with Bill.  I worked, so I worked for William Greaves Productions on several of his productions, and including working on his feature film, "The Marijuana Affair."
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  William Greaves--
Speaker 2: Which was shot in Jamaica.  So, I went on location to Jamaica when he did that.  And the film was, that film was produced by Bob Arum who was Mohammad Ali's promoter, and that they had met during the time that Bill Greaves made the film about the Ali fight.
Speaker 1: "The Marijuana Affair," I interviewed him, and I can't, don't even remember that one.  But--
Speaker 2: And it was starring Calvin Lockhart.
Speaker 1: Calvin Lockhart, yes, he was a great actor from those days--
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: --was in a lot of movies.  Calvin Lockhart.  He was from, I think one of the Islands [Caribbean] himself.
Speaker 2: Right, and the film, another one of the filmmakers from that time period was Bill Gunn.  And Bill Gunn was the director who had made a very stylish black vampire film, "Ganja and Hess."
Speaker 1: I've heard of that, but I've never seen it.  Yeah, now, what about William Miles, was he--
Speaker 2: Yes, I knew Bill Miles as well, and Bill Miles worked on--had started as a film researcher and then become a very, a documentarian who specialized almost in films about the black military, and that he did several films, award-winning films about the black military.
Speaker 1: And I, the one I remember is "I Remember Harlem" or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --narrated by Cesar, Adolph Cesar.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Adolph Cesar, had that voice, right.
Story_ID: 39578
Speaker 1: So there were, so it was a very great, it was a wonderful time to be in New York and to both study film--when I studied film in 19, from 1972 to '74 [1974], I also had the good fortune--I worked my way through school.  So I had the good fortune of getting a job with the United Church of Christ.  And the United Church of Christ was the group then that has sort of inherited in many way the, the American Missionary Association.  So it was in that context that I then ended up doing additional research and worked on a fund-raising campaign for the American Missionary Association.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so--
Speaker 1: So I wrote about the schools, Tugaloo [Tugaloo College, Jackson, Mississippi] and the other schools that were a part of the, that were supported by the AMA [American Missionary Association].  I did that as a part of my work with the United Church of Christ.
Speaker 2: Now, the American Missionary Association, I think we were discussing before were abolitionist--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, these were--
Speaker 2: --that come out of the tradition of--
Speaker 1: --right, right, exactly.
Speaker 2: --New England Abolitionism--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and they founded black schools in the South after the Civil War, right?
Speaker 1: That's correct.  And they had come out of the, and the United Church of Christ was a combination of these two major church groups, one of them being the Congregationalists.  And so it was the Congregationalists that had then helped to found these schools, Wilberforce and these other schools.  And that had created then, you know, this American Missionary Association group of schools.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now, Lincoln [University] is the one I think that they really founded early, and there's always a (unclear), like Wilberforce is an AME [African American Episcopal] school.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right.  Wilberforce--
Speaker 2: It came out of the United Methodist--
Speaker 1: Episcopal, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: --bought it first and then they, AME got it in 1856 or somewhere.  The question always is Lincoln, which was founded by the American Missionary Society, first or Wilberforce?
Speaker 1: Right, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: They argue about it still.
Story_ID: 39579
Speaker 1: So there were those schools that, so I worked on this fund-raising campaign for the schools as my actual job, but that I also had applied to, I had, I saw a notice of a program that I thought would be very beneficial.  And in case I didn't get into film school, I thought, oh, boy, this could be a good opportunity.  So I applied to this program, and the good news was that I was accepted.  The complicating factor was that I had also now been accepted at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York].  So I was going to grad school, but I also felt I couldn't turn down this opportunity which was to attend a minority training program at the Public Television Station in New York, the flagship Public Television Station, WNET.  So by day I was a Columbia student.  By night, I went to this program that was run by Peggy Jackson.  And it was this minority training program which then had some of the leading African American camera people, sound people, media technicians, working there, and that they, by day, worked on "Tony Brown's Journal."
Speaker 2: Now, "Tony Brown's Journal" was an iconic show in those days.  People watched it every week--
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: --and anybody doing anything intellectual, in the black community watched "Tony Brown's Journal" and talked about it all week.
Speaker 1: So there was this whole sort of coterie of black journalists, media journalists who were working on that program.  And another person who worked with that program and had created another, a second one, was Tony Batton.  So Tony Batton was a black journalist, media journalist of that era.  Charles Hobson who continues to produce.  So there was a nice sort of group of people then that I grew to know in New York, and I, because I also had interest in fiction film and in writing fiction film, I made it a point of learning act--I took some acting workshops.  And I took these down on the Lower East Side [New York, New York] at the New Federal Theater.  And that was yet, again, just an incredible group of people, the actor, Dick Williams.  This was Woody King, Jr., of course, was leading that activity at the New Federal Theater.  And there was just a brilliant--Denzel Washington, Samuel L. Jackson, his wife, Latonya Richardson, there were several actors who became quite prominent during the coming years who were a part of the New Federal Theater community.  And just by being in that world and volunteering down there when I wasn't taking classes, just exposed me to just incredible moments.  So I saw plays in rehearsal over and over again, and saw playwrights like Charley Fuller, Larry Neal.
Story_ID: 39580
Speaker 1: Yeah, Larry Neal, he passed away in '81 [1981] and that was really a--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --considered a loss to, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, it very definitely was.  And Larry was a very, he and Amiri Baraka were very close.  And through their relationship, through that friendship, I would often then learn of events where Amiri Baraka was doing works and performing.  And it was, that was a time period where he moved from poetry and plays even into performance of musical performance.  So it was just a, it was a really rich and fascinating time to be in New York.
Speaker 1: Oh, it seems like everything you're doing is rich with (laughter), you're seeking all the right people 'cause you're coming in contact with all--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --these great minds.
Speaker 2: No, I turned up being in the right place at the right time in a lot of, in many, many ways.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know, there's a figure we didn't mention in the Public Television, and that's the host of "Soul," Ellis Hastley (ph.).
Speaker 2: Yes, very--
Speaker 1: Did you know him?
Speaker 2: I did know him.  I knew Ellis, and worked with him for a while, and it was just--he was a delight to know, absolutely brilliant man, really brilliant man and one of those people who at that time, Ellis was very comfortable in his skin as a black and out gay man--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I--
Speaker 2: --and that he just, he was such an impresario.  And one of the, I don't exactly remember which year, but he did a series of performances at Lincoln Center, called "Soul at the Center."  His national TV program was "Soul" and that he had a weekly TV program called "Soul" which had a range of performers on it.  And he then had this series of concerts and performances, "Soul at Lincoln Center," which was just phenomenal, really wonderful.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause I remember he had a knack of putting such eclectic, like one show, like June Jordan the poet, Rasad Roland Kirk, the Spinners, all on the same show.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Al Green.
Speaker 2: That's what I mean, that he was just such an incred--he was such an impresario.  He was just brilliant, and he did, you know, he had the good presence of mind to, on the Sunday's associated with the Lincoln Center program, that he then had a program about black sermons as performance works.  And he had Aretha Franklin's father and his legendary sermon, "My Eye is on the Sparrow," and he then had someone else performing James Weldon Johnson's "God's Trombones,"  But he then, it was really about the art form of the black sermon.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what a loss he was.  And so-
Story_ID: 39581
Speaker 1: So I was in New York in that wonderful, heady time, and it was culturally a fascinating time too so that the, you know, everything from the music to what people were doing, Gordon Parks, you know, was able to meet and talk with Gordon Parks.  And this was a time when more and more blacks were beginning to move into filmmaking as well, Melvin Van Peebles.  And it, there were only a small number of people who were looking at films in more an art sense.  The era, of course, became the Blaxploitation film instead and some of the rare art films that came out of that were the ones like "Ganja and Hess" by Bill Gunn.  I had the, I worked with the United Church of Christ, worked, studied at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], and then also studied at WNET.  Afterwards, that led to Brooklyn College.  I taught at Brooklyn College [New York, New York], brought in a number of really skilled and wonderful filmmakers to my film classes, while I taught film.  And I continued to work on films in my evenings.  I'd work on our, weekends I'd work on other film projects.  So I worked with a group of Latino filmmakers on a series called "Aqui Y Ahora," "Here and Now" as a series.  I was a sound person on that.
Speaker 2: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 1: Sure, A-Q-U-I, Aqui, and then the letter "Y" for and, and then Ahora, A-H-O-R-A.  So, Aqui Y Ahora.
Speaker 2: Okay, that was a TV show?
Speaker 1: That was a television series that was being produced for Public Television.  I met a number of filmmakers who continue, I, you know, I continue to relate, have a relationship with all the way to present day.  And it was really a good learning experience for me.  I continued to write and I wrote a story that was published in "Essence Magazine."  This was now about 1976, I believe, called "Early Morning Calls."  And I was delighted to have my fiction published.  I also wrote a screen play and the screen play that I wrote was never produced, but as a result of someone, of an agent seeing my script, she referred me to a company.  And I was commissioned to write a script for a fiction film.
Story_ID: 39582
Speaker 1: Okay, well--
Speaker 2: So I wrote a film for what would be the, called the "B" movie industry, which was so much fun, and a path that I would have continued on.  And this was the, the film was produced.  It was called "Teammates."  And this was in 1976.
Speaker 1: "Teammates," now, what was it about?
Speaker 2: It was about a, it was a comedy.  And it was about a group of high school students and the sort of central theme is the, the cheerleader on the basis of a dare decides to go out for the football team.  And this was at a time when Title IX had just taken hold.  And so, and women in men's contact, in contact sports was being debated then.  And so this young woman ends up then on the football team.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And "B" movies or films, that industry went the way of the dinosaur, sadly, but those were the second features at drive-in movies.  And the idea was that the industry was so fascinating and I just enjoyed every minute of it because these were films, they were low-budget films.  And it was a low-budget film industry, and they had it in New York.  And Roger Corman was the, the sort of head honcho of this kind of industry.  But the idea was that you gave, for people going to the drive-in theater, you needed two films to make a complete evening.  So one would be the high budget, big picture, and the second would the "B" movie, and that would be this low-budget film.  And most of these, some of these were pretty campy, you know, films, "Witch Blade Sisters" and things (laughter), and they would finance the films by you wrote the outline.  You wrote the outline of the story.  They pitched the story to the distributor, and the distributor would essentially pay for the film before it was even shot on the basis of, yeah, that sounds good.  So the poster for my film had been produced before the film was even made (laughter).
Story_ID: 39583
Speaker 1: But I was, the producers treated me royally.  They, you know, it was my first paid screen play so I was in heaven.  And I was, I had been working with Bill Greaves as an editor and on other film projects.  But now, here I was having my script produced.  And the company liked it so much that they, this company, Independent International, they asked if I would consider writing another film for them.  And I was on the, just about to do that when I got a call from an organization that asked if I would meet with them to consider being on their board of directors.  And this turned out to be an organization, the Film Fund.  It had just been established, and that they were putting together their board of directors.  And it was an impressive group of people who were executives from other foundations and wealthy individuals.  So I met with them and, for this interview for the board, and at that time, one of the board members said, you know, you'd be excellent as our executive director.  And a few days later, they offered me the job of being executive director of the Film Fund.  So I left Brooklyn College [New York, New York] to become the first executive director, the founding executive director of the Film Fund.  And we set up shop at 80 E. 11th Street, down in the village of New York, right off Broadway.  And the, we gave grants to filmmakers.  One of the films that was most recognized, that was associated with the Film Fund was the Academy Award-winning film, "Harlem County USA," produced by Barbara Kopple.
Speaker 2: Now, that was a classic.  I've seen it, "Harlan County USA," about the coalminers' strike.
Speaker 1: That's correct, yes, about the coalminers strike in Harlan County, Kentucky.  And we, that job then, which entailed raising money to support film on social issues, was just wonderful.  The good news was I absolutely loved it and loved my work.  The bad news was I couldn't do that and write "B" movies too.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I had to, I'd made this choice and though, well, I can always return to screenwriting.  And so I left behind my "B" movies (laughter) and went into the Film Fund and had the really terrific experience of working with very, very well-known documentary producers like Julia Reichkart (ph.) who most recently had a film "A Lion in the House."  That was also a highly acclaimed and award-winning film that aired on public television as well.
Story_ID: 39584
Speaker 1: So this is now, we're now at 1977.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So 1977 to 1980, I was the executive director of the Film Fund.  I was based in New York [New York] and had an office in Los Angeles [California].  And I had an office in Los Angeles because we received so much support from the Hollywood film community, Barbara Streisand, Jane Fonda, Richard Pryor, a number of people, Norman Lear, contributed to the Film Fund and supported these films that were, you know, really, films on social issues that we were doing at that time, and that as a part of our work, we also, I met Sandra Shulberg, another independent filmmaker who began to talk about the plight of independent feature filmmakers and wondered if the Film Fund could be helpful in some way.  So through a combination of small grants and in-kind support, we worked together and Sandra and her colleagues created the first independent feature market and independent feature film festival.  So I have a booklet with my name in it where I and Sandra and others curated the first independent feature film festival at Lincoln Center and that it later grew to become then a real dynamic force on its own, the Independent Feature Film Project with markets on both the East Coast and the West Coast, and that has eventually led to activities like Tribeca and a number of others in support of independent feature filmmaking.
Story_ID: 39585
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is exciting stuff here.  So we're going into the early '80's [1980s] now.  And so you were with the--
Speaker 2: I was with the Film Fund until 1980.  And we continued to raise money, give grants to filmmakers.  The films were award-winning films, and we gave the grants through, we had a peer review process involving other independent producers.  And the work that we were doing came to the attention of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting in Washington [D.C.].  The, at that time, Congress had mandated that the Corporation [Corporation for Public Broadcasting] would change its process, would alter its process and whereby its grants had been given through their board of directors.  And the public had felt that that was not as transparent as it should be for an organization that, where the money was appropriated from Congress even though the Corporation itself is not a federal agency.  So the Corporation, having heard about--when they talked about, well, how could we give these grants, how should we give them, people kept saying, you should do it the way the Film Fund does.  So that led to, one day this group of men showing up at my doorstep at the Film Fund who then were representing the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and asking if they could learn more about how we did our grant making.  After that conversation, a few weeks later, I then received a job offer from CPB [Corporation for Public Broadcasting] asking if I would consider moving to Washington [D.C.] to work for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and managing their efforts with independent producers.  So this was now 1980, and I thought, gee, I'd been with the Film Fund for three years.  And I thought this would be interesting to take this on.  So I moved to Washington in 1980 and began work that fall with CPB.
Story_ID: 39586
Speaker 1: Okay, Corporation for Public Broadcasting.  Now, just back to the Film Fund for a minute--
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hum.
Speaker 1: --now, the Film Fund, then does the Film Fund represent the first attempt to organize independent filmmakers and the independent film effort?
Speaker 2: No, there were many.  There have been many efforts to--the Film Fund really didn't organize independents.  The Film Fund merely was a grant-making entity to provide financial support to independents.  It was much more like a, sort of an old-school form of kick starter (laughter) in a way, but the, so it just really raised money and then gave grants to deserving filmmakers, to a few deserving filmmakers because it never could have satisfied the large number of filmmakers that are really out there.  The, there was an organization in New York that was really much more the group that organized filmmakers.  And that was the Association of Independent Video and Filmmakers, AIVF.  And the Film Fund had a good relationship with that organization and many of the other organizations that were like that.  There were also a number of organizations throughout the country.  They had been what is called the "Newsreel Movement" too.  And so in Philadelphia, New York [New York], San Francisco [California], Los Angeles [California], Chicago [Illinois], you had these organizations were, new, called "Newsreel."  Chicago Newsreel was, there was a black couple in Chicago that ran the Newsreel group there.  There was, in San Francisco--the only remnant of it that remains is in California where in San Francisco, there's a nonprofit organization, California Newsreel that remains a major distributor of films by and about people of color.  And it's one of the leading distributors to schools and universities of documentaries about African Americans.
Story_ID: 39587
Speaker 1: And Louie Messiah was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and still is in Philadelphia and still does community work there.  And that these were efforts to connect film to community, and you had John Alpert and Downtown Community TV and New York.  So there was lots of people around the country doing really interesting things.  And many of those groups and the successors of those groups still remain and help to keep a vibrant, independent film movement in this country.  So I, it was wonderful.  Being in the Film Fund gave me the, placed me sort of at, in the center of all of that, and through that, I just learned and got to know really thousands of filmmakers all over the country, you know, people in Austin, Texas.  I met Latino filmmakers in Austin, Texas, other filmmakers in Florida, Atlanta.  So really, all over the country, I grew to meet and know filmmakers.  And certainly, moving to Washington [D.C.] to work at CPB, expanded my knowledge, exponentially because now, instead of working with hundreds--the Film Fund had a budget of just hundreds of thousands of dollars for grants.  And now, at CPB, I was working within a, with a TV fund which at that time had a budget of roughly about forty million dollars.
Story_ID: 39588
Speaker 1: So I worked for the CPB, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting for nine years.  I started as the, as a coordinator for independents, working with independents, and worked on the--the Director of the Fund at that time was Louis Friedman who had come from CBS and had been, was a highly respected producer from CBS.  And that Louis moved to Washington and assembled his team and that I was very, very fortunate to be a part of that initial team of the CPB Television Program Fund.  A black man from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] who had worked in public television on air with Black Horizons had been the host of "Black Horizons," Donald Marbury, also worked there, was one of my colleagues.  John Wickline (ph.), a journalist, was responsible for our news and public affairs programs.  And Gene Cott, Eugene Cott, was the deputy director of the Fund.  So we were a very close-knight team and we developed concepts that we were able to put immediately into action and to, and to make these a reality.  So the first was a series called "Matters of Life and Death," and I worked on that one.  And then another was a public affairs series called "Crisis-to-Crisis."
Story_ID: 39589
Speaker 1: Now, what was "Matters of Life and Death" about?
Speaker 2: It was an anthology of independently produced documentaries.  It was very much the precursor to the series "POV" that airs now on public television and just celebrated its 25th anniversary.
Speaker 1: And the other one was--
Speaker 2: The other series was "Crisis-to-Crisis" which was a precursor to "Frontline."  So this is so far back that these series like "Frontline" or "POV" didn't exist.  And what was really lovely was that during the time that I was there at CBS in the nine years between 1980 and 1989, we were able to bring a number of these projects to fruition and help create these series like "Frontline."  "The American Experience" came of that.  "American Playhouse" and another drama series, "Wonder Works."
Speaker 1: I know one of our associates of The HistoryMakers is Paul Brock who was a producer with "American Experience."
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, there're four, I remember four black history associated plays, "Solomon Northup."
Speaker 2: "Solomon Northrop," "Charlotte Fortrand," yes.
Speaker 1: "Denmark Visas--
Speaker 2: "Denmark Visas Rebellion," yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and it seems like there was one more.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there is and I have, I have a booklet that has the list of them all, but, yes, very definitely, yeah.
Speaker 1: Those are, I know--
Speaker 2: But that's what I had the really good fortune to work on those and was a terrific experience.
Speaker 1: And I remember some of the actors in the plays were drawn from the New Federal Theater--
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.  So that's why it became, it was really interesting to see what a small world it was and remains.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And we did other, I worked specifically with drama, and so we funded other productions that were aired as a part of "Great Performances" too.  And one of those, which was, I thought, quite spectacular, was "The Gospel at Colonus."  And this was a Joe Papp, I believe, production. And it starred Morgan Freeman.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now, Morgan Freeman, I first saw him on "Electric Company."
Speaker 2: He was in Public Television, working on the "Electric Company," the children's series.
Story_ID: 39590
Speaker 1: Okay, so, let's see.  So this was, in this nine years, what was your favorite project in these nine years?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's hard to say, but my favorite project really, because there were so many projects that we worked on that I feel had a real legacy, but I think that "American Playhouse" was my favorite because of the range of, and the real range of drama that we produced there.  It was one of those moments where I felt that we were truly living up to our commitment to be diverse and to, to showcase the talent from around the country so that one minute, I would be out on the West Coast meeting with the people from the Teatro Campasino.  And we had then "Zoot Suits" as one of the dramas that was one.  And then the next minute, it was "Stand and Deliver" with Eddie Olmos, "El Norte."  So we had these "Seguin" with Jesus Travinio producing.  So we had brought forth all of these really talented producers, directors, doing fiction.  And we did Ntozake Shange's "For Colored Girls," for television, another version of "Raisin in the Sun."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was just a wide number of dramas that were produced during that time.  CPB also supported Ossie and Ruby [Davis] doing "Ossie and Ruby's Playhouse," no, "Ossie and Ruby Presents," I think it was called.
Speaker 1: Yeah, with Ossie and Ruby and they would present a movie.
Speaker 2: The Ossie and Ruby Show.
Speaker 1: And they would comment on a movie.
Speaker 2: They would do, well, it was a variety, they were attempting to have it as a variety show.  It was, you know, there was still the notion in those days of the variety shows.  So you had the, like the "Ed Sullivan Show."  So it was going to be their version of that where they would have, you know, Ashford and Simpson performing.  And then they were going to comment on a movie, and then they were going to do a skit themselves or something.  And they were producing that out of the studios in 1981 of WHMM, Howard Mass Media, which later became WHUT, Howard University Television.
Speaker 1: So they produced it right over here in D.C. at Howard?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So Ossie and Ruby.  So this is 1981?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 39591
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so were there other programs, Public Television or Corporation for Public Broadcasting shows produced at Howard in those days, in the '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: I don't know of ones that were being done for national.  But there, I know that Howard University was producing a number of local programs.  It had its own flagship program, "Evening Exchange," which later became "Evening Exchange with Kojo Nnamdi" and Kojo and I had met when we were doing the radio programs.  Kojo is also from Guyana.  And that Kojo and I had met when we did the radio programs back in the Drum and Spear days.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Kojo Nnamdi is an icon here in D.C [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yes, he is.  He is a highly revered interviewer, raconteur.
Speaker 1: Right, right, exactly.
Story_ID: 39592
Speaker 1: So I then ended up working at CPB from 1980 till 1989 and during those years they also asked if I would be their representative for a series of international conferences.  And the first one was a conference in 1981, I believe, in Senegal, in Dakar, and it was with the African Broadcasters, the group of the union of television and radio, national television and radio from out, throughout Africa.  And the group's name, they called, the acronym was L'URTNA, L-apostrophe-U-R-T-N-A.  And that stood, you know, for this union of radio, TV, national of African radio, television nationale.  But I, so I met in Dakar with these heads of TV from all of these different African countries at that time.  And that was a really useful way of learning about what was happening in television and in media in Africa.  It was painful to hear of the lack of resources of so many of the countries and the limitations of broadcast in so many of the countries.  And so it kept my interest up and I tried to keep in touch with some of the people from some of those countries.  This was much more difficult in those days, however, when you're still doing postal mail as a way of international connections.  And this was sort of, still sort of pre-fax, and, you know, pre, the predominance of fax or email--no emails or anything back then.  But I met with them, and then I was asked by CPB to be the representative for the conference, International Public Television, which is called INPUT.  I was elected after attending a couple of the INPUT meetings, one in Bellagio, Italy and another in Toronto.  I was then asked to become the vice president for the INPUT organization.  And so that led to my attending each year these International Public Television conferences where I met broadcasters from all over the globe.
Story_ID: 39593
Speaker 1: Now, I wanted to bounce back to something that got you on this television track in the first place, the need, the need in Africa for media--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and your vision that if we could, if we only had film and media accessible in Africa--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --we'd be able to influence people to a larger extent or educate 'em on a larger extent.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, were there many African Americans participating in the African television efforts in those days?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I know I know one in Chicago [Illinois] that--
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge, because the, not to my knowledge, there were not.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Orella Spheres who was with the Kuumba Theater Company had a children's television show in Ghana, I think in the late '70s [1970s] or early '80's [1980s], but I don't know of any others.  I mean I know about her, but I don't, I've seen photos of her show, but I don't know who else.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I, yeah, I don't know of any in the--I know of people who had the interests in selling things that they had done, to African countries.  But I don't know of people who were trying to help Africans themselves develop their own media.  The closest that I came to that was the, the people who I mentioned, with this meeting in Senegal, one of the people who was spear heading that was Charles Hobson, who I had mentioned earlier.
Speaker 1: Okay, Charles Hobson, okay.
Speaker 2: And Charles and later worked with the, with Ali Mazrui, the African scholar, to help with, in a co-production of his series, "The Africans" which then aired on public television here.
Speaker 1: Now, that was produced in the late '80's [1980s], I mean it aired in the late '80's [1980s] too.
Speaker 2: Right, yes, right.
Speaker 1: It was met with a lot of attention, you know, educators would fill auditoriums--
Speaker 2: Right, it was met with a lot of attention, but it was also one that was deemed somewhat controversial in some quarters because Mazrui, himself, was Muslim and that he also was, you know, self described, he was a self-described Marxist.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so there was the question of should public television really be airing this program that is, is it objective or is it really the commentary of a Marxist Muslim?
Speaker 1: You know, I think the first event for educators I ever attended about something that public television was doing was the preview of, the public preview of "The Africans."
Speaker 2: Of "The Africans," yes.
Speaker 1: And he taught at the University of Michigan, so he was here--
Speaker 2: Yes, he did, yes.
Speaker 1: --he was here.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  He was here when the series premiered, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and well known by people.
Speaker 2: And very well known, yes, and had written extensively.  But he was a highly respected international African scholar, and so.
Speaker 1: But being a Marxist even in the late '80's [1980s] was, before the fall, I guess, of the Soviet Union.  Okay-
Story_ID: 39594
Speaker 1: So that was the, so I attended these International Public Television conference, INPUT, and that led me to meet with television executives in Spain, France, Italy, just a wide number of countries.  And that I, my efforts there were to really try to encourage the greater inclusion of the rest of the world.  The conference itself, still one of my favorite conferences, annual conferences, brings together producers and public television executives from around the world to talk about, to look at and critique television and to examine trends and to think about what we're doing and where television is going, particularly, public television, non-commercial television.  So I still find it such a stimulating and rewarding conference and that back then, when I served as the vice president of the organization, I think until--I think I was there until '84 [1984] as VP [vice president], that my interests and my efforts were to try to make it more global.  And it was great to see that that did come to be and that I later attended an INPUT conference in South Africa, in Cape Town, and it's now the next, the last I attended a little over a year ago in Seoul, Korea.  And the next one will be held next year in El Salvador.  So it's nice that it now is far more global and inclusive of broadcasters from around the globe.
Story_ID: 39595
Speaker 1: Now, it seems as though you'd have some interesting observations about, you know, the approach to public television around the globe.  I would imagine that something like public television could get confused with state television.
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: That is correct, and one of the other activities that I continue to do, that I enjoy doing very much is serving as a volunteer to an organization, the U.S. TTI, United States Telecommunications Training Institute, that's based here in Washington [D.C.], that brings over to the states a group of broadcasters from other countries.  And it brings them here to learn, for professional development and they self-select courses that they are interested in.  And it's been terrific to meet producers and program directors and television managers from Tanzania which has television now, Uganda, Nigeria, all of the African countries, include--and then from places like the Philippines, many different Asian countries or from countries like Georgia, Ukraine, Mongolia.  So each year I meet a group of those broadcasters, and, again, it's been, you know, the dialogue about what is public television and what is state television.  And for them, the greater intellectual freedoms and greater freedom of speech has come with commercial broadcasting.
Speaker 1: And I would guess in some of the countries, that would be true.
Speaker 2: Because, "public" in those places isn't public, but has been government broadcasting.  And then under therefore, greater, far greater restrictions.
Story_ID: 39596
Speaker 1: Now, I know one of the, we interviewed one of the, the Chief Operating Officer of Sesame Street, and he was telling us, Mr. Ming, yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I was going to ask, was that Mel Ming?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Mel Ming.  He was talking about the, why the distribution of "Sesame Street," that--
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: --being the greatest international, I guess international contribution of American Public Television.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  No, it's just wonderful, and one of the things that they do that has made it, made "Sesame Street" so successful internationally, is they don't just export the show in its format to another country.  But they're very, very sensitive about what's the culture, customs and in that country.  So, while here "Big Bird" is the big yellow bird, that in another country, it's not even a bird necessarily, as the central character.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it depends on the culture of the country and what they--
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, but that's something that, you know, I would think any country would want to have the type of show that would increase literacy--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you would guess, but (laughter), I guess there may be situations where the state wouldn't wanna encourage literacy.
Speaker 2: No, I think-(simultaneous
Story_ID: 39597
Speaker 1: I think it's, I think that would be something that all countries would want.  It's, usually, the problem comes later when you begin to talk about news, and news that you're choosing to air.  There're some places where the only news that a country can air is the comings and goings of the president.  And it just sort of says, our fearless leader was here and now he's there, and that here's what fearless leader has to say.  You know, so it's been that kind of, and it's been--having discussions with people who live under those kinds of restrictions makes you value so much the freedoms that we have here.  It makes you really treasure them.  And it makes me appreciate public broadcasting in this country even more, even though it's very sadly, an undervalued resource.  And I've had the very good fortune of having then a very long career in public broadcasting.  So after, so I continued to get promotions during my time at CPB.  At one point, I became responsible for drama.  I was head of drama, and that's the years that I worked most closely with American Playhouse.  I also, during that time was able to work on, to help fund and see the development and, for broadcasts of great productions like the "Mahabharata" which was developed for TV, all 14 hours.  Years, in 1989, I was promoted to head the Television Program Fund.  So at that point, the fund was a $43 million fund that financed then programs like "Sesame Street" and others for public television.  And so I thought, boy, what more could I ask for?  Am I not the luckiest person in the world.  I'm the head of this wonderful fund in public broadcasting supporting all of this incredible talent.  Well, just six months later, while I'm still enjoying being the head of the Television Program Fund, they decided that PBS should be restructured, public television should be restructured and that PBS should have a chief program executive.  And it should have a trusted individual who would make program decisions as opposed to the collaborative method in which the stations had previously purchased programs.  Let me just back up to explain this 'cause it's a little complicated.  The PBS is not a network.  It's the Public Broadcasting Service, and it's a membership organization made up of over 350 public TV stations from all over the country, including Virgin Islands and Guam and Alaska, Hawaii.  The managers of those stations would come together each year and would have a market.  And at that market, the, if you wanted to pitch a program idea, the producer of "Frontline" would get up and make a statement about, "Here's what I have coming up for next season.  And if you support us, we'll have 10 hours of great documentaries and here's a clip."  And afterwards, then they would vote with their dollars on what they were going to spend.  So you would then know, PBS would know what it was going to send out by satellite and distribute to the stations based upon that.
Story_ID: 39598
Speaker 1: All right, go ahead.  Finish explaining the--
Speaker 2: Okay, so I had the great fortune of then having been made the head of the Television Program Fund in 1989 and just thought, boy, am I the luckiest soul.  I have "the" best job and manage a fund of over $40 million, giving grants to very talented producers to make programs that then will be aired on PBS [Public Broadcasting Service].  PBS at the same time in 1989 was undergoing a transformation and that, it was mandated by Congress that there should be a restructuring in public television and as a part of that, PBS agreed that it would hire a chief program executive.  And they had a national, they hired a major search firm to do a national search for them, the chief program executive of PBS.  And there were newspaper articles, it was considered highly provocative, and people kept saying that, no one, that's an impossible job.  No one would ever be able to do that job and that they won't even hire anybody.  Who could they even find that would do that job or that could do that job because someone would have to know all of the stations.  They'd have to be knowledgeable about television programming, about all of this range of content from science programs to drama.  Who could they, you know.  Where will they find someone to even do that?  And there were rumors about them looking at the executives from the BBC and other places and thinking that, well, the people from the BBC won't, they'd be driven insane by the madness of public television and wouldn't even figure it out.  And the real question, the fundamental question was, would the stations trust the individual because now, you're asking, you're saying that the stations, that where before, they used to vote on a slate of programs and say, I want "Frontline," "The American Experience" and "NOVA," that they now would be entrusted their money, saying, here, I trust you.  I'm going to give you $5 million or $7 million or three [million], whatever their dues would be, that they were going to give that to PBS and trust that this individual would make the right decision.  So that was the, that's the backdrop.  And that I then got a call from the head hunters and asked if I would consider becoming the chief program executive at PBS.  So, I left CPB and was named Chief Program Executive at, I left CPB, was named Chief Program Executive at PBS.
Story_ID: 39599
Speaker 1: Now, many of us that watch public television don't know the difference between CPB [Corporation for Public Broadcasting] and PBS [Public Broadcasting Service].  I know I don't, so can you explain the fundamental difference between those entities?
Speaker 2: The major difference is that the Corporation for Public Broadcasting is a non-profit organization that was created by the U.S. Congress as a part of the Public Broadcasting Act that [President] Lyndon Johnson signed, and it was the corporation or CPB was created to receive funds from Congress, a federal appropriation of taxpayer dollars on behalf of all of public broadcasting.  So the corporation annually receives a budget that it dispenses to public TV and radio stations all over the country as grants and then also has a smaller amount of money that it gives to producers to create content for TV and radio through a television fund and a radio fund.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: PBS, located in Virginia, is a membership organization, has nothing to do with radio.  That's NPR, it's a membership organization of radio.  PBS is a membership organization that then represents the majority of the public television stations from all over the country who pool their money through dues paid to PBS for, and in return, PBS provides a satellite connection to those stations and also provides a slate of children's programs and general audience programs to those stations.
Story_ID: 39600
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, here we are and you're--
Speaker 2: So I was named in 1989, I was asked to become the first Chief Program Executive for PBS [Public Broadcasting Service].  And I was very pleased that my appointment was greeted so favorably by the stations who sent me so many wonderful notes congratulating me and saying how much they trusted me and looked forward to working with me, and also from the producers, including one producer who was one of the sort of, most respected producers, executive producers at WNET.  He was, produced the series "Nature," and his name was George Page.  And at one of the, at the first annual meeting, after I had been named, when he got up to make his presentation about his program, he then said, "Now, you general managers won't be voting about my program, but I will have to await the decision of the Czarina," referring to me.  And so that became a nickname at that time, that somewhat stuck.
Story_ID: 39601
Speaker 1: So do you think when you look back at it, I mean, it just, you know, stepping back from it yourself, do you think it was a better idea to have the, let the stations vote or to have a central person in charge of it?
Speaker 2: I think it was essential for the health and growth of public media at that time for public television that you had to have an individual because you have to put it in the context of what was happening at that time period.  Before then, there had been only the three major networks and PBS.  There was CBS, ABC, NBC and PBS.  And people had those choices on their dials.  And public television was very much then easily identifiable, no competition.  There was nothing like it.  You knew, if you went across the TV dial, you knew distinctly if you were, whether it was for children with the cartoons and "Sesame Street" or whether it was general audience programming, and it was the sitcoms and public television there, you knew distinctly the difference.  Around that time, cable television was beginning to develop and at cable and some of the individual, some of the people who were developing cable programming, they very smartly had looked at public television, and looked at its model and were beginning to say, if I am going to succeed with my commercial cable channel, and I have available to me documentary material, what is the most successful material on public television?  Ah, nature programming.  There's all of this other nature programming that public television doesn't air that I can pick up free or for a song.  So you had other channels then beginning to come into being.  And they could then sort of offer the alternative that if you like seeing nature on public television on Sunday nights, we can offer it to you in an unlimited strand, day after day, every day, 24/7.  So that you had the Discovery Channel, the History Channel.  You like Arts and Entertainment on public television, we have an Arts and Entertainment channel.  You like those performances like "Live from Lincoln Center," we can have Bravo.
Story_ID: 39602
Speaker 1: I don't know.  As time has marched on, some of those cable channels haven't lived up to their commitment to these themes--
Speaker 2: Right, but that's the nature, that's the nature of it.  You don't have.  It's a business.  You're not obligated.  It's, your obligation is to your shareholders.  You can change the name, so the "Learning Channel" became TLC.  Bravo lost any connection to what Bravo originally stood for in terms of its original focus on performing, the Performing Arts.  Arts and Entertainment at one point was so successful with "Biographies," they spun off a Biography channel and then became A and E, as if A and E, you know, have no meaning in much the way that the CW or other acronyms like that.  So it's, that, but public television because these things were at the heart of its mission still airs opera, still airs the ballet.  You know, it still carries that variety of programs that are at the heart of its mission.  You'll still find Jazz on public television.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so the struggle, I guess, in the nineties [1990s] is to maintain, like some kind of brand identification for public television, what is it about as opposed to these other (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, so at the point that they went to the model of having a chief program executive, you needed an individual who could make deals internationally.  The Discovery Channel could send its programming person to the U.K. and cut a deal with the BBC.  You're going to send the committee or you're going to say, "I'm sorry but we'll have to vote.  You'll have to wait until our annual meeting when we'll vote on the programs that we'll be supporting."
Speaker 1: I see.  I'm getting the picture now.
Speaker 2: So you needed the leadership.  You needed to allow content leadership, and the stations knew that they had to, at that point, trust, entrust that to PBS.  And so I'm really very pleased that I was able to then serve in that role at PBS, and to be the first person, the first programming executive for PBS at that level.
Story_ID: 39603
Speaker 1: Okay, also in 1990, one of the most successful public television series, not the most successful, was produced, "The Civil War," by--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Ken Burns.  And this has launched Ken Burns as a household name--well, in certain households (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, and no, it very definitely made Ken a household figure and that I had the, the luck, really, the good luck that Ken's series was one of my first, was sort of my debut with the National Television Press.  And we had decided to air the series in a rather unusual for public television fashion, of rather than having it air on a weekly basis, you know, one program, one hour, one week, followed by "tune in next week" for the next hour.  But we had decided to stunt the program by airing it all, starting on a Sunday night and airing it all within a week.  And the TV critics took particular note of this and that the articles, at the time, the news articles from the critics said, you know, this series seems quite promising.  Unfortunately, that woman that they have at PBS is, you know, may not be doing it justice because she's put it all together and that no one will watch, that it's--what a pity that she's doing that.  And, of course, then we were wildly vindicated by it becoming the highest rated program at that time in public television's history.
Speaker 1: And it may, is it still the highest rated program?
Speaker 2: No, Ken topped himself with "Baseball" later.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I'm surprised at "Baseball" 'cause I think the
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Civil War was the one.  That series, I think for the first time, it was the first time that I'd ever seen, though I'd read about it, seen black soldiers depicted in the Civil War.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And I think the nation probably never thought about it until then.
Speaker 2: Well, then that was one of the things that, about Ken's work that's still very striking which is that Ken really, and his team of researchers, they look for the, his goal really is to tell America's story, and that Ken has been very, very genuine about really trying to make sure he's telling the full story.  And the story for him, as well as it is for so many of us, is a story of real cultural diversity of being a society of many races of people and that there's the particular role in which African Americans and white Americans have played and done this sort of, sort of unusual, strange dance in a way of, of the past, from the institutional slavery up to the present day.  And that's something that Ken has tried to address in all of his programs when relevant.  So the, with the "Civil War" and later with "Jazz" and many of his stories sort of connect to each other.  He does the "Brooklyn Bridge" and that makes them think, oh, ghee, this bridge was done by these people who were constructing things, the Civil War.  Civil War makes them think about then the, you know, the whole thing of Baseball in the history, how did baseball get started?  The Negro Leagues and then there's Jack Johnson.  He did his excellent film about Jack Johnson, the boxer, the African American boxer.  He's doing a film now on Jackie Robinson too.
Speaker 1: That's quite a story.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, so this launches Ken Burns, 1990.
Story_ID: 39604
Speaker 1: I remember 1991, I had a three-year old, and we watched "Lamb Chop's Play Along" every morning before she went to preschool.
Speaker 2: And I, working with Sherry Lewis was a delight, and she was thrilled to be invited to come to public television.  And so working with her was a delight, and that I continued to meet with her even after I had left public television, and we would sometimes get together and have lunch, she and her husband, would meet and have lunch.  And she was just a delightful person, and so I was very saddened by her very untimely death a few years ago.
Speaker 1: Now, I wondered, when Lamp Chop's Play Along came on the air, I wondered what television could have been like or what her creative life had been if public television had picked her up a long time before--
Speaker 2: A long time before, yes, exactly.  No, I think that she could have done so many wonderful things because she was a trained musician too and that she then was a musicologist and had great skills and such a wealth of information to provide to kids.  And so she was a real educator at heart, and her values fit so perfectly with public broadcasting.  Interestingly, when we developed Sherry's program, we were at a point where I wanted to refresh our children's schedule.  We, at PBS, at that time, had, of course, the tremendous success of "Sesame Street," but we knew that you couldn't just rest on your laurels and have only Sesame Street, that you needed new programs for young viewers and you needed, we needed those programs again with, you--it was a time when you had channels like "Nickelodeon" and "Nick Junior" coming in and that those could announce that they were doing something new, "Blues Clues" or something and people would tune there and they would feel that, well, my kid's seen Sesame Street.  There's nothing new there for them, even though each year Sesame Street was spending a tremendous amount of effort renewing itself and changing.  So we thought that even though our budget was limited, what if we could launch three low-budget, or just even one, low-budget children's series?  Wouldn't that be great and wouldn't that help to refresh our schedule?  And so we, the first one, we thought, we said, boy, it will be low budget, so I'm not so sure it'll be as visible as Sesame Street.  But let's give it a try.  Let's give this "Barney and Friends" a try.  And it became a phenomena.  Barney, the big purple dinosaur became a big hit.  And parents began to hate us (laughter) because it was like stuck in their heads, all of the songs from Barney 'cause their kids to hear them over and over again.  But the, Barney's success brought millions of kids to public television and brought them to Sesame Street.  And we had Sherry's program, "Lamb Chop's Play Along," and then we also had another "Dragon Tales" as well.  And the success of those programs then just reinvigorated public television's children's schedule, and that's continued to this day where now, there're constantly new programs, "Curious George," "Fetch," there's just been--the latest one has just been released, "Daniel Tiger's Neighborhood" which is a take-off on the Fred Rogers program and the Land of Make Believe.
Story_ID: 39605
Speaker 1: Right, now, yeah, now, he's a factor throughout all of these children's--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --programs, Fred Rogers and, you know, we interviewed the director of WQED in Pittsburgh--
Speaker 2: George Miles.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And we, I actually walked into Fred Rogers' office, even though he had passed, just to stand there for a minute, you know.  But he was, did you ever meet him and--
Speaker 2: Oh, I--
Speaker 1: --I'm sure, I know you did.
Speaker 2: I had regular meetings with, you know, Fred Rogers and it was, just a real pleasure to meet him.  And he was, there are some people who you meet on their, you see them on the stage or you see them on air, and it's one person and then off screen, it's a different person.  Like I've met, a well-known comedian who as funny, you know, one of the funniest people in the country, as soon as he would step off the stage or as soon as the cameras would go, you'd worry that the man was gonna commit suicide.  But Fred, you know, such a different personality, but Fred Rogers was one of those people that Fred Rogers was always the very same, the same person that you'd see there on screen, he was, he'd come to, often at our annual meetings, the entire auditorium, entire room would be in tears.  You know, you'd have just, and you'd have grown men, all of us just crying because of something that Fred had said, and it was the way he said it.  He could be so, so sincere, so genuine and so caring.  And he really saw his program as really a ministry towards young children.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what, I hear that from everybody.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The antithesis of that, I guess, is the local TV, commercial TV station guy that might be a--
Speaker 2: Like "Pee Wee's Playhouse," it was, you know, it was the, you'd have all of the raucous, "Ah, let's," that hyperkinetic activity.  And instead Fred Rogers was, "Now boys and girls, let's have a moment where we're quiet and where we're talking and where we're looking at things."  And he could just really bring the energy and tone of things down.  And where kids, you would think, would feel that that was too old-fashioned for them, but instead, they'd go and sit politely, star at the screen and, you know, really, he could, he was mesmerizing in that way.  So he was very, very special.  During that time, I met so many--my years at public, in PBS--I was there until '96' [1996], and that I just met so many phenomenal people.  You know, everybody from the dancer, Mikhail Baryshnikov to Henry Hampton, the producer of "Eyes on the Prize."
Story_ID: 39606
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna talk about him a minute, but I just, I was trying to think if Bob Keeshan ever went to public television from "Captain Kangaroo"?
Speaker 2: Bob Keeshan did not, he did--
Speaker 1: Did they do that?
Speaker 2: --some programs, he did some things, and I did, I've had the, you know, good fortune to meet him at one point too.  But he didn't do, he did some specials, I wanna think, but he did not have a regular program on.  Another person who you might find interesting, you may remember, recall, had a program for children on public television was Lavar Burton.  After his acclaimed role in "Roots" that he then also still, he worked on "Star Trek" as Jordy, and was quite well known publicly for that role, but that he also could, worked for public television as himself for "Reading Rainbow."
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And that that had started as a summer series to keep children interested in books through the summer months.
Speaker 1: Another African American host was the woman that was the host of "Where in the World is Carmen San Diego."
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: What is here name?  I know she used to work with--
Speaker 2: Lynn Thigpen.
Speaker 1: --the "Electric Company."  Yeah, she was on the Electric Company too with--
Speaker 2: Yes, Lynn Thigpen.
Speaker 1: --Morgan Freeman at one time, yeah.
Speaker 2: And I was, "Where in the World is Carmen San Diego" is a series that I'm quite proud of too and because when I was, first became the Czarina of, and became head of programming at PBS, the press took me to task for a comment that I made when they said, well, you know, what, how would you--what kinds of programs will you air on PBS under your leadership?  And I said, a broad range of programs.  And they said, drama?  And I said, yes, of course, that public television should have drama.  And I said, I can't think of a format that should be excluded, although everything should retain the value and the importance of public television which the underlying value and importance is that we're there to inspire, to enrich and to educate.  So at its heart, it should educate.  But that means that you do that broadly, you do it in what forms that are entertaining.  And they said, well, but will you ever air a game show?  And I said, if it met that criteria, yes.  And they said, you'd air a game show?  I said, yes, I would air a game show.  So that became the headline, "New PBS head will air game shows."  So someone pitched me a game show, and that game show was "Where in the World is Carmen San Diego?" and I said, yes, this is exactly what I was talking about.  It had been a very successful videogame and teaching geography, and I thought absolutely.  And, yes, Lynn Thigpen was the host for it.
Story_ID: 39607
Speaker 1: Okay, now--and she did an excellent job.  In 1994, you were recognized by the "Hollywood Reporter" as one of the Power 50, 50 most influential women in entertainment.  So, now, was this--did you pay much attention to that or did you (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Well, I was, have always been very pleased to receive awards and notices.  And it was great to be noted as one of the Power 50 by the Hollywood Reporter and to also be listed, along with, I think, Bill Cosby and a handful of other people as one of the "101 Most Powerful People in Entertainment" one year.  So those accolades were terrific, but what was always most important to me was trying to make sure that we were making public television stronger and seeing it grow.  So that was always my focus and the most important thing to me.
Story_ID: 39608
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we didn't mention Bill Moyers, I think, he was around in those--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --days and very much an important of public broadcasting--
Speaker 2: Bill Moyers has always been a very important part of public television.  And he, himself, was present back, he was on the staff of [President] Lyndon Johnson back in 1967 when the Public Broadcasting Act was signed.  And Bill then has had several very well regarded programs on public television, including one that was a series really a relatively quiet series where he interviewed well-known people.  And one of the, one of his most well known of those interviews was the one that he did with the, I'm blanking on the writer's name right now.
Speaker 1: The philosopher and the writer, the--
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: --author of "The Hero with a Thousand Faces."
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: I'm blanking on his name too, but I can see him.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And I can, right, that's what I was about to say, yeah.  Good time to pause, and I can figure out his name.
Story_ID: 39609
Speaker 1: Yes, was very definitely an important figure in public television and always has been.  And in his series with Joseph, the noted author, Joseph Campbell, was one of the most successful.  It was one of those, as they call it, a sleeper, in the sense that it wasn't something that was highly publicized, and it was never, it was a ratings hit, but it was something that so many people would request and we'd repeat over and over again.  And people would just flock to that series, of just thoughtful conversations.  Moyers was an incredible interviewer, very, very good journalist in that way.
Speaker 2: Right, and Campbell was the--
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: --discussing, you know, myth, and how it's used to tell stories and how people, what the power of myth is.  And he's really, you know, he comes, he came to us from the Skywalker Ranch, right out of, George Lucas, I mean--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: --Lucas' ranch.  It was a very interesting series.
Speaker 1: Well, it was George Lucas, attributes Joseph Campbell's work as an influence in his work, in creating "Star Wars."
Story_ID: 39610
Speaker 1: So it was, but I just met so many remarkable people throughout my years in public television.  So I was there for, at PBS [Public Broadcasting Service], until 19--roughly 1995.  And then I left PBS.  There was a change in the administration of PBS.  The president of PBS had been, during the time that I was there, was Bruce Christensen.  And the chairman of the board of PBS was Ted Capener and both from Utah, both Mormons from Utah and just both delightful and incredibly supportive people.  And both were so supportive during a time when one of my decisions caused great controversy throughout the entirety of public television.  And that was my decision to air a program called "Tongues Untied" by an African American man who passed away years ago, but a filmmaker, a talented filmmaker--
Speaker 2: That's--
Speaker 1: --Marlon Riggs from the Bay area.  And Marlon Riggs was a gay filmmaker who had, who was HIV [Human Immunodeficiency Virus] positive, who later died from AIDS [Autoimmune Deficiency Syndrome].  And Marlon wanted to make a film about the ways in which the African American community, in particular, treated men who were gay and wanted to make a film about his experience of growing up gay in this time period when being gay was so reviled.  And "Tongues Untied" is that work, and it was a strong work.  It had some nudity in it.  It had some strong language in it, but this was at a time when many television programs had similar examples of nudity or strong language.  And there was no FCC prohibition against the use of that language.  So it was not illegal or, but it was a matter of judgment and taste and that we decided that the program was appropriate to air and would air in an unedited version, but with an advisory at the beginning to make sure it was--and would air within the safe harbor of very late night to make sure that then parents would have the opportunity to not have children screen the program, if, you know, particularly, if families felt that it was inappropriate for them.
Story_ID: 39611
Speaker 1: This past week, there was some sort of FCC [Federal Communications Committee]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --ruling on an episode of NYPD Blue that was aired in the '90s [1990s] during the period of time with a nude scene.  I mean it's taken this long to even to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: --deal with that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --for the FCC to even make judgments about some of these cases.  But it was, it, it was a different time period and that part of what was, so that you had programs like public television had aired "I Claudius."  There were a number of dramas.  We had a number of dramas from the BBC that had had nudity, had made references to sex.  But the difference now was that we were also in the midst of the culture wars.  Our country was at a, really being sort of ripped apart with discussions in political campaigns about what was appropriate and inappropriate.  So that the Corcoran Gallery, for example, had shown the Mapplethorpe [Robert Mapplethorpe] photographs.  And that had led to a change in the leadership at Corcoran.  There were just, the NEA [National Endowment for the Arts] had supported a group of artists and one woman had rolled nude in chocolate, and so (laughter), as a part of her performance art.  And it was thought that this, that the NEA should be eliminated from federal funding because of this.  So it was a time when public institutions were being criticized for airing works of art or for showing works of art that might have nudity or just be out of what one group would determine was truly art.
Story_ID: 39612
Speaker 1: Remember Dred Scott in Chicago [Illinois] that had the flag on the floor that you'd have to sign the complaint--
Speaker 2: Walk on, right.
Speaker 1: --about it, you had to walk on it to sign the complaint.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, you know--
Speaker 2: Right, so we then had this really tough decision to make, you know.  It's like where were we in this and was this program, should I air this program or not?  And I decided that I would air the program.  And it was a tough decision because I knew that it would fall on the shoulders and be the responsibility of our stations across the country, that if I made the decision, if I had said, "No, I'm not going to air the program," then that would, the decision, the heat would be on me of having made that decision.  But I knew that in making this decision to air it, not only was I going to take the heat for airing the program, but our stations would now have to make the decision, will they, in turn air the program.  And it was a proud moment for me of the kind of courage of public broadcasters in places where, boy, did they, you know, were under so much--people threatened to take away their, all of their state funding, contributors said, I'm never going to give you another penny.  So in Georgia, the manager, long-standing manager of the station there, had to go before his state legislature to defend his station's decision to air the program.  But all across the country, public broadcasters stood up and carried this program.  And I just felt that it was really, that as an African American person who had then fought in the Civil Rights Movement, I participated in the Civil Rights Movement because I genuinely believed that people should be treated fairly and equally, that there was no way that I was then going to participate in something and say, well, no, it's okay for us to air a program with nudity in it when it's only women, but this is now gay people.  There's no way I was going to treat people differently because they were gay or lesbian.  And so I made the decision to air the program, and I was absolutely so, so honored and proud that other, all of these leaders of public broadcasting, including the board chair and the president of PBS, stood with me.
Story_ID: 39613
Speaker 1: Now, did it air on Independent Lens?  Was that the show or--
Speaker 2: It aired as a part of POV.
Speaker 1: Okay, POV, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, it aired as a part of POV.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So that program aired and we continued to air other provocative programs and "American Playhouse" did "Tales of the City" in San Francisco.  We did a program that was about, sort of the, a post-apocalyptic--this was our, the concerns about nuclear holocaust.  And we aired a program the day after that was, you know, had that kind of sense about it.  Now, Kevin Bacon appeared in "Lemon Sky."  So just a number of works by great playwrights and others.  And then in 1995 when, again, the culture wars were still raging and a new president comes into PBS and feels that he would really like to consider the programming in a very different way.  And I just felt that that's not likely to work, that I'd been given, as the Chief Program Executive, I had been given all of this freedom to make the program decisions entirely.  And now, the new president wants those decisions to be his really, you know, where I would be an advisor to him in many ways, with him making the final decisions.  And I thought that that's a sign of a lack of trust and a sign that it's time for me to move on.
Story_ID: 39614
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I thought, so I resigned from PBS, and it was--and my deputy director resigned with me, a terrific guy from Pennsylvania who I had hired, resigned with me and some of the other staff.  And I thought, okay, what now?  I thought it was a good time to think about and reflect back on my career up to that point and to think about what I wanted to do next.  And I was offered a number of really wonderful jobs in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] with commercial broadcasting, based upon my PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] years.  But I thought, let's just pause for a minute.  Let's think about this.  Let's think about, what next?  And I went back to how I had come to media in the first place and remembered, you know, getting on the plane in Tanzania to go to film school and said, "What happened to that woman?"  What happened to the Jennifer Lawson that wanted to make the films about Africa and about the Africa that I was experiencing when I was in Tanzania?  That's the person who got on the plane.  What happened to the film about Africa?  And I thought, okay, that's, that's a starting point.  And it was, I had realized that I had made that when I had left the screenwriting to go to the Film Fund, that I had, in fact, become a person behind a desk.  You know, not that I was complaining.  I'd had a wonderful career being behind the desk, but that, what happened to the producer?  What happened to the person and did I have that ability even to do that again.  So I thought that I owed it to myself to produce.  And the first thing that came to mind then was to produce a series about Africa that would try to defy some of the stereotypes about Africa.  So it would be, so the series that I envisioned would have a city in every episode because I was tired of people, that when I'd say I lived in Africa, they sort of say, well, where did your plane land?  Or (laughter), did you live in a hut?  So I wanted, I felt every episode, should be about different parts of the continent and every episode should have a city, an urban scene in it and that every, that every episode should try to connect the history of the continent with also the great variety so that people would understand that we're not talking about Africa is too big and too incredibly, geographically, culturally diverse to be thought of as one place.  You know, people say, oh, you went to Africa as if you're saying you went to Texas.   And how can you say that about a place that--and their, you know, their thought immediately comes, oh, the jungle and not realizing that the, what we call the jungle or a Rainforest is just limited to one part of Africa.  It does not cover the entire continent.  And it, and you would think that people would get that when, at that time, they're, you've just come out of the awful stories of starvation because of horrible droughts, the Sahelian droughts, and people would, you know, you think, how can they think about drought in the Sahel and then they are still talking about the jungle.
Story_ID: 39615
Speaker 1: Yeah, in 1995 I think there was a tremendous drought in the Sudan--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and it was on the news and people were going there to raise--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --money to feed them.
Speaker 2: Right, so you talk on one hand about people starving the death in Ethiopia or in, you know, Mali and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Somalia, yeah, Somalia in '95 [1995], Somalia, yeah.
Speaker 2: So you have this, so there was this huge disconnect.  And so I thought, that's what I will do.  I'll start designing this series on Africa, and that if I am fortunate enough, I'll produce it.  And, you know, otherwise, then I'll figure out the next step at that point.  But first, I'll work on this.
Speaker 1: So what was the first step on this project?
Speaker 2: The first step on it for me was doing the research, was beginning to say, what is it, what is the story that I want to tell?  And it was just writing tons and tons of notes, just having, filling up, you know, notebook after notebook with, okay, what is it that I would say?  What would I tell and then beginning to take those pages and say what's, what's the organizing principle here?  What organizers?  So, what makes it a coherent series?  And I then began to realize that what I wanted was a tapestry in many ways.  I wanted the history woven through each episode.  I wanted the geography in each, and so I then drew a map and started thinking which, how many episodes did you need to tell the story of the continent through its geography?  And with that, once I had that structure, I felt that the most--and I could attach history to those geographic regions, I thought, now, there's the need for story because all of this is information.  What are the stories?  And I thought that the essential thing would be that each episode had to have people's stories and had to be driven by at least two or three stories of individuals with whom we will stay with long enough that you can identify with them.
Story_ID: 39616
Speaker 1: Contemporary people that are--
Speaker 2: Contemporary people, and not experts.  So not experts weighing in and telling you about the region, but instead, following people.  And that to get through, later when, after we'd hired a very talented producer, a line producer, we began to talk about how it would be ideal if the person story involved a journey because through their journey, we would have a legitimate reason to move about in that region; so if the person's personal story naturally took us.  So we sent--by then I had, after, so I started with just my working totally alone and developing the concept.  And after I had fully developed the concept, I then began to seek partners to, to help make this a reality because I knew the series that I wanted to make would be shot in film because I knew I had been to, when I was at PBS, I had gone to Japan and seen high definition television and knew that eventually high definition, HD TV, would be here.  And I didn't want my series made in the quality of video that was available at that time because if it were made in that quality video, it would never look as stellar as high definition could look.  But in film, it could capture the details of film and then and transfer to video, still retain into digital media, still retain at least that visual quality.  And I felt that Africa deserved the most beautiful, the best film quality because the Africa that I knew and cared so deeply about was a place of just incredible physical beauty as well.  So I wanted that for this series and just felt that, that what I was embarking upon was like saying, I wanna build a 747, and I want it to have great jets to, with the best engines.  So, and I kept thinking, well, okay, that if you can then be the one that designs the 747, maybe you can find the Boeings of the world to partner with.  So I thought about that, and that led me to New York to meet with WNET, the producers of the "Nature" series.
Story_ID: 39617
Speaker 1: And I sent them the outline for the series that I had developed and asked if they would consider partnering with me on it.  And I took Amtrak up to meet with them and went and met with the executive producer for the series, who I didn't know.  So, and I liked the fact that I didn't know him.  His predecessor had been the guy who had dubbed me the Czarina.  So if it had been during the time that George Page were there, I would have been able to, you know, sort of see someone who was a familiar face and would have known me from my sort of PBS career.  But the person who was there, Fred Kaufman, we didn't know each other.  So this was now going to be strictly on the basis of this "does my script, do the materials that I have sent him, will they pass muster with Fred?"  And so I raised the question and Fred said, "We'd be delighted to partner with you."  So now, with my first partner in hand, then we then went to "National Geographic," and I'll never forget the meeting that we had where Fred and I had, we went--and we thought that we would be meeting at "National Geographic" with one person.  And so we had set up this appointment to come and pitch the idea to "National Geographic."  So for the pitch meeting, Fred and I sort of did our rehearsal, and we, you're always a little nervous about this because so much is riding on this.  We want them to invest millions of dollars in this, and so we're nervous about it.  And we are thinking we're meeting with Tim Kelly, who was the head of television.  And the person, the staff person say, you know, they're, the meeting is in here.  You'll, just come here.  And they opened this door, and it's like, [gasp sound] there were about fourteen people sitting around a huge boardroom table.  And Tim welcomes us, introduces us and turns the floor over to us to pitch the idea.  And Fred and I had agreed that I would do the pitching since it was my concept.  And so here I am now (laughter), thinking that I'm meeting with one person and having to present to the fourteen people that were there.  And before we left the building, we finished our pitch, and we were now getting ready to head out.  And one of the people who was in the meeting, comes out of the meeting and comes up to me and introduces himself and says, "Hi, you don't know me, but I just want to say you just blew us away, you just blew us away.  This is fabulous.  And I hope I get to work on this too."  You know, and so within a few days, we got the call from "National Geographic" that they, indeed, were onboard as well.  So with this partnership between my little company "Magic Box Media Works," which operated out of my home office on the second floor here in my home, that I partnered with "National Geographic" and WNET's "Nature" series, and we then secured the necessary financing, hired a very skilled company out of the U.K. that had done a lot of shooting throughout Africa, and produced a series that we then named "Africa."
Story_ID: 39618
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is in 19--so how long did it take to go from the partnership you established to the completed product?
Speaker 2: I started working solo on this project in 1995, yeah.  So 1996, really, I started doing the research, that I linked up with WNET.  We linked up around 1998, and that three years later, the series premiered on September 9, 2001.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we had the most incredible good fortune all the way up through that point, went to the press tour.  It was very, very well received there at the press tour; went to, took it to the PBS annual meeting, and the stations just, you know, really responded extremely well to it there.  "National Geographic" published a companion book and we had music, CD.  "National Geographic" and PBS both agreed that each of their organizations wanted to release the DVDs, VHS copies.  So all was going incredibly well, and the press for it was just tremendous.  We were invited by Oprah Winfrey, and when I say "we," one of the women who appears in the last episode, a young woman, Calise Wabonda (ph.) who appears in the final episode, a young South African woman, we were invited by Oprah Winfrey to appear on her program.  And Oprah had called me here at home twice to say that she thought--she had seen the series, had screened it twice, thought it was phenomenal and that she wanted to make it a household item in every home in America.  So we were to appear on her program on September 12, 2001.
Story_ID: 39619
Speaker 1: And as a part of then the media tour that we were making, we were in New York on September 11, 2001 to appear on the Bryant Gumble Show.  And we were in Bryant Gumble's studio, just having come out of the Green Room to go into the studio to be interviewed by Bryant Gumble, where he paused us in the doorway to say, "Wait, I'm getting, I have to do a piece about a breaking news item.  A plane has flown into the World Trade Center."  And he says, hold just a moment.  Let me cover that, and then we'll, you know, we'll do this segment.  And so we're standing there, and that's, and this continues and we're having little chit chat outside of the studio while he continues to, you know, cover this breaking news story.  And we're all watching the monitor of the plane in the World Trade Center when the second plane strikes.  And we all realized, oh, my God.  This is something totally different.  This is not an accident.  This is something totally different.  And it became a very surrealistic moment, you know, from then the next forty eight hours.  It was almost as if I was living in a movie because to walk out on 5th Avenue, out of his studio where--and there was a car waiting to take us to the airport to go to Chicago [Illinois].  But, of course, all of the airports were closed.  Everything, you know, people were running through the streets of New York [New York] now.  The driver wanted to know where should he drop us, and I then had to think for a moment, where--and I wanted to make sure that the woman from South Africa would be comfortable.  We had checked out of our hotels.  And so, and I suggested that she would go home with our publicist, with this young woman who lived right there in Midtown [New York, New York], and I would join them there later.  But first, I was going to go and see if I could check into my hotel again, the hotel that I had just checked out of.  You look down 5th Avenue, you could see the towers, the smoke and everything coming from the towers, the smell of the burning was, you know, in the air.  And I now had to also be concerned about my son, my older son, he and his wife, lived on the Lower East Side and worked downtown Manhattan.  And cell phones, my cell phone wouldn't work.  The phone didn't work, phone booth, no phone service.  So it's like, and our younger son, my husband was in Toronto [Canada] as he always is at that time of year, attending the Toronto Film Festival.  And we had decided that since he would be returning the next night, and since it was only going to be for one night, that we could leave our teenage son home alone, that he would go to school and that he would just return to be home alone.  And now, I was hearing reports that D.C. was also under attack.  So it was this, you know, really, really unrealistic time for us.
Story_ID: 39620
Speaker 1: All right, so, this 9-11.
Speaker 2: So, September 11th, I was New York [New York] and that the series had premiered the previous Sunday and had excellent ratings and had gotten, the broadcast had gotten off to a great start.  But now, then that all went into limbo.  And, of course, that was the least of my concerns.  First, was the safety of my family and then just thinking about our nation, our world and what was happening.  And eventually, I was able to make my way back to D.C., and we never appeared on the Oprah Winfrey Show.  So the series was never promoted there.  It was included, she had done a very lovely piece about me in "O Magazine."  And the series then did quite well, but the interruption around September 11th meant that it really did best on its repeat airing.  And, but it continued to air in different places, both on public television as well as on the "National Geographic" channel.  There were articles that I then wrote.  I participated in writing articles for "Traveler Magazine" for "National Geographic Traveler."  So this whole experience ended up with me having realized some of my sort of, you know, the things as a child you connect to, but you never think that you're going to have that level of personal involvement.  So, for me, as a child who used to treasure those old copies of "National Geographic" magazine that I'd get in second-hand stores often, that it was now just such a delight to me that I would then end up with an article in one of the "National Geographic," you know, publications and on their, and having contributions on the "National Geographic's" website and, of course, this series done with "National Geographic."
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did, so the series aired again--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and did school boards pick up on it?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes, and the series has sold in over 130 countries.  So it was just, it's had its success, (laughter) and one of the funniest moments, I just hate now that I didn't take picture of it, was that once on a vacation to Hawaii about a year later, probably around 2002, was in Hawaii.  And I go into Costco in Hawaii on the Island of Maui, and there is a huge display that's right in the doorway, a pyramid made up of copies of the DVDs of my series.  And it was a special promotion.  And the series was being sold there in Costco.
Speaker 1: That's something to see when you see it--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --out like that.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  So it's like, see, as if one of your children has somehow gone away and that now appear (laughter) somewhere.  And it just makes you realize the many places and possibilities that your work goes in that respect.  So, the series did well in that respect and that it won a couple of awards.  But I don't think it got the kind of attention that it deserved because, of course, the majority of all awards during that time period went to programs related to 911.
Story_ID: 39621
Speaker 1: Now, who was the narrator for your series?
Speaker 2: Joe Morton, the actor Joe Morton of "Brother From Another Planet" and--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.  And we auditioned a number of people and we just felt that Joe was the absolute right person for it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very definitely the right person for it.  And that we used, for the soundtrack, we had an original composition by a British musician, David Poore who then wove in music into the original composition, wove in--we purchased the right to a number of songs by African musicians from the different regions that we covered, and that that music--I think that David Poore did an excellent job of doing the seamless integration of the music from the different regions of Africa into the overall composition for the series.
Story_ID: 39622
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a moment from the series that you, you know, that stands out as your favorite part of--
Speaker 2: Oh, there are several pieces that I absolutely love, but my favorite is the first, the introduction, the beginning of the last episode.  It's the beginning of the first episode and the beginning of the very last episode.  And it begins, the first episode is one where we introduce the notion and give a, set the tone of the series, and we introduce the notion that we are all Africans, that the people and talk about the fact of DNA evidence that shows that there is greater diversity in terms of our genes among people in Africa, even in the same country within Africa, than there is among somebody like me and a Scandinavian person, that we're, that we are more genetically, you know, if you get past the superficial notions of how we appear in terms of skin color or hair texture, that we're more genetically connected than people who might even live three miles from each other in some parts of Africa.
Speaker 1: Right, Africa being the birthplace of human beings.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, exactly, yeah.  And how it's, that the scientific evidence suggests that if you go back far enough of the history of humankind, that the first and only place that there were human beings was Africa and that it was waves of migrations of people from out of Africa that then peopled the world.  And so within that sense, we are all Africans.
Speaker 1: Is the series still used by--
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And still in demand.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 39623
Speaker 1: Now, there are, how does it compare with Ali Missouri's Africa Series or with the series by Basil Davidson and some of the other--Henry Louis Gates' trip to Africa.
Speaker 2: Yes, right, and I don't know because I haven't, I, you know, don't dwell in the past in the sense so that I also don't go and try to get, you know, comparable sales or comparable figures to see how those series are doing or have done.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, okay, so now, did this result, did the African series result in more projects from Magic Box?
Speaker 2: I, after I did the Africa series, then I ended up, began starting to prepare to do other pieces.  And it was at that time that I then--so I, the short answer is I did some individual pieces through Magic Box, but I did not do another series and that I worked as a consultant to a number of other projects.  But I didn't produce another series.  And instead, I thought about retiring and that, at that point, I spent a little too much time watching television here and beginning to worry about WHUT and whether it would survive on air.
Story_ID: 39624
Speaker 1: Okay, that's Howard University television.
Speaker 2: That's Howard University's local public television station.  And through my consulting work, I was very well aware of the changes in, that were taking place in television in general with the digital transition.  And so I worried that Howard University would lose its station.  And I thought, what a pity because this is the only public television, only non-commercial television license held by a historically black college.  And to have Howard University lose the station would be such a pity to me.  So I thought that I could just assist them as a volunteer or as a consultant to raise the money necessary to get the equipment to transform the station to digital.  And when I went and met with them, I discovered they did not have a general manager and had not had one for eight years.  They had had just a short period, Adam Clayton Powell III for nine months had served as their general manager.  But he then had left and for 18 months, it was then under-
Story_ID: 39625
Speaker 1: So I then thought that, oh, ghee, I could, I can help do this.  I can help WHUT make the transition to digital media.
Speaker 2: Now, this transition is gonna, I assume, cost a lot of money?
Speaker 1: Yes, the transition, I thought that this would cost probably three to four million dollars.  But having raised millions of dollars for a TV series, having worked with millions of dollars in my job at CBP and then been responsible for over $130 million, you know, during the time that I was PBS, the budget there, I felt, I could help them do this.  I could help them, and, particularly, since, as a consultant--during my time with "Magic Box," I worked as a consultant to a number of public television stations.  So I was aware of some of the places where one might be able to get funds as well.  So I thought, gee, I could do this, and I felt that that was a community service effort that I could do and that I would still be free to pursue my film projects and things.  So I then went over, and when I discovered they didn't have a general manager, you can't raise money and say, please send the money to this place.  They don't have anybody in charge there, but I'm sure it'll be used well.  And so I thought, well, two years, two years, I'll give it two years.  So in 2005, I became then the--really, 2004, I became the general manager of WHUT.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I then immediately set out to secure the funds to, for its digital transition.  I'm pleased to say that was fully done, and in addition to transforming the broadcast side of it, its broadcast operations to digital, then I also secured money to fully transform its studio facilities as well, including helping to raise money to put a new, repair the roof, put in new lighting systems in the studio facilities and also to put in a new suite of cameras, editing rooms to make it a fully digital, state-of-art facility.
Speaker 2: Okay, and here it stands today as a digital facility.
Speaker 1: Right.  It took me longer than I thought to, what was to be a two-year project, became a six-year project (laughter).
Story_ID: 39626
Speaker 1: Okay, in terms of the programming, what programming changes were you able to initiate at WHUT?
Speaker 2: We were, we'd started doing more local programs, and we were able to do, we did--started a series at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and that had, they had actually started that series before I came onboard.  But we devised a means where we're able to make more programs within the context of the series.  And then we also started doing local specials about events, people, places around Washington [D.C.].  And we began, became more active in community engagement as well.  So the station, to this day, has a community cinema program where the station shows films from its Independent Lens series at that place I was mentioning, at "Bus Boys and Poets."  So the station shows a film at "Bus Boys and Poets," has a panel discussion and engages the community.  And that gives a different face to WHUT and has had events in the studios itself.  One of the other activities that I initiated while I was there that I'm most proud of is that we decided to become actively engaged with the Anacostia community, with children's activities.  So we ran a summer camp, a reading camp for kids to improve student literary over the summers.  And this was a camp targeted towards four-year olds, and it was held in a charter school, Howard Road Academy, in Anacostia, and then it later expanded to a second site there.  But it was, it just made me enormously proud that we then would have the TV station, come across town and then work with kids and bring the kids sometimes to the studio so that they then understood what television was about.  And we did the same with another group of children, with a group, Martha's Table, which caters to homeless families.  And I just thought that we were beginning to model what a TV station could be like and could do if it's community oriented.  And I think that it was a shot in the arm for the staff.  I feel that it united us as staff in a very different way.  When we would then break out of our roles of general manager and camera person or operations director or programming director, and there we all were with the program director now in the costume for the character "Super Y," and that we're all serving cupcakes to kids or (laughter), talk, having a workshop for parents about the importance of student literacy and giving out free DVDs for parents.
Story_ID: 39627
Speaker 1: That seems like, I've often thought about what it would be like to have a black public television station and what kind of things, you know, I would do if I was in charge of one or, and, but I also thought about what kind of support could we get.  And how does the community support you?
Speaker 2: The, it's really interesting because we, that's still, I think, a work in progress.  We started, another series that we started was one called "Let's Talk Education" where we partnered with the Dean of Howard University School of Education and then brought in people from the, D.C's [Washington, D.C.] board of education and others to talk about educational issues.  Here in D.C., that's a major topic and was a rather contentious issue, particularly under our previous school chancellor, Michelle Ree.  So we thought that this could be a good way of our engaging with the community and showing how television, particularly a public TV station, could create a forum where people could come together.  So we'd invite people to come to the studios for the taping of the program.  And then afterwards, we'd have a reception so that people could actually network and mingle, and that we had some individuals who then participated in those sessions, who would then contribute and become members of the station.  The majority of our support still came from viewers who loved the programming.  And that was first and foremost, it was the people who said, oh, I love WHUT because you showed the "Charlie Rose Show," you showed "BBC News."  These are the things you show and we love it for these reasons.  So they gave for that.  So you had one group of people who contributed for that.  You had another group who then contributed because of the things that we were doing in the community and a smaller group of dedicated Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] alumni, who loved the fact that Howard had its television station.
Story_ID: 39628
Speaker 1: Okay, well, it seems like you did a lot to support WHUT in those six years.  But, now, you left in 2010--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --so just two years ago.
Speaker 2: And right before I left, it was the, in terms of contributions, one of the nicest things happened, which was that we got an anonymous donation of over $100,000--
Speaker 1: That's great.
Speaker 2: --which we used to then set up a, I insisted that we use that to set up an endowment that could support then local programming and help to foster local programming on into the future.
Speaker 1: Is there a connection or was there a connection when you were there between the School of Communications at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and WHUT in terms of producing the work of independent, producer student work and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: The, there--there was a connection.  It's not so much what we did is because the student work wasn't necessarily appropriate for broadcast.  We would occasionally package together the best of student work and have a showcase of that.  So we would do that.  They have an award, an annual award, the Paul Robeson Award.  And we would put together some of the really wonderful works that would come out of that and then air those.  But that would be something that you could only do once a year.  It wasn't as though you could really do something on a regular basis.  Instead, what we did, is--what I did, is that Howard has an internal network.  We had a channel that we could create and that I invited the students to create their own channel with that.  And they had this, what they called the "Spotlight Network."  And so student producers then--and the Spotlight student organization has existed for years in, where students from the School of Communications and from all over the university, then are invited to come and work and to have access.  We had special equipment reserved for them to use.  So they're invited to come and participate in the life of the station.  So you have students from business and law as well as from communications.  But we created then this Spotlight Network where their works could then air on this closed circuit.  And we felt that, my notion was that as they perfect their skills, then we could begin to pull some of the best of that material or the best, the most talented kids, we could begin to use also for broadcast.  And we did.  There was one young man who we had hosting, helping to host the commencement program.  And he's now an on-air person in Columbus, Georgia.
Story_ID: 39629
Speaker 1: Okay, so I know you had committed yourself for two years--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --stayed for six years.
Speaker 2: Stayed for six years.
Speaker 1: But, so, but how did you finally leave WHUT?
Speaker 2: I resigned, I retired really.  I retired from WHUT, and I was planning to retire and go back to that same moment that I had before creating the "Africa" series, which would go back to, sort of saying, okay, who am I now and what would I do with the skills and abilities that I have?  And just at the point that I was beginning to think of those things, I was offered the position at the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.  And I thought, well, this is interesting.  I'll be going full circle and going back to the place that I started formally in public broadcasting, back to CPB.  And so now, I'm head, again, of the television program fund.  The budget is larger.  Back then it was $43 million.  Now, it's roughly $75 million.  But I thought that it would be--I agreed, and again, I was thinking, two years.  I thought before truly retiring, that it, I could play this role in public broadcasting and perhaps this would be a useful one because with public broadcasting being so under assault, it might be very difficult for them to fill this position.  The position had been vacant for a while, and I think it's a challenge to get talented people to move to Washington [Washington, D.C.], to an agency where, you know, a presidential candidate like Mitt Romney says, I'm going to, you know, stop funding public broadcasting.  So it's not a place for somebody who's seeking job security.  And I'm at a stage in my career where I'm not trying to build a career or seeking job security, I thought, this could be a role that I could play, particularly, since I know so many of the people, you know, the--whether it's the general managers at the stations or the people at PBS, most of the people in the programming arena at PBS are people that I hired when I was there.  So we have wonderfully, collegial relationships, and now we're able to fund a wealth of programs together, and I really enjoy that.  We, Skip Gates [Henry Louis Gates], who you mentioned earlier who did "Wonders of the African World" is now, has done two seasons of "Finding Your Roots," a series that uses DNA evidence and genealogy studies to look at aspects of American history.  Stanley Nelson has done, who I met years ago when he was an independent and had done a short film on Madame C.J. Walker, did a wonderful job of, on the "Freedom Riders" and the "Freedom Rides."
Speaker 1: I saw that and--go ahead, go on, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yes, no, there are several, so it's, I feel quite rewarded by the work that I do in being able to support, again, such a wealth of talented producers.
Story_ID: 39630
Speaker 1: Okay, it seems one disturbing thing about public television this year is that "Nature" is no longer on Sunday nights, at least not where I am.  So I don't know.  Is that a--
Speaker 2: It was a deliberate move.  It was, it was deliberate that they moved it to have more of a science and nature evening.  And so it has been moved to Wednesday nights in some places, in most places so that they would have a dedicated night.  And so it airs, along with NOVA and that these are things that, and so far, the viewing then has increased as a result of that and that Sunday nights then was given over to "Masterpiece" and "Masterpiece Classics," and that has gone incredibly well with the success of "Downton Abbey."
Story_ID: 39631
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  I miss "Nature" on Sunday, but I'm probably the only one, I guess, that does.  What's in the future for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting?
Speaker 2: They're, currently, there are plans afoot to do a wide range of things.  First and foremost, I think on the television side, there will always be that commitment to quality programs.  So and we're looking at future seasons of "Nature," "NOVA," other, you know, first-rate programs like that.  We're always seeking to increase the diversity of the programs there so that I spend a lot of my time meeting with young producers who are Latino, Asian American, African American and others.  The African American, there's a producer, Jackie Jones, who's finishing up.  They just, they're finishing up a series called "D.C. Met."  That's about the trials and tribulations of a public school here that's designed for kids who are most at risk of dropping out of school.  And they're doing, it's one that they've been doing.  They actually have their production offices at WHUT.  So that's a series that's in production now.  A range of other programs like that, and that one of the, my area, digital video content, includes looking at apps, it includes looking at games and material for iPads and other platforms.  And so that's something that I'm very excited about.  And that's another aspect of my work that I really like, which is that I'm always being encouraged within my career to--and I hope it's something that I'll continue to do for the rest of my life, to keep learning, is to stay abreast of the latest technologies, to think about, to spend time wondering how would "Nature" look on an iPad and what would you do differently if you were putting "Nature" on the iPad.  So and I just, I really relish those conversations, going to conferences like "South by Southwest" where producers then are challenging themselves to think about what is the next generation of media and how do we meld what happens on the big screen with what happens on the mobile platforms and how can you--can you start a story on television as "Electric Company" now does, and then have the next part of it take place on a mobile platform where kids can then go on and interact and learn through this program--they have "Prankster Planet," and then go back to the broadcast for the next episode.
Story_ID: 39632
Speaker 1: Yes, you were telling me about something you used to do at WHUT.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was, when I was at WHUT and serving as general manager, I had the staff copy me on all mail that we got from viewers.  If someone wrote a letter, I wanted to see it.  I signed, I personally signed every letter that we got for donations.  I didn't want the impersonal touch of them, people getting a form letter back.  But if a viewer sent a letter to us and sent a contribution and said that they really enjoyed watching this particular program, I wanted to personally respond and say, I'm glad you liked that program, and if you like this program, perhaps you'll like this one as well, and it'll be coming up, you know, at a certain period of time.  And I felt that that personal touch was, was really important.  But it was also fascinating what it led to as well because I could then tell what people were watching, what their interests were.  There was a group of men who, that apparently meet here, a group of African American men who meet regularly to discuss different aspects of African American history.  And there was a program, we changed our schedule at one point (laughter), from one night of the week to another.  We had a program on, and they were upset because the schedule had changed.  And they were having their meetings, unbeknownst to us, they were having their meetings around the TV schedule so that they could watch the program together and discuss it.  And when we made the shift in our schedule, it threw them off, and they were upset about that and hence had written.  And I was fascinated.  Had I not read the mail in that way, I would never have known of their existence.  And it was just really interesting then to, I arranged a phone conversation and talked with one of the people from the group, to just find out, you know, what they were doing.  If I had remained at the station, I had the notion that I would have invited them in for a discussion there at the station.
Speaker 1: I'm always fascinated by the intellectual life of the black community, that remains hidden--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --from even me most of the time.  And when it peeks up, you get excited.  You say, well, people are gathering around and discussing things--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and thinking about these things all the time.
Speaker 2: So there's a group of men who gather to listen to Jazz and discuss Jazz, a group of African American men, and they meet regularly.  None of them are professional musicians or have backgrounds in music, and so they have a wide range of interests and professions.  But that's their collective interests and they meet to discuss Jazz.
Speaker 1: There're all kinds of groups--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to tell the truth.
Story_ID: 39633
Speaker 1: But, well, one thing, oh, one figure we didn't discuss, and we promised to discuss earlier was Henry Hampton, and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --"Eyes on the Prize."  I know it was just rebroadcast, I suppose during your tenure back at CBP, the corporation.  So, yeah, tell us about Henry Hampton.  When did you come across him and tell us something about him.
Speaker 2: Well, I first met Henry Hampton years ago before he truly became a filmmaker, when he was working with a church group in New York.  And, but I knew, I met Henry and learned of his real passion for telling these important stories of African American history and that years later, then it was really just wonderful to see that he had taken that passion, taken that focus that he could have on something.  And he had not only produced the landmark series, "Eyes on the Prize," which is a chronicling of the history of the Civil Rights Movement, but Henry did far more than create these--and "Eyes on the Prize" was really two series.  There's "Eyes I" and "Eyes II," the later years of the Movement.  He created that incredible series and a companion book and everything with it.  But he created really an institution during his lifetime that was "Blackside Productions."  And he brought together a talented group of producers, black, white, other races together, and that he created a production process that united them and that told the stories that ensured that the stories were told with an incredible accuracy because they'd have what they called "school" before they'd produce any episode.  He'd bring together the leading scholars and people related to the episode that they were telling with the filmmakers.  And the scholars would then give the producers a background in that subject matter.  And they worked together so closely, all of these producers worked together so closely that they still have really great bonds up to now.  And some of them have gone on to, from producing works like Orlando Bagwell, who did "Africans in America," to now heading a unit, "Just Films," a $50 million project at the film, at the Ford Foundation to Jackie Jones, the woman that I just mentioned who's doing the program for PBS that they are scattered all over the country and doing really incredible documentaries.  And the genesis of their work though in many ways goes back to Blackside Productions.
Speaker 1: Okay, I thought we'd--I know how we skipped over him (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, and he did a number of series.  Henry also did a series about contemporary Africa and that, unfortunately, was done at a point when his health was, he was really very, very ill.  He later died of cancer, but he was very ill at the time.  And so he wasn't able to give that series the kind of attention, the series on Africa called "Hopes on the Horizon."  It's little known because I think it just sort of passed quietly in the night as a TV series.  But it was really one where he was trying to tell good news stories about developments in Africa.
Story_ID: 39634
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now, we always ask this question.  So we'll ask it of you as well.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I have throughout my career been convinced that education is absolutely critical to all forms of progress for any people and that, so I see education as so absolutely important.  And I've worked in adult literacy.  I've worked in childhood literacy, and I see those as connected to, you know, my work in Civil Rights, and that it, I'm really concerned that somehow, we have not provided a kind of leadership in the cities and small towns across America to young people, to ensure that they would see the value of education in a similar way.  It was something that in my growing up in a segregated place and in a place that was, you know, working class, was not about wealth or anything.  But our families at that time seemed to understand the importance of education and that I just worry that now, we have far too many of our young men and women who, instead of going to school and using that as a fulcrum to growth, to careers and better future for their children, they end up out of school.  They end up turning to crime, and in prison.  It's just, we're losing too many people to those paths as opposed to more people on the path that would then lead towards greater stability for them and families and path forward.  So the, the number of people who end up being incarcerated and the downward spiral that that sets within a family is just alarming to me.  So I'm very concerned about the future of our young people and the kind of leadership that we provide or seem not to provide for them in tangible ways that could turn that around.
Story_ID: 39635
Speaker 1: Okay, when you look back on everything you've done to this point and all your many roles, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  I guess I don't, it's not something that I feel is for me to determine, that if I had done something in my life that was one of those, you know, incredible things like invented the, a vaccine or something, then I would certainly be able to point to that and say ah-hah, that was my legacy.  I don't feel that I can judge my accomplishments in that way because I don't feel that I've had an accomplish of that level, of that magnitude.  I would hope that through my life, I have done something positive and have made a contribution.  But I think it's for time to judge the value of those contributions.
Story_ID: 39636
Speaker 1: Okay, likewise, when you look over your career, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could do it again?
Speaker 2: No, using the information that I had at the point I was making all of those decisions, I'd do the exact same things over again.
Story_ID: 39637
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us something about your family.  Now, I know you have some children and you're married.  Tell us about your family.  Your--I know, in the previous session, we discussed the passing of your father who was a critical inspiration in your life, and I don't think we got to your mother--is your mother still living?
Speaker 2: My, my, no, my parents, my mother died when I was 13 years old.  So my mother died when I was a teenager, when I lived in Fairfield, Alabama, and I was just beginning high school at the time that my mother suddenly passed away from a heart attack.  And so, and that was one of the reasons that my father became even more of a sort of presence in my life, since that was the only parent for a while.  And my father then died when I was in my early twenties.  My father died back in 1977, I believe.  So I then, after, I have two brothers and I have a brother that lives in Atlanta, Georgia, an older brother and a younger brother who lives in Birmingham, Alabama.  My, I've married.  I've now been married for 30 years.  And I'm happily married to Anthony Gittons, and that my husband, Tony Gittons, is someone that I met through the Civil Rights Movement and that we were, worked together with Drum and Spear Press here in Washington [Washington, D.C.].  So back in the days when I was working with the bookstore and the publishing company, Tony was the head of the bookstore.  He was a student activist.  He, at Howard University [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and is known within the Howard community for his activism there.  And he is also featured in "Eyes on the Prize" because of that.  And we have then two sons.  We have a son, our older son, Kye Gittons, works in New York as a webmaster.  And he's the father of our grandchild, who's a little boy from Ethiopia and that he and his wife then adopted him from Ethiopia.  And so that part of our family is there in New York.  And our younger son, Zachery Gittons is currently in Silicon Valley because he has created, he's a young entrepreneur who created a company.  And he's currently out in a tech incubator.
Story_ID: 39638
Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a kind and generous person and a person who has been generous with my time for, particularly for people who are learning and who are attempting to come up in the media field or in other, any other area where I might have useful information.  So I'm pleased when I can be helpful to others in that way, and I'd like to be remembered as a person who then did answer the phone calls, returned them and shared information when there was information to be shared.
