Story_ID: 436409
Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gines and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Will you please state your name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, Larry Paul Langford [HistoryMaker Larry Langford], L-A-N-G-F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Three, seventeen, forty-eight [March 17, 1948].
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Birmingham [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm the public relations director for Birmingham Budweiser Distributing Company [Birmingham Budweiser Distributing Company, Inc.], and I am the--a member of the Jefferson County Commission.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: It's at the Jefferson County Courthouse in Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: March the whatever it is--20, 21st (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The 21st, 2007.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, sure.
Story_ID: 436410
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna start by asking you what I call People magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: Sure, whatever.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably blue--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I like ice cream and cookies.  That is my diet, basically--ice cream, cookies, peanut butter and jelly--on buttered toast (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay (laughter).  When you go on vacation, do you have a favorite destination?
Speaker 2: I have not taken a vacation in about twelve years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like Christmas; I'm really--I'm into the whole Christmas thing, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, my mom [Lillian Cotton Langford] used to tell her children before she died that: "If you believe you can, or if you believe you can't, you're right."
Story_ID: 436411
Speaker 1: Let's start with talking about your father.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me his name?
Speaker 2: His name was John Langford.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you know where he was born?
Speaker 2: Don't have a clue; he walked out and left my family--my mother with four children.  He just walked away.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so therefore, you have no information about your grandparents.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: All right.  Tell me your mother's name.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Lillian Langford [Lillian Cotton Langford]; maiden name was Cotton--Lillian Cotton.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, some part of lower Alabama, down around Greene County [Alabama]--somewhere in that area.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you know about your grandparents on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were all dead by the time I--my mother's parents died when she was fourteen, so she was on her own from fourteen years of age trying to raise her children, so I never had any contact with them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell me more about your mother.
Speaker 2: Oh, she was a special lady, you know?  She waited tables, took in ironing for people, worked as a domestic.  A great chef; worked as a chef at a lot of hotels and eating establishments, was very good, and she only had one major problem--she loved her children too much, so much so that she worked herself into the grave trying to do for her kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What type of mother was she to you?  What was your relationship with her?
Speaker 2: I was her favorite kid, and the other kids knew it (laughter).  My mother and I were very tight.  There was nothing that she thought that I couldn't do, and whatever I tried to do or wanted to do, she was right there, she was my biggest cheerleader.  And I remember when I was getting ready to graduate from high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], I wanted to go to college but she didn't have the money, so she sat down and she said, "Listen, you may need to consider going into the [U.S.] Air Force, because they had the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], and if you really wanna go to school, that's the best way to do it."  And I remember when she took me down to the bus station to go enlist in the [U.S.] military, I had passed the test and all, and she cried the whole time that she put me on the bus.  And I just knew, before I got to Montgomery [Alabama] to be inducted, that somehow or the other, she would catch the bus, and get me off the bus, you know.  But she was a, a very religious lady.  She loved her children too much and--but she also disciplined us, you know.  I've got scars on my back right now where my mother would beat your brains out.  My mother'd say, "Don't do something--," I remember one time I walked in the house and I wanted to go out on the park and play with the guys, you know, so I walked in.  I didn't say, "Can I go?"  I say, "Mama, I'm going out on the baseball field out there with the guys," and she'd say, "You can't go out there today."  And I lost my mind temporarily and I said to her, "Well, why can't I go?"  She said, "Because I said you can't go," and that was it.  And that's the difference between children today and when I came up.  Respect for your parents was not optional.  My mother raised us to say, "Yes, sir," "No, sir," "Yes, ma'am," and "No, ma'am," to everybody, but today's mentality is that if you say, "Yes, ma'am," and "No, ma'am," and you're black and you say that to a person who's white, that's a slave mentality.  It has nothing to do with no slave anything, that's respect mentality, and that's why America's going straight to hell in a hand basket right now, because nobody cares about anybody anymore.  And if we don't stop this pretty soon, you're gonna see the most blessed nation in the history of civilization fall apart right before our very eyes.
Speaker 1: How much education did your mother have?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think she went to like the seventh grade, and at the time that her parents died, she had to fend for herself, but she insisted I get an education, so much so that--it was during the Vietnam War, and she just said, "I would just pray that God never put you in harm's way, but if you really wanna go to college, this is the way to go, and you're gonna have to do one or two things; you can make an excuse for yourself and not go, or you pay whatever price was necessary and go."  And so, you know, I went--we grew up in public housing, and when I think back over it, just from this conversation I'm having with you this morning, you know, there are a lot of things we tend to forget, but I used to have to take the wagon and go down on 3rd Avenue [Birmingham, Alabama], which is now a homeless shelter by and large, and pick up the government cheese and peanut butter and all of that stuff on Monday mornings and take it back home.  But, you know, this lady worked seventeen hours a day to provide for us.  And I went in the Air Force, stayed in there four years, nine months, twenty-two days, six hours, and fifteen minutes.  Got out of the military, came back, I finished Lawson State Community College [Birmingham, Alabama]--
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: --and for her, that was like she graduated.
Story_ID: 436412
Speaker 1: Before we get to the college days--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I really wanna talk about your childhood growing up [in Birmingham, Alabama].  So, now you told me that you grew up in public housing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your siblings.
Speaker 2: There was four boys and a girl, and I was the middle kid, and we grew up in the projects [Loveman Village, Birmingham, Alabama], and someone was generally killed on the corner there every other day, if not every day.  The irony of it is, is that I had some pretty rough brothers now.  My sister was pretty rough, but for some strange reason, in our family I was not allowed to hang out on the corners, by either my brothers or what society terms the thugs in the neighborhood.  If I went up on the basketball court to play basketball, and we got into a fighting, shouting, cursing contest, they would beat my butt and send me home, "Go home."  They insisted I went to school, and I can't tell you why.  It's like they said that somebody's gonna come out of this project that we know, and for no special reason I was the person by and large, that they decided, "You're gonna go to school," and so, you know, I would have to go to school, I couldn't hang out after school, I had to go there, come home.  While my other brothers and sisters did--and my sister, you know, did other things, they insisted that I study.
Speaker 1: Tell me your brothers' and sisters' names.
Speaker 2: All of them are dead now, but one--brother's name is Oliver [ph.]; I had a brother named Gene [ph.], one's name was Sonny [ph.]--John [ph.] was his name, and the fourth brother that I had my mother [Lillian Cotton Langford] adopted, name was Bob [ph.]--like we could afford to adopt somebody's kid.  But back then, you know, whatever you had, little or much, you know; there weren't orphanages and all for black folks, so other families took in other people's children who either didn't want them or just by circumstances they ended up needing it, so that's how I got the fourth brother and a sister.
Speaker 1: What was your sister's name?
Speaker 2: Sister's name was Vivian [Vivian Langford (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Vivian.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 436413
Speaker 1: So that shows something about your mother, another characteristic.  What do you think were some of the characteristics that you got from your mother that you use today?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I don't value dollars, I don't value material stuff, I get--you know what?  I probably give away much more of my--of what I earn than I keep.  My mother was very soft-hearted, you know?  When she got real ill, the doctor came in there and he told us that she had an enlarged heart, and that her heart was twice the size of a regular heart, and I remember asking him, I say, "Well, what's wrong with her?"  He said, "Well, I just told you, your mother's heart is twice the size."  I said, "What is wrong with her?"  Because if you knew my mother, I was surprised her heart was just twice the size that it was, and they didn't understand it but I did, you know, and--but my mom, during Christmas, she would bake, oh, just potato pies, and make potato salad and chicken and dressing and stuff, and she would always take it down to the homeless shelter.  Imagine that (laughter), we're in the projects, and she would take--and you know what she would do?  She would--as we got older, we all were required to buy a case of apples, bananas, oranges, or some kind of fruit, during the Christmas holidays, and she would have a caravan leading from our apartment in the projects to go to Bryce Hospital [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], a mental hospital, to take food and clothing that she had gathered for these people.  That's the kind of lady she was--caring about somebody other than yourself, you know.  And while I don't have a lot of money or anything, I don't need anything.  You know, God has been good to me, and it's all because my mother taught that people are people, no matter who they are.  You respect everybody and you help everybody, and that the more you help other people, God brings it back to you.  So, you know, those are characteristics of her that--I probably have more of the traits like that from her than I probably need, because people have a tendency to mistake kindness for weakness, but that's okay, you know.  It's all the nature--a part of the beast, but those are the things that I've taken from her, treat everybody better than you treat yourself.
Story_ID: 436414
Speaker 1: You talk about your neighborhood.  This is in Birmingham [Alabama], is that right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: Where you grew up in the projects [Loveman Village, Birmingham, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: The neighborhood as being rough, but what about your neighbors?  Tell me about some of the neighbors.
Speaker 2: Well, none of us had anything, you know?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And everybody shared everything.  It was not unusual for a family to come and say, "Let me have a cup of sugar."  See, people talk about that stuff; I was there.  "Give me a cup of flour."  You know what a rent party is?  You ever heard of a rent party (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: That's where--you didn't have boomboxes; you would take your whole stereo out in the backyard.  Your lights were out, but you would run an extension cord to the neighbor's house next door, and you'd run a little string of lights out there around the deal, and you'd get this big black kettle.  And you go take your last fifteen, twenty bucks [dollars] and you buy as much whiting fish because it was the cheapest fish out there, and a loaf of bread, hot sauce, mustard, you know.  And all of the neighbors knew that you were having a difficult time.  It was rent time, and you would go out there and play music all night and cook fish, and all the other neighbors they didn't have anything either, but they would come buy a fish sandwich from you, to enable you to be able to pay your rent, and we would do the same thing.  Those were the best times because now, a little bit of affluence has made fools out of all of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about your elementary school.  What was the name of the elementary school that you went to?
Speaker 2: I went to Washington Elementary School [Booker T. Washington Elementary School] here in Birmingham.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what do you remember about the times in elementary school?
Speaker 2: You know--the elementary school years were interesting to the point that we had truant officers when I was in school.  I'll never forget this lady, her name was Miss McQueen [ph.].  She was the truant officer.  If you didn't come to school that morning, she was at your house that evening.  If you were caught off-campus during the day, Miss McQueen was at your house telling on you (laughter), getting your butt whipped that same day.  People cared about people then.  And now, I don't remember a lot about the in-house classwork, I just always remember how this lady always just seems to know where were, what we were doing, when we were doing it, and our parents were indeed held accountable because they had to come, and they would come and check on us and--it's not like that today, but it was like that then.
Story_ID: 436415
Speaker 1: When you think of your neighborhood when you were growing up [in Birmingham, Alabama], what sounds, what smells, and what sights come to mind?
Speaker 2: Probably--there was a ditch that ran down in the back of that place out there, along the railroad tracks and--which is where we played a lot, you know--played in the water not realizing, you know--pollution, that's a modern day term.  We used to actually go swim in the ditch.  There was a big ditch out in the back, that's where we swam, you know.  We would jump over--jump off the train trestle into the water, swim, and then we would go about a mile from up where I lived up on Red Mountain.  And there were caves--used to be old iron ore caves, and we would go back into these caves in the heat of the summer, and jump off and swim in the caves.  And we had a friend of ours name was--we called him Kid, and he jumped off in the water, hit his head, and he drowned, and they had to get divers to come in and go into the caves to find him.  But it was just a simple time where--simple pleasures, people were, children were just children, you know?  We were all devious as we could be, and we got away with as much as we could get away with.  But I remember that, you know, we--everybody respected everybody, though.
Speaker 1: What sounds are in the background that would remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Jackie Wilson.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Every song he ever made, I still got 'em.  I mean I went and got 'em all on CD and DVD, you know?  "You ought to see my baby walking down the avenue," ['Talk That Talk'] you know?  'A Lover'--'A Woman, A Lover, A Friend.'  My mother [Lillian Cotton Langford] loved Jackie Wilson, and believe it, we had to listen to Jackie Wilson 'til hell froze over.  Jackie Wilson, [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson, Cannonball Adderley--mercy, mercy, you know?  I don't listen to a lot of the modern-day music.  I can't understand it, that's the other thing.  I'm a music fanatic, but I've got all these old albums, and now the beautiful part, they've cleaned 'em up and put 'em on a CD.  But every time--I listen to a lot of XM radio [XM Satellite Radio]--Soul Street in particular, on XM, and The Groove, and every now and then they'll play Chuck Jackson, 'Any Day Now,' Jackie Wilson, Marvin Gaye, you know, and Tammi Terrell and The Supremes and (laughter)--yeah, that's what I remember--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you said your mother was a good cook (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so what smells take you back to that time?
Speaker 2: Well, you know--chicken and dressing.  Now, you know, the funny thing is, I had one sister [Vivian Langford (ph.)] and my sister would burn Jell-O.  My sister couldn't cook, okay?  Only woman I've ever seen would burn Jell-O, but all of the boys could cook.  I can make cinnamon rolls from scratch, I can cook a pound cake better than anything you can buy.  Apple pies, apple cobblers, potato pies.  I mean we could cook--all of us.  You know, my mom had to work, so each of us had a day that we had to fix dinner for the family, you know?  And--but just to watch her, you know?  My mom was--it was like an artist at work in the kitchen, you know?  And--but I also remember my older brother, and he died recently, but it was his time to cook that particular day, and I had a--our baby brother was a real little bitty baby, and he was crawling on the floor, and my brother went to pick up a big pot of pinto beans--I'll never forget it--and he was going from the stove to the sink to like add more water to it, and he stumbled over my baby brother and wasted that huge pot of boiling pinto beans on the baby, and he--it was an accident, you know, and my mom walked in the house, and everybody was screaming and we didn't know what to do.  And she grabbed my baby brother and she put him up under the sink and she held him and ran cold water on him to wash that stuff off of him and his skin was peeling off, you know?  And he was screaming and yelling and she was screaming and yelling, and my oldest brother looked like he had just gone into a trance, I mean, you know.  And I remember she took him and she wrapped him in a wet sheet, and she took him and she ran out of the house 'cause we didn't have a car, and she ran at least--I don't know, maybe, maybe five miles, all the way to Hillman Hospital [Birmingham, Alabama], with her baby, yeah.  And my older brother never got over that, you know?  And you see my baby brother today, as I said, it's just the two of us left, but you see him, and you're never to know that he had that accident, you know, but--so there was a lot of good times, a lot of--we had our crises like everybody else.
Story_ID: 436416
Speaker 1: What were some of the extracurricular activities that you participated in, in your elementary school years [at Booker T. Washington Elementary School, Birmingham, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Baseball, football, ping pong, tennis (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ping pong?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, ping pong, they call it table tennis now, but it was ping pong when I was playing.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But I played, in the community--softball, baseball, football--all of that.
Speaker 1: Was there a community center where you lived?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in the projects [Loveman Village, Birmingham, Alabama] there was outdoor basketball courts and ping pong tables inside, and there was a baseball field, football field, yeah, yeah, we had all of that, and all of us played, yeah.  I was pretty good, too.
Speaker 1: Since you like music--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you play an instrument?
Speaker 2: I couldn't carry a tune from here to the door in a bucket, but I love music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For me, that was my escape.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about reading?  Is that instrumental (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I read a lot, that's why I'm wearing these glasses (laughter).  I read--that's what I do for relaxation; I read a lot.  I'm trying to understand scripture, so I--you just can't read the Bible and extract from the Bible, glean from a passage the things that are germane to your life.  You know, one of the things we forget is that while the Bible always means what it says, sometimes it doesn't say what it means.  So you have to go and research this; sometimes you have to go back and get the Talmud, the Jewish--I call it the Jewish bible--to get a full understanding of things.  You have to have a Greek dictionary--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --look up the root of words, and my biggest fear is that--at one time I feared going to hell more than anything on the planet.  Now, I know I'm not going, but there's--you must always stay focused.  You know, it's easy to venture off and drift away from it, and we all sin, and anybody who says they don't sin is a liar.  The object of the ballgame is to understand how we got in this mess, and what is done to get us out of this mess, and then you have to choose.
Speaker 1: Well, was religion a big part of your growing up?
Speaker 2: I didn't attend a church in my earlier years, not like we should have, but my mom [Lillian Cotton Langford] was always working.  (Cough) Excuse me.  But I walked in the room one day and my mother--I had the lights off in the room, and I don't know, we just going through the house and, and she was sitting there crying, you know?  Now you got to--you have to know, you have to know these sons she had; you didn't wanna mess with my mama.  Like most black folks, if you wanna fight, or holler, "Yo, mama," you got yourself a fight.  That'll get you a fight quicker than anything in town.  But my mom was--my mom was a beautiful woman, I mean she was pretty.  I mean--and she'd be walking to the store with her sons, and guys would whistle at her and the fight was on, you know; don't be whistling at my mama.  But anyway, I walked in the room this particular day, and she was in there crying, and so the other brothers came in.  We wanted to know who had done something to her, what happened?  What's the matter?  And she said, "Nothing."  I said, "Well, why you crying if nothing's wrong?  What's the matter with you?"  She said, "I'm just talking to the Lord."  "Okay."  She said, "Don't worry about it."  She said, "One day you'll understand."  And we still badgered her about somebody having done something to her, but she was right because now I do understand.  But she would just sing songs to herself and to us, and she would pray, but I never forgot when she said, "I was just talking to the Lord."  I didn't understand it then, as she said, but I understand it now.
Story_ID: 436417
Speaker 1: Do you go to junior high school or middle school, or do you go straight to high school?
Speaker 2: At the time when I was in school, it was elementary school [Booker T. Washington Elementary School, Birmingham, Alabama]; from elementary school, to high school, to graduation, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) High school, okay.  Tell me what high school you attended.
Speaker 2: Ullman--Parker High School.  I went to Ullman High School [Samuel Ullman High School, Birmingham, Alabama] first.
Speaker 1: Auburn?
Speaker 2: Ullman, it's long since, it's gone.  U-L-L-M-A-N, Ullman High School, and that was in (unclear), and then I transferred and went to Parker High School [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama].  Graduated from Parker, the last class that graduated in January of '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, during your high school years, a lot of things happened in the '60s [1960s]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and a lot of civil rights began happening here, as well as all over the nation.  What were your thoughts, or where were you as far as your family, people that you knew, involved in civil rights?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we snuck away from school and got in some of the marches, you know, but my mom [Lillian Cotton Langford] tried to protect her children from the evil that was occurring in this community, but like all kids, you know, we still snuck away and we did some things, but in the midst of an era--and you couldn't understand it, you know.  My mother had pretty well sheltered us to the extent that she taught us, "No matter what society says about you, you are the one who determines your future," but we were not oblivious to it.  We knew everything that was going on.  People were dying all around us, so we were aware.
Story_ID: 436418
Speaker 1: We were talking about high school.
Speaker 2: Hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your high school years.
Speaker 2: You got to remember, I grew up in public housing--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and there were a lot of black kids who grew up outside of public housing who never let us forget that we were less than they were because we came out of the quote, unquote, projects.  And there was a young lady--I guess I was about fifteen, sixteen--loved the way she went.  I won't ever forget, you know, I bought a box of candy and it was on a Valentine's Day and I took it over to her house and her parents let me come in, and I won't call her name because you all would know the person.  She had some relatives that were pretty nationally well-known people.  And I will never forget, the daddy came in and he looked at me and he asked her where was I from, and she said, "Well, he lives down near Loveman Village [Birmingham, Alabama]," that was the name of the project.  And then she came back in the room crying and she said, "My daddy said you have to leave our house because nothing comes out of the project but thieves and thugs."  I will never forget that.
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: So, from her house to--back to the project was about maybe a mile and a half walk, and the damage that he did that day later turned out to be a positive because I was determined to show him and everybody else that just because you live in public housing didn't mean that everybody who lives in public housing were drug addicts, thieves, and killers, and all that kind of stuff.  And that has stayed with me a long time, and this--and that's been what, forty-two years ago?  And I've never forgotten it.  But in high school I was an average student.  Liked math and science, did not like--was not a big fan of speech and English.  And when I graduated from high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama] and got outta the [U.S. military] service, it's ironic, I ended up working in fields that I didn't like when I was in school, you know (laughter).  It was kind of a strange deal.  Ended up as a news reporter for a long time, so nothing eventful.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean, I didn't come up with any inventions that saved the world (laughter).
Story_ID: 436419
Speaker 1: You're getting ready to graduate [from A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], and you go into the [U.S. military] service before you graduate; tell me how that happens (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Three weeks.  Yeah, I graduated in January, and I had completed all the requirements.  I was still allowed to graduate, but I had enlisted early to go in.  You know how they do it, they lock you in, and right after the graduation, I went right on in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 1: This is the Vietnam [Vietnam War] era.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, tell me what it was like.  You were in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: [U.S.] Air Force.
Speaker 1: Air Force.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, tell me what the Air Force was like.
Speaker 2: I really don't care to talk about it.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: It was not a happy time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let me say this much, since you asked the question--to be spit on in airports.  So go ahead, what's your next question?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so when you return home, what do you do now?
Speaker 2: I came back home, got enrolled at Lawson State Community College [Birmingham, Alabama], and worked.  I used to work for Southern Research Institute [Southern Research, Birmingham, Alabama]; I used to work with the rhesus monkeys they had in there.  They would give 'em various diseases and then see what the effects of the diseases were, and then of course they would either try to cure 'em or use various drugs on 'em to test 'em.  Our job was to keep the cages cleaned out and that sort of thing, and then when I finished Lawson State, I went to the University of Alabama at Birmingham [Birmingham, Alabama] to finish up the degree, and graduated in 1972.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was your degree in?  Your degree was in--
Speaker 2: Social sciences.
Story_ID: 436420
Speaker 1: So, what's your next step?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to work for a while with a local television station.  Worked there for about ten years as a news reporter.
Speaker 1: What was the station?
Speaker 2: Oh, WBRC-TV, Channel 6 [Birmingham, Alabama]; it's a FOX station now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Worked there for about ten years as a news reporter for them.
Speaker 1: Tell us about some of the stories that you reported during that time.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Everything.  I basically covered the murders--the killings, yeah.  I hated that part of it but, you know, that was a whole new deal for me, but won every Sigma Delta Chi Award for journalism, and I was just driven more or less, and had this insatiable desire to succeed, but I also don't fear failing either.  It may sound like an oxymoron, but the fact of the matter is if you fear failing, you'll never succeed.  So, I was--and I was pretty well driven to do a lot of things.  Then I had a--my favorite part, working for the television station, I used to do a little series called, Adopt a Pet.  Go to the local humane society, and we did it as fun one day; all of these dogs were being euthanized and all, and I had a little puppy in my hand and put him in my pocket, and I just did a little quick feature of this little puppy.  It was at the Birmingham Humane Society [Greater Birmingham Humane Society, Birmingham, Alabama].  "They're gonna be here for a week, and then they euthanize the puppies, so if you would like to adopt a pet, this little puppy."  I gave 'em a number to call, and the numbers just--people just called like mad.  And so once a week, I would go over and pick a little pet and give 'em away, yeah--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --get people to the humane society and you save a lot of the animals over there.  That was a highlight for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what makes you leave there?  Well, before we--before you leave there, the news station had a lot of things that other stations didn't have, like a helicopter.  Didn't they have a chopper and a--where other stations didn't have certain things that the station brought in during the time you were there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it was a contracted deal, yeah.  It was, it was the number one station they had here, strongest signal.  This is all before cable, of course--
Speaker 1: Of course--
Speaker 2: --you know, so it was the most widely-seen station.
Story_ID: 436421
Speaker 1: Before I left the station [WBRC-TV, Birmingham, Alabama], I used to cover local government--city council in Birmingham [Alabama], and I said, "Well, you know, I would cover the government."  I said, "If these clowns could do that, I can do that."  So I ran for the city council in Birmingham in 1977 and got elected, which is unheard of.  Usually, you got to run two, three times to get elected, but I got elected the first time.
Speaker 2: And this was in what year?
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-seven [1977].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I was a member of a nine-body city council, and so what I did was--at that point, I decided--I got tired of trying to get four other people to vote with you, so I ran for mayor in 1979.
Speaker 2: Mayor of Birmingham?
Speaker 1: Birmingham, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It scared everybody to death 'cause I had an afro about as big as a house.  If you go over to the Birmingham City Council chambers, they got pictures of old councils out there--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you'll see this guy with this great big afro, you know.  And didn't win the mayor's race, then I moved to Fairfield [Alabama] to keep from running--to get out of politics, didn't wanna run anymore.  And my wife [Melva Ferguson Langford] and I bought a house out there, and one day the neighbors came and asked me if I would run for mayor of the City of Fairfield, so I went down and I met with the people, and I asked them to pave the street around my house, and they promised they would do it.  And about a year passed and they didn't do it, so I said, "I know what to do, I'll just run for mayor and pave it myself."  So, I ran for mayor, paved mine, and paved everybody else's, too, and I served as mayor out there for fourteen years.
Story_ID: 436422
Speaker 1: We'll talk about that, but before we talk about you becoming mayor, you mentioned your wife.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When did you get married?
Speaker 2: October the 1st, 1982.
Speaker 1: And what is your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Melva [Melva Ferguson Langford], M-E-L-V-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is there a story about how you met Melva?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  You know, she was coaching a church softball team, and I was a member of a little group, it was about five or six of us.  All of us had Corvettes [Chevrolet Corvette], you know.  And one day, one of the guys said, "Let's go buy barbeque sandwiches for a fundraiser for the church."  And I went by the house with 'em and we all pulled up in our little 'Vettes, you know.  We all stepped out and--he was dating my wife's sister, I didn't know her.  And she was standing at this barbeque grill.  She had a rag tied around her head, you know, and she was cooking and she had her back to us, but she had on a nice pair of blue jeans, you know?  And--I tease her all the time, she turned around and went to walk away and it looked like two little boys under a blanket fighting.  You know, "You hit me and I hit you back."  So I said, "Well, I need to take that woman out right there--ask her for a date."  And she tried to act a little coy for a few minutes, but we decided to get together that next week, and then I found out she was coaching the church softball team.  So, to continue the relationship, you know, you got to use every trick in your arsenal, you know, so I went over and start helping her coach the church softball team, and about a year later--let's see, no, four years later--we dated for about three or four years.  Four years later, we got married, yeah, and we've been together ever since so we've been--celebrated our twenty-fifth anniversary last year.
Story_ID: 436423
Speaker 1: So, now you're living in Fairfield [Alabama]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and this is what year that you moved to Fairfield?
Speaker 2: About '80 [1980], '81 [1981], '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: And the neighbors asked you to run--
Speaker 2: Yeah, for mayor.
Speaker 1: --for mayor.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, tell me what was that like?  What type of--what size city, and what's the makeup of Fairfield (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The city has a--it was the smallest--one of the smallest cities in the State of Alabama, contiguous to the City of Birmingham [Alabama].  However, it is the most densely-populated city.  It's about three square miles, but there were 12,000 people living in this three square mile area, and just a steel town, pretty much built by U.S. Steel [United States Steel Corporation] in the early days.  And--
Speaker 1: It was about 80 percent black--is that accurate?
Speaker 2: At that time, it was about 50/50.
Speaker 1: Oh, really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Now, it's considerably more, but it was about 50 or 55 percent black; it never had a black mayor, had thirteen members on the city council--thirteen members on the city council, and so I ran for the office and got elected, and suffered through hell for four years because the--I got elected against the other black power brokers in the community, and they gave me hell for four years.  So, at the end of that term, I said to the community, you know, "Either you give me a city council I can work with, reduce the size of this one down to seven, from thirteen to seven, and give me a group I can work with, or give them a mayor who'll work with them."  The community reduced 'em down to seven, gave me a city council that I could work with, and we completely rebuilt that city.
Speaker 1: Tell me some of the things that you did to rebuild the city.
Speaker 2: Oh, we repaved almost virtually every street in the community, brought in businesses that were never there before, increased the size of the police department, built a community center where they had never had one, built a civic center where they had never had one, built a brand new high school, bought a hospital out there that became part of the HealthSouth organization [HealthSouth Corporation, Birmingham, Alabama], and we did a--you know, now that I think about it, we really accomplished a lot in that community.  But more importantly than what we did is the community had a reinvigorated sense of pride.  I'm kind of fanatical about cleanliness, and that's putting it mildly, but the city won the cleanest community in Jefferson County [Alabama] for like seven years in a row.  Our interstate banks and all were cut once a week, we still set your garbage out for you in the early mornings, put the cans back.  For fourteen and a half years, I'd got elected overwhelmingly every, every time around, and then about two years into the--my fourth term at the election, I ran for the county commission [Jefferson County Commission].
Story_ID: 436424
Speaker 1: To people who lived in Fairfield [Alabama]--you said it was a steel town.  Tell me about the steel industry there.
Speaker 2: At one time, U.S. Steel [United States Steel Corporation] had a--was the major employer in Jefferson County [Alabama], and had about twenty-three to thirty thousand people that, of course now with all of the federal regulations the steel industry began to shrink, and now it's down to about twenty-two, twenty-five hundred people, but the--Fairfield was built by the steel industry, hospital and everything, because it was like a world contained within a world.  And that's where the bulk of black people were working in those--in that hot steel mill out there.  And I was taken on a tour of the steel mill when I was in high school, and the purpose of them taking me on the tour was to show me how important it was for me to go get an education.  They said, "You don't wanna work out here."  And true enough, I went out there and went to work out there, and they were right.  I sure didn't wanna work out there, boy, no.  But the steel industry is, and has always been the lifeblood of that community out there.
Speaker 1: Well, as it shrunk, what did you do to bring in other businesses for people to have jobs?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, we were able to get a mall developed out there, and bring in high-paying, or good-paying jobs out there, and the vast majority of the people have worked all over the county, but the community itself--when I was elected mayor out there, that budget of that city was something like two and a half, three million dollars.  When I left, it was over fifteen--that's how much revenue had been brought into the city.  So, then of course while I was mayor, I worked for about nine years at that time with about eleven other cities to convince them to come together to build an amusement park in the western part of the county.  We did.
Speaker 1: And the name of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) VisionLand park [VisionLand; Alabama Splash Adventure, Bessemer, Alabama].
Speaker 1: VisionLand.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell me how you came up with that idea.
Speaker 2: Well, I guess I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or why you came up with that idea.
Speaker 2: Well, I got tired of the people saying they always had to go to Atlanta [Georgia], to Six Flags [Six Flags Over Georgia, Austell, Georgia] to, you know, for family entertainment.  And so it just dawned on me, why don't we just build our own park and build it here?  It took nine years to do it, but I got nine--I think ten or eleven cities to come together to put up the funding.  We were able to get property, about--nearly a thousand acres of property out there, and at the time, the property was on the market for like $1500 an acre, and we raised over $100 million and built a water and amusement theme park out there, and it's still operating today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What are some of the other things that you did to bring revenue to Fairfield?
Speaker 2: Again, you know, government only has one way, and that's sales taxes and bringing in businesses and increasing opportunities for people to work in all of those things, but done in conjunction with the new city council out there.  So--it may not sound like a great deal, but when I say a budget went from two and a half, three million dollars to fifteen million dollars, when you consider you're only getting three cents on the dollar, that's (laughter), that's, that's miraculous in and of itself.
Speaker 1: What about education?
Speaker 2: Built a brand new high school, upgraded the elementary schools and the middle schools.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the teachers?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, the teachers are hired through the State of Alabama, but education improved tremendously out there.
Speaker 1: Were the teachers not certified before that time, or do you helped to get a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I did that since I've been on the county [Jefferson County Commission].  When it got to the county level here, I got the county commissioner to put up about $15 million to nationally board certify every teacher in the county.
Speaker 1: Oh, I got you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Tell me more about VisionLand, because that was really a big deal, wasn't it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was (laughter).  You know, you took and you built a place synonymous to Six Flags in Georgia--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --where you had a separate water theme park in Georgia.  I built a water theme park and the amusement park all on the same grounds.
Story_ID: 436425
Speaker 1: All right, so what happens when you leave as mayor of Fairfield [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Came here to the county commission [Jefferson County Commission] (laughter), got elected president of the county commission.  There were three Republicans always on the county commission, and two Democrats, and me and a Democrat was able to get one of the other Republicans to nominate me for president of the commission--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and served as president for the past four years, and now I'm in my second term on the commission right now.
Speaker 1: Who are the other commissioners that you've worked with?
Speaker 2: Commissioners Buckelew [Mary Buckelew], White [Gary White], Smoot [Shelia Smoot], Collins [Bettye Fine Collins], and myself.  It was--it's a five-member commission.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And talk about what you do on the commission, or what you have done to improve Jefferson County [Alabama].
Speaker 2: Well, probably the biggest thing--a lot of things I could point to, but the single biggest thing was convincing the county commission to raise a one-cent sales tax county-wide--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and we borrowed a billion dollars to rebuild every school in this county, and got it done.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there were a lot of unhappy people about raising the one cent sales tax.  But the schools were falling down and needed to be repaired, and it is your children in there, so we raised the tax one penny, and then divided the money among the area school districts based on population, so Birmingham [Alabama] got close to $400-plus million, the county got over four, and the smaller municipalities got $12, to $30, to $40 million.  So, if I don't do another thing the rest of my life, I'll have gotten that done to improve education in this county, and that's more than most people ever get done in a lifetime.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We've kind of rushed through your life, so I actually wanna go back and talk about more of your getting to where you are today.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And we kind of brushed over your college years, so let's go back--let's just step back a little bit, and talk about your college years because you have to understand that the generations to come will use this story as an inspiration--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --to see someone come from public housing to be able to go to college and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, see, but I didn't just go to college, you know (laughter).  I came from public housing--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --through the [U.S.] military--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --through junior college [Lawson State Community College, Birmingham, Alabama], University of Alabama at Birmingham [Birmingham, Alabama], and my last official formal education ended me up at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And you go from public housing to Harvard University, that means that there are a lot of people cared about you.
Story_ID: 436426
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So let's step back and, and start with you coming--well, before you even come out of the service--you didn't wanna talk about your experience in the [U.S.] Air Force, but what were your thoughts about Vietnam [Vietnam War]?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, in hindsight, we can always say we should never have gone into Vietnam--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and I think history has proven that out at this point.  You know, we have learned to build bombs that can destroy and kill the people and leave the buildings standing.  And what does that say about our society?  We've got smart bombs and dumb people.  We're smart enough to make weapons to destroy, and too dumb to love one another.  And nothing's changed.  We've just become more sophisticated in how we hate each other, and yet at the same time, we be going to church on Sundays and on Wednesdays, praying all those prayers and singing all those songs and telling all them lies about how much we love the Lord, and yet God's word--it begs the question, and we all need to ask ourselves, "How can you say you love a God who you have never seen, and walk past each other and won't even speak?"  America has without question being the most blessed nation in the history of civilization, and no enemy had to bring us a Trojan horse.  We are the Trojan horses for our own country--the dissension, the hatred, the he-said, the she-said and I-heards.  We are a sick country, we are a sick bunch of people.  And I think half the problem is we've been given too much.  We don't hold anybody accountable for anything now.  We set people up for destruction; that's what we do.  We relish in the miseries of other people.  Nothing sells more in this nation than sex and hatred and degradation.  You want an end to a conversation in America, all you got to do is say, "Jesus said," and the conversation comes to an end.  But isn't it amazing, we can go to football games, we can cheer for the Sun Devils [Arizona State Sun Devils], the Blue Demons [DePaul University Blue Demons], and the Demon Deacons [Wake Forest University Demon Deacons].  It's okay to go cheer for the devil at a football game, and against the law of the land to say a prayer in your own schools.  You don't wanna get me started on that, you really don't--
Story_ID: 436427
Speaker 1: Let's talk, then, about when you return as a civilian and enter into college.
Speaker 2: Yeah, came back, went into college, got elected head of the African American society at college--part of the student government association.  You know, college for me was a lot different than it is for a child who goes out of high school to college.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I had been in the [U.S.] military, so when I came back and went to school, it was a mission, it was not to go there and join Greek organizations, and I remember when I first (laughter)--I do remember this.  I was at UAB [University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama], and they wanted me to join some fraternity, and the guys came up and, "We want you in this fraternity," and he gave me a brick and called me a dog.  And I told him, I said, "You know, I will take this brick," and I won't tell you what I told him I'd do with it.  I been in (laughter)--I was much growner than these kids, and they had nothing to do with their lives but let mamas and daddies pay for it.  I had to pay for my own, so I had to pay for it, work, and go to school--I didn't have time for none of that nonsense.  Well, when he gave me that brick, and you're gonna be called a dog and you're gonna stand in a line and these guys are gonna beat you with sticks and--no, no, you're not (laughter); oh, no, no, no--not the kid (laughter).  So, I played baseball for UAB; I was a pitcher on the UAB baseball team the first year they had a baseball team, and--but my whole college experience was about getting in and getting out; getting a degree to make my mama [Lillian Cotton Langford] happy.
Speaker 1: You paid for--you didn't use the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, I used the G.I. Bill plus I had to have a full-time job to do it.
Speaker 1: And where did you work?
Speaker 2: I worked for Southern Research Institute [Southern Research, Birmingham, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay, you did tell me that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then I worked for the TV station [WBRC-TV, Birmingham, Alabama], so I did all of that while I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, while you were still in school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And let me tell you something.  Anybody wants an education, there's a way to get it, and mamas and daddies do not always necessarily have to have money.  If you want something bad enough, you'll find a way to do it.  And that was my mother's teaching and preaching to her children--if you want it bad enough, you'll find a way to do it.  You know, I have a personal home business that I run out of my home--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and when I'm dealing with people with the business I'm in, and it's a communications business, you know.  One of the things that I say to people, and a point that I stress to people who wanna get in this business, is how much does your lie cost?  Okay?
Story_ID: 436428
Speaker 1: I asked you off-camera about your experience with religion.  When did it become, you know, something that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let me finish my statement, right before you went off on that last tape, about how much does your lie cost?
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's an issue that, that all of us need to ask ourselves on a daily basis.  All of us are living a lie.  The question is can you afford the lie that you're living?  And if you can't afford the lie that you're living, then you work three or four jobs like I do.  If you can afford the lie that you're living and you're content with it, then you either work or you don't work.  And I think that society has to ask itself that same question about every aspect of your life.  How much does your lie cost?  You wanna live in a four-bedroom house?  Can you afford it?  You wanna drive a Mercedes-Benz?  Can you afford it?  I didn't say whether you can afford the car note, can you afford to pay the car note and then maintain the vehicle?  So, everybody's life is based on a lie, and we just have to determine what your lie is, and can you afford it.
Speaker 1: Hm, that's interesting.  Not that I know that I agree with it--everybody living a lie.
Speaker 2: Believe me, if you stop and are really objective about it--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --everybody lives a lie.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And in your home-based business, tell me why that's important that you understand that.
Speaker 2: Because you can make a lot of money in this business, and if your lie has you in a financial bind, work hard.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Make enough money to afford the lie.  If you're content, don't even get in the business.
Speaker 1: I see.  Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But trust me when I tell you, most people (laughter), most people like to believe that they're not living a lie, but the truth is everybody's living one--living in houses you can't afford, got car notes you can't pay, and drinking liquor that you can't spell.
Speaker 1: Okay, but a lot of people don't fall in any of those categories.
Speaker 2: Trust me when I tell you--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --the only reason they don't fall into the category is because they can't afford to lie.
Story_ID: 436429
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Let's go on back to your religious experience (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, my mom [Lillian Cotton Langford] raised us to know who Jesus was, and like most Christians, you know, the vast majority of the over 30 billion people that you can document who have inhabited this earth since its inception from the point that records have been kept, the vast majority are going to hell, so you can't get mad with me because that's not Langford [HistoryMaker Larry Langford] saying that, that's the Bible making it very clear--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that "Wide is the gate and broad is the road to destruction, and many will enter," [Matthew 7:13] but it also says that "Small is the gate and narrow is the road to life, and few will find their way in." [Matthew 7:14].  You got to work your way into hell, and see, a lot of us are working overtime to get there, so the vast majority of the people will go to hell, all because we are too blind to understand that we can't save ourselves.  I was always amazed, in the last ten years, over the preoccupation with the Ten Commandments, you know?  Yeah, I want you to stop and think about that, that's really funny.  The Ten Commandments should be posted on this building [Jefferson County Courthouse, Birmingham, Alabama], it ought to be posted on this monument.  Well, you know, the truth of the matter is we act like the Ten Commandments are multiple choice, you know--we just pick the ones we like and discard the ones that we don't like.  Now, the irony of it is, is when you look at religion and how little we know about it, if you get into God's word, you'll find that he has a great sense of humor, he really does.  He realized early on that we can't follow directions very well (laughter), okay?  In the Garden of Eden, he gave us one directive--eat of every tree but one.  Now, a while ago, there were two trees that he had in the middle of the garden: the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and the tree of life.  But he never told man not to eat off the tree of life.  He only said don't eat off that tree of knowledge of good and evil.  We couldn't wait to eat off that tree, could we?  And just as soon as God comes down and he says, "What have you done," the first thing man said was, "That woman," and we've been blaming each other ever since.  To show you his sense of humor, he knew if you wouldn't follow directions very well on one issue--he gave us Ten Commandments; now if you wouldn't follow one, he knew you wasn't gonna follow ten, and that's why I say we pick the ones we like and discard the ones that we don't.  But society has written 30 million laws based on ten, all because we couldn't, or wouldn't, follow one.  So, you got to understand what you're dealing with when you're dealing with human beings.  We are--we're not the brightest light bulbs in the pack, okay?  You know, we say a lot of stuff and we do a lot of stuff because we are more concerned about impressing people than we are on salvation.  And so if you look at the Ten Commandments and all of these things, if you ask the average Christian what is the difference between the law and crazy, you'll lose them before you ever walk outside the door.  Ask him why was the Ten Commandments given to us to begin with.  The general reaction is, it is the dos and don'ts of life--how to live and how not to live.  That ain't what scripture told you at all; it said that the law was given to us to show us how far from God our hearts really are, and how much we needed a savior--for Jesus to come.  And you see, the law--depending on what you do, grace depends on what Christ does.  Now, I'm sure if there are any governmental agencies overseeing this, they're gonna cut that out of there, we'll get God out of there real quick, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no, no.
Speaker 1: They don't have a problem with me telling you about people dying around me in my neighborhood because that's good stuff (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Story_ID: 436430
Speaker 1: No, this is your story about your life (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I'm just saying.
Speaker 1: --but what I wanna know is about your personal experience--your salvation experience.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, when I finally came to the conclusion that all I did was make a mess out of everything I put my hands on, it was time to look for an alternative to this because I wasn't getting it right, and so the question becomes one of can it be gotten right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the time that you decided this?  When was the time that you--
Speaker 2: Well, I was in a hospital room in the [U.S.] military, and I was afraid that I may die before I got back home, and so I asked 'em for any preacher to come and baptize me, and they sent a guy and he baptized me in the room.  But after I got out of the military, I came out of fear of death, of possible dying, only to realize that I sought salvation out of fear of dying, when I should be seeking salvation out of fear of living.  But life has a way of bringing you full circle, and since I knew that everything I was touching I was making a mess out of it, the only person who could get me out of this dilemma I was in was Christ.  But you see, the problem is with us is that we won't--we--you know, there's an old saying, "If you wanna hide something from the world, all you got to do is put it in a book."
Speaker 1: No, if you hide something from black people (laughter).
Speaker 2: Especially (laughter), especially, huh.  But society as a whole, just put it in a book.  And so I was asked if I would teach a bible study class to about ten people one day, because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wait a minute.  But before you get to that point, we still haven't understood--you--
Speaker 2: Why I turned to the Lord?
Speaker 1: --received salvation in that hospital room.  When you came home, what church did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to a Baptist church over in Titusville [Birmingham, Alabama], and I went in and I asked to be really baptized.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I was--he sprinkled me in the room and--but you know, how do you--I came to ask myself a lot of questions.  How're you gonna follow a god whom you do not know?  And nobody had given me the background that Jesus is the answer, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah.  I didn't know what it meant.  I knew enough to know I didn't wanna go to hell, and since she had made it clear he was the only way to avoid going, I got baptized, but then I real- I was still empty, and decided to go to church.  I went to church, learned enough to substantiate what my mother [Lillian Cotton Langford] had said, and came to a full realization that the only way out of this mess is through the only person who can fix this mess.  And then of course, I heard scripture read--a preacher was preaching one day, and he says that the way to be saved--and he gave the scripture passage that said, "If you confess with your mouth that Jesus Christ is Lord, and believe in your heart that God raised up from the dead, you shall be saved," [Romans 10:9].  That was the word I needed to hear, "Shall be," not "Possibly," not "Maybe," "Shall be."
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And then I went back and read it myself.  And then it, of course, led to you reading other things, and then it led to other things.  But I realized that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That you needed salvation more so than the baptism.  The baptism was just the beginning, but you realized that you needed the salvation.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the baptism had to mean something, and it--
Speaker 1: You have to have salvation.
Story_ID: 436431
Speaker 1: If Christ didn't mean anything, and you only did it because you had a vague idea that death may be at the door, and you don't wanna go to hell.  And then I needed--I, I needed to evaluate the difference between heaven and hell because to a lot of people, hell is heaven--dumbly, but that's basically what it is.  And so, you know, it led me to have to get very interested in His word, and to not be ashamed to talk about it because He says, "If you're ashamed of me, if you deny me before man, I'll deny you before my God."  Black people, we grew up with that, now we've turned from--the only difference between black people and the children of Israel is the date and the time.  Remember when Moses goes up and he sees the bushes burning and not burning, and he says, "Lord have you not heard the cries of your children in Egypt?"  And he says, "Not only have I heard their cries, but I have seen their afflictions at the hands of their taskmasters," and he says, "I'm gonna send you, Moses, to free 'em," right?  Moses go and free the children of Israel, they leave, they leave Egypt, he brings 'em to God's mountain, God goes--Moses goes up to get the law, wasn't gone forty days.  When he came back, they had already built 'em a new garden.  But we couldn't go in the stores and eat those old tasteless hamburgers they had in there, and God heard our cries and he freed us, and what did we do?  Just as soon as we got these little dinky little houses and stood on the backs of others who have died for us.  Nothing worse than having to deal with black people when a lot of us get positions.  Now, if you think I'm lying, take that camera (laughter), go in Alabama Power [Alabama Power Company, Birmingham, Alabama], Alabama Gas [Alabama Gas Corporation, Birmingham, Alabama], or any of the banks, and deal with some of them black folks that greet you at the door.  "What do you want?"  And I don't hesitate to tell 'em, "Hey, hey, don't bring your attitude to me.  It's because of people who died to get you in those positions."  Let me give you a funny thing that happened to me.  Some people came here doing business with the county, and they picked up the checks and came to talk to me about some business items, and they went down to the local bank down here.  I won't tell you which one it is because it applies to all of 'em.  And these two white guys walked in and walked up to the tellers, big checks now, gave 'em their checks to cash.  They never said anything except, "Thank you, sir," "Yes, sir," "Thank you," cashed their checks.  Well, I walked up there, I signed the checks!  Gave her my check, and then she wanted to know my driver's license number, my--, "You give me a picture of your kid."  I raised a million dollars' worth of hell, but nothing's changed except the date, the time, and our attitude about things.  Let me tell you, I was pretty bitter for a long time about being beat down and this sort of thing, and disrespected, until I came to another passage in scripture that said, "God has the respect of none of us."  You know, this whole racial thing we got, that's black folks and white folks playing games to put somebody down.  But the fact of the matter is, God says, your pedigree, who you are, where you live, your car that you own, doesn't mean a thing.  Once I came to understand that, I now do not allow people to push my buttons--not on racial issues.  Now, it's an issue that it is what it is.  Now, I force people to have to deal with me on the facts of a situation because the facts will render most people null and void, including me.
Speaker 2: Hm.
Speaker 1: But I can't understand--God is still in control, baby.  Don't you kid yourself.  In the midst of all this, God still has the last say.
Speaker 2: He's always been in control.
Speaker 1: Trust me when I tell you, the world doesn't know it--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --but he has the final say on all of this.
Story_ID: 436432
Speaker 1: What made you--you started at a Baptist church, and what made you go to a Catholic church (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A Catholic church?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, well, my wife [Melva Ferguson Langford] was Catholic.  When I first saw that woman with the pretty blue jeans on out there as she was coaching that church softball team (laughter); you know, you have to go where your heart leads you.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But let me be clear about two things about the differences between Catholicism and a Baptist church.  Both of those are denominations, see?  People think that Catholicism is a denomination--I mean it's a religion.  It is not a religion, it's a denomination, and I have had a lot of problems in the Catholic church because I don't believe in a lot of the things that are traditions within the church.  But the fact of the matter is I can still go to the church, I can still participate in Mass, but the one thing that I do get out of it more than anything else is that they have Mass every Sunday.  And the church I was attending it was once a month maybe, and I realized that the Lord says, "As often as you do," speaking of community of the Eucharist and all.  "Do this in remembrance of me."  I like to plead with him once a week, every chance I get.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But that was the basic difference, but as long as Jesus is the basis of the religion, or the basis of the service, then it's not a problem, and the denomination is academic.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, you were going to tell me a story about having ten people at a bible study that you were teaching (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, you know, when I first started teaching bible study in the class, I did it as a favor--come and speak to this little group, and it went from ten people, and within a couple of years it had gone to almost three hundred people in this class, and it's still that many people now, so we had to move it to 9:30 on Monday mornings to keep that class manageable and controllable because if not, we did it in the afternoons, you couldn't get in the building.  And see, in this class that I deal with, you cannot tell me what you think.  I'm not interested in what you think.  What does scripture say, because scripture will interpret scripture.  And so I spend about ten, fifteen hours a week just depending on what the subject matter is for the following Monday, reading the Bible, researching it, the history of it, and so forth.  So I--that's what I do for fun.  There were a lot of people--I've never been able to drink, you know.  Got drunk one time in my life--I was seventeen years old, and--you can open liquor around me, particularly vodka, and it'll make me sick even to this day.  And unlike some folks who said, "I tried marijuana once," I never tried drugs at all.  My mother [Lillian Cotton Langford] would kill you--the thought that you would do it.  But I guess it's--you know, we all got other habits, as I'm fanatical for ice cream and cookies, you know.  I eat a pint of ice cream seven nights a week, and a half a box of vanilla wafers every night.  And I see how you're shaking your head, I've never--you know what?  I haven't gained or lost a pound in thirty years.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Might be--maybe a new diet for America (laughter).
Story_ID: 436433
Speaker 1: What other organizations are you involved with?
Speaker 2: None.
Speaker 1: None at all?
Speaker 2: I'm not a group person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, no.  Nothing bothers me more than to have a group decision made about nothing.  If you see a problem, just fix it.  I don't need to study it to death.  I've--not to say I hadn't served on some boards, that's why I got off those boards and those committees.  Well, the child was hungry.  The child is not--that child isn't interested in the cholesterol content of eggs.  The child is hungry, feed him!  We'll worry about that tomorrow.  The child is naked, clothe the kid!  The child is not interested how much of it is microfiber, how much of it is cotton.  We study everything and we put a study in place when we don't wanna do anything.  So, if you don't wanna do anything, just go study it to death.
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: My attitude is if you see something, if it's a problem out there, go fix it.  I saw a sign on the back of a car that says, "Pray that the Lord takes the drug epidemic away."  He didn't give you that, that's the choice you made.  We wanna blame God for everything and then we want him to fix everything without us having to do anything, you know.  Lord, save me.  Well, he could do that because he has that power; the question is, "Why should I save you?"  Do you know who you're talking to?  You know, there's a parable Jesus gave that fits all of us to it.  You've got the rich, young ruler, and he comes to Jesus and he says to him, "Good master, what must I do to be saved?"  I love--you know, if you go read the Bible, Jesus was totally no-nonsense, he just cut right to the chase.  He says to the guy, "Why callest thou me good?"  Not what, "Do you know who you're talking to?"  Because Jesus' responses was, he said, "There is none good but one God, yet you call me good master."  But at the time, to call someone good master when this parable--when he spoke of this parable, it was the highest form of flattery you could get to give to the teachers of the law, so Jesus says, "None is good but one God; do you know who you talking to?  Do you know that you are talking to God in the flesh?"  And our problem is 90 percent of the time, not only do we not know who we're talking to, we don't know what we're talking about (laughter).
Story_ID: 436434
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, what are your hopes for the African American people?
Speaker 2: That we turn back to the Lord, that we get a real understanding that you didn't get where you are because of who you are.  You know, it's like--out of all we've been through as a race of people--let me be clear.  See, it's easy to talk about what we--the sufferings we had.  If God had not changed and touched the hearts of a whole lot of white folks, we'd still be picking cotton.  We don't like to talk about that because our plight has to be equated with self-actualization, but the fact of the matter is there were a lot of white folks who died saying, "What was done to black people is wrong.  They are not second-class citizens, they are God's creation.  Do the right thing."  But you see, I didn't come to that realization because in my life it was just much easier to, to blame every--if you were white, hell, you were the devil--until I come to realize what the Lord had said about us, well, society has proven.  We spend a lot of time, valuable time, worrying about what other people think about us, or trying to justify ourselves to people.  I don't have to justify myself to you and you don't have to justify yourself to me.  Jesus took care of that on Calvary.  We got to get back to that.  Why trying to--who you trying to prove something to?  At the end of the day, do you know what?  Going back to my mom [Lillian Cotton Langford], my mom used to say, "Never justify your actions.  Your friends don't need it and your enemies aren't gonna believe it anyway, so what are you worried about it for?"  But I want mamas and daddies in the black race to get back to being the parents we were before we became affluent.  You know, it really bothers me when I go to the mall.  Sometimes, I go to the mall and sit there just to watch us.  We take our little boys to the mall, we punch holes in their head, we put earrings in 'em, his pants down, his butt showing, don't nobody wanna hire him, he's calling our daughters bitches and whores, we're accepting it, so he can't figure out what's wrong.  Our daughters are becoming mothers before they're becoming wives.  But there was a time in my lifetime where if you did something wrong in the community, everybody in that community would beat your butt--knock you out, and wouldn't think nothing about it.  When your parents came home, you got another butt-whipping.  But now, you can't whip your children because we'd hurt the children; they're just too--no, your daughters are just too good to be touched.  You need to go home and kick they wagon wheel off.  We go out and pay $120 for a pair of sneakers for a twelve-year-old child.  Are you crazy?  He can't jump any higher in a twenty dollar pair than he can in a hundred dollar pair--got the name of somebody's, of--you don't even know, tattooed on your child's butt.  Who is Tommy Hilfiger, and when was the last time he was invited to your house or you went to his?  Pants down, you're a thirty-two [inches] in the waist, you wear a--you're about thirty-eight [inches].  Do you--our children got to be taught those are prison fashions.  In jail, you can't wear a belt.  Pants are too big, they fall off you.  Earrings in your ears?  Black kings wore earrings--name one.  You know what?  We need to remember what it was like when we didn't have anything, when we had to depend on each other.
Speaker 1: We can remember those things, but the generations coming up don't remember them.
Speaker 2: It's our fault.  We can't blame white folks for that, that's us.
Story_ID: 436435
Speaker 1: So, what is your suggestion for getting to that point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The church needs to go back and, and fulfill its role as a church.  I have the highest respect for the Jewish population.  I have a high respect for all people, including my own people, but I have a particular love affair with the history of the Jewish people because they'll never let you forget it either.  The Holocaust will never happen again because they will never let you forget that it happened, no matter how much people say, "It didn't happen."  It did happen.  But you know, the difference between the Jewish population and us is that they're gonna make you know about 'Schindler's List' or, or go back and read 'The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich' ['The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany,' William L. Shirer].  And do you know Hitler [Adolf Hitler] professed to be a Christian?  He said that God would see that what they were doing was right.  But nobody talks about the millions of Africans who drowned on ships being brought back to this country.  But the other thing they don't tell you is that it was black folks who sold black folks into slavery (laughter).  Think about it.  When I tell you we're out of touch with the world, we're out of touch with the world.  We talk about slavery and people owning people.  In the 1600s, 1650, 1670, they had to pass a law in Virginia to stop black folks from buying white folks.  In Louisiana, they had to pass two laws to stop black folk from buying white folks.  We had bought so many white folks down there in New Orleans, Louisiana until they had to pass a law to stop it. Don't take my word.  Go to the library, go to the law books, look it up.  So we're all guilty of this stuff.  But to hate someone because of the pigmentation of their skin, see that's a real sickness.  But we don't have pride in who we are because we don't teach 'em anymore, and we can't blame anybody for that but us.  You wanna give 'em an instant piece of history that hopefully will lead us to something better.  Make it clear to them that if black folks and white folks came together to stop the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] from driving through our neighborhoods killing us in the--under the cover of darkness, those people didn't die so we could drive through our own neighborhoods and blow each other away during the broad open daytime.  See, that's the history we don't wanna hear about, we wanna hear about the black guy who rose from poverty--from the projects to become president of the county commission.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  I didn't get there because of me, I got there on the backs of a whole lot of people who went before me.  That's why when I see people on the streets, the differences between me and a lot of politicians, if you walk the streets with me, everybody comes up to speak to me because I hadn't forgotten.  I'm not sitting in the ivory tower to the exclusion of the people who put me there.  Never forget where--how you got there.  Don't burn down those bridges or you may have to cross 'em.  That's--we're not teaching.  We can't blame no one for that but us.
Story_ID: 436436
Speaker 1: What would be your message to the future generations?
Speaker 2: Well, if there is one, there would be people here.  Find the Lord, put Him into your life, don't become caught up in this world, know that this world is a dying world.  Find love somewhere, learn to love somebody.  Tear down the walls you--all of us got walls built up around ourselves.  Most marriages just do not last because of the walls we bring to the marriage.  Most marriages do not last because of the amount of baggage we bring to the relationship.  It's not enough you already got your problems, now you marry me now you got my problems.  Learn to find what love is, and be true to yourself.  But any society that does not know the Lord is a society that is destined for destruction, and we are dying very fast because we believe in ourselves, and you can't do nothing but make a mess out of what you touch, kid.  Jesus is the answer for this society, for this world, and as long as Christ is not at the peace table, you will only have chaos.  Look around you, go to somebody's church, read a book, find out who you--seek the kingdom, and then treat everybody better than you treat yourself.  Don't be so quick to take a life.  You can't give it.  You have no right to take anything that you can't give.  Quit believing the hype, okay?  Learn to treat our women with more respect.  If you ever learn to respect your woman, life changes at home.  Were it not for our black women, our churches would be closed.  The real grounding that I have had in my life came because I married a good woman [Melva Ferguson Langford].  If something were to happen to her tomorrow, I would have a real difficult time, but my wife and I respect each other for who we are, you know?  There are no games, there are no airs, I can go home if I'm tired.  I don't have to go in a phone booth and come out with a red S on my chest, you know, trying to pretend I'm Superman.  There are days I don't have to fly for her, you know.  Just learn to let the wall down low enough to let somebody come in unconditionally.  Everybody's not out looking to destroy you.  You might find there are a lot of times and a lot of people out there who--if you ever experience genuine love, it changes your attitude about a lot of things.  You start--you look at life a little bit different, you're not so quick to get angry, and--but the two of you have to find the Lord, and don't be unequally yoked.  If you're a believer in the Lord, don't go marrying some non-believer.  Spend a little bit more time and find, find out about these folks before you go jump in bed with these folks, 'specially nowadays, 'cause you jump in bed with the wrong one now, you be walking down the street your whole butt fall off, you know, with all this stuff going on in this society out here.  We're passing out stuff out here even medical science had never heard of.  And so if we ever learn to control the self a little bit, and read, it'll take you places your wallet can never take you.
Story_ID: 436437
Speaker 1: Is there anything in your life that you have not done that you would like to do?
Speaker 2: I would like to visit the Holy Land.  I would like to--I had an opportunity to go to Israel once, and I didn't take advantage of it.  I would just like to see the Sea of Galilee.  I would like to visit the tomb where Jesus laid, and even if it's not the right place, I still wanna visit it because--whether it's the right one or not (laughter).  I just--I would like to experience that because when you read the Book of Revelation--I saw Jesus come back, I saw a new heaven and a new earth.  The New Jerusalem, since the center of the world--his millennial reign is gonna be from Jerusalem, I'd like to see it--the before and the after.  I know what the before is, but that thousand-year reign from where Satan has been locked in the abyss for a thousand years, never to deceive the nations anymore, and yet Jesus will still have to rule with an iron scepter.  Isn't that amazing?  He will have to rule this earth with an iron scepter because we cannot blame it on the devil--, "And the devil made me do it."  He won't be here, but think about it--at the end of that millennial reign, and when Satan is loosed upon the earth for that--for a short while, forty-two months (laughter), he still will be able to deceive even the elective God.  Arm yourself, put on the armor of the Lord, understand what you're up against, and remember that God did not put hinges on our arms for one reason only.  Quit patting yourself on the back, okay?  If he had wanted us to pat ourselves on the back, he'd have put hinges on our arms (laughter).  Learn to give a little bit, lighten up, learn to smile, learn to laugh.  Best medicine on the planet.  If you do that, I think we still have a chance.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there anything that we have not spoken about that you would like to speak on (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I have talked to you more about my life than I've ever talked to anybody about my life.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right.
Speaker 2: Now, usually, I won't take--I won't do these interviews.  I was curious to know what it is you all do--why were you coming to talk to me?  Why me?  'Cause there are a lot of people you could have talked to a lot more interesting than I am.
Speaker 1: Well, hopefully--it's about the stories of people's lives (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, well, my story is I'm scared as hell of going to hell (laughter).  And so hell has scared the hell out of me (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, well if that's it, we'd like to thank you so much for taking the time to do this interview.
Speaker 2: It's been a pleasure.
Story_ID: 436438
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, go ahead.  Just tell us, you know, who this is and when it was taken, and where (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that good-looking guy you're looking at right there (laughter), that's me in the United States Air Force--very, very early years.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And what you're looking at now, in my pastime, I love to fish, and I went to a private lake a friend of mine owned, and of course the eighteen-pound bass--of course you know that's a fish lie (laughter), but the bass weighed almost ten pounds.  And every chance I get, I go out to the water to fish.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great.  Next?
Speaker 1: That picture there, that is Bishop David Foley [David Edward Foley].  He is the bishop of the Catholic diocese [Roman Catholic Diocese of Birmingham in Alabama] here in Birmingham [Alabama], and he and I are very good friends.  You need all the friends you can get who know the Lord (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now that lovely lady there is my wife; that is Melva [Melva Ferguson Langford], we've been married twenty-five years, and--we didn't talk about it on the camera but, you know, she begged me to marry her.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: I was walking down the streets and she just grabbed me around the ankle, and she said, "Please, please, please," and been with her twenty-five years (laughter).  That's my story, and I'm sticking to it (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Well, we heard on tape about all the preparation that went into that moment (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm here to tell you, I am here to--you got that right.  I'm telling you, boy (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay, that's fine.  Okay, what's this one?
Speaker 1: Now, that picture there--I was at a speaking engagement, and the young man you see in the wheelchair has a terminal illness.  And it was a black history series out there and this child is dying.  I gave him a bunch of money for a birthday party for him and his class, so that they--and this is just part of my weakness there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good shot.  Okay, next?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--as you can see, my hair is getting grayer by the day.  When I first got into politics it was--my hair was jet black.  One little gray patch I picked up from my mom [Lillian Cotton Langford], but politics'll do it to you.
Speaker 1: What year is this, do you know?
Speaker 2: That was 2003.  I can tell it by the tie--I'm a tie fanatic.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Does one have a party affiliation here in Birmingham?  Are you guys all Independents?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I'm a Democrat, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, and then this one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, those are some of my old friends right there.  That's Hank Collins, Danny Fields--people that I worked with when I was mayor of the City of Fairfield [Alabama]--my fishing buddies.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, good.  Next?
Speaker 2: Now, you got to be sure you get a picture of my ja- I'm a jazz player; it's on the table over there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  I had the piano player and bassist over your shoulder (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  Now, that picture you're looking at right there, that is a picture that is at VisionLand park [VisionLand; Alabama Splash Adventure, Bessemer, Alabama].  The people who built the park took parts of their profits and built a carving out there of me holding two kids at the park.  That's that picture right there, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, nice, okay.  Next?  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's when I was being sworn in for my second term as the county commissioner.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  That was what year?
Speaker 2: That was '06 [2006].  Yeah, it's one of those little ugly black and white photos.  I don't photograph real well, but it was one of the many pictures.  We use that when I'm speaking at various places for cabaret artwork.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Is this the same--
Speaker 1: That's a different swearing in, yeah.  Now, that picture there is when I was being sworn in the first time, and that was in 2002.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good, next?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a picture of my wife.  We were at the Fairfield Civic Center [Fairfield, Alabama], and it was one of those regional meetings where we had a lot of elected officials out there as we dedicated the facility, and that was about 2002.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Great.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah, that picture there was speak--that was in two thousand--I believe that was in 2002 or 2003, speaking at the inauguration-ship when I was being sworn in for the last time as mayor the City of Fairfield.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Of course, that picture there is a picture of me trying to look serious.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay?
Speaker 2: This is the last one.
Speaker 1: I was at a function for Alabama Power [Alabama Power Company, Birmingham, Alabama], speaking at a program for them, and that's Bobbie Knight who's the senior vice president with the Alabama Power, and I have a lot of speaking engagements every year, and they just took a picture of that occasion for us.
