Story_ID: 199733
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Spencer Leak, Sr.  S-P-E-N-C-E-R, L-E-A-K, Sr.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 15, 1937, here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm a funeral director, licensed funeral director, among other things (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you've filled various positions in state government as well?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I've had--I've filled many positions in state government.  Right now, I'm a commissioner for the Illinois Department of Human Rights.
Story_ID: 199734
Speaker 1: Now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?  This is I guess January the 22nd--21st or 22nd, 2004, sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the Leak & Sons Funeral Home [formerly, A.R. Leak Funeral Home], 7838 South Cottage Grove [Avenue].
Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: In Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 199735
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask, and they just require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food I guess is fish and chips.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have several.  But my favorite, I guess, is that, "The most powerful force in the universe is an idea whose time has come" [Victor Hugo].
Story_ID: 199736
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  And I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Andrew Leak, Sr.] side of the family.  We'll start with your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her name is, Dorothy Steger was her maiden name, S-T-E-G-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth would have been September the 3rd, 1908.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: Well, I only know of my mother speaking of her mother, my maternal grandmother, as being a very beautiful woman who died very early in life.  I believe she was still in her twenties when she died.  But I remember my mother recounting that she was very beautiful, dark-haired, and a very loving woman.  And my mother was--never really got over the fact that she died so early in my mother's life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And therefore, my mother then was raised by her stepmother.  Her father married after my mother--her mother passed away.
Speaker 1: Is there any information about your mother's father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Not my mother's father's side of the family.  I really don't know that much about--the fact that he was--Rueben Steger was her father.  And I only know that he was a landowner in Alabama, and that at one time he was a prominent landowner, but was greatly affected by the stock market crash in '29 [1929] and lost most of his land holdings.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Steger is a German name, right I guess?
Speaker 2: I believe it is a German name, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there any story about the origin of it, or anything that you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know the origin of the name, but I know that it was a prominent name in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were brothers, but that's all I recall her telling me about because I never knew him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what part of Alabama is this?
Speaker 2: This was Huntsville, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Huntsville--
Story_ID: 199737
Speaker 1: What about your father's side of the family?  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Andrew Robert Leak, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth would have been November the 28, 1908.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in, I guess it was Hensley, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Hensley?
Speaker 2: H-E-N-S-E-L-E-Y [sic.], Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, how far back can you trace your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, I really can't go back any further than--I don't even recall my father's--my grandfather's name, or my grandmother on my father's side.  I just know that they were residents of North Carolina and then moved to Arkansas.  And then they had, I guess over twelve children.  My father had about twelve siblings.  But other than that, that they originated in North Carolina, I know really nothing about my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Are there any stories from that side of the family about life in the 19th century, Reconstruction or Civil War or slavery or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, I really don't have any recount of that.  It has always been my intention to really do a check of my family history, both on my mother [Dorothy Steger Leak] and my father's side, but I've never had the opportunity.  However, I intend to do that.  But I really don't have any history from my mother's father or my father's father or mother or ancestors--
Story_ID: 199738
Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother [Dorothy Steger Leak] and--you know, how did she grow up?  And what was she like, you know?  What kind of personality did she have?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was a very outgoing person.  She was for all intents and purposes a white woman.  In that day and era, if you had one drop of Negro blood, you were considered Negro.  But for all intents and purposes, she was white, living in a--she grew up on a farm.  Her mother and father [Rueben Steger], we owned a farm.  They obviously had large holdings because they had sharecroppers who were white and black who worked their land along with them, and they were--so, I understand from her that she had a very normal childhood, other than the fact that her mother died when she was very young.  And her stepmother was not a cruel person.  It was just, I think my mother just never got over the fact that her mother had died so early, and she just could not adjust properly.  But she spoke well of her stepmother.  There was never anything negative other than the fact that she was just not her mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Did she go to school there in Huntsville [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: She went to school there.  And during that time, I think they had the old schoolhouses.  She spoke well of several teachers who were--her and her sister were classmates.  And she spoke--I just don't recall their names--but she spoke well of them.
Story_ID: 199739
Speaker 1: And then she [Leak's mother, Dorothy Steger Leak] was a very beautiful woman, and so she was sought out by many of the gentlemen of that area.  And many were very disappointed when she married my dad [Andrew Leak, Sr.] because he was not from that area.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So they met, they met in Huntsville [Alabama]?
Speaker 1: Well, it was sort of an arrangement.  They actually--it was sort of an arrangement where an aunt of my mom's was familiar with a relative of my dad's.  And so, they arranged a meeting, and that meeting took place in Huntsville, Alabama.  And they were subsequently married there.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's interesting.  That doesn't happen that much anymore, you know, but that's interesting.  Sort of an arranged (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, but it was one of the old-fashioned--where I have a niece, you have a nephew, I think we should arrange for that.
Speaker 2: Okay, they had spanned so much territory, from Alabama to Arkansas that's pretty--
Speaker 1: Yes, right, that's true.
Speaker 2: That's a long distance there.  Now, did your mother--now she--yeah, you said she attended school in Huntsville?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And your parents, when they moved to Chicago [Illinois], they moved together then right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, my father was already living in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My father had been married prior to marrying my mother, and he had taken residence in Chicago.  So, he migrated here before their marriage.  And then after their marriage, then my mother moved to Chicago.
Speaker 2: Okay--
Story_ID: 199740
Speaker 1: Well, let's hear about your father [Andrew Leak, Sr.].  What was your father like, and how did he grow up?  And how did he end up in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, he was a product of the rural area of Arkansas, and he was a part of that great migration of Negroes from the South looking for employment, looking to--in my father's case, his dream had always been to open up a business.  And so he was looking for business opportunities.  And he came to Chicago and he married a young lady that he knew in the Quinn Chapel A.M.E. Church [Chicago, Illinois].  They sang in the choir together and they met.  They married, and my father worked various jobs during that time--insurance man, whatever, you know, was available at the time.  When he and my mother [Dorothy Steger Leak] married, he was a washroom attendant at the Chicago World's Fair.  And--
Speaker 1: This is 1933.
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-three [1933], right, and that was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Century of Progress [International Exposition], right?
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And my father worked there, and was able to save enough money from working there on the tips and his salary that he was able to save enough money to go into business.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so he was--okay.  He moved to Chicago would you say--well, what year would you say he moved to Chicago?
Speaker 2: I think he--
Speaker 1: Initially.
Speaker 2: Initially, he came to Chicago in the late '20s [1920s], 1927, '28 [1928], somewhere in that area.
Speaker 1: So, he was married for just a brief period of time?
Speaker 2: Just a brief period of time to his first wife.  They had a son, my brother, Eddie Leak.  And they had a son and then after the marriage ended, then his son then went to live with his mother, of course.  And his mother remarried and then relocated.  And then my father married my mother.
Story_ID: 199741
Speaker 1: So, they're [Leak's parents, Dorothy Steger Leak and Andrew Leak, Sr.] in Chicago [Illinois] in 1933?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And do you know what inspired him to get involved in the funeral business?
Speaker 2: I know that he was in, he was an insurance salesman during that time.  And he was selling, I think United Insurance.  And I think because of the close association that insurance companies had with funeral homes--in that time there were what you call burial insurance companies who insured African Americans just for the purpose of having funds to be able to bury a loved one.  And so, therefore, there was a close connection with funeral homes.  And I think he just graduated in from the insurance agent to funeral director because of the fact that he felt that there was an opportunity for--because of segregation, and the fact that there were so many black people now moving into Chicago, the need was there for black funeral homes to take care of their dead.  So, therefore, he just--the transition from insurance agent to funeral director was a very easy transition.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your father have a chance to go to college when he was coming up or--?
Speaker 2: My father, once he decided that he wanted to go into the funeral business, he went back to--he did not have a--I think he may have had a grade school education when he came to Chicago.  And he then went to school at night, at either Phillips High School [later, Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] or one of the high schools.  He went and got what we call the equivalent of a GED [General Educational Development], which then allowed him to go to Worsham Mortuary College [Worsham College of Mortuary Science, Chicago, Illinois, later, Wheeling, Illinois], which is located on the West Side of Chicago.  And it was a college that required, I think, about a nine-month course.  And with a subsequent apprenticeship, you would--he would have been able to be licensed after a year.  So, and that's what he did.  And he was successful, and he graduated from Worsham College in 1937.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Prior to that time, he was already in the funeral business, he was just not licensed.  He was working under a licensed funeral director who was a partner with him.  And the funeral home was called Unity Funeral Home [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay so this is in 1933, right, started Unity Funeral?
Speaker 2: This is in the mid-'30s [1930s], yes, starting in 1933.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then of course after he was licensed, then he--the partners, they kept the business intact until they dissolved the partnership.  And then my father sold the Unity Funeral Home corporation name to the Unity Insurance Company, who were developing a funeral home, and they wanted to use the same name for their funeral home as their insurance business.  So, A.W. Williams was the president of the Unity Insurance Company [Unity Mutual Life].  And my dad sold the Unity Funeral Home name, corporate name, to Mr. A.W. Williams.  And then we became A.R. Leak Funeral Home [later, Leak & Sons Funeral Home, Chicago, Illinois] at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, this is 1936 or '37 [1937].
Speaker 2: We're saying late '30s [1930s], early '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it was founded under A.R. Leak in 1938 or so?
Speaker 2: Well, Leak & Sons [Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois] came after my father died.  But it was A.R. Leak Funeral Home prior to that.
Story_ID: 199742
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about growing up.  I mean, how many brothers and sisters do you have first of all?
Speaker 2: I have three brothers--Andrew [Leak], Junior [Leak], and Leon [Leak].  Well, it's three of us.  It was, I had three brothers.  Eddie Leak, I was not aware of his existence until I was a teenager.  And then that's when we, we found that my father [Andrew Leak, Sr.] had been married.  We just didn't know.  My mother [Dorothy Steger Leak] knew, but we just, it was just something that had not been discussed with us until we were in our teens.  And then we met our, my brother, for the first time during that time.  And then we've been, we've been brothers ever since.  But--
Speaker 1: Okay, so you have two brothers?
Speaker 2: So I have two full, and then Eddie is my half-brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the other brothers are Andrew, Jr. and--
Speaker 2: And Leon--
Story_ID: 199743
Speaker 1: What was your first childhood memory?  Can you remember what you first--?
Speaker 2: My first childhood memory?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I guess my first childhood memories was going to school.  I can remember--just vaguely I remember playing with my brothers in our yard prior to going to kindergarten and beginning--but I remember clearly going to school that first instance when I was about five years old.  So, that's where I have clear memories of the day to day things in kindergarten, and then going to first and you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: But prior to that, I just have vague memories of just general playing and playful activities with my brothers.
Story_ID: 199744
Speaker 1: What neighborhood did you live in when you came up?
Speaker 2: I, we grew up at 19 E 37th Street.  So, it's really in the Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] area now.  But that was our family home from the time that I was born until I was a teenager, and then we moved from that family home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about growing up.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up, you know, in that neighborhood in Bronzeville in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was a typical neighborhood, I guess, what we now call the ghetto.  It was, it was a neighborhood made up of a combination of homes and apartments that were interspersed.  We were cognizant of the fact that we were poor.  It was, we knew that times were hard when I was growing up, because we did not have the amenities that even other children in the neighborhood had.  So, we were aware of the fact that we were poor.
Story_ID: 199745
Speaker 1: He [Leak's father, Andrew Leak, Sr.] had already founded the funeral home [A.R. Leak Funeral Home, later, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: He had a business.  But that business for many years during the time that I was growing up, was just a business that--we barely made it.  My dad worked other jobs, and the funeral home was something that he was trying to build.  But in order for us--to feed us, there were other jobs that he worked.  He worked as a dishwasher at the old Toffenetti restaurant [Toffenetti-Triangle, Chicago, Illinois].  And he worked--so he worked until he got to the point where he could take care of his family without having outside work.  And so, but that was, you know, I was much older then.  So, I remember just growing up and not having, you know, the material things that other kids had, as far as clothes.  And I remember not--the food not being as prevalent as--I remember my mother's [Dorothy Steger Leak] would fix soup, and we may eat soup maybe four or five times a week.  And then of course, hopefully, on Sunday there would be chicken.  And then if there was chicken, hopefully my father wouldn't bring ministers home and things like that, because the ministers, they would always get the--(laughter) we'd get the leftovers.  So, it was--so I just remember--
Speaker 1: That's a fear of many children.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  So I remember that--however, as poor as we were, that was something that was shared by most of the kids in that neighborhood [Bronzeville, Chicago, Illinois].  So, it wasn't one of those situations where we had many kids who could say, "Well, you don't have this, you don't have that" none of us had anything to speak of, as far as bicycles and things of that nature.  Later when I was in my early teens, I was able to, you know, get things like that.  But the neighborhood, the smell, it was--it was in the--we're talking about the '40s [1940s], mid-'40s [1940s].  And it was one of those neighborhoods where the men wore the zoot suits and the Cab Calloway hats.  And the ladies were in their period clothes, so I remember that.  I remember the fact that crime, or what we call street crime, I remember the transition from really the street crime to the gang activity.  So I remember that clearly, that there were several gangs in our area that kept up a lot of, you know, confusion, mayhem and whatever.  The Vagabonds was one.  The Deacons were... and these were street gangs.  I knew members of both.  And although I was not a member, I was aware of their gangland activities.  However, guns and drugs were not an issue then, it was just mayhem and--
Speaker 1: Territorial?
Speaker 2: Yeah, territorial.  Yes, you couldn't go here or there because--so, basically that's what it was.  But other than that, I was never threatened by gangs.  I was--we were, during that time the gangs had baseball teams, and there were--and I played on several teams.  So I was, I was thought to be a good softball--baseball player.  And so therefore, I was, I was always asked to be on several teams.  But basically that's--we may have a fight after a game or during a game or something--
Story_ID: 199746
Speaker 1: I enjoyed going to school.  I was very good at school, in grammar school.  I had--I was chosen for plays and to give an oratorical--or contests, things of that nature.  I was a part of that.  So I enjoyed grammar school, per se (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now--
Speaker 1: It was the [Benjamin W.] Raymond [Elementary] School at 37th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Is it still there?
Speaker 1: It's still there.
Speaker 2: Okay, Raymond School.  Okay.  Who were some of the students and teachers at Raymond School that you remember?
Speaker 1: Oh, that is funny you should ask that because I met Miss Douglas [ph.] yesterday at a funeral service.  She's eighty-five years old now.  She was a teacher at Raymond School.  Was very, she's been very influential throughout my life, because she sort of followed me through.  She was always interested in the things that I was doing.  But I remember her.  She was very beautiful at the time, so naturally, you know, everybody had a crush on Miss Douglas.  But she was very energetic, beautiful woman who was very nice.  And so I just remember her.  There were several other teachers.  Miss Brown [ph.] and as you notice, I never knew these ladies' first names because it was always Miss Brown, Miss Douglas.  Miss Patterson [ph.] I remember Miss Patterson because of the fact that in those days teachers were allowed to spank.  And Miss Patterson was one who used to, who I think enjoyed spanking me.  Mrs. Dixon [ph.], though, I guess of all of the teachers, I remember her most.  She was a teacher, her--she was from a prominent family.  She, her son now is a federal judge in California.
Story_ID: 199747
Speaker 1: You were talking about one of your teachers, Miss Dixon [ph.], who became a lawyer, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Miss Dixon.  And I remember she always tried to motivate us by telling us about her son, who was, I guess a college student then, who then went on to law school and then subsequently he became a federal judge.  And he's now, he sits in the Los Angeles Circuit [Los Angeles, California].  But she was, she saw in me something that--and I was just a kid at the--you know, at that age.  She was my seventh grade teacher in grammar school [Benjamin W. Raymond Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  But she expected much more out of me than I was giving to her, and she never let me forget it.  And I appreciate that now.  At the time I just thought--you know, my perception of her was shared by most of the kids--that she was a very mean woman, and vindictive.  But in reality, she was not.  She was, she just--she was no-nonsense, didn't take any prisoners, and expected certain things.  And I appreciate that now, but I remember her more vividly than any teacher I had in grammar school.
Story_ID: 199748
Speaker 1: What sort of a young man were you in grammar school [Benjamin W. Raymond Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]?  Did you, I mean did you have a lot of friends?  Were you outgoing?  What did you like to do?
Speaker 2: I had a lot of friends.  And I was sports-conscious, so I played a lot of ball.  And you know, you played everything then--basketball, football.  I recall the kids who lived on Michigan [Avenue], who we thought were the rich kids; we used to play football with them.  And they used to come and play in the school lots.  And they had pads, shoulder pads, and we just--knee pads and we were playing, of course, you know.  And I used to, we used to tackle those guys, and we didn't have any pads.  And I never will forget, you know, how they laughed at us, the fact that we were not prepared.  But we just couldn't afford, but it was the first time I ever encountered that, so I recall it.  But I was a fun-loving kid, you know, I had a lot of friends and I was considered popular.  People, you know, among the kids they knew me.  And I was into a lot of things at school--speeches and things of that nature--plays.   So, it was a lot of fun, even though I knew that times were hard.  Because my mother [Dorothy Steger Leak] and father [Andrew Leak, Sr.] would always let us know, "Hey, you know, we've got--it's a struggle here."  So, I never forgot that we were in the midst of a struggle in order to live.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did--
Speaker 2: Even though we had a business [A.R. Leak Funeral Home, later, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois], which I began as about an eleven or twelve year old kid working in my father's business while I was a grammar school student.  And I would have to leave my playmates after school and go to the funeral home, because the secretary was off work at about five o'clock.  And I would take her place as the telephone--I had to answer the telephone and watch the place, and cleaned up.  So, many days I'd either walk from 37th [Street] and State [Street] to 45th [Street] and State, which is where we were located then, 4405 South State Street.  Or, I finally was able to get a bike.  So then I rode my bike, or at that time I took the streetcar from 37th to 45th Street.  So, all of those--that's how I got to work.  But I had to work every day after school.  And then on Saturdays and Sundays I was expected to work at some point during--
Story_ID: 199749
Speaker 1: Now, that's before the projects were built on State Street [Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, that was before the projects.  In fact, we thought that the projects, we thought that that's where rich people lived.  You know, we saw these brand new buildings going up, so we said, "Hey, that's got to be neat."  And the kids from the projects and us, there was a separation there, and we, we did not socialize much.  The kids in the projects I guess socialized with kids in the projects.  And we just never, I guess we went to the same school, but we were never friendly with those kids.  And I guess it was just separation.  But we always thought that they were doing better than we were.
Speaker 1: Okay so they were built during the time that you lived in the neighborhood [Bronzeville, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The Ida B. Wells projects [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois] was built during the time I was there.  Because I used to play on the, we used to play on the land where the construction was going on.  So, there was always available land.  There was always hills and valleys and whatever, so we had a lot of fun playing.  But we always thought that those housing projects represented wealth and something new, you know, because we were living in houses and apartments were really not in good condition.  So, anything new was impressive to us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, now Ida B. Wells and the Madden [Park] Homes--I guess the Madden Homes were being built, right?
Speaker 2: The Madden Homes were at 37th [Street] and State Street, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that was just prior to our family leaving that area--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --going into at least what we knew were, you know, better surroundings.
Speaker 1: I was, I was referring earlier to the projects on State Street where 45th would be, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hum--
Speaker 1: --where I guess the original site of the funeral home [A.R. Leak Funeral Home, later, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois] was being--I guess it would be Stateway [Gardens Homes] or Robert Taylor [Homes]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Robert Taylor would have taken over the land, you know, the area where we had our funeral home.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Because that was our main funeral--that was the business address where our business sort of progressed. And there was a lot of transitions, and prepared us for the move here on Cottage Grove [Avenue].
Story_ID: 199750
Speaker 1: Now, did the family move from 37th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] or did--around that time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The family finally moved from 37th and Wabash to 5312 South Greenwood [Avenue]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].  My father [Andrew Leak, Sr.] was able to buy a building there.  And we lived in the second floor apartment, and he rented out the first and third floors.  So it was great for us as children, moving from 37th and State Street to Hyde Park.  It was, we thought now, hey, we're moving on up, you know.  (Laughter) And so, it was a quite a change, quite a change for us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how did the war change the situation in Chicago [Illinois] in that--?
Speaker 2: World War II [WWII]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, my dad was--because of the three children, he was exempt from service because of the family.  At least that's the way I recall it.  But he was drafted, but married with three children, exempted him.  So, he never went to service.  So I was not aware, I was not familiar, other than the sights of seeing soldiers, you know, guys in uniform.  That was my only recollection right after the, during the war and right after the war.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your economic life didn't get better during the war, or at all?
Speaker 2: Economic, well, I guess we just slowly progressed into--as we got toward the '50s [1950s], the business [A.R. Leak Funeral Home, later, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois] began to grow, and allowed us to move from 37th Street.  We sold that house and was able to buy this building in Hyde Park, and we lived there.
Story_ID: 199751
Speaker 1: Now, you attended Hyde Park High School [later, Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]?  Was that--
Speaker 2: I attended Englewood High School [later, Englewood Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] first when I, while I was still living at 37th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue].  And then when we moved to 53rd [Street] and Greenwood [Avenue], then I transferred to Hyde Park High School where I graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what year did you graduate?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-six [1956].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell me about--well, tell me about Englewood, then Hyde Park, and how they were different.  I understand from what I've read that in the old days, Englewood and Hyde Park were big rivals.
Speaker 2: We had a great rivalry as far as football and basketball, and there were always fights.  I remember the fights after the football and the basketball games.  Academically, Hyde Park was more, much more than Englewood as far as the levels of academic achievement.  So, that's, that was the difference other than the difference of Englewood and the Hyde Park area.  Hyde Park then was considered, you know, the neighborhood.  Hyde Park High School was the school.  It was at the time that I was going there, it was the number one school in the state in academic excellence.  So, I had a difficult time keeping up because of the fact that I was--well, I was really--at that time I thought I was God's gift to the women, the female population of Chicago [Illinois] (laughter).  So I was not, I was not as good a student as I should have been.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or as I was capable of being.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, Hyde Park was also like a, it was mostly white, right?
Speaker 2: It was.  Yes, it was mostly white, Jewish, mostly Jewish, and a lot of Japanese, Chinese students there.  And I think when I was there, I guess about maybe a third of the school was black, if that many.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was mostly white--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --and Asian.
Story_ID: 199752
Speaker 1: Now, who were some of your classmates and teachers at Hyde Park [High School, later, Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Oh, at Hyde Park.  The vice principal's name was Douglas [ph.]. I don't remember his name.  He was a very nice guy.  I remember him very well, although he died early in life after we left high school.  I remember Mr., the physics teacher, Mr.--what was his name?  Mr. Tapley [ph.] was my physics teacher.  And I had difficulty with physics so I remember him very well.  As far as students--you mean as far as their names are concerned?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Or anyone that you may know?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, that might have went to school with you.  I know Hyde Park has got a--there's a, there are quite a few notable people that--I mean, and even if they're not notable, if they were friends of yours, you might wanna talk about them.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it was--I remember Leon and Judy Albritton [ph.].  And I remember they--they were very good friends.  They were considered notable.  They--my goodness.  I don't have a good memory for names, especially when I'm going back.  The Shropshire family, the Shropshire family I remember.  There were several of those young people who were my schoolmates.  Donald Sharp, who is now a minister, pastor of Faith Tabernacle Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois], was in my graduating class.  There was a top rock and roll group who were very, became prominent during high school and after high school.  I can't for the life of me think of their names.  But they were all in my graduating class.  I'll think of that name in a minute.  Just happened--[HM Reverend Dr.] Leon [D.] Finney [Jr.], of course, of TWO [The Woodlawn Organization], [HM] Conrad [Walter] Worrill who is very prominent now, Melvin Mathis who is, who is a great basketball player.  And James McClure comes to mind.  He was an excellent basketball player for Hyde Park.  He became a doctor, that I had a very--and Connor Reese [ph.], when I was at the jail [Cook County Department of Corrections], I'll tell you about that.  But James McClure was very--during, Bettye Jo Taylor was the first Miss Black America.  That was a prominent beauty contest for young black girls.
Speaker 1: Miss Black America?
Speaker 2: She was the first.
Speaker 1: And she was a classmate of yours?
Speaker 2: Well, we were actually--we dated all during high school.  But she was from Houston, Texas, and when she won the contest then she came to live in Chicago [Illinois].  But she was very beautiful, and very prominent because of her achievements.  So, you know, the magazines and all of that were---I don't know, I just can't--names will come to me.  I just can't right--
Speaker 1: That's okay.  What about teachers?  Were there any particular teachers or individuals at Hyde Park that really took an interest--?
Speaker 2: Well, this one teacher, the vice principal, Douglas, he was very, sort of--he was a role model for me, a very good, excellent teacher.  And I remember him.  I'm just, I'm vague on the, I can't remember the--the other teachers will come to me.  I was--there was one.  The Chicago police officer assigned to Hyde Park was a guy that I became very close to during school, in a dubious manner, because of the fact that I was always cutting school and getting, and he was always chasing me, but we called him Hondo [ph.], Officer Hondo.  And he was a very, very interesting character, to say the least.  And so, I had many encounters with him.  But as far as teachers are concerned at Hyde Park, I just can't recall the names now.  In fact, I haven't even really thought about it for a long time.
Story_ID: 199753
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were basically, you said that you were distracted by girls, basically [at Hyde Park High School, later, Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I was really--exactly I was.  And I was not a good student.  You know, I was not a good student.  In fact, I did not graduate with my class because I was distracted, you know, by girls.  And I was with a lot of guys who of the same ilk.  And we were not bad kids in the sense that we were out stealing hubcaps and things of that nature.  But I was just not in with those kids who were serious about school, during that time.  And then I was working full-time at my father's business [A.R. Leak Funeral Home, later, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois].  By that time in high school, I was working full-time.  And so, therefore I guess I used that as an excuse for not studying as much as I should have.  And my father [Andrew Leak, Sr.], who was very wrapped up in the business, really was not--did not, didn't make the demands that a lot of fathers did on their kids as far as my academic, my academic--he just did not--
Speaker 1: So he sort of--
Speaker 2: --he wasn't there asking me about homework and things of that nature.  He was just concerned with the business and my contribution to the business.  That was our relationship, not so much me as a student, me as an athlete.  It was me and my relationship, and how I contributed to the business, because that was our life, the funeral home.  And so that was, we concentrated on that.  School was really seen as something that you had to do, but it was not prominent.  It was--our business was the most prominent thing in our life, and we worked constantly, trying to make this business successful, because we knew that's the only way that we could receive any manner of success in life is through our business.  So our focus was there, our concentration was there, and school was secondary.
Story_ID: 199754
Speaker 1: Did you ever think when you were in high school [Hyde Park High School, later, Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] that you might want to do something else other than be in the funeral home business?  I mean--
Speaker 2: I never thought of being anything else other than being in the funeral business.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: It just never, I never had aspirations to be a, you know, doctor or lawyer or Indian chief.  It just was always the business [A.R. Leak Funeral Home, later, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois].  I was wrapped up in it, and it was the business.  We talked the business at dinner, during off-hours.  Everything we did, as far as a family, was centered around the business.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you were, say, a senior in high school, did you have a sense that you were gonna go to college, you know, to pursue--
Speaker 2: I only had a sense that I was going to go to college to prepare me to go to be a funeral director.  And I had no sense of going to college to finish college.  It was just to get enough credit hours so that I would be able to enter mortuary college and get my mortuary degree, which enabled me to be a licensed funeral director.  So it was all--it was just that, and that alone, and everything emanated out of the funeral home.
Story_ID: 199755
Speaker 1: So after you graduated [from Hyde Park High School, later, Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] in '56 [1956], what did you do?  Did you just keep working, or did you try to go to school?
Speaker 2: I continued to work in the business [A.R. Leak Funeral Home, later, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois], and then I went to [Woodrow] Wilson Junior College [later, Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois].  And I became a student there, and on and off at Wilson Junior College until I became a student at Worsham College [of Mortuary Science, Chicago, Illinois, later, Wheeling, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think during those days, you had to have at least thirty credit hours in order to get into mortuary school.  And so, I worked to get those from Wilson Junior College.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Worsham College is on the West Side you said, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, near the County Hospital [later, John H. Stroger, Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] at that time, on West Jackson [Boulevard], yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  And this is the same college your father [Andrew Leak, Sr.] attended right to?
Speaker 2: This is the same school my father graduated from, yes, same school.
Speaker 1: Well, how did you, how did you find it?  I mean, many of us have never gone to mortuary school.  So, I mean, what does it consist of?  And how did you--how did you take to it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it's sort of like a pre-med school.  That's what I likened it to.  Everything was about a year, I guess, and everything was concentrated into that year.  And so you just--we had the anatomy, pathology, microbiology, chemistry, mortuary administration.  All of these were basic courses that we had to take, and really had to just cram and try to take these courses during the course of a day.  There was never any interim periods; you just went straight through.  And then you, you took your various exams for licensing after that.  But it was very difficult, because you had to cram so much into that short period of time.  And so, many of the kids, like myself, we would get enough credit here and there, and then finally you finished and you got your license.
Story_ID: 199756
Speaker 1: How did growing up around a funeral home [A.R. Leak Funeral Home, later, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois] affect you?  I mean, so many people are--some people are afraid of the funeral home.  It makes them sad.  And you know, sometimes it's an atmosphere where people, families come together like a family reunion.  Well, how did the business affect you in watching the people coming in and out, and working with the public?
Speaker 2: Well, I was not affected by death itself because I was, I grew up around the funeral home.  So therefore, death itself and the ramifications of death, I was not impacted by--if it was a situation where babies, or fire victims, or something like that, I was affected by that.  And so, I empathized with the families in that regard.  But for the most part, we were burying people that were older than I.  And so I just felt that that was natural, for the most part.  And so, I was not affected by it, psychologically affected by it.  I just saw it as business, and it was basically giving service and doing it better than our competitors.  That's what I was concerned about.  So, we wanted to be the best; we wanted to give the best service.  I wanted to be the nicest guy.  I wanted to--because it was--that business it was so highly competitive.  The relationship with ministers was very key to the success of our business.  You wanted to get in the good graces of pastors of churches so that they could recommend you.  So therefore, we were always going to church affairs, church sponsored events--trying to keep a good name among the pastors of especially the larger churches of our area, because it was tied to the business in a very significant way.  If a minister did not like you or did not--he would not recommend you.  And, and people of that era, during that--even now.  But especially then, a minister's approval or disapproval was very paramount to them.  And so that was--my father [Andrew Leak, Sr.] consequently had--most of his friends that I knew of were ministers.  And they would come to our home for dinner, and we would go out and socialize.  And those ministers recommended him, and this is how our business grew.  So, it was really church-oriented.
Story_ID: 199757
Speaker 1: About the time, I think it was in '54 [1954] or '55 [1955] that Emmett Till was killed in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: The funeral was here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: The funeral was here in Chicago.
Speaker 1: It wasn't at [A.R.] Leak [Funeral Home, later, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois], I don't believe, right?
Speaker 2: We did not service the family.  I believe it was Rayner Funeral Home [A.A. Rayner & Sons Funeral Home, Chicago, Illinois] that did.
Speaker 1: Bu it was a prominent event, and it must have affected--there must have been some talk in the community about it in terms of--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was, yeah.  Actually, it was really the start, I believe, of the civil rights revolution.  I remember going to the funeral and viewing his body, which was a very--the reason as far as those of us who were in the funeral business, we were interested because of the fact that the family chose not to have the funeral home make up the face.  They wanted the public to see him, disfigured as he was.  And so we thought that was very interesting.  We had never prepared a body, especially of a person who had died and the remains were put in a body of water, which caused very severe disfigurement.  So, we'd never seen a person shown without any preparation done, without any attempt to repair the damage done to his face.  So it was very interesting to us, as well as the notoriety of the death, because it was a national news story.
Story_ID: 199758
Speaker 1: It was a discussion as to whether Emmett Till was viewable.  Because all that we had heard, the accounts we had heard--we saw there were pictures taken of him when he was removed from the [Tallahatchie] River there.  And then we heard that Mrs. [Mamie] Mobley, or Mrs. Till, had decided that she would keep the casket open and not allow the funeral home to repair his face.  So we knew the public was not--had never seen, for the most part, a person that, in that grotesque position.  And so, we were curious to see how the public was going to respond to it.  And so, several of us went down.  I was a teenager at the time, I was still in high school [Hyde Park High School, later, Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And we went down to the church [Roberts Temple Church of God in Christ] at 40th [Street] and State Street [Chicago, Illinois] just to see him, and see how that worked.  So, it was quite an experience--
Story_ID: 199759
Speaker 1: When you came out of Worsham College of Mortuary Science [Chicago, Illinois, later, Wheeling, Illinois], it's--what year is it?
Speaker 2: Well, I came out in, I guess just before I went in the [U.S.] Army.  So, it must have been about '59 [1959], 1959.
Speaker 1: That's right, '59 [1959], okay.  So you went in the Army in 1959?
Speaker 2: I went in the Army in 1960.  I was drafted in, actually in '59 [1959], but I didn't go until 1960.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, 1960 was a big election year when [President] John [Fitzgerald] Kennedy.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960] was the actual--but by the time of the election, I was already in basic training.  But I was in Chicago [Illinois] during the, you know, the events leading into the election, and it was a very, very closely contested election between Kennedy and [President Richard Milhous] Nixon.  And so I was very, at that time I was politically astute.  And so, I was aware of the dynamics, the political dynamics, of what was going on.  And so, I was very interested in how the election was being waged, and the things that the Democratic machine in Chicago was doing in order to promote Kennedy's election.  So, it was a very interesting year for me.
Speaker 1: Yeah now, Mayor Richard J. Daley, it's been said that he was largely responsible for the margin of victory that John Kennedy enjoyed.
Speaker 2: Well, I think so, definitely here in Chicago.  And we had always stated, being in the funeral business, that the precinct captains would come to the funeral homes to get the names of people who had passed away, and those people's names wound up on the voting list.  So, we had a lot of clientele who voted and were not aware that they had voted (laughter).
Speaker 1: These are stories you hear about Chicago, but they're actually true.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is true.  These were true statements.  And people were voting once, twice, you know. And so, you know, the authorities were not watching closely, as they do now.  And so, a lot of funny things happened here in Chicago.  And I would imagine that Kennedy got a lot of votes that were not actually cast in a legal manner.
Story_ID: 199760
Speaker 1: Now being involved with a funeral home or a funeral mortuary in the black community is often a political--I mean there's a, you're privy to a lot of political relationships and what's going on in the city--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --because you see prominent people and who's related to em' and who's, you know?
Speaker 2: Right because funerals were a means by which local politicians would--during election years they would do a lot of campaigning by coming to the funerals in the community.  Because you had a large gathering of people, and if the politician made an appearance, then that was seen as a plus for him.  So, you had politicians who would call us seeking to come to funerals, especially prominent funerals where a large crowd was expected.  And so, we saw that.  There was always the, there was also the connection between funeral homes and the coroner's office.  At that time there was not a medical examiner, but there was an actual coroner of Cook County [Illinois], who was an elected official.  And there were deputy coroners who actually performed inquests.  And if a person was accidentally killed, or a victim of homicide, the inquest was actually held at the funeral home.  And I remember on so many occasions that where--especially in the cases of homicide--the actual defendant was brought in in handcuffs, and they had an actual inquest where the defendant may have been represented by legal counsel.  The deputy coroner was the judge, considered the judge, and then you had some political hacks that were the coroner's jury.  And I remember my job was to take the jury back to the morgue because they had to be sworn in over the body of the deceased.  And so they would, the coroner would swear in the jury.  And then our chapel then was used as the hearing room.  And I had to prepare the chapel for those hearings, and they became very interesting hearings.  A lot of evidence--because the evidence as to the circumstances of the homicide was gathered at that particular hearing.  And then the jury then would go into another room, and then they would make a decision that the death was indeed by homicide.
Speaker 1: So, the accused was actually brought into the presence--
Speaker 2: The accused was actually brought--
Speaker 1: --of the body?
Speaker 2: No, the accused never saw the body.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the accused was brought in by the police.  But only the jury was sworn in in the morgue where the body was.  And the deputy coroner then, who was a very powerful individual--he was a police officer, you know, he wore a gun.  And I remember they were very flamboyant, the coroners, the deputy coroners, you know because they were judge, jury, and whatever, and they wielded a lot of power.  And so, all of this happened in the funeral home setting.  So that was--and then of course then the coroner, the state outlawed the coroner's office.  It becomes the office of medical examiner.  And then the inquests were held at the county morgue after that.  But prior to that, they were done in the funeral homes.
Story_ID: 199761
Speaker 1: You went to the [U.S.] Army in 1960?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you stay over here in the [United] States, or did you go--
Speaker 2: No.  I went to Fort Riley, Kansas for basic training, and then I went to Fort Knox, Kentucky where I was trained as a high speed radio operator.  And then from there I went to Karlsruhe, West Germany where I was stationed there for the duration of my time in the Army, which was about eighteen months.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any interesting stories from your Army experience you want to share with us?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a high speed radio operator, and I was my battalion's-- radio, in those days we called them the Net Control Station.  In a battalion, each--there was a battalion which was the Net Control Station.  And then each company in the battalion had their own stations.  So, each radio operator then had to communicate through the Net Control Station, and I was the Net Control Station operator.  And we did our, most of our communication was done using Morse code, and then some were audible communications.  And I remember it was during that time that the Autobahn incident with--where the Russians [sic. Soviets] had stopped our troops from--on the Autobahn and would not allow them to come into, to Eastern Germany from West Germany. And then, you know, we had the confrontation between [President John Fitzgerald] Kennedy and [Premier Nikita] Khrushchev at that time where--and we thought we were actually going to war because of that.  And then, as you know, the Berlin gate, [Berlin] Wall [Germany] went up.  It was constructed during the time that I was in Karlsruhe, Germany.  So, actually we thought we were gonna fight.  And we were being trained as--I was in a combat engineer group.  I was the radio operator for that group, and we were being trained as combat engineers, a lot of floating bridges and all of that.  And we actually thought we were going to fight.  We came that close.  And the reason that I was aware of it, I had a secret clearance.  So therefore, I was able to get the radio traffic that showed how close we were to actually going into a shooting war with the East Germans and, of course, supported by the Russians.
Speaker 1: Now, were you in Germany when John Kennedy went to Berlin [Germany]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And made his famous--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --speech.
Speaker 2: I was there '61 [1961] and '62 [1962].  And that's when the Berlin crisis erupted, in '61 [1961].  And then I was just getting out of the service when the Cuban Missile Crisis occurred.  And in fact, I was on notice that I was gonna be called back if war had ensued during the Cuban Missile Crisis.
Speaker 1: Course many of us in those days thought if war did ensue, there wouldn't be a world left, you know after, if it was an atomic war so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes we, yeah we thought it would have been a holocaust, yeah, an atomic holocaust.  But fortunately it didn't happen that way.  But a lot of people were not aware of how close we came to war in Germany.  But that was the first encounter between Khrushchev and Kennedy, and we were very close then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was aware of that because of my clearance, and the fact that I was privy to information that the average soldier was not privy to.
Story_ID: 199762
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so when you came back here [Chicago, Illinois], this is in '60 [1960], the latter part of '62 [1962]?
Speaker 2: Sixty [1960], yeah, the latter part of '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: All right so you went back to the business [A.R. Leak Funeral Home, later, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois], the family business?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went back into the business and then I was full-time in the business.  My dad [Andrew Leak, Sr.] had--was ill, and my brother had left the business.  And so I was actually--my dad depended on me I would think for actually running the business.  So, at that time I was in my mid-twenties.  And so I began to operate the business full-time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I married during that time, and so actually that's where I began my adult life.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how did you meet your wife?  Where did you meet her?
Speaker 2: I married--my first wife was Mavis Staples of The Staple Singers.  And her dad and my dad, Roebuck Staples and my dad, were very good friends.  And so, it was--it was not arranged, but we were--we dated prior to me going into the [U.S.] Army.  And after I got out of the Army, then we decided to marry.
Speaker 1: Now, did you attend church together?
Speaker 2: Did I attend church--
Speaker 1: With the Staples?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, if you're a funeral director, you went to many, many churches.  She happened to--her family happened to belong to the Mt Eagle Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois], Reverend C.J. Rogers, who was a very good, close friend of my father's.  They were--and then so therefore I would always see her at that particular church.  But then there were many occasions--they were at that time a very popular Gospel singing group, so therefore they went everywhere in the city, as well as throughout the nation.  And so, we would see each other during those times.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you, the family didn't have one specific church, but you attended a lot of churches coming up, growing up?
Speaker 2: Right.  My dad was the chairman of the trustee board at Providence Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois] and Canaan Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois] at the same time.  He was a full-fledged member of both churches.  But that's, that's the way it was done.  And I was a member of the Liberty Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois].  That's where I had membership, but I was very familiar with pastors all over the city.  So, nobody really knew what church I belonged to because as a funeral director, aspiring funeral director, you wanted to develop as many relationships with the churches throughout the city as you could.  So you were there, especially on those occasions where there was an anniversary or birthday, or there were musicals and things like that.  You wanted to be there, let your presence be known that you were supporting the church and its pastor.  And consequently, that would then translate into an opportunity to serve families in those particular churches when there was a death.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have any observations about the famous Staples family, The Staples Singers?
Speaker 2: Do I have any--?
Speaker 1: Observations about them you want to share with us?
Speaker 2: Oh, just other than they, we were very closely knitted and they were very popular.  This was really--during the time that I was married, they really, they became popular as far as the general public after we were divorced.
Speaker 1: Right 'cause in the '60s [1960s], they were mostly gospel.
Speaker 2: Mostly gospel.  And then in the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s] then they got into the area of, you know, rock and--
Speaker 1: 'Respect Yourself.'
Speaker 2: 'Respect Yourself.'
Speaker 1: They always had a message, but it was--in popular--
Speaker 2: Exactly.  It was always message oriented, and it was never any of the traditional rock and roll songs.  So, they were unique in that regard.  And we remained friends after--you know, we were just two young kids that got married too early.  And she had her career and I had the funeral home, so we were--we were sort of separated by our professions, and it did not work out.  But we, the families stayed close because we've known them, you know, I'd known them since we were kids.  And then my daddy and Mr. Staples, they remained friends.  They civil rights ventures.  They marched with [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] during those years.  And so we were a very closely related family in spite of the fact that we, our marriage did not work out.
Story_ID: 199763
Speaker 1: Did your father or yourself attend the March on Washington in '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: My father [Andrew Leak, Sr.] attended the March on Washington.  He also marched with [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] in Selma [Alabama], and several other.  And when Dr. King made his ventures into Chicago [Illinois], the northern ventures, my father provided the limousine, and I was his driver.  I was Dr. King's driver.  In fact, I was relating that to the kids at Malcolm X [College, Chicago, Illinois] yesterday.  So, I was right out of the [U.S.] Army.  In those days, the limousine services were segregated.  And so, therefore there was no provisions for black entertainers or sports figures.  So, the funeral home [A.R. Leak Funeral Home, laer, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois] had the limousines.  So, therefore we were always asked to donate limousines to carry public figures like Dr. King.  And so my father always volunteered our limousines, and I was Dr. King's driver for the most part when he came to Chicago.
Speaker 1: That's something that we don't hear a lot about, but that kind of extension of courtesy to, you know, black leadership is something that--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, right.  And that relationship, you know, of the funeral director and the community.  We were expected to, you know, give that service as well as ambulance services.  Private ambulance services in the black community emanated out of funeral homes.  And most of the prominent funeral homes had an ambulance service, and I was the ambulance driver for my funeral home.
Speaker 1: You got a chance to do both, the chauffeur, the driver (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I did it.  Oh, I did it all.
Speaker 1: The ambulance.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I drove ambulance for, I guess when I was seventeen, eighteen years old.  And then went into the Army and then came back, and was still the ambulance driver up I guess until the early '70s [1970s], when Chicago began to provide ambulance services for, you know, the Chicago Fire Department.
Story_ID: 199764
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-four [1964] there was, from what I've read, there was a confrontation with Oak Woods Cemetery [Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Around their refusal to cremate black bodies or bury black bodies?
Speaker 2: Right.  My father [Andrew Leak, Sr.] led a group of ministers as well as the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in a march on Oak Woods Cemetery on Memorial Day of 1964.  We wanted to test their segregationist policy in not--refusing to cremate black bodies.  And--
Speaker 1: Now this is significant.  I just want to interject that Oak Woods is right in the black community in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right in the middle of the black community.  So, we were never able to bury a body at Oak Woods, nor cremate.  And so when we had a family who wanted a cremation for a loved one, we had to go to the North Side [Chicago, Illinois] to cremate.  And so I guess in that day, it was about a two-hour ride to the cemetery to cremate.  And here is Oak Woods right in the middle of our community.  So, we really wanted to test the waters since we were in the midst of the civil rights era.  We just could not relate to a cemetery six blocks away from us refusing to bury our dead or cremate our dead.  So, [HM] Reverend Clay Evans had a member in his church, Fellowship Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois], who was a young girl whose mother wanted to have her cremated.  And we used that as a test case.  We got our permit to cremate.  We named Oak Woods Cemetery as the cemetery, and then we called them and ordered the cremation.  And they told us that they would not allow us to come because she was black.  And so we intentionally took the funeral procession--we had the funeral procession and took the body to Oak Woods, so that they could meet us at the gate and turn us around.  And once they did that, then we organized a march on Oak Woods Cemetery, and about ten thousand people marched on that day.  And they changed their policies two days later.  I remember the march was on Friday, and on Monday they made an announcement that they were accepting black families, not only for cremation, but for burials also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, that's, that's important because Oak Woods, from what I understand, dug up some black bodies early in the century to bury some Confederate dead at a Confederate monument [Confederate Mound].
Speaker 2: Yes because prior to the, prior to 1900s, blacks were buried.  In fact, it was the cemetery of preference for blacks in 19th century Chicago [Illinois] around the--in the 1880s and 1890s, blacks who died were buried in Oak Woods Cemetery.  And so, and then they had a lot of confederate war dead there because of the Confederate cemetery--not a Confederate cemetery, but it was a Union cemetery, but confederate soldiers.  And so most--
Speaker 1: Yeah those who died over at Camp Douglas [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Exactly, Camp Douglas, right.  Then they were actually buried at Oakwood Cemetery.
Speaker 1: In the '30s [1930s], where the--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --black community was actually, where the Black Belt was, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, definitely.  And so, they were allowing these confederate war dead, and then they would not allow blacks in the communities.  So it was, it was something that we tolerated until we then got into the middle of the civil rights era, and then we just became intolerable then.
Speaker 1: Well, that's good, because I never heard the other side of that story.  I heard how it became segregated--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with the confederate group coming in and--
Speaker 2: Exactly, right.
Speaker 1: --wanting to bury their dead there.  And Oak Woods actually digging up black people and out of and moving them out of there.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, and moving them out, to make room.  Yes, right.
Speaker 1: So, so your father and Clay Evans and others--
Speaker 2: So my father, yeah, and a group of ministers, they marched.  And my job was to gather support.  So I went to church to church to church, you know, asking the members of the church just to be a part of the march on the cemetery.  And we were successful, and we had about ten thousand people.
Speaker 1: I think it was still some years before Oak Woods became a popular cemetery for--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: --black people to be buried.
Speaker 2: Right, we just wanted the right.  Still at that time not many--we did all of our cremations after that at Oak Woods because of the convenience.  But then black people, for the most part in that area were buried at Lincoln [Cemetery], and Burr Oak [Cemetery, Alsip, Illinois], and Restvale Cemetery [Alsip, Illinois], and Mount Glenwood [Memory Gardens, Chicago, Illinois].  Those were the four main cemeteries for blacks.  And then Oak Woods of course--their graves, their cost was much more.  And so, a lot of blacks could not afford to bury in Oak Woods Cemetery.  So for that matter, they kept a lot of black people out of the cemetery until we got into the '70s [1970s].  And then of course, blacks were more economically able to purchase a grave in Oakwood Cemetery.  So, it became then an elite cemetery for blacks, in that only the blacks who could afford to go there went there.  And so its history--from being a segregated cemetery, it came to one of the elite cemeteries.  And then of course, with the death of [Mayor] Harold Washington, it really became the top cemetery for blacks.
Speaker 1: Right, right, yeah Harold Washington is buried there, Dr. Bobby Wright.
Speaker 2: Exactly, right.  Jesse Owens, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 199765
Speaker 1: Back to [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] now '65 [1965], I think it was '66 [1966] that Dr. King came to Chicago [Illinois], before his extended--
Speaker 2: Well, that was not the first time.  His first time was really in '59 [1959] and '60 [1960].  That was his first trip to Chicago.  And I'll never, at that time I was his driver.  And he had rallies at the Stone Temple Baptist Church on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], and the Tabernacle Baptist Church here on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were actually the largest churches that blacks owned at that time, and so we had those rallies.  My job was to drive him, and also to be his gopher for the most part.  And then I was in charge of selling his book at the rallies.  I think his first book was 'Stride Toward Freedom' ['Stride Toward Freedom: The Montgomery Story'].  And so, it was my job to sell the book, collect the money and give it to him.
Speaker 1: So, you had a lot of jobs around the--
Speaker 2: Oh, I was busy (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right but those are the kinds of jobs--when you're the chauffeur of a celebrity or a scholar or a dignitary--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it really wasn't a job.  I mean, that was just, you know, I got to--the glory of being in the company of Dr. King and press conferences, and getting on TV, getting your pictures taken all sorts of stuff.  Really, it was a labor of love for me.  Really didn't recognize the danger in it, because you know, Dr. King was always being threatened, you know.  But we never even thought about that.  We were just so glad to be in the limelight, the spotlight.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was in--was it '59 [1959] or '60 [1960] where he was actually stabbed by a woman [Izola Ware Curry] in New York [New York].
Speaker 2: Exactly.  In fact, just prior to coming to Chicago.  He was autographing that same book when this lady stabbed him.
Story_ID: 199766
Speaker 1: Now, what was [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] like, as from the point of view of the chauffeur and the assistant and the gopher and all of that?
Speaker 2: In that personal--you know, I watched him with the rallies and I watched him with the press conferences where he was the Dr. King that we all know you know, dynamic and very, you know, uniquely qualified to respond to any type of interrogation.  But from a personal, he was very comical, he liked to joke a lot.  And you know, we're talking about a guy who was--I guess I was nineteen; he had to be twenty-seven, twenty-eight years old.  So we're talking about a young guy, you know, a young man, you know, with the weight of the world thrust upon him.  But at the same time, he was just a guy who young.  Of course, he had a family.  But he was just a very personable person, the kind of guy you really could get to know, and you would enjoy being around.  And he was a man's man, you know, he liked the things that all young men like.  And you know, he was aware of the fact that women, you know, were, you know, swooned and were attracted to him because of his position.  And so, he was a, you know, he was just a young guy mainly.  We just thought of him really as one of the guys.  But then you separate that instantly once he began to speak or involved in negotiations as far as the Civil Rights Movement was concerned.  So, very mature beyond the years.  But then when you get him with the cameras off, and then he was a very just warm individual, great human being, great person to know.  I count it as really a high point in my life, being able to chauffeur him, and to really be a gopher for him, holding his coat and selling books and things like that.  I just count it as really a pleasure, and I recall those days very fondly to my children and to others that I know.
Speaker 1: Is there any particular story that you can relate to us about Dr. King that you know, might add some color to that?
Speaker 2: Other than--I guess I can remember--I was his first trip to Chicago [Illinois], we were going to and fro throughout the city with the police escort and fifty, sixty, seventy miles an hour all throughout the city.  And I recall looking at him through the rearview mirror as we were driving.  And he was, he was holding on for dear life (laughter).  And when he got to a destination, a particular destination, he would always, you know, I could see a sigh of relief on his face, as if he's, "Hey, I'm glad to," you know.  But and he'd always in that big, great voice of his, he would say to me, "Boy, you sure can drive."  (Laughter) And he would always say that.  (Laughter) I think he was so glad to get to his destination.  Because you know, we would drive--I considered myself at that age a professional driver because I'd driven ambulances and funeral cars.  But it would, it got to be sort of hairy, you know, at moments, you know, going through the traffic.  But we got him safe and sound to his destination without any incidents.  And he was very--not only he was thankful for my father's [Andrew Leak, Sr.] friendship to him and allowing me to work, you know, for him as his chauffeur or whatever while he was in Chicago.  And every time he came back, we were his, he just expected a car from [A.R.] Leak Funeral Home [later, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois] to be at his service.
Story_ID: 199767
Speaker 1: Were there any other celebrities who came to town [Chicago, Illinois] that you chauffeured in those days that you would have stories about?
Speaker 2: Well, not that I but our cars was always--I just insisted to my dad [Andrew Leak, Sr.] that I drive [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.].  But of course, Mary McCleod Bethune, we drove her.  And Reverend Joseph Jackson, the president of National Baptist Convention, we were his regular chauffeurs.  Our funeral home [A.R. Leak Funeral Home, later, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois] just provided--
Speaker 1: That's King's adversary.
Speaker 2: He was definitely an adversary to Dr. King in those--well, I think he remained that way for the rest of King's short life.  And he never, he never responded to Dr. King as other ministers did.  He was very conservative, and just marching to a different drummer.  So, they never--but he was an outstanding man in his own right, and very knowledgeable, great preacher of the Gospel.  And my dad and he were very good friends, very close friends.
Speaker 1: Okay so, when Dr. King came to Chicago for that great march at Soldier Field [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Soldier's Field.
Speaker 1: --great rally at Soldier's Field.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Were you driving him?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was with him.  I drove him, I drove him to Soldier's Field, and he was elated at the response that he received.  It must have been the largest crowd, I would think, other than the March on Washington that he spoke to.  And he was very--he considered Chicago, you know, as that first northern city that he, that he brought his campaign.  You know, when he brought it north, Chicago was the main--that was that key city.  And he felt that Chicago was the most segregated city in America.  And he always commented that people think things are bad in the South, in Montgomery [Alabama] and Birmingham [Alabama].  He said, but they just don't know.  Chicago is the most segregated city.  And of course, you know, he had the incident in Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois].  I was not with him on that occasion when they marched into Marquette Park and he was hit by the rock.  That was--but that was--and then the way that the black clergy in the city had, you know, had been plotted and schemed against him because they were--they became his adversaries because of their relationship to Mayor Richard J. Daley.  And so, those were interesting times.  Most churches would not allow him in their pulpit.  My church, fortunately, was one.  My pastor, A.P. Jackson, was a Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] alumni so therefore he welcomed him.  And [HistoryMaker] Reverend Clay Evans and Reverend John Thurston were the few churches that really would allow him to, you know, to have rallies or have meetings for, at that time, Operation Breadbasket when it was in its formative years.
Speaker 1: That's right, A.P. Jackson, he was the pastor of Liberty Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Liberty Baptist Church, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Reverend Thurston was right down the street, right?  A block away.
Speaker 2: Yes, New Covenant Baptist Church [later, New Covenant Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois].  Those were two churches that he spoke at pretty regularly.  And so, I remember on so many occasions, you know, sitting in church listening to him and--
Speaker 1: Clay Evans, of course, held one of the mules that pulled the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the caisson with his body on it.
Speaker 2: That's true, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, any other thoughts about King being here in '66 [1966], Dr. King being here?
Speaker 2: You know, other than, you know, those incidents that took place, and the fact that this was a very significant city in his campaign, nationwide campaign. So, we felt very closely allied to him because of his relationship to people here.  The Urban League, certainly Bill Berry and Al Raby, who organized all of his activities, facilitated his activities here in Chicago.  And then we worked with them to facilitate him as far as--as I said, as far as driving him and things of that nature.
Story_ID: 199768
Speaker 1: What about some of the other prominent figures in the racial dialogue in those days, like Malcolm X, for instance.  Did you have much contact with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Malcolm X, I did not know personally.  Their headquarters were right around the corner here at 79th [Street] and Champlain [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], so I would see him on occasion.  We had the same barber.  My barber at that time was a man whose name was, his last name was Spencer 3X, 2X, or something of that nature.  And he was my barber as well as Malcolm X's and Muhammad Ali's.  So, we all got our hair cut in that same barbershop.  And so, but I just didn't know him personally.  I regret the fact I just didn't, never--being that close to him and not know him personally, but I did not.  But that was the Black Muslim [sic, Nation of Islam] headquarters, the business headquarters, on 79th Street.  And naturally, 79th Street then was a street of prominence, a lot of activity.  And certainly, Malcolm X was a part of that scene when he was here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And right down the street on 83rd [Street] was the Salaam Restaurant.
Speaker 2: And then the Salaam Restaurant was at 83rd Street, which is where I became very closely related to [HM] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan.  During, we had dinner there on many occasions, and I serviced many members of the Black Muslim community during that time, our funeral home [A.R. Leak Funeral Home, later, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois] did.  So, we had many funerals here at the chapel.
Speaker 1: This is in the '60s [1960s] or '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: This, yeah, we're talking about the '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s], right.
Speaker 1: Okay all right.  And they also had a supermarket down the street.  Your Supermarket [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: And then they had, yeah, they had a supermarket, a bank, the old Guaranty Bank [& Trust] on Stony Island [Chicago, Illinois].  They owned that bank and they owned a supermarket and several restaurants.  Other than the Salaam, there was a restaurant on 71st Street.  They owned a lot of property on 71st Street.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right, on 71st.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And a sandwich shop on 83rd [Street].
Speaker 2: And then the sandwich shop, with the bakery.
Speaker 1: On 79th [Street].
Speaker 2: And they had an excellent bakery.  Where the Hard Times Restaurant [Captain's Hard Times Dining, Chicago, Illinois] is now, that's where their bakery was.  And it was a very--bean pie, you know, it was a very favorite of mine.  They still make those bean pies.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So this, this community was really jumping.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: In the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s].  I mean--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was.  It was--
Speaker 1: --if you rode through here--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Chatham [Chicago, Illinois] community, you know, was considered the community because we had actually just desegregated the community.  And this funeral home was originally Skeels [ph.] Funeral Home.  And so we had a lot of prominent whites who were buried out of this cemetery--I mean out of this funeral home.  And then we--of course, we purchased it in 1959 and expanded it.  And during that time that we came here, this area was open to the black community, and it became a community that was considered middle class.  And we, I think we timed our arrival perfectly because that's when our business began to grow was when we came here, we were very reluctant to leave 45th [Street] and State [Street], but we were forced to leave because of the--the city took the property and--
Speaker 1: When they built the projects?
Speaker 2: --in anticipation of the Robert Taylor Projects [Chicago, Illinois], right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This neighborhood in the mid-'70s [1970s], I know it was interesting because you could see Roebucks Staples on the street.  [HM] Lerone Bennett or--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, vibrant, very vibrant.
Speaker 1: --[Richard] Dick Durham.
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: People just walking in the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, right.  Yeah, it was, it was the neighborhood, yes, on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].  And we were a part of that.
Speaker 1: I think that those in other cities, if they read Muhammad Speaks--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --they would read about Cottage Grove [Avenue] and 79th and all the businesses and things associated with that.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, exactly, because the paper was actually printed here and everything.
Speaker 1: Right down the street in the Pioneer [Trust and Savings Bank] Building [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: In the Pioneer Building, exactly, right.  So, it was a hub during those years.
Story_ID: 199769
Speaker 1: Now, you attended Daniel Hale Williams College [sic. Daniel Hale Williams University, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --during that time.  Very interesting college, sort of an independent college, set up by Dr.--I'll get his name in a minute.  But he was--
Speaker 1: I don't know it myself.  I wish I could help you out.
Speaker 2: He was a very controversial figure.  He became, he left there and became the president of Malcolm--he was the first president of Malcolm X [College, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Oh Hurst.  You're talking about Hurst, Charles Hurst.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, Charles Hurst, right.  He was the first president of Malcolm X College, and then he left Malcolm X in some controversy there.  And then Daniel Hale Williams, he began that university on the West Side.  So, those of us like myself who were seeking to get a college degree late--after I left mortuary school [Worsham College of Mortuary Science, Chicago, Illinois, later, Wheeling, Illinois], then I did not seek to do anything academically until I decided to go back to school.  And I went through Malcolm X--I mean to Daniel Hale Williams and then finally at that time, Roosevelt--a combination of Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] and Daniel Hale Williams.  And then I went to Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois] and got my graduate degree in corrections.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, why did you choose corrections as a focus?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to--after getting through Daniel Hale Williams, I wanted to--I had children then who were young, and I wanted to get into a college.  I wanted them to see their father graduate, you know.  And so, it was during an age when my children were--I felt that they should see their father as a-- so that that could inspire them to--they were, my oldest son was, I guess was first year of high--not even that.  This was, we're talking the late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s].  So, I wanted to go back and get my graduate degree, and I decided that I would do it in corrections.  Dr. Kittie, Kittie Kid Robinson [ph.] was in charge of the academic admissions at Chicago State.  And she advised me to go into corrections because I really didn't have any other--other than being a deputy sheriff at one time.  And during that time, deputy sheriffs, you know, you could be a civilian deputy sheriff.
Speaker 1: You had to get appointed or something?
Speaker 2: Exactly, if you were politically involved, and things like that.  So, but that was my only experience in law enforcement.  So I began.  I, she advised me to go into corrections and criminal justice.  And that's where I decided to get my graduate degree.
Story_ID: 199770
Speaker 1: And then from there [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois], I began to work in several political jobs that had, that were related to law enforcement.  I was the consumer affairs director for the City of Chicago [Illinois] under Attorney General Ty Fahner.  This was in the early '80s [1980s].  And then I became the director of the Cook County Jail [Cook County Department of Corrections, Chicago, Illinois] in the late '80s [1980s].  And I was the deputy inspector general for the secretary of state.  This is the early '90s [1990s].  And then at the end of the '90s [1990s], I was the deputy director of the Illinois Department of Corrections.  And then I retired from there and became a commissioner with the Illinois Human Rights Commission.
Speaker 2: Okay, now through your--
Speaker 1: So, that was just--all of those jobs emanated out of my seeking that graduate degree in criminal justice and corrections.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, it was a very prophetic move in my--it led to so many other things that I did politically, going after that particular degree.
Speaker 2: What sort of stands out for anyone who knows about you, in the area of criminal justice you've been a critic of the criminal justice system.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And a reformer of the criminal justice system.  There's a picture I'm looking at right now with yourself and Mother [Consuella] York, who is a, who devoted her whole life to trying to--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --reform the criminal justice system.  We were talking off-camera about [HM Reverend] Harold Bailey and [HM Patricia] Pat Hill and other people in town who have--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I became a critic of it, because being a part of it, I knew, I knew the things that should, that the criminal justice should have been involved with in order to try to turn around the lives of young people who were caught in the system.  I knew it was racist to the core, and that it did not, it did not respond to the underlying causes of blacks being incarcerated and the drugs, lack of education and things of that nature.  And so while I in the particular positions that I was already in, I tried to make changes in that regard while I was in a position to do that.  I tried to engineer drug treatment programs in the County Jail that was non-existent when I became the director.  I tried to do that in the Illinois Department of Corrections also.  But then while I was out of corrections and in law enforcement itself because I became--actually, as the deputy chief inspector general, it was a law enforcement position.  And so I was on the other side then, because I was putting people in jail as opposed to watching over people who were coming to jail.  And, but, but the--I saw the inequities and the inconsistencies in the criminal justice system, you know, straight up, and I tried to make those reforms that I felt were necessary to try to turn around some lives while I was there.  And I did some innovative things, I think, in order to do that, and hopefully made a difference during the time I was there.  The system is still worse now than it was when I was in it, so there are a lot of things that need to be done.  And I just remain a critic of it, the system now, and hopefully try to do some things now from on the outside.  I took over the chairmanship of Black on Black Love just recently.  [HM] Ed Gardner's, who founded that group--of Soft Sheen Products--has stepped down.  So I took the mantle, because it's involved in the criminal justice system as a deterrent to recidivism.  And so, I hope to use that vehicle as another means to try to engage the system and try to change it, from that perspective.
Story_ID: 199771
Speaker 1: Do your experiences as a funeral director, or being around the funeral business, influence how you feel about the criminal justice in the sense that you see the victims?  You see both, on both sides.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I see--
Speaker 1: The gangbangers and the victims of--
Speaker 2: It gives me quite a panoramic view of the system, all sides of it I see.  I have to sit down and counsel with mothers who've lost sons who were victims of the system.  And then I have to deal with the victims.  I have to deal with the victims' families.  So, I get that perspective.  And then when I was at the jail [Cook County Department of Corrections, Chicago, Illinois], then I dealt with the criminals themselves, and what caused them to get caught up in lives of crime.  So, from that perspective.  So, I get it all.  And I have the knowledge that's all encompassing--knowledge I was able to accumulate because I dealt with so many facets and ramifications and implications of the system.  So it is, it has prepared me to try to do some things to try to change the system.  But it's, it's a burden that I enjoy carrying the challenge to try to do something, because I know it can be done.  I've seen instances where the work we try to do has paid off in young men and women who have turned their lives around.  So you just never give up, although it's a very formidable system to try to engage.  And it's entrenched in politics and economic--the construction of prisons, and that's a part of it.  And--
Speaker 1: Yeah people say that that's the economic--it's economically rescued the rural areas of Illinois.
Speaker 2: It's no doubt.  And I've seen firsthand these desperate communities seeking some economic opportunities.  I've seen how they wrestle to try to get these prisons in their areas and the things that go on behind the scenes, and the money that changes hands and the job opportunities and the appointments and the political--all seeking to get a prison that will be filled with African American inmates for the most part in sections of the state that they're not familiar with, which causes more problems--where their attorneys, their families are not able to get to them as they should.  They're put in urban areas far from the railroad stations and highways, and so making it very difficult for these mothers to get to these young people.  And it's so important that they do, because it goes a long ways in making them better citizens while incarcerated.
Speaker 1: You were talking about like a five hour drive--
Speaker 2: Yes, five--
Speaker 1: --from one end of the state to the next.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: For instance, from Chicago [Illinois] to Shawnee [Correctional Center, Vienna, Illinois] or someplace that's a long--
Speaker 2: Right.  And then you get caught up in these cars that make a living out of taking families to various prisons, and they're not--we had several incidents where there were multiple deaths in accidents from people going to and fro to prisons in vehicles that were not designed for that, not properly maintained.  So, it's a problem that has many dimensions, and it's fascinating for those of us who are in the system to try to work to engage in.  And most of the time we're working in opposition to the, to the status quo.  Because it's incumbent upon government to keep these young men in prison because it's an economic--makes a tax-based economically viable--and they depend so much on these young people coming in and out of prison, and coming back again and again.  And jobs are involved; construction contracts are involved; drug treatment facilities--all designed to take care of a problem that if government dealt with it in a proper manner beginning with when these children go to school, begin school, this crime rate could be cut drastically.
Story_ID: 199772
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about being director of the Cook County Jail [Cook County Department of Corrections].  Now, you did that for four years.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That seems to be out of these political jobs, the biggest job.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say it was the most significant opportunity for me, working in the criminal justice system.  And I was fortunate, in that Sheriff [Jim] O'Grady, who appointed me, allowed me to have full run of the jail.  He never interfered with my running my jail.  He just always wanted to be cognizant of the things that I was doing, to be kept informed, so that he would be able to respond when the press inquired of something that I was doing that was considered controversial in the administration of the jail.  But it was a very rewarding experience for me, in that I had never run a penal institution.  It was a--and so, they, the feedback when I was appointed was, hey, here's a funeral director becoming the director of one of the toughest jails in America.  (Laughter)  And they were wondering how, well, how would I be able to come by?  And the sheriff, I remember when I first was appointed, and actually, he was a newly elected sheriff.  So, we both went on a tour of the jail.  And as you know, Superintendent O'Grady, he was the superintendent of Chicago Police Department prior to becoming the sheriff of Cook County [Illinois].  So therefore, he knew a lot of the officers at the jail.  And they had relationships not only with them in particular, but their families, who were police officers under Sheriff O'Grady.  So, as we went to the jail--we laughed about this afterwards.  All of the officers were coming up to the sheriff wanting to talk to him and meet him.  And then all of the inmates were coming up to me, because I had buried in their families, and they knew me from my, you know, from the funeral home [A.R. Leak Funeral Home, later, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois].  And so, he said, "Hey, I think I got the right guy for the job.  You know all the inmates and I know all the officers."  (Laughter) I had a relationship with those young people because of the funeral home because we had served their families.  So therefore, my name was known to them, and therefore I had a relationship to them that a seasoned correctional administrator would not have had.  And consequently, that helped me in running the jail because of the fact that I wanted to be a hands-on director, and I wanted to be inside those cell blocks on a day to day basis, engaging these young people as to why they were there and what caused them to be there and what they wanted to do with their lives.  Did they want to be career criminals and things of that nature.  And then we got into the whole drug culture.  And so, consequently, I was able to work with these young people in a way that a seasoned warden or jail administrator would not have had the opportunity to do.
Story_ID: 199773
Speaker 1: During the '60s [1960s] we were talking about servicing not only prominent people--entertainers such as Sam Cooke and others--but that was during the time that the Blackstone Rangers [later, Almighty Black P. Stone Nation] and the Gangster Disciples were beginning as street gangs [in Chicago, Illinois].  And there was a rivalry between them, so we [A.R. Leak Funeral Home, later, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois] were burying those young people.  And I remember on many occasions if a member of the Blackstone Rangers died, Jeff Fort, who was the leader, was the one who paid the funeral expenses.  And so it was my job--no one else in the funeral home wanted to go into what was considered Blackstone Ranger territory.  That's the 63rd [Street], 64th [Street] and Dorchester [Avenue] and Blackstone and those areas.
Speaker 2: Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois], yeah.
Speaker 1: And most of the funerals were held at the [First] Presbyterian Church [Chicago, Illinois], Reverend [John] Fry, who had a very unique relationship with the Blackstone Rangers.  And I had to go into Jeff Fort and collect the funeral expenses.  And then during my stay at the jail [Cook County Department of Corrections, Chicago, Illinois], Jeff Fort was indicted by Richard M. Daley, who was the state's attorney, for a murder that happened several years back.  He was indicted and brought to Chicago [Illinois] from a federal prison in Texas, where he was a federal prisoner who was in jail because of his relationship with Gaddafi [Muammar Gaddafi] and some terrorism charges.  He was indicted and then returned to the County Jail, where his trial would take place at 26th [Street] and Cal [California Avenue].  And so therefore, he was my prisoner for about a year.  And everyone was afraid that Jeff Fort's coming to the Cook County Jail would create havoc in the jail.  But because of my relationship with him during the twenty years before as the leader of the Blackstone Rangers, and the fact that we were actually the funeral director for that particular gang--we buried most of the young people who were killed in those gang wars--that I was able to keep peace at the jail with Jeff Fort there.  In fact, the jail was more peaceful during his tenure there than it was prior to or afterwards.  So, it was, it was a sense of irony in the fact that this man who was the leader of one of the largest street gangs in America then at that time came to the jail and as the most dangerous man in America.  And the jail did not go up, as we call it in jail terms.  It never went up.  In fact, in Division 1 where he was housed, we had less incidents during the time that he was there.  Because I went over and I talked to him, and I told him that I was not gonna deny his privileges, as I'd been asked by the U.S. attorney and the state's attorney's office--to deny him phone calls, deny him visits from his family.  And I told him that as long as he was there, and that there were no problems, that he was going to get the privileges of any inmate there who was a pre-trial detainee.  And so, we had an understanding.  He said, "Look, I'm not going to allow anything to happen at the jail to embarrass you."  And it never did, and he kept his word.  And so, it was very peaceful during the year that he was there.
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  You know, gang leadership--you know, any strong leadership can actually take control of the situation, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because he was looked upon as a god.  You know, the prisoners actually bowed to him, and that's how they regarded him.  And a word from him, the jail could have gone up.  We could have had all sorts of problems.  But he kept his word, man to man, with me that there would be no problems while he was there, and there was not.
Speaker 2: Were there problems with any of the other gangs in relationship to him?  Were the GD's, the Gangster Disciples or any other?
Speaker 1: No, no.  No problems whatsoever.
Story_ID: 199774
Speaker 1: Did you know Larry Hoover as well?
Speaker 2: Yes and--
Speaker 1: He being the leader of the Gangster Disciples.
Speaker 2: He was the Gangster Disciples.  And we had a relationship with him.  I just knew these people.  I knew 'em from involvement in the community and involvement at the funeral home [A.R. Leak Funeral Home, later, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois].  And so, that's why I had a relationship that a regular jail administrator would not have had.  And I did not--I was not an associate, but I was a respected member of the community.  They respected me as such.  And when I became the director of the jail [Cook County Department of Corrections, Chicago, Illinois] they respected me even much more, because of the fact that they knew that I would be fair with them, and that they would not be treated in a negative fashion.  When I came to the jail, assaults on inmates were just commonplace.  I stopped that.  I outlawed profanity in the jail, which was something that--
Speaker 1: Now was that difficult to do?
Speaker 2: Oh, very difficult.  And it was especially--not so much for the inmates, but for my personnel (laughter).  In fact, they were asking, "Well, how do we communicate with these guys?"  I said, "Well, you're going to have to try to use the King's English, because we're gonna outlaw profanity."  And I would discipline even my correctional officers as well as inmates for the use of profanity.  And it got me in trouble with Oprah Winfrey, who brought a psychologist there who was trying to interact and engage inmates from his field of endeavor.  And they had several sessions at the jail.  Oprah Winfrey was there with him.  And during the course of his presentation to the inmates, he was using profanity in that he felt that that would make him more, you know, acceptable to the inmate population.  In his presentation, if he used profanity, because he felt that that was a language that they understood.  And I had to disallow that--the use of profanity by him, which embarrassed Oprah Winfrey because she had invited him there.  It sort of took the wind out of his sails, so Oprah was not too happy with the fact that I did that.  But I was, I considered profanity verbal abuse.  And verbal abuse in a prison is always a precursor to physical abuse.  And if I could, if I could stop the verbal abuse, if I could cut it down, then I could cut down physical abuse.  And it worked, and we had less incidents of physical violence--officer on inmate, inmate on inmate.  After we--they knew that we were going to be very--we were gonna be very--we were gonna promote the use of the King's language, other than profanity.  And they knew that we were serious about it and that we were going to discipline about it, it changed the tenor of the jail.  And Mother [Consuella] York was present.  She was the reason that I stopped the profanity in the jail because as I, when I first came there, she was on a tier.  And a correctional officer was cursing profusely to an inmate trying to get him to get in line, leaving the hospital commissary.  And she was there, and I engaged the officer.  And I told him that, "How can you use that type of language in the presence of Mother York," who I felt was sort of like a Mother Teresa.  I held her in such high esteem.  And so did the inmates.  The inmates would never use profanity, and then here we had correctional officers who were doing it in her presence.  And so, on that same day that I admonished that particular officer for using profanity in her presence, then I issued a direct order that profanity was outlawed.  And so it was a controversial order, and then I got a lot of flak from a lot of people, inside and outside the facility.  There were accusations that I was trying to turn the jail into a Sunday school or whatever, and that type of thing.  But it really worked.
Speaker 1: Well, would that be a bad idea, in retrospect, if you think about it.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) From my perspective, I think it would be an excellent idea.
Story_ID: 199775
Speaker 1: Did you know Jessie "Ma" Houston as well?
Speaker 2: Yes, I knew Jessie "Ma" Houston.  I knew her mostly--I did not know her during, well during the--I did not know her as--she preceded, in fact, she brought Mother [Consuella] York.  She recruited her and brought her into the jail system [Cook County Department of Corrections, Chicago, Illinois].  But I just knew her as a minister and through PUSH [People United to Save Humanity], and my involvement with Operation Breadbasket and [HM Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson.  But I was not, I didn't directly work with her in the prison system as I did with Mother York.  Mother York was there on a daily basis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, we worked together daily.  In fact, if there was ever an incident where I really--I had to go in by myself to try to straighten it out--I said it would be only two people I would take in there.  And that would be Mother York, and the other would be Waylan Johnson [ph.], who was my bodyguard and my assistant.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were director for four years?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right and--
Speaker 2: Three and a half to four years.
Speaker 1: Three and a half to four years.
Speaker 2: August of '87 [1987] to '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: And what happened?  Did another sheriff emerge?
Speaker 2: Then another sheriff was elected, and then I was, I resigned when the other sheriff took over.  And then I went to work for George Ryan [Sr.] as an inspector with his police department at the secretary of state.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That was [Richard] Elrod, I guess, who became the new sheriff?
Speaker 2: Well, Elrod was defeated by [Jim] O'Grady.  So, Elrod had--
Speaker 1: He was before?
Speaker 2: He was before O'Grady, yes.  And then [Michael] Sheahan defeated O'Grady, and he's still the sheriff now.
Story_ID: 199776
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) Sam Cooke was the largest funeral we have ever had here at the funeral home [A.R. Leak Funeral Home, later, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois].  As you know, he was killed in Los Angeles [California], but all of his family lived here in Chicago [Illinois].  His father [Charles Cook] and his mother [Annie Mae Cook]--in fact they lived about a block from the funeral home.  And so, they asked his wife [Barbara Cooke] to allow the body to be transferred here for the purpose of having a funeral here in Chicago.  And then we transferred him back to Los Angeles where he had his burial, which is where his wife lived.  And so, that was indeed the largest--I never will forget.  It was probably the early part of December, and it was bitter cold on the night that we had his visitation.  And traffic was just blocked off for miles, and people were lined up from, I guess from 75th [Street] down to the, three and four blocks, just in line just to view the body.  It was just--and the funeral was at Tabernacle Baptist Church [later, Tabernacle Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois], which at that time was the largest church in our city.  It held about three thousand people, and it was packed to capacity.  So, it was actually the largest funeral that we've ever had.
Story_ID: 199777
Speaker 1: And of course, then we had [Willie Morris] Flukey Stokes, who was a gangster extraordinaire, a very debonair type of gangster here in our community, he was considered--because of his attire and the cars and the diamonds and all of that. We were talking about the funeral of [Willie Morris] Flukey Stokes [sic. Willie Stokes, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And there's a picture I remember in the [Chicago] Defender of him with fistfuls of money, thousands of dollars in his hands.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was he actually buried that way, or was it just for the photo?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  It was only for that picture.  They posed--that money was--
Speaker 1: Awful wasn't it?
Speaker 2: --only there for about five minutes, just long enough to take the picture.  (Laughter) It was funny.  I had a friend of mine who worked in Saudi Arabia, and that was on the front page of his paper in Saudi Arabia.  So when he got back to the [United] States, he brought me the paper.  So, it was really around the world.  I was asked by the [Chicago] Tribune--in fact [Robert] Bob Greene was the columnist--why my funeral home [A.R. Leak Funeral Home, later, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois] serviced that type of funeral.  They thought it was bad taste, and whatever.  And what I tried to convey to him is that as a funeral director, my job is to give a funeral service according to the lifestyle that reflects the lifestyle of the individual.  And I said on many occasions my funeral home has serviced a murder victim, and then we actually served the murderer's family.  I've served, I've serviced families where the husband killed the wife and then killed himself, and I've had the separate services for each one of them.  But each family had no problem coming to me, because they knew that I would give them the services that reflected their own lifestyle.  So, the circumstances of who victimized who was never an issue.  And so, I said I have to be able to give a funeral service that reflects his lifestyle.  And his father wanted him to be buried in a casket that was similar to an automobile.  And I searched--at that time we weren't dealing with the Internet, but I called as many people as I could to find a car.  And I was fortunate there was a casket company in Indianapolis [Indiana] who had fashioned this car casket, and the person did not use it.  That particular family that had commissioned him to do it, did not use it.  And so, we transferred that casket and was able to use it.  And consequently, that became one of the--I guess the second largest funeral that we ever had to--Sam Cooke being the first.  And then subsequently, his father was murdered in the same fashion.  And so, we had his service about a year later.
Speaker 1: What was Flukey Stokes' father's name?  What was his--
Speaker 2: Well, Flukey Stokes was the father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And his--but the son was--
Speaker 1: The son was buried with the money.  I mean had the money in the--
Speaker 2: --the son was the one that was buried like that.  And his son was called "The Wimp," and that was his name.  But Flukey Stokes was the father, who was subsequently killed in gang-style fashion after that.
Story_ID: 199778
Speaker 1: I guess the evolution of funerals in the early '90s [1990s] I guess--and it sort of peaked in 1994 in Chicago [Illinois] where so many killings of youth on corners, a lot of drive-by murders--had reached I guess its peak in '94 [1994] and '95 [1995] in Chicago.
Speaker 2: The killing of young people?
Speaker 1: Of young people, young black people in the neighborhoods, standing on the corner, and a drive-by killing (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I think really it mirrored the '60s [1960s], really, in that during that period of time the Vietnam War was going on.  And at the same time the Vietnam War was going on, the Gangster Disciples and the Blackstone Rangers [later, Almighty Black P. Stone Nation] were at war with each other.  So we found our funeral home [A.R. Leak Funeral Home, later, Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, Chicago, Illinois]--we were servicing a young person killed in the streets of Chicago as well as a young person killed in the jungles of Saigon [later, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam].  And we were burying them every week, at least one or two from each--one from Vietnam or Chicago getting shot down in the streets.  So, really those gang wars really began for our funeral home in the '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s].  And then they peaked, I guess, in mid-'70s [1970s].  And then they began to go down again until, as you say, the last ten years because I think we've averaged in Chicago for the last ten years over close to seven hundred murders per year, and we've become the murder capital of the nation.  And our funeral home, we're probably burying about one-fifth or one-sixth of all of those young people, just here in this one establishment.  So, we have been-- we have been inundated with these--having to serve these young people.  And, and, so I just recently organized a group of mothers.  It's called Mothers Opposed to Murder, MOMS, Inc., that's the acronym.  And trying to use mothers who have been victimized by losing their sons--we're trying to organize them and collectively deal with what we feel are the problems that beset our community that causes it to be so violent.  And Black on Black Love, which is organization that I'm just taking over the reins of is designed to do that.  So, the Mothers Opposed to Murder will be just one of the programs that will be under the umbrella of Black on Black Love.  I just felt that mothers who had so--were that close to the violence, having their children victimized by it, I think they could be instruments in trying to keep this type of violent behavior from visiting future mothers.  And our funeral home, even though we're--I just, I'm uncomfortable profiting by the deaths of these young people and to the degree that I just feel that something should be done to try to cut down the murder rate in Chicago.  And I'm thinking that through a combination of these mothers, along with other groups who are in the area, I think that may be able to diminish the number of young people that have been killed.
Speaker 1: Other than law enforcement officials that meet the victims and perpetrators' parents and relatives and friends, you're in the unique position of meeting a lot of them in, in terms of trying to console them and make sure that--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --they have their final--
Speaker 2: And it's out of that unique position that I'm able to establish the type of relationships to bring about that type of organization.  So I'm, I am, I'm very intent on trying to cut this murder rate down.  Even as a funeral director who has to service and then profit by these young people, that's some profit I don't need to make.  And so, that's my current--you know, as I turn the reins of our business over to my son [Spencer Leak, Jr.], I feel that I can be more effective in doing that, and still be able to look over his shoulder to make sure that he's operating the business according to our standards.
Story_ID: 199779
Speaker 1: In that same vein, are you now moving into retirement now or just--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm moving into retirement.  I officially gave my son, made him president of our funeral home [Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, formerly, A.R. Leak Funeral Home, Chicago, Illinois], Spencer Leak, Jr.  I still remain the title of chairman and CEO [chief executive officer], but I'm trying to incorporate him, integrate him into the leadership of the business where he can make the type of decisions that I've had to make, especially since the death of my father [Andrew Leak, Sr.] in '93 [1993].  And so, I'm trying to get him acclimated to making those type of decisions, rather than just working in the business and making funeral arrangements and going on funerals.  And so, I'm watching him as he progresses to that point.  And then at the same time, that I'm working behind the scenes with these type of organizations trying to diminish this violent crime rate, as well as working inside the prisons on the inmates who are incarcerated there--this new generation of inmates--seeking to help them and turn around their lives.
Story_ID: 199780
Speaker 1: We talked about you getting married earlier but that was to your first wife [Mavis Staples].  You married--these are the sons of your second wife?
Speaker 2: Yes, I married my present wife [Henrietta Leak] in 1969.  And we have three children.
Speaker 1: Three sons, right?
Speaker 2: Three sons.  Spencer, Jr. is the oldest.  He's the president of our company [Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, formerly, A.R. Leak Funeral Home, Chicago, Illinois].  My son, Stephen [Leak], is an administrative assistant with U.S. Senator Peter Fitzgerald.  And then my baby son [Stacy Leak] is a producer in the [HM] Judge [Gregory] Mathis TV show ['Judge Mathis Show'].
Story_ID: 199781
Speaker 1: Sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, one of my major concerns for the black community is this black-on-black violence that has for the last forty years plagued our community in a way that it never plagued black communities prior to now.  When I think back to the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s] when I was a very young man and growing up in the area where I alluded to--that neighborhood on 43rd [Street], 47th [Street] and State Street [Chicago, Illinois]--where all of these black people had engaged in their own businesses and were trying to live positive lives--I just did not see the type of crime.  Murder, during that time was considered something very special and unique.  And as I indicated, with the deputy coroners coming to the funeral home [A.R. Leak Funeral Home, later, Leak & Sons Funeral Home, Chicago, Illinois], that only happened maybe three, four, or five times a year as far as our funeral home was concerned.  It was just something that really did not happen in our city.  There were--if there were murders in the city, it was the policy kings who were murdered because of their involvement with organized crime.  But you didn't--you saw this, some instances of domestic violence where a husband would kill a wife, or a wife, but you just didn't see it to the extent that you see it over the last forty years.
Story_ID: 199782
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: By my family, I'd like to be remembered as a father who felt that my success was directly tied to their success in the next generation, and that even though I may be gone, that the only way that I can be successful as a man and a father is that my children see some sense of success in their particular fields, not necessarily the funeral industry.  I just want to be remembered by my family as someone who tried to be a good father and raise them properly, and then did some things and developed some things that would make their life easier than my life was because that's what my father [Andrew Leak, Sr.] did for me.  And so, I owe it to my father and I owe it to my children to make sure that they live a better life.  They should be accomplishing much more than I did because I felt that I accomplished more than my dad, which is the way the right of succession should occur.  And to the community at large, I just would like to be remembered as someone who tried to make a difference in areas where it was controversial to try to make a difference, in criminal justice, jails, penitentiaries, in law enforcement.  I'd like for people to say of [HM] Spencer Leak [Sr.], he was different.  He marched to a different set of drums.  I was a Republican in a Democratic city [Chicago, Illinois], and I was able to profit by my involvement with the Republican Party in spite of the fact that it was in the midst of a heavily Democratic city where I was criticized by some because of my Republican Party affiliations.  However, being a part of the Republican Party caused me to have the particular jobs that we've talked about.  And if it had not been for my participation in the party, I would have never been appointed to those political positions that allowed me to do some things that may have made a difference in society.  So, therefore, I always got a particular joy out of going down a different road than my compatriots or my contemporaries.  But I was able to go down the road and still not lose the relationship with them.  I was able to--my business [Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, formerly, A.R. Leak Funeral Home, Chicago, Illinois] was able to succeed by the grace of God, and in spite of the fact that my particular political persuasion was different--
Story_ID: 199783
Speaker 1: --Now [A.A.] "Sammy" Rayner, who's another important, you know, mortician in the city [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: --was also an important Republican as well.
Speaker 2: He was, he--well, he eventually became a Republican.  But he was an independent Democrat as we, as I was before going to the Republican Party.  And so I think the Republican Party, those blacks who were in it were formerly members of the Democratic Party, but they were, we were in that independent wing of the Democratic Party where we fought the status quo and the machine.  We were anti-machine, and Sammy Rayner was certainly one of those.  And I respect him, admire him for that.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, because a lot of the preachers you deal with were part of the machine, as you said with the--
Speaker 2: Well, now, the machine is not the machine anymore.  In fact, those people that twenty, thirty, forty years ago would have been battling the machine are now allied to the machine.  And so, we're living in a different era.
Story_ID: 199784
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently, you think, if you had it to do over again?
Speaker 2: In my life?  If I had it to do over again, I would have been a better student.  I would have--because I loved school.  I was a very good student in beginning.  And if I had it to do over again, I would have been a really dedicated student.  And I--that's the one regret that I have in my life.  During that period when I thought I was slick, I was not slick.  And, and I wasted some years that could have been used in a very positive manner.  I wasted those years, and I regret that.  And I--and when I went back to school, that was my attempt to make sure that my children would not waste those valuable years, and that they would be serious about school to the degree that they would finish college, which they all three have, and they all have successful careers.  So, that's my one regret.
Story_ID: 199785
Speaker 1: What do you see at this point as your legacy?
Speaker 2: As my legacy?  I'd like to think that this business [Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, formerly, A.R. Leak Funeral Home, Chicago, Illinois] is my legacy that I was able to--after many adversities resulting from the death of my father [Andrew Leak, Sr.], we almost lost our business.  The business was in danger of going out of business.  We were facing a possible bankruptcy.  We were facing the loss of our business license.  We were facing the loss of our property because of unpaid property taxes.  Our funeral home had really in the last part of my father's life, had imploded, and we were in very grave danger of going out of business.  And when my dad died, I took the reins of the business.  I had no other choice, no alternative.  And I was, my attorneys and my friends warned me, said, "Do not get involved.  You're going to go down with the business."  And, but by the grace of God, I was able to take the reins.  And after a very, some real shaky years in the beginning, we were able to turn around and bring our business back.  So, that's a legacy that I leave, but I cannot take credit for it, but I give all credit to God and my relationship with Jesus that was able to manifest itself in the running of this business, to the degree that I was changed as an individual.  And when I was changed by my relationship with Jesus Christ, then this business turned around, and consequently we were able to bring it back.  And so, I can--whenever my death, I believe I can leave a business to my son [Spencer Leak, Jr.] that is successful, and one that will allow him the privilege of doing greater things, but he will not have to face the problems that I had to face when my father died.  That's something that I will make sure does not happen to my son, what happened to me.  Because a lesser individual, one who was not--who was not a Christian in every sense of the word would have--we would have lost this place.  We would have been out of business now if it had not been for my relationship with Jesus Christ because only God could have turned around this business.  The way that it was headed, it was--people were predicting how long I would stay in business after the death of my father, and some were saying three months, some were saying six months.  It's been eleven years.  We've turned the business around and we've increased our business every year since my father died, since 1993.  So for ten years, I've been able to operate this business and turn it.  So, that's the legacy I leave.  And I'm proud of that fact, but I don't take credit for any of it.  I give credit to God and my relationship with Him.
Story_ID: 199786
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is Mother Consuella York and myself.  We're in the Division 4 of the Cook County Jail [Cook County Department of Corrections, Chicago, Illinois] after having a religious service.  Mother Consuella York was the really the Mother Teresa of the Cook County Jail.  Every Christmas and Thanksgiving, she would serve every inmate in the jail a Thanksgiving and Christmas dinner, as well as throughout the year she was there for them.  The inmates loved her--
Speaker 2: Okay and this is shot around?
Speaker 1: --in a very special way.
Speaker 2: About what year is this?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: About what year is this?
Speaker 1: That's 1987.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And that's 1955, and I was a saxophonist in Hyde Park High School [later, Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] concert band.  And I'm just there on your--no, go all the over and come down.  And right and over, and that's me right there.
Speaker 1: Right here, okay?
Speaker 2: Right there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: With the saxophone, looking very sincere and musically inspired.
Speaker 1: Of course you were, you know.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And that's a picture of my wife [Henrietta Leak] at our seventieth anniversary dinner, the seventieth anniversary of our business [Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, formerly, A.R. Leak Funeral Home, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay, the year?
Speaker 1: Year?
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: Oh, this was 2003.
Speaker 2: Great, okay.
Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-three [1933] to 2003.
Speaker 2: Wow (unclear).
Speaker 1: And that was at the same affair.  That was, that was me turning the mantle of our business over to my son, Spencer Leak, Jr.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And I believe that's the same, the same affair.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: And this picture is--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: --this is the March to Selma [Selma to Montgomery March], the famous Selma [Alabama] march.  And [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King along with my father, who is just behind, over the left shoulder of Martin Luther King, right there.  That's my father, A.R. Leak.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: Okay, very good, next.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And that's a picture taken here at our funeral home [Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, formerly, A.R. Leak Funeral Home, Chicago, Illinois] when we--when Dr. King came by to visit with us on one of his--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: Yes, this is one of the pictures taken when Dr. King came to Chicago [Illinois] and came by to visit my dad here at our place of business.  That's taken in the lobby of our funeral home, I believe.
Speaker 1: Was this is 1960--
Speaker 2: This would be '65 [1965], '66 [1966] somewhere in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right that's me and my wife of thirty-five years, Henrietta Leak, the love of my life.
Speaker 2: Okay, very good.  What date would you have us attribute to this?
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: Was that--what year?
Speaker 1: Oh, that would have been, I guess at--probably in the mid-'90s [1990s], about '95 [1995].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: That's my first grandson, Spencer Leak, III, born December the 30th, 2003, 5:20 in the afternoon, and I was there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The next generation of Leaks.
