Story_ID: 72481
Speaker 1: My name is Samuel Adams with the History Makers.  Behind me is Scott Sterns who'd be the videographer.  I'd like to begin by asking you to give us your name and spell it for us, sir.
Speaker 2: Alvin Little.  A-L-V-I-N L-I-T-T-L-E.
Speaker 1: Can I have your date of birth, sir?
Speaker 2: May 10, 1926.
Speaker 1: And, can I have our address and location of where we are today?
Speaker 2: I live at 121 13th Avenue, East Rankin Florida 34208.
Speaker 1: Can I have today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is April 24, 19--no 2002.
Speaker 1: And, your occupation, Sir?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired postman.  At the present time, I'm a home health aide.
Story_ID: 72482
Speaker 1: We begin each interview, I'd ask five simple short answer questions, that we ask everybody just simply to break the ice and begin our interview.  What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color?  I don't have any to be truthful.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I like food period.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I think I like summer best.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation spot or destination?
Speaker 2: I don't have any particular place.  I just like-- I'm a homebody.  I don't do a lot of traveling.  I think I did enough of that when I was in the Service.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Be yourself at all times.  See what you can do to help better yourself and your fellow man.
Story_ID: 72483
Speaker 1: I like to start with your family, sir.  Could you give the names of your mother and your father and your brothers and sisters and the spellings of their names?
Speaker 2: My mother's maiden was Essie Mae Hamilton.  E-S-S-I-E M-A-E H-A-M-I-L-T-O-N.  My father's name was William Little.  W-I-L-L-I-A-M L-I-T-T-L-E.  I have two brothers:  James, J-A-M-E-S McMillan, McMillan, M-C-M-I-L-L-A-N and John McMillan.  This is by my mother's second marriage.  J-O-H-N M-C-M-I-L-L-A-N.
Story_ID: 72484
Speaker 1: Sir, I'd like to begin by asking you about your mother's parents.  Did you know them?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother's--my grandmother's name was Mamie Hamilton.  My grandfather's name was Mack Hamilton.
Speaker 1: And, what type of people were they?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather was a farmer.  My grandmother wrote insurance.  That was her, her livelihood.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about what type of people they were that you've heard growing up or you experienced?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know, I know about all of them because my--I had to live between the two.  They divorced when I was young and between my grandmother, which was very religious, which they both were, they were--well we had prayer at her house every Sunday morning if you were there.  And, my grandfather was very religious also.  He was very religious and very astute about going to church on Sundays also.  He was a very good person.  In fact, I was practically raised by my grandfather.
Speaker 1: And, what type of man was he besides being very religious?
Speaker 2: He was just an ordinary man.  He's--he'd be minding his own business.  He didn't do a very lot of socializing and what not, he was very--he went to church more than anything.  Other than work, he went to church more than anything else.
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about your father's parents?
Speaker 2: No.  I never--I only saw my grandmother once.  My father was originally from North Carolina and I only saw her once.  I was about fifteen years old when we went to North Carolina.  That was the only time that I have ever seen anyone on my father side as far as my grandparents were concerned there.
Speaker 1: Were there any stories about his family that you ever heard growing up from your mother?
Speaker 2: No.  I never--I didn't because he left when he was a young man.  He came to Florida.
Story_ID: 72485
Speaker 1: How did you parents meet?
Speaker 2: None of that, I don't know.  I don't know.  That's one on me.
Speaker 1: What type of woman was your mom?
Speaker 2: My mother wrote insurance.  She was an insurance agent also.
Speaker 1: Well, what type of women was she as a person?
Speaker 2: Well, she was a good person because she remarried and then she divorced my step-father and I had two brothers which she had to support.  And, she had to bring us up and she kept us--she kept a very strict ruling on us as far as discipline was concerned.
Speaker 1: And, how about your father?  What was he like?
Speaker 2: He was a more of a, I would say, more of a sporting type person.  We--He lived in Sarasota.  My mother lived in Bradenton, which I had to spend the time between the two of them.  I disliked Sarasota with a passion, but I liked Bradenton better.
Speaker 1: And, why did you--why did you dislike Sarasota?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Just a town I never have really cared for.
Speaker 1: So, what was your--what was the household dynamic like?  What was growing up in your house like?
Speaker 2: Well, we were very close as far as my mother.  My mother worked and I had to--I was the oldest of the two boys, so I had to be the overseer of the house as far as taking care of the household duties and what not because my mother was working.
Speaker 1: So, you were the--the responsibilities fell--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Everything fell on me.  The cooking and the washing of the dishes and keeping my brothers in line.
Speaker 1: And how, how did you assume that?  I mean, did you--
Speaker 2: I had to whip 'em sometimes.
Speaker 1: Give us a story on that.
Speaker 2: Well, they got to be pretty big guys. You know, they kinda get outta line when it comes to a thing like that, so you can't so much wanna handle 'em because my baby brother grew up to be bigger than I am.
Speaker 1: Were you and your mother close?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Yeah, I love my mother, dearly.
Speaker 1: What, what type of things did you learn from her?
Speaker 2: Everything.  I learned discipline.  The main thing she made me go to school.  She made--she stressed education with me and my brothers.  I joined the Navy because my mother divorced my step-father.  Her alimony was only five bucks a week, which was two dollars and a half a week for my two brothers.  So, in order for us to eat, I joined the Navy.  Spent almost four years during World War II.
Speaker 1: Now, your mother, what--I mean she was in insurance?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She wrote insurance, yes.
Speaker 1: So, how did she go about the town doing that in black community?
Speaker 2: Well, it was more like a door to door collection.  More like life insurance.
Story_ID: 72486
Speaker 1: Your community, Bradenton at that time when you were a child, what was it like?
Speaker 2: Bradenton was a very lively town.  The community as real close.  Everybody knew everybody and there were a lot of people, a lot of work and people were from--coming from all different area, different states and a lot of--there were a lot of blacks in Bradenton at the particular time.  I would say from the '20's [1920s] up until the late '60s [1960s] or '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: So, was it a close community?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Very close knit community.  Everybody knew everybody, a lot of people.
Speaker 1: Were there any people in there that influenced you a great deal, that you admired or looked up to in that neighborhood?
Speaker 2: No.  Not really.  I've always pretty much been my own person because I knew that nobody weren't--they weren't going to give you anything at any particular time so, I came up which I considered, the hard way.  I was always trying to do something to better my own conditions as far as my mother and my two brothers were concerned.
Speaker 1: So, at an early age, you took on almost a fatherly role.
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  I joined the Navy when I was 16 years old.  I put my age up a year.  I was 16 when I joined the Navy my junior year in high school.
Speaker 1: So, what was your school like?  The school--what school did you attend here?
Speaker 2: Lincoln High.  It was Lincoln High at that particular time.
Speaker 1: And, what types of experiences did you have while you were at Lincoln High?
Speaker 2: Well, I was an "A" student for one thing.  So, I was pretty good in my books.  And, I did pretty well in the Navy because I passed the, you know, the aptitude test that they gave and I ended up going to Hampton at the age of 16 at Service school.  And, then I went on from that into--I moved pretty fast in the Navy to only be 16 or 17 years old.
Speaker 1: What type of child were you?
Speaker 2: I didn't understand you.
Speaker 1: What type of child were you?
Speaker 2: I considered myself as a good child because I never--my mother--we never go in any trouble, me nor my two brothers.  My mother was very strict about discipline, we never got into any trouble. None of us never went to jail or anything.
Speaker 1: What's your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well, that's kinda hard to say.  I've always--when I was coming up, I always was hanging out with guys that were younger--older than I was because I was--I went--my mother stressed education and I went to school pretty much year-round.  I'd go to school in Sarasota where my father lived.  I'd go to school in Bradenton where my mother lived and there were children that were four and five years older than I was and I was in the same grade that they were in.
Story_ID: 72487
Speaker 1: So, during your school, your mother was for, your mother was really stressing the importance--
Speaker 2: Stressing the importance, she was stressing the importance of an education.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that also were there to nurture you along the way?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  They all encouraged me because I was--they considered me as being a smart student.  They always had me doing things that other students weren't doing.  They weren't doing some of the things they had me doing.
Speaker 1: And, which teachers really took--kept an eye on you and had you doing these other things?
Speaker 2: Well, they all did.  I think I--one--well before I went to the Navy, there was this lady by the name of Ms. Edith Adams.  And, after I came out of the Navy there were Ms. G.B. Woodward, she was--she kept me pretty strict as far as schooling was concerned.  She gave me a lot of good advice as far as how to carry myself.  I was a pretty good athlete when I came out of the Navy and she gave me some good advice that I wasn't gonna get a scholarship so, and she gave me the reason why.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: She--Well, I was playing, I was hurt.  I got hurt in my senior year in high school after I got out of the Navy.  I quite school in my junior year in high school and when I went into the Navy.  I got hurt in my senior year playing basketball--well I was a good basketball player and she told me I was stupid for playing because they weren't gonna give a scholarship.  She said you shouldn't be out there playing and you're hurt like you are.  I had--my ankle was--I had a great big swollen ankle.  That was--she--I really thank her to this day for that.
Story_ID: 72488
Speaker 1: In your church community; what church did you attend?
Speaker 2: Well, I used to be a Methodist.  I grew up in a Methodist Church, Ward Temple AME Church, and I--my wife and after I got married and had--I have five kids, my wife and my children were going to Baptist Church.  So, in 1964 I joined the church where my wife and my children were attending.
Speaker 1: So, when you were a child, what was the church--
Speaker 2: I was a Methodist.  I was--I went to a Methodist church.
Speaker 1: Was it a very close knit church?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, what were some of the things that you learned there?
Speaker 2: Well, we, we had a lot of good biblical discussions, you know, especially in Sunday school.  I use to go to Sunday school a lot.  We discussed the lessons, you know, thoroughly and I enjoyed that very much.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, you said--what, I would like to know what sights, sounds, or smells remind you of Bradenton when you were a child?  What sights, sounds, smells can you come in contact with now that remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Not too many because at that particular time Bradenton was--it didn't have as many industries as it has now.  At the present time, we have Tropicana, which is the biggest employer in the county.  And, it has a citrus smell that you can smell sometimes when--I don't know what it is, whether it's the filters that are not working properly, but at the present time you can get the citrus smell all over the whole county.
Story_ID: 72489
Speaker 1: You said you were a good student, a good student in school--
Speaker 2: Well, I was salutatorian.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  You were a very good student!
Speaker 2: Well they--well what they told me--see I had gone into the Navy and they said that I didn't begin with the class-- I was supposed to have finished school in 1944.  I didn't finish until '47 [1947] and they say that I didn't begin with the class so I was the salutatorian.  It didn't bother me because what's in our head, you can't take it out anyway.
Speaker 1: You were a quality student so, when you left for the Navy, you say you did this so you can help your family--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we could eat, man.
Speaker 1: When you made this decision where did you go?  What was the process that--
Speaker 2: When I joined the Navy, I went to Great Lakes, Illinois in 19--in August of '42 [1942].  I left there in December of '45 [1945], went down to Hampton to Service School.  I left there in April of '43 [1943] and went to Portland, Maine, where I was stationed for almost three years on a patrol ship.
Speaker 1: Now, what are some of the experience you're having while you're in the Navy?  What are your experiences?  This is World War II, so.
Speaker 2: World War II, yes.
Speaker 1: So, you know, what's going on while you're--your experiences on the ship for a black man in 19--
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't have any problem because I knew what my duties were and I knew what my--everybody had a position on the ship regardless whether you were in the engine room or where ever you were, you had a battle station.  And, where ever your battle station was--was you had to be there if they, you know, the battle alarms was sound.  I had a--it was a great experience for me because I learned a lot things that I live by today.
Speaker 1: Such as?
Speaker 2: Well, I learned to how to get along with people.  I learned discipline, main thing.
Speaker 1: So, was this an integrated ship?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  It was a small crew, but it was integrated.
Speaker 1: So, how was that?  Did you have any--was there any racial tension?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't.  Everybody was very close.
Speaker 1: Everybody was very close?
Speaker 2: Everybody was very close on the ship.
Story_ID: 72490
Speaker 1: So, your stay in the military, after that, where are you going now?  What are your thoughts on what you'll do after you--?
Speaker 2: When I got out, I got out the Navy in '45 [1945], December the 19th of 1945.  I came back home and I went back to, I went back to school, my junior year in high school.  I had five years of eligibility from the military service.  So, I finished my junior and my senior year in high school.
Speaker 1: And, from there, did you wanna go to college or did you think--
Speaker 2: I went to college, yeah.  I went to college.
Speaker 1: And, how were your experiences at the institution you attended?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a good experience there, but the Veteran Office and I didn't get along.  I was married at that particular, I was married at that particular time and he didn't want me to go home and I had to.  My wife was--we had had our first child and he and I had a dis--well it was a disagreement about it, because we were only supposed to have had three cuts in the quarter and I say, well I'm going whether you let me go or not.  So, he say he wasn't gonna okay it.  So, I say I can solve this problem.  I packed up and left.
Speaker 1: Now, did you regret leaving?
Speaker 2: Not one iota.  Not one iota.  I went--my father-in-law was a farmer, I went and he said I don't know how to ask you this, but he said, he was in a lot of debt.  He and my mother-in-law had divorced, and he asked me would I help him.  He said, "I know you've never worked on a farm."  We would farm, we'll farm 100 acres, and I made money.  Because at that particular time, I happened to get a grant from the government to farm 'cause we were farming enough land for me to get paid for that.  Plus, I was getting a salary from him.  Plus, I had my crops that I was raising and I was making money.
Speaker 1: And, where is this?
Speaker 2: Pompano Beach.
Speaker 1: And, what type of farm was it?
Speaker 2: It was a truck farm.  Truck farming.
Speaker 1: Now, while you're in Pompano Beach doing the farming, what's going on around--anything going on around you that you're taking notice of or you're just learning these business skills as you go along?
Speaker 2: I was strictly learning how to farm.
Speaker 1: And, did you enjoy that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  That's one of my harvest now.  If I can find a little piece of land, I'll grow something in a minute.  I like farming.  I like to see things grow.  It was an experience for me.
Story_ID: 72491
Speaker 1: What took you from Pompano Beach back to Bradenton?
Speaker 2: Well, he was in debt when I went there and when I got him out of debt, I says "It's time for me to leave."  And, I got him outta debt and I left and I moved back to Bradenton [Florida] where my mother was.  I took my wife.  I had two kids at that particular time and I moved back to Bradenton and I've been in Bradenton practically ever since.
Speaker 1: In Bradenton in 1950, and even from your childhood to this point, what was, what were the racial relation, what was the racial relationship between the races like during this time?
Speaker 2: They weren't bad.  Bradenton has never really been, in my personal opinion has never been a bad town as far as race relations are concerned.  Because, there were people that looked out that, people looked out for their employees and what not.
Speaker 1: So, when you come back in 1950, what type of work are you looking for?
Speaker 2: I had given a friend of mine a job.  I had told him about a job waiting table and then when I came back to Bradenton and I started waiting table for a living.  And, I started making good money waiting table.  I waited tables from 1950 until 1964.
Speaker 1: So, how did you--what were the experience--where did you work waiting tables?
Speaker 2: I worked at a cafeteria.  I worked at a cafeteria.  The first one I worked under with the buddy of mine that I gave the job.  The next one I worked under, I took over the head waiter's job and I was a head waiter in most of the places where I worked.
Speaker 1: Now, were these black places or were--
Speaker 2: No.  These were white place, predominately white at that particular time.
Speaker 1: Now, what were the, what were those experiences like working in--'cause you were one of the first to not work in the kitchen, to be a waiter--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: In the area.  So, what was that like?
Speaker 2: Well, to me it wasn't anything because, I mean, you render the service and that's what it was about, all about with me, rendering the service.  Learn your trade, knowing how to do it, and render a service, how to be courteous to people.
Speaker 1: Did you receive courteous--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I know--I never had any incidents of people wanting to be, you know, rowdy or rude, very rude.  I've never experienced anything like that.
Speaker 1: So, what type of living was there in the service industry like that, at that time?
Speaker 2: We made all kinds of money.  Man, I was making good money.  People were making about $30 - $35 a week.  I imagine, I was making a hundred and something at that particular time.
Speaker 1: In the 19--this is the 1950's?
Speaker 2: In the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: So, were there more doors opening for blacks to come and be waiters?
Speaker 2: Well, at that particular time, practically all the waiters were black at that particular time.
Speaker 1: Then, how did that, how did that come to be, because at the beginning most of them were in the kitchen?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did that transformation occur?
Speaker 2: Well, what it was at that particular time, they had ladies carrying trays.  And, ladies could only carry one tray and a guy--the average man could carry two.  And, I imagine economically, they were looking for the economical side to hire waiters instead of waitresses, which they were predominately white waitresses at that particular time.  And, during that time, they were--99 percent of places had all black waiters.
Speaker 1: Now, was it--see what I really wanna know about is that, that transformation from blacks being in the kitchen to coming out being--mingling so-to-speak, with the white patrons.  Was that a big deal for that to happen?
Speaker 2: Actually, they were--most of the cooks, most of the help in the back as far as cooks and what not, were black at that particular time.  They were doing their job in the kitchen and we were doing our job in the dining room.
Speaker 1: So, it was an all-black service?
Speaker 2: Well, not all black.  There was, there was a few whites as far as salad departments, and different departments but they were predominately black in the back as far as the kitchen was concerned.
Story_ID: 72492
Speaker 1: So, what--how did your rise come to being the head waiter, the head service person?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I was a little more educated than the most of them.
Speaker 1: What type of education did the others have?
Speaker 2: Some of them had practically none.  Put it that way.  They weren't too, they weren't too sharp.
Speaker 1: Did this, did this show up in their work?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes it did.  Their language and everything and as time progressed and different people, you know, different pla--I went--and I imagine that I was one of the first ones that they saw--and they saw that I had been to college and what not and had a good education.  I moved pretty fast.  I didn't stay just a waiter.
Speaker 1: So, where were you the head waiter?
Speaker 2: The first head waiter job I had was at Burgers Cafeteria, and the next one I had was at Morrison Cafeteria, and the next one was at William Talleyhouse Cafeteria.
Speaker 1: Now, did you do any waiting or any waitering at black--
Speaker 2: No.  No, no, they were, there wasn't any black places that really need waiters.  Black owners with--to do the capacity and the volume that we were doing at that particular time.  We were feeding thousands at that particular time.
Speaker 1: So, what were your responsibilities in feeding thousands of people as the head waiter?  What did you have to do to manage what was going on to make sure everything worked?
Speaker 2: Make sure that you had somewhere to seat them, keep the tables clean, and you had to serve, be fast in your serving and keep the tables clean, keep somewhere--keep the--see it was a steady flow of people at that particular time and you had to keep the dining room clean, always somewhere to keep somebody to be seated.
Speaker 1: So, how much of a challenge was that?
Speaker 2: It wasn't really a challenge because all you had to do was be attentive as to what you were doing at that particular time.  Make sure that everybody was doing their job.
Speaker 1: So, you were like one of the first black leaders in business in the community in Bradenton, weren't you?
Speaker 2: Well, I imagine I was, at that particular time.
Speaker 1: So, were you able to open a lot of doors for business for others to get jobs?
Speaker 2: What I did at that particular time, I hired the guy that I knew that wanted to work and taught them.  I had--I got some guys and trained them.  And, I had guys to train guys as to what we were doing as far as to keep the, you know, things rolling, at that particular time.
Speaker 1: Now, at what point do you start looking to other work that--what brings you to the post office?  What is the--
Speaker 2: Well, at that particular time, I was at the--I was working at the William Talleyhouse, that was an outfit out of New York.  I was the Supervisor of Service and I was going--I had to go to different states and open up places when they were having problems.  And, and my--I had--I took the postal exam in the '50s [1950s] on a--you know, my wife and I was talking, she says, "We'll you so smart, go take the postal exam", which I did.  And, I passed it the first time I took it.  So, we were talking one day and she says "One day you're gonna wake-up, you're gonna be an old man waiting table but no benefits."  And, this is why I went to work for the Post Office.
Speaker 1: Now, before that, you were saying, you were supervisor and traveling the country?
Speaker 2: I had to go to different places, if they had a problem.
Speaker 1: What types of problems did they send you to solve?
Speaker 2: Well, they had guys that they were trying to train if they were getting ready to open up a place.  I had to fly to different places and open 'em up, you know, to help get the guys--whip 'em in shape to do it.
Speaker 1: What do you mean whip 'em in shape?
Speaker 2: Make 'em, make 'em learn how to do their job.
Speaker 1: That's the Navy coming out in you, huh?
Speaker 2: Well, well yeah.  You had to--they had to do the job if they didn't, they couldn't have, you know, the place couldn't have gone smooth, run smooth.  When you got--well, take it like this.  Say if you're feeding a thousand people a meal and you got them in--standing in line, constantly coming down the line to eat their meal and you can only seat 200 and people are constantly getting up and leaving, you gotta--as fast as a table is vacant, you gotta be on the ball and get it cleaned up and ready for the next set of people that are coming to occupy.
Speaker 1: Do you have any stories about, when an incident didn't work well, and you had to just fix it up immediately?
Speaker 2: Well, you have to sometimes--there were times that you had to help the men because, you know, they couldn't keep up.  Because if you had a fast checker and the line was moving fast, you had to help, you had to pitch in and help sometime.  If not, you just stand around and give orders.
Story_ID: 72493
Speaker 1: Now, the pay for what you were doing as the head waiter and the postman pay, which was more?
Speaker 2: Well, with my salary plus my tips, I was making more money than I was when I first went to work for the Post Office.
Speaker 1: But, because of the long--you understood the long haul, the benefits it would--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The postal--the Post Office was, I took an approximately $100 a week cut to go to work for the Post Office, as far as the salary--money with my salary, plus tips, that I was making at that particular time.
Speaker 1: So, what was the Post Office experience like when you first got there?
Speaker 2: Well, they were paying $2.48 an hour which was big money.  That was the best paying job in the whole county.  And, it was an experience.  They give you this Carrier's Manual.  And, I studied it front to back and you had to know your Ps and Qs.  And, I always ask guys--the secret to my success was--I ask guys what part of your route, when you're a substitute, that you--are you giving me?  Because you never know when you had to fill-in on that particular route.  When you're a Sub you have a lot of things that you have to do.
Speaker 1: So, there--were there any other Post Off--postal service people when you got there?
Speaker 2: Not any.  No, I worked four years before another black person walked in.  I kept harping on it and they said "Nobody never passed the test."  But, there were people there that had been working there for years that had never passed the Civil Service Exam.
Speaker 1: Now, why were they--why was there a push to keep blacks out of the Postal Service?
Speaker 2: I think it had to do with the Postmaster.  Now it wasn't the employees.  It was, I think it was the Postmaster himself.
Speaker 1: What were his thoughts on blacks working there?
Speaker 2: Now, I was told, and I never--I don't know this to be as a true fact, but I was told that he said that "blacks didn't wanna work."  Because you had to work irregular hours when you're a Substitute at the Post Office.  You work when they want you to work.
Speaker 1: So, they can call you in at--
Speaker 2: Any time.
Speaker 1: So, what point in time did you become the first postal person?  The First African American postal--
Speaker 2: I went in in December of 1964.
Speaker 1: And, then you began immediately?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 72494
Speaker 1: Could you explain how you were active in the first integrated restaurant here in Tallahassee?
Speaker 2: Bradenton.
Speaker 1: Bradenton.
Speaker 2: We're still in Bradenton.  At that particular time, they were picketing downtown.  Especially Morrison's Cafeteria and they weren't letting them eat.  So, I went to the manager when I was the head waiter and I asked him, I said, "John what are you going to do when the people come out here to eat."  I said, "They're going to come."  So, he says, "I'll tell 'em, we--he's gonna tell 'em "Welcome to the Talleyhouse."  Well, I had that--in the meantime, I had gotten my men together, all the waiters.  I said, "Now if he doesn't let 'em eat, we're gonna all quit."  We were gonna leave, we were gonna walk out and leave him stranded.  We all had families too.  So sure enough, they came with the sheriffs, deputies, following them around and what not.  When he met them at the door and they came in and they ate.  And I was then that we're the first restaurant that integrated in Manatee County, William Talleyhouse.  It's not there and it's where Mel's Diner is at the particular time now.
Speaker 1: How did Bradenton receive the Civil Rights Movement that was going on around the country in that early '60s [1960s] period.
Speaker 2: I didn't see too many problems as far as Bradenton was concerned.  Bradenton has always been kind of a moderate city.  It's a kind of a laid back city.  Most of the things are here, if it is it's hidden.  It's not really out in the opened like a lot of places.
Speaker 1: Did you ever experience any of it?
Speaker 2: I've never really experience too much of anything as far as racial resentment is concerned because I've always been an outspoken person.  I've always felt that if anybody else can do, I can do it.  And, you do it, do be--try to be the best you can be.  Don't let anybody out do you.
Story_ID: 72495
Speaker 1: So, now when you enter the Post Office as another trendsetter, being the first black Postal serviceman.  How did people in the black community first--well how are they looking at you like--how are they receiving this.
Speaker 2: Well, they didn't say anything.  They knew I had to have some brain to be there.  At that particular time, there were a lot of dirt roads.  We had bicycles; and the Post Office didn't have a lot of modern vehicles like they had--they have today.  We had bicycles and riding up dirt streets and using personal, people personal cars that they were leasing out to the Post Office.  And you, I was all over the county.  And like I said, I didn't have any problem because my being a waiter and I knew a lot of people.  And, I was all over the county and as a Sub.  I worked all over the county in all different areas of the city and outside of the city delivering mail.  I never experienced anything like that.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you go about opening the door for other blacks to come in and work the Post Office?
Speaker 2: I just kept harping that I hadn't seen any come in and I was wondering why.  And, they were saying ain't nobody blacks never passed the Civil Service Exam.  And, the point I was--had been made to me by some of my former co-workers, that there, there were a lot of people that were working there that had never passed the exam and was working there.  So, I harped on that.  But, I did have one guy, he was the superintendent of the mail, he asked me, he said, "Why don't you--why don't we go about seeing about how to help blacks pass the exam." And the formal principal of the high school, he's deceased at this particular time, we used to have classes at the old Community Center to help blacks pass the Postal, you know, Civil Service Exam.
Speaker 1: Is it a very difficult exam?
Speaker 2: At that particular time, it was because it was a lot of comprehension, it was and it was more--and even today its accuracy.  And, it was a lot of changing.  At that particular time, they had trains delivering mail back in the '50s [1950's] when I, when I took the exam and if you made--didn't make the correct change as far as the mail, the routing of the mail, you get all the answers wrong.  You had to make sure that you got the correct answers.  It wasn't how many you got, it was how many correct answers that you got.  It was accuracy more than anything else.
Speaker 1: Now, you took the test in the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: In the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: And you didn't start until '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: I had--I was making more money and I didn't wanna work there. I didn't wanna make that little bitty chump change.
Speaker 1: Yours is truly an economic decision.
Speaker 2: That's what it was.
Speaker 1: So, the movement here in Bradenton is, well the movement around the country, the movement that's going on around the country, you're this first black Postal Service person.  What's is like you first day when you go into the white neighborhoods to deliver mail?
Speaker 2: I didn't have any problem.  I didn't have any problem.  Just another guy delivering mail.
Speaker 1: So, really it wasn't the big (simultaneously)
Speaker 2: To me it wasn't, no.  Like I said, I grew up in Bradenton and I--and me being a waiter and I'm, I'm practically every--any neighborhood that I went into, I saw somebody that I knew.  And, I never had any problems.  Even I had a--there were a few people that were, a few people that were working there that were resentful.  But, they were in a minority but the--most of the guys were glad to see somebody come and help deliver that mail because at that particular time, we were getting all kinds of volumes of mail.  People were getting newspapers from home, three and four newspapers and all that kind of stuff.  We had a lot of mail.  In fact, we were number one in Atlanta District as far as delivering mail per person.  As far as per man was concerned.  We were number one.
Story_ID: 72496
Speaker 1: Now, how were the services?  The Postal services at this time.  What were, what was the technology they used at the time for putting the mail out, getting the mail out in a timely fashion?
Speaker 2: They had different shifts.  I have different shifts.  They had--well, the clerks came in and put the mail up.  The carriers come in a different time, go by and pull your mail out of your slot and you go to your case and put it up and case it as according to, you know, the way your route ran.
Speaker 1: So, what became your full-time route?  Because at first you were a substitute.
Speaker 2: I didn't get a full-time route until I got to be a regular.  I had had surgery at that particular time and a guy died and I moved up in his place.  I made regular and my first full-time route was City 12.  It started downtown and ended up on 19th Avenue.  Started at the river and ended up nineteen blocks away and covered about eight blocks from 9th Street to 1st Street.
Speaker 1: How was it the first time you had a regular shift?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't anything because I used to swing--I used to be a swing man.  And, I had five different routes that I had when I was a swing man.  I had to deliver those five routes.  That was my 40 hours a week, plus overtime.
Speaker 1: And, how long were you with the Post Office?
Speaker 2: From 1964, I retired in '73 [1973].  I got hurt on the job.  I got hurt during the Vietnam War.  I was carrying a box up to the house and I felt this sharp pain in my back and they were treating me for a pulled muscle and I had a ruptured disk.  This happened in May of '69 [1969] and it was January of 1970 before they found out what was really wrong with me.  I had surgery in February of 1970 and I had to stay out six months before I would go back to work.
Speaker 1: So, when you came back to work, you worked how many years after that?
Speaker 2: I worked three more years.  Well, I worked--well, yeah, three more years.  Then it got where they changed from the little mail that they had to the little jeeps that they have and it's only one way in and one way out and the bad side that the nerve problem I had was on my right side and stepping out contstantly on this, the right side, aggravated it more.  So, I had to take early retirement.
Speaker 1: After nine years?
Speaker 2: Eleven.
Speaker 1: Eleven years, okay.  So, by the time you retired, how many black postmen were there?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  Duke, Louie.  Only two, two other guys that were black postmen and there were several ladies that were clerks.
Speaker 1: Oh so, it improved greatly from the time--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  There were some that I helped but they, you know, I helped them to pass the test.  Because, there was a book at that particular time put out by "ARCO" that had the Civil Service Exam, you know, in it and you could--it gave you an idea of what you to expect, what you were to expect when you were taking the exam.
Story_ID: 72497
Speaker 1: So, what did you do after your retirement? What were your thoughts on what--
Speaker 2: I couldn't do anything because I was lame for six years, I couldn't do anything.  But, I had one doctor to stick with me.  I couldn't do anything for six years.  Then after that, I got better.  And, there's a guy at my church, asked me to work for him.  I ran a landscaping sod company for seven years.  I was office manager.  Did all the buying, all the selling, everything, bidding, collecting, paying, you name it, I did it.
Speaker 1: Now, the doctor who stuck with you through that time, who was that?
Speaker 2: He's dead at this particular time.  His name was Doctor Robert T. Hand [ph.].
Speaker 1: Now how did he help you get back?
Speaker 2: Well, he just stuck with me.  He just kept changing medications where I got where I could do, you know, where I wasn't, where I couldn't do anything.
Speaker 1: So, the landscaping business, another venture you entered into, how was that?
Speaker 2: It was a challenge.  I had never done that, but the last year I worked for the guy, we made a million bucks.
Speaker 1: Now, you were just landscaping around Bradenton, or?
Speaker 2: Well, we were Manatee and Sarasota County.
Speaker 1: And, how did you go about building up the service to that level?
Speaker 2: I just learned.  I learned.  I went to the, I went to the ag center.  I went everywhere I could, the workshops to the places that grew the sod and all this stuff.  I learned everything I could the hard way, through experiencing.  Just finding out and storing my knowledge in my forehead so I can learn what I was doing.  Because people would ask me, when I would go to give a bid on something, they say, "Well you, we're gonna give you the job", I say, "why?" they say, "Well, you tell me the same thing that the ag agent told me."  So they, people would check on you.  We made a lot of money.
Story_ID: 72498
Speaker 1: So, you've never found, because you, I mean, it seems like throughout your life, you never found the problem of race to really come up and be a problem?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I did the same, it was the same thing when I ran the sod company.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you, how do you believe you overcame the race problem?
Speaker 2: I have found that people respect intelligence.  That's what I, that's my, that's the only answer I can really give.  People respect intelligence.
Speaker 1: Now, do you see that in young people today, that they understand that's how you overcome the problem?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say that they respect me because, they see, you know, I think they use me as an example because I'm still trying, I mean, if I could help them in anyway, I'll still do, even today.
Story_ID: 72499
Speaker 1: So, the landscaping is not the last business you entered into.  There was another one?
Speaker 2: Well, the guy that I was working for, well we made a lot of money and he didn't wanna pay income tax. It's a fact.  His salary was $100,000 plus he owned the business and he said that the County and I had framed up on him.  So, I says, "Who do you think you are?"  He--so anyway, I took him to the county, the county told him, say, "Well, now the first thing I'm a tell you, you're not paying Al enough.  That's what they call me, Al.  The first place, you're not paying enough for what he's doing.  So, I say, "well, here now this guy isn't gonna wanna hear--so he and I weren't gonna get along so in the meantime, I went out to the Vo-tech and took up this CNA course.  I went at night, from six to ten, Mon--on Monday through Thursday.  I didn't tell anybody but my wife.  I finished that course and I started working at night to see if I liked it because I found out there was money in it.  And, I didn't say anything, so when he start talking a lot of noise, I says, "It's time for me to split the scene."  So, I left that and that's what I'm doing today.
Speaker 1: So, you've never, you've never found it difficult to find a job.
Speaker 2: Naw, man, naw.  My heart is making money.
Speaker 1: That's the goal?
Speaker 2: That's--my heart is making money.
Speaker 1: Now, why do you see, because you are a hard worker, that's the obvious there, where do you think you got that from?  Just to work so hard and be so diligent about it?
Speaker 2: I've always found that ain't nobody give you nothing.  If you want anything in life, you gotta work for it.  Ain't no free lunches.
Story_ID: 72500
Speaker 1: Applying that to the black community you see today, what you see going on around us, how do you think the black community can improve upon making inroads to improve themselves?
Speaker 2: I tell young people today, regardless whether you're going to college or whatever you're doing, my philosophy is, is qualify yourself to do what's in demand.  If it's not in demand, then you're wasting your time.  I live by that today.  If it's something in demand, you can make money.
Speaker 1: Do you think African Americans understand that?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I stress that to people period.  Not only African American, anybody and they find out, how do you do this or how do you do that?  Find out what's in demand.  And, if it's in demand, you can make money at it, if you qualify yourself to do it.  And, be good at what you do.
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: Well, I have found that I can't solve all the problems.  I don't believe in meeting and eating all the time.  I don't--I don't think--I eat at home.  That's what I tell people.  I can't solve the world problem.  I can only solve my own problems.  Some things, I can't solve of my own.  I don't try to solve the world problems anymore.
Speaker 1: Now, you grew up and saw probably things young African Americans will never see; the whites only, segregation, you went through the Civil Rights Movement, all these things, and all through it, you were successful at every venture you entered?
Speaker 2: Never had a problem.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you explain to people coming up today who say, they can't find jobs, they can't make it here.  They--what's your response to that?
Speaker 2: Well, you gotta qualify yourself to do things nowadays.  I mean, regardless what's field it's in, you're not--take people that are on jobs, take me for instance for what I do.  I've been doing this for fifteen years and if you're not qualified, you're not gonna, you're not gonna come in and make the money that I'm making.  It just doesn't work that way.  You gotta start at the bottom and work up.
Speaker 1: Now, that--now did you understand that from the Navy?  Was that the Navy experience?
Speaker 2: That's life.  That's life. That's life (unclear) not from the Navy, that's life.
Speaker 1: What do you see as just a businessman, I'll take you as that, as a business man and a person who has been, a person who's started trends actually being first in some of the area, how can African American as business people, open our own businesses and economically advance ourselves?
Speaker 2: Well, I--being, I worked with African Americans as far as business is concerned.  First thing, you gotta be prompt and the next thing you did, you gotta do quality work.  If you not prompt and do quality work, you can't make it.  Most--and, I don't think any business, I don't---regardless of who they are, if you gotta have money up front, you don't need to be in business.  Say, if I give you a job, if it was me giving you a job and I gotta give you some money, if you can't afford to do my job without me giving you some money up front, not a deposit, just money up front to be able to buy supplies and what not, you're not qualified to do a job.  That's my philosophy.
Speaker 1: So, how did you go about finding the jobs that you sought into the firm--being a waiter, to the Post Office, to the landscape, to the CNA, how did you choose, that these are the jobs I wanna do?
Speaker 2: These are the things that were in demand.  The Post Office was a livelihood that I had security.  Landscaping job was just something to do to supplement my income.  I learned to do that and then when I found out there was money in the health field.  And it's true, because people are going to get sick every day.  The population is getting old every day and there's money to be made.  So, qualify yourself, whatever is--whatever field you need to go into, qualify yourself and go into it and make money.
Story_ID: 72501
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't have any, I don't have any particular thing that I want it to be.  I just wanna be me.  I just wanna be me.
Speaker 1: What do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Well, I just want people to remember that the things that I've done to try to help people and the advice that I tried to give 'em to help themselves, you know, that's what I'd like to--I don't want any--I don't want a pat on the back.  I don't want, I don't want my name in the paper.  I'm not particular about that--being on any committees and what not because I've found that most of that isn't worth what it's all about anyway because most of those things aren't worth being on anyway.  Most politicians are crooked.
Speaker 1: You think they all are?
Speaker 2: Most of them are.
Speaker 1: How about the black politicians?
Speaker 2: Most of them are.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.  It's been great talking to you Mr. Little.
