Story_ID: 641530
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Handy L. Lindsey, Jr. [HistoryMaker Handy Lindsey, Jr.].  That's H-A-N-D-Y, middle initial L, which is for Lee, L-E-E, Lindsey, L-I-N-D-S-E-Y, and I'm a junior.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 24, 1952 and Leflore County, Mississippi.  The actual little town, I think, is Louisville [sic.].
Speaker 1: Leflore County.  Okay.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a foundation executive.  I've been working in professional philanthropy for about thirty three years.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February 10, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We- presently we are in the--actually in the board room of the offices of the Cameron Foundation, which is located in Petersburg, Virginia.
Story_ID: 641531
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we ask as a warm up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the first one is--they just require a short answer.  The first, the first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My favorite food is chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is the fall, the autumn.
Speaker 1: All right.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Tuscany, Italy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Hm.  (Pause) I'm not sure I do.
Story_ID: 641532
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Handy Lindsey, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Pearlie, P-E-A-R-L-I-E, middle name, Lee, L-E-E, and the maiden name is Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N [Pearlie Coleman Lindsey].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 18, 1937 and also somewhere in Leflore County, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What towns (unclear)--can you tell us where Leflore County is in relationship to, let's say, Jackson?
Speaker 2: Leflore County is--well, the center of the, of the county is about a hundred miles northwest of Jackson, Mississippi.  It is in the northeast quadrant of Mississippi, which is where the largest concentration of African Americans have always lived in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: That is referred to as the Delta [Mississippi Delta].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Not very far at all.  I know about my mother's father and my mother's mother, as my maternal grandmother passed away just a few years ago.  And my mother's father, Marshall Coleman, passed away probably in the early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did your grandfather do for a living?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was a sharecropper.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That means he was renting (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Which means that he rented, he rented a house that sat on the property of the plantation owner and, you know, shared the product of his labor or got a portion of the product of his labor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's one of the toughest lifestyles in Mississippi, I guess you'd have to say.
Speaker 2: But it's--yes, but probably the most common--at that time, the most common lifestyle in Mississippi and certainly the one, the only one that was pretty much open to African Americans.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories about what it was like in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, I can, I can--I can't recount stories told either by my mother or my grandfather.  I mean, I probably only saw my maternal grandfather two or three times in life, and this goes back to before the age of six for me.  So I don't remember him telling stories, but I do have, you know, fuzzy recollections of my own about that time.  And as given that my mother and father were also sharecroppers just like my grandparents were.  And, so I can remember living in a--what they called a shotgun house on a plantation owned by a white man.  It was probably more than a mile to the nearest house.  And we were surrounded by soybean fields and cotton fields.  And my father, you know, left the house early, very early in the morning and returned, you know, long after sundown and was tired and hungry and dirty (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now your grandmother, basically, did she--she helped with--
Speaker 2: My grandmother, she worked in the fields; that is, she picked cotton and chopped cotton, and which is pretty much what everybody in that community who was an African American did.  I mean, either you were in the fields or you were a mechanic keeping the equipment running or you were in the house as a domestic servant.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: My grandmother's name Fannie Mae [Fannie Mae Wraggs Haney]. Haney was her married name.  Her maiden name--Haney is, H-A-N-E-Y.  Her maiden name was Wraggs, W-R-A-G-G-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So your mother grew up, you know, in, on a farm basically, as you say, kind of isolated, I guess, in a sense, with a mile, you know, between her and neighbors (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, pretty much the only, you know, social relationships you had were with other people who were doing exactly the same type of work, you know, getting up every day and going to the fields when the truck, you know, pulled up to the front of the house, and you jumped on the back and went off to the cotton fields.
Story_ID: 641533
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Pearlie Coleman Lindsey] have any stories about growing up that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: Only my mother talked about the fact that she got married early, and she married to, I think, basically, escape (laughter) from my grandmother's [Fannie Mae Wraggs Haney] household.  So she married young, married my father [Handy Lindsey, Sr.].  They were--she was only thirteen, I believe, when they got married.  I was born when she was fourteen.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now did your mother have a chance to go to school at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  My mother, my mother completed sixth grade, my father completed eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your mother talk about her aspirations growing up?  Did she want to--did she have a profession or a--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --place she wanted to live or something that--?
Speaker 2: No, never heard her talk about anything that was aspirational other, you know, than having sort of her own home and having the money to take care of, you know, her children.  My parents split up very early in my life.  I think it was 1958 they split up, you know, after having, you know, gotten married, I guess, in about 1951.  And it had, I think, a lot to do with what was going on, not just in their own, you know, personal life, but in the life of black people at the time.  That was the time of sort of the last wave of, you know, the great black migration from the South to the North.  And it's interesting if you look at Nicholas Lemann's book, 'The Promised Land' ['The Promised Land: The Great Black Migration and How It Changed America'] as he talks about that Great Migration, my family's story is told right in that book.  You know, Clarksdale, Mississippi, being the point of departure for many families.  My family lived in, you know, in Greenwood [Mississippi], which was about, you know, sixty miles from Clarks- Clarksdale, and then, ultimately moved to Clarksdale.  And my family split up while they were living in Clarksdale.  My mother moved north to St. Louis [Missouri], and she moved north to St. Louis because, while my father's family stayed in Mississippi past the '50s [1950s], in fact, past the '60s [1960s], my mother's side of the family had moved--had already migrated to St. Louis and other points north, St. Louis and Toledo [Ohio], Milwaukee [Wisconsin], places like that.  And my mother wanted to be near her family.  My father wanted to be near his family.  And they split up, and my mother took my two sisters [Margaret Lindsey Crawford and Helen Lindsey] and I with her to St. Louis in 1958.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was your, was your mother part of a large family in--?
Speaker 2: My mother's family, she had two--she had a sister and two brothers and, so just the three siblings, not a large family.  Just the opposite of my father's family, who my father was the youngest of eight children; three brothers and four sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother, basically, made the move because other family members had--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --moved and she--okay.
Speaker 2: And the draw, the draw was very strong, and my father, she wanted my father to move with her, but my father didn't believe that, at that point in time, and again, it's 1958, and my father--no education, his only experience is, you know, operating farm equipment and maintaining farm equipment--didn't believe that there was any type of job that he could successfully, you know, secure in a northern city like St. Louis, and so he wanted to stay in Mississippi.
Story_ID: 641534
Speaker 1: Give me your father's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Handy, H-A-N-D-Y (laughter)--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --Lee Lindsey [Handy Lindsey, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind the name Handy?
Speaker 2: The only story I can tell you is that it is a name that has been in the family for a number of generations, but it has not been passed down in any type, in any type of straight line or orderly fashion.  For instance, you know, I am a junior.  My father, my father was named after his mother's father.  His first name was Handy, and he was--his name was Handy Wesley Jackson [Handy Jackson], and he was a itinerate minister from, I think, Cairo, Illinois.  But, so my, I guess, maternal great-grandfather was named Handy, my father was named Handy, I've passed the name on to my oldest son [Josef Lindsey], but not as a first name, he--I passed on to him as a middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So--
Speaker 2: But this I do know.  The name Handy was at some point in time a very common name for African Americans in the South.  And this goes back to when you were called for what you did.  And, so lots of, you know, black men living on plantations, working on the farms in Mississippi and Alabama, were named Handy.  And you might recall, if you've, you know, read the autobiography of Fred- Frederick Douglass ['Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass,' Frederick Douglass], that his best friend was named Handy, Handy Caldwell.
Speaker 1: And there's even a, there's even a song called 'Hard Work' by a man named John Handy.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh (laughter), yes, in fact, I own that particular record album.
Speaker 1: All right.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Quite a saxophone player (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.  Okay.  I mean there's probably, you know, it probably does relate to someone's ability to work or to solve problems.  That's, you know, just, you know, that's just a hunch but, that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's probably--
Speaker 2: Well, interestingly to- today, even now when I meet people, they--the first thing they tell me, "I've never met anyone named Handy before."  And then there's a question that follows, it's, "Well, are you?"  (Laughter) And my response depending on my mood is, "Well, I try to be."
Story_ID: 641535
Speaker 1: Now what do you know about the ancestors on your father's [Handy Lindsey, Sr.] side?  I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On my father's side, it doesn't go back any farther than that either.  And, so I know I can vaguely remember my father's father, who had (laughter) an interesting name, his name was--he went by the name of Lee Lindsey, but his first name was actually General (laughter).  So his name was General Lee Lindsey.
Speaker 1: Now this is something that's not that uncommon in the South.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: To have--I know there was a receiver for the Browns [Cleveland Browns] named Lawyer Tillman in Mississippi.  There was--I mean, you know, people were named Colonel--
Speaker 2: Major.  Yeah, very, very common.
Speaker 1: There's a fellow who runs a youth pro- program in Chicago [Illinois], Major somebody, you know, I--you probably know who I'm talk- talking about, on the West Side.  But, yeah, that's--it's not that unusual, not that unusual.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.  But, okay.  So General Lee Lindsey.  He went by Lee.  And--
Speaker 2: And as I said, I vaguely remember him, but all I remember is hearing stories about how he was such a stern man.  My dad and my dad's brothers always talked about how he was, he was a stern and hard disciplinarian and, you know, you'd better stay on your Ps and Qs.  And, so that's the overwhelming image I have of him.  And he, in terms of profession, I think, basically, again, just, you know, a sharecropper.  As I remember my dad talking about when he was a kid growing up, he talked about the plantation that they lived on and all--and the work that they all did, you know, that large family on that plantation.
Speaker 1: And, now to the best of your knowledge, I mean, did they--had they worked the same land since the days of slavery, at the same place for the same people?
Speaker 2: Pre- pre- pre- pretty much, pretty much for the same plantation.  I do remember stories where they talked about some member of the family that might have, you know, let's say they were in Greenwood [Mississippi] and he--some member of the family might have left Greenwood for a while to go up and do some logging work in Drew, Mississippi, or someplace like that, but, ultimately, would return back to that same land where the family had just worked for generations.
Speaker 1: So the familial relationships basically draw, keep people--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes, that's true (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in the same place, yeah.
Story_ID: 641536
Speaker 1: Now are there any stories that your father's side tell about, you know, the struggles of life or the joys of life in that region?
Speaker 2: I don't remember any stories of joy.  I only remember stories of struggle.  And, you know and, my father told lots of stories of struggle, and one of the stories that he told that sticks out in my mind was, you know, he was a young man, probably only, you know, nineteen or twenty and--or maybe even a little younger because I don't think he had married my mother [Pearlie Coleman Lindsey] yet.  But he was, you know, a field hand and was out working with a group of other field hands and, you know, the supervisor came out and the supervisor was the son of the plantation owner.  But he was a young guy himself.  And he, you know, basically, gave my father an order and sort of punctuated that order with nigger.  And my father, who was, you know, big, strapping guy, you know, stood up and looked at him and said, "You know my name is Handy [Handy Lindsey, Sr.], and if you want me to do something, you can call me Handy."  And the white man hit him and he hit him back.  And my dad had to leave town that day.  And for the next like two or three years, my dad had to actually sneak back in town to see his family, to see his mother [Inez Jackson Lindsey] and father [Lee Lindsey].  You know--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: He did that until, you know, because, basically, the word had gone out, was, you know, they're going to kill you tonight.
Speaker 1: So did--as far as you know, was there a network to get people out?  Because I've heard these kinds of stor- you know, these kinds of stories before where somebody does that, they can't come back.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  I mean, I don't know the details of that, but I do know that my father had relatives that lived a little farther north in Mississippi, I mean, like in Clarksdale [Mississippi] and, you know, Clarksdale was, you know, basically, the last jumping off point before Memphis [Tennessee].  And, you know, Memphis was basically a big distribution, you know, point.  And, so he had a relationship--relations--relatives in Clarksdale who he got to, and then--and he also had relatives in Detroit [Michigan].  So once he got to Clarksdale, they helped him to get to Memphis and then from Memphis to Detroit.  And, so each time that he was, you know, coming back to sneak in to see his parents, and that was only in, you know, like, maybe once, twice a year he could do that.  He was coming from, either from Detroit or from East St. Louis [Illinois] where he had managed to work for a little bit.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, but at some point he comes back to Mississippi for good?  Well--
Speaker 2: He comes, he comes back for good, and that's when he and my mother marry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And--
Speaker 1: --a couple years after this--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --incident where he had to flee?
Speaker 2: Right.  Exactly.  And, so he's back there and, so from '51 [1951] to '58 [1958] they're just there, you know, sharecropping themselves and, you know, a family, I mean, I have two sisters [Margaret Lindsey Crawford and Helen Lindsey] by then.  And it's just, you know, the five of us living in this little shotgun house where my mother goes to the field every day and comes home and, you know, makes dinner and everything for the family.  And my dad, at that point, was more, doing more mechanical work than anything, so he was fixing the farm equipment, keeping it operating.  And that he did until he had an accident and broke his leg working on a harvester and was in the hospital for a while.  It took a little while, a long time.  It was a pretty bad injury, and it took a long time for him to recover from that.  But that changed the kind of work he could do, and that also sort of led to my mother's concern about, "Well, what are we going to do here?  My folks are in St. Louis [Missouri], let's go up there, you can get a job at a factory, blah, blah, blah."
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I take it when he came back he settled in a different place in Leflore County [Mississippi]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) other than where he--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --was before?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Well, in fact, when he came back, he didn't go back to Greenwood [Mississippi], which is where his mother was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's where the incident took place?
Speaker 2: That's where the incident took place (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: He went back to Clarksdale.
Story_ID: 641537
Speaker 1: So is there a story about how your parents met that they tell?
Speaker 2: I don't know that story.  And I don't remember either my mother [Pearlie Coleman Lindsey] or my father [Handy Lindsey, Sr.] really talking about how they met.  I know other than I can remember just a couple of references to my dad saying, you know, he remembers, you know, coming to court my mother, you know, on a Sunday afternoon and having to sit on the front porch because my [maternal] grandmother [Fannie Mae Wraggs Haney] was a very, very stern and (laughter), and intense old lady.  But somehow they did manage to spend enough time together to decide they wanted to marry each other.  But, you know, you ask about stories, and it's interesting to me that I have so few recollections, it's as if my family didn't tell stories.  And, so there's a lot of my family's history that I think that has just been lost forever, because none of us, me, my sisters and I rea- none of us really know any of that detail.
Speaker 1: Well, some of it, you know, would just be triggered, I mean, I don't know.  I mean, I'm just speculating, but I know, some of the people sitting around at night on the porch, talk, tell ghost stories, and then talk about some of the history just--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: Well, I missed quite a bit of an op- of the opportunity for that, particularly with my father, given that my parents split up in 1958.  Nineteen fifty-eight [1958] I was six years old.  And, you know, so we moved north with--my mother, my two sisters and I moved north, my father stays in Mississippi.  And, so I didn't have a chance to hear stories from my father.  After 1958 until 1971--no, '72 [1972], I actually saw my father once.  And, so very, very limited contact over all of that time.  And my mother, my mother had all kinds of issues and demons.  My mother was not a storyteller and was totally consumed with just sort of getting through, you know, the next day and, you know, turned to alcoholism, and alcoholism ultimately killed her.  My mother died at, you know, age thirty-seven from cirrhosis, you know, which is just phenomenal to be taken out that early in life.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's (unclear).  Okay, so.  Now, when--so you have like, how many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: I have two sisters, two sisters.  One, Margaret, Margaret Harris Crawford [Margaret Lindsey Crawford], who is a year younger than myself and then Helen Lindsey, who is four years younger than myself.
Story_ID: 641538
Speaker 1: Now when you consider their personalities, their dispositions, their talents, even their looks, who do you think you take after the most, your mother [Pearlie Coleman Lindsey] or your father [Handy Lindsey, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: I look like my mother, but I am sort of the spirit of my father.  My father, though he was an uneducated man, he was a curious man, he was an intelligent man, he was a very disciplined and hardworking man and all of those things, all of those qualities I really hold in very high regard and esteem.  And I've emulated that, you know, even though there's this huge period in my life where he was not a part of my life.  But my father is still, always my number one hero.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother, my mother, on the other hand, as I said, consumed by her own demons and stuff like that.  I look like her, but have none of her personality.  My mother had a very, very acerbic tongue (laughter), was quick to anger and had a propensity to violence.  And that was something that sort of ran through my mother's side of the family, you know.  There was a violent streak in those people.
Story_ID: 641539
Speaker 1: So at age six, she [Lindsey's mother, Pearlie Coleman Lindsey] moves you all to St. Louis [Missouri] and--
Speaker 2: And we move in with my [maternal] grandmother [Fannie Mae Wraggs Haney].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And, so my grandmother, who at that time, is living and working as a waitress, living in a rented walk up apartment in St. Louis.  And in her household, at that time, is--are her two sons, one of which is grown, and a niece whose mother was my grandmother's sister but was deceased and, so my grandmother was raising the niece.  And then my mother comes, you know, on Christmas Eve (laughter) with three children in tow.  And, so we all lived in that--sort of like a three bedroom apartment.  We all lived there.  I mean, so everybody sleeping everywhere.  And we lived there until my mother managed to get, you know, a job and her own, her own apartment.  And her job was, you know, as a waitress.  The only work my mother ever really did was either as a waitress or as, you know, a domestic doing, you know, housekeeping.  But with, you know, sixth grade education, there just wasn't much opportunity for her.  And after a while, I mean, even that work she gave up.  And, so my mother, basically, was on public aid and--
Speaker 1: Oh, you can end (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And she was on public aid until the point that she died.
Story_ID: 641540
Speaker 1: Can you describe where you grew up, the neighborhood--did you grow up in the same neighborhood basically or did you move around?
Speaker 2: We moved, we moved around.  You mean in St. Louis [Missouri]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in St. Louis, my mother [Pearlie Coleman Lindsey] moved a lot (laughter).  And it had, you know, I think it probably had to do with, you know, not being able to pay the rent all the time.  And, so between first grade and sixth grade [at Curtis Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri], we probably lived in seven or eight different apartments but all pretty much in the same neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what part of St. Louis is this called (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I guess you'd probably call the area--this was sort of the north--the northwestern edge or the northeastern edge, I'm sorry, of the central city.  And the neighborhood was probably referred to as Hillside [St. Louis, Missouri].  And right in the center of the neighborhood was Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School [St. Louis, Missouri], which was the elementary school I attended.
Story_ID: 641541
Speaker 1: Now what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.  Well, there's the pickle factory.  Because Du- Dunbar Elementary School [Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri] was two blocks--was located two blocks from the pickle factory.  And, so the overwhelming smell in the neighborhood all the time was of vinegar (laughter).  And quite interestingly, one of the treats, though, that kids would buy from the little confectionary store on the corner at lunchtime was pickles (laughter).  So not only did we smell pickles all day long, we ate them as well.  So that's probably the overwhelming smell.  The sounds were that of, you know, foundries sounds, factories.  You know, some of, you know, metal stamping and stuff like that because those places were sort of surrounding the neighborhood and the school as well so--(pause) those, those probably are the two most dominating memories of sight and sound.
Story_ID: 641542
Speaker 1: So you started school at Dunbar Elementary [Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dunbar Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I started there in 1958, and this was my first time in school.  I was old enough to be in school in Mississippi when we left, but I had never been enrolled in school.  In fact, I went to the fields every day along with my mother [Pearlie Coleman Lindsey].  And, so my first experience with school was when I was enrolled in Dunbar.
Speaker 1: Now was there--had you been exposed to trying to write or read or anything before?
Speaker 2: Well, my dad [Handy Lindsey, Sr.], my dad had taught me to read and write, so when I started school, I could, I could read and write.  I mean, I was behind the children there but not far behind and, so (snaps fingers)--
Speaker 1: That's not bad for those days.  I think that's pretty good--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because they didn't--I remember when I was in school they didn't teach you to read or write until you're in the first grade.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were, you know, up to speed pre- pretty much (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: I would think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I could read, I could read, I could read a little bit and I could write a little bit, but I didn't know anything else (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did you like school?
Speaker 2: I loved school.  I mean, I was--it was like I took to it like a fish to water.  I loved everything about school.  I loved getting up every day and going, I loved every teacher that I ever had, even the ones who were mean.  And, so school was just--and I, and I guess because it just, you know, my world was so small before school.  And school just expanded it.  So I absolutely loved it.  I was a, I was a good student, a very good student.  And probably once, you know, I was enrolled in school and, you know, really mastered reading and writing, and reading became my passion.  I read everything I could get my hands on.
Story_ID: 641543
Speaker 1: So did you go to the library a lot?
Speaker 2: Oh, I went--I not only went to the library a lot, but during the summers when, you know, when school was closed, I created a reading list for myself.  And this was back during the era of the book mobile during the summer when school was not in session.  The book mobile would come to the school parking lot and, so it was sort of like bringing the library to the community.  And, so I would go to the book mobile.  I'd charge out the maximum which was six books, and two weeks later I'd be back to turn those in to charge out, to charge out another six books.  So, you know, I spent an awful lot of my summers unlike most of, you know, the other kids in my neighborhood, I spent my summers, you know, sitting on the porch or in a quiet nook reading books, and it just totally made my world so much bigger than it was otherwise.
Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite books?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can remember 'Call of the Wild' ['The Call of the Wild,' Jack London] was a wonderful book that I read.  I remember to this day, you know, 'To Kill a Mockingbird' [Harper Lee] is a book that I will still read from time to time.  But during that period, you know, the Jack London books had a great deal of appeal and, so things by Jack London or things like that, I read an awful lot of that kind of stuff.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So these were adventure books.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, adventure books.
Speaker 1: Outdoors and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --about places that you wouldn't, you know--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 641544
Speaker 1: So did the family get a chance to take advantage of the parks and the zoo in St. Louis [Missouri] and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, let's put it this way, I did.  Well, you know, the schools that we attended had, you know, field trips and, so we participated in those field trips.  But there really was not any instance of the family making use of those resources on its own.  So as children, what we got exposed to was all a function of what the school exposed us to.  Now as I got older, then I ventured out on my own.  I mean, there was a period when I was in high school [St. Louis University High School, St. Louis, Missouri], you know, the Saint Louis Zoo [Saint Louis Zoological Park, St. Louis, Missouri], at that time, was run by Marlin Perkins, you know.  And, so the Saint Louis Zoo was one of the most renowned zoos in the world.  When I was in high school, my freshman, sophomore year of high school, I probably spent, I mean, weeks in Forest Park [St. Louis, Missouri] where the zoo was (laughter), you know, and much of that time in the zoo, just going all the time and just learning, and learning, and learning.
Speaker 1: You know, 'Wild Kingdom,' remember that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Broadcast every Sunday?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what about the other cultural aspects of St. Louis that are--
Speaker 2: Again, in terms of my family, you know, my mother [Pearlie Coleman Lindsey], my sisters [Margaret Lindsey Crawford and Helen Lindsey] and I, we really weren't exposed to any of that other than if an opportunity was provided by the school.  And, so fortunately, you know, you know, Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri] took us on field trips to the zoo, took us on field trips to the St. Louis botanical gardens [Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis, Missouri], to the Saint Louis Art Museum [St. Louis, Missouri], the natural history museum [Saint Louis Science Center, St. Louis, Missouri], all of those things we got exposed to but only through school, not, you know, independently as a family.
Speaker 1: So what do you think the family would think if they would go on a field trip or something like that?  I mean, the family wouldn't just, "Let's go to the zoo or go to the museum or something?"
Speaker 2: That would--that's a thought that the family would never have.
Story_ID: 641545
Speaker 1: Now were your sisters [Margaret Lindsey Crawford and Helen Lindsey] as enthusiastic about reading in school as you?
Speaker 2: No.  And in fact, my sisters--neither of my sisters did as well in school as I did, although both my sisters are just as bright as I am.  But my sisters had other challenges, you know, given the nature of my mother's [Pearlie Coleman Lindsey] life and how they related to her as opposed to how I related to her.  I managed to sort of eke out a little life for myself independently of my mother, whereas my sisters were pretty much really dependent upon her.  And, so my--the ol- elder of my two sisters dropped out of high school, got pregnant and dropped out of high school probably, I think, age sixteen or so, ultimately, got a GED [General Educational Development] but, you know, never went to college or anything like that.  My younger sister, she did complete high school, but never went to college. Fortunately, she went to work for General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] right after graduating from high school and, so she took early retire- retirement a couple years ago.  I mean, so, you know, she's got a pretty secured life, a pension and everything like that but not a college degree.  And, in fact, I was the first, I was the first of my generation to attend college and one of only two people, not only first, but one of only two people in my family's generation, I mean cousins and everything, to actually obtain a college degree.
Story_ID: 641546
Speaker 1: I know you said you loved all the tea- teachers, even the mean teachers, but did you have favorite teachers that really provided like a--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  In fact, I can--I'll say, and then I'm not overstating this case.  There were two teachers who I think literally saved my life.  And that--these were my elementary school teachers.  Now this was not at Paul Laurence Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri].  This--after I finished fifth grade at Dunbar, my mother [Pearlie Coleman Lindsey] moved again and we had to tran- I had to transfer schools.  So I went to Curtis Elementary [Curtis Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri] after leaving Dunbar.  And at Curtis, I had two teachers there who I believe are absolutely responsible for the success that I have.  And they were my sixth grade teacher, who was a Jewish man by the name of Albert Fair [ph.], and then my eighth grade tea- teacher, who was an African American woman by the name of Alice Hudson [ph.].  Now those two teachers sort of conspired with my Boy Scout troop leader to get me into a college prep high school, and they worked with me, they tutored me, worked me really, really hard.  And it all started when, at the end of a marking period, my sixth grade teacher Mr. Fair wrote on my, on my report card at the very bottom, and I'd gotten like all A's that marking period, he wrote at the bottom, college material.  And that just caught my attention, and I came back to him and says, "What does this mean?"  (Laughter) And he explained what it meant, and I said, "Well, I want to do that."  And that's what got the ball rolling.  He talked to the eighth grade teacher, who was sort of like the master teacher of the school, the lead teacher of the school.  And, so he talked to her and they got together.  And I had been being tutored by my Boy Scout troop leader.  And, so--
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Richard Bischof.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: B-I-S-C-H-O-F.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And (unclear (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was he African American?
Speaker 2: No, he's white.
Speaker 1: White, okay.
Speaker 2: Good old German background (laughter).  German Dutch.  But Richard Bischof, you know, ran the Boy Scout troop out of the community center in the neighborhood.  This was at like Monsignor Butler community center, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, there's a longer story to be told regarding Richard and we can get into that when you want, but because I actually lived with his family for a few years.  In fact, most of my high school years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But anyway, these three individuals really conspired to get me ready to take the entrance exam for St. Louis University High School [St. Louis, Missouri].  Now, mind you, I had had Mr. Fair that year.  The next year, my seventh grade year I had another teacher who wasn't as interested, but then in my eighth, in my eighth grade year, I did have Mrs. Hudson.  So I'd been taught by both of these two individuals, and we're now at the point where I'm about to graduate from elementary school, and they want to get me into a really good high school so that I might have a chance to go to college.  And they worked with me and tutored me, tested me.  I took the entrance exam and scored higher than anybody from that community had ever scored and earned a three quarters scholarship to St. Louis University High.  And by the way, if you wonder what that school is, it is the same high school that Henry Hampton went to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Henry Hampton was there ten years ahead of me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of Blackside productions [Blackside, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The producer of 'Eyes on the Prize.'
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.  And in fact, there's a, there's a Hen- Henry Hampton Scholarship [Henry E. Hampton Minority Scholarship] for African American students at the school today, and I contribute to it every year.
Story_ID: 641547
Speaker 1: Now this is a magnet school, I guess you'd call it (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, well, a college prep [St. Louis University High School, St. Louis, Missouri].  It was a private college prep, a Catholic--
Speaker 1: Oh, private?  Okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  This was a school run by Jesuit priests.  And it is one of the oldest, oldest private schools in Missouri.  It was founded in 1818, and it was basically founded as the laboratory school for Saint Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is also, you know, a Catholic university.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  So well then, so how did you do?  Now here you're at--so like I guess a good question might be, now was there a disconnect between home and school in terms of--well, I know it is, but how did you resolve that dis- disconnect?
Speaker 2: Well, well, see, that's where Richard Bischof comes in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yes, there was a great disconnect between home and school.  I mean, my mother [Pearlie Coleman Lindsey] wasn't doing anything to provide an environment for her children to get educated beyond, you know, anything other than keeping them enrolled in school.  And the home environments that we had weren't conducive, you know, to having a quiet, you know, a comfortable place to study or anything like that.  And, so I--my being a good student, it was something that I had to achieve against the odds.  That's true for my sisters [Margaret Lindsey Crawford and Helen Lindsey] as well, but they succeeded at it less well than I did.  So in order to really create that environment where I could be the student, that's how I ended up living with Richard Bischof.  I mean, he approached my mother one day and said, "Look, I think your son has some potential to really do well, and he can go to college and he can be anything he wants to be.  I'd like to help him do that.  Would you mind if he came and lived with us for a while?  I'll take care of him."  And, I mean, which is an extraordinary thing to do, but that's what he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you meet Mr. Bischof as the scout leader, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As a scout leader, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you have, did you have a pretty good scout troop, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, we were a pretty, we were a pretty good bunch of kids, you know.  And he took us on, you know, many scouting trips, you know, camping in southern Illinois, central Missouri, and places like that.  And it was just great, because it just opened up a whole new world to, you know, a bunch of kids growing up on the north side of St. Louis [Missouri], which is, you know, even today is just one huge ghetto where, you know, I mean, the only opportunity there is to get arrested.  And that's the way it was when I was a kid, it's that way now.  So it was an, it was an extraordinary thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So this is once again expanding your world.
Speaker 2: Expand- expanding my world.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 641548
Speaker 1: So how did your mother [Pearlie Coleman Lindsey] respond to Mr. Bischof's [Richard Bischof]--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean my mother said, "Fine."  And I think the motivation there was one less mouth for her to feed.  And, so that relationship started.  I mean, I, you know, lived with Mr. Bischof and, you know, his family and, you know, I was a serious student.  It's what he, it's what he encouraged me to do, it's what he demanded me to do.  You know, he taught me algebra, so when I started high school [St. Louis University High School, St. Louis, Missouri], you know, I actually knew algebra going into high school, and that was, you know, a good foundation for starting to compete with kids where, you know, in this prep school, while during elementary school I had been, you know, number one in my class, you know, every year, and that's what I was used to.  And then all of a sudden, I'm in an environment where every kid in the room was nu- was number one in his class.  And, so it was quite a shock going from, you know, being, you know, the cream of the crop to just being part of the crop (laughter), you know.  But that was challenging and I didn't know it at the time but, you know, that experience was saving my life because if I look at had I not had that experience, and I had not been worked with by these two teachers and Mr. Bischof, and prepared to get ready to go to this college prep school, if I had just followed the same trajectory of every other kid in my neighborhood my age, if I look at what happened to them, I'd be dead now, because they're--I mean, you look at my eighth grade class [from Curtis Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri], and most of my eighth grade class the boys were either--they either died in Vietnam or they died on the streets of St. Louis [Missouri].  The ones, the ones who survived, and there are very few, did so by being in the [U.S.] military but being fortunate enough to not have seen active, I mean, combat.  And the other guys who, you know, were, you know, the gang issue was starting to really, you know, heat up there in St. Louis at that time.  You know, drugs were coming on the scene at that time and, so most of my class were taken out by the environment.  I managed to escape that because I was doing this education thing over here so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --it saved my life.
Speaker 1: I remember one of the black newspapers in St. Louis was famous for following murders.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Whirl [St. Louis Evening Whirl].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, W-H-I-R-L, the Whirl.  I mean, if it, if it, if it outrageously bleeds, then it leads, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Of all--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the black papers--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's the one that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they say that like follows violence.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 641549
Speaker 1: I was compelled to ask you, though, was there any incident that took place that really precipitated Mr. Bischof [Richard Bischof] asking if he could bring you into his household?  I mean, did something happen at home that just kind of, you know, dramatized where you got, "I got to get out of here"?
Speaker 2: Not one, not one incident, but just a series of them.  As I said, you know, my mother [Pearlie Coleman Lindsey] was prone to violence, and I think I took my last beating from her.  And I don't even remember what my infraction was, but my mother grabbed a, the plastic, rigid plastic hose part of a vacuum cleaner.  You remember those old, old kinds of vacuum cleaners.  And she hit me with that, and she basically, you know, disciplined me with that, and it was the first time that I'd taken a beating from my mother and I decided I wasn't going to cry.  And when she finished beating me and I'm standing there and I'm holding back the tears, didn't cry, didn't yell out or anything like that, and when she finished, I asked her if she felt better.  And my mother never hit me again, and shortly thereafter I left her house.
Story_ID: 641550
Speaker 1: Were you involved in clubs and groups and (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I was, I was an athlete.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was, I was an athlete, I was, I was a gymnast and I ran track.  And those were pretty much my activities throughout high school [St. Louis University High School, St. Louis, Missouri].  A couple of years I was involved in, you know, the school's, you know, theatre productions and stuff like that, the plays and stuff.  I did some of that.  But those are pretty much the three things.  So theatre, track, and gymnastics.
Speaker 1: Now was this an all-male high school?
Speaker 2: It was an all-male high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was a high school, and the enrollment there was just shy of a thousand students, and there were around thirty African Americans.  And, so there was basically one of us in each homeroom class (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now did the African Americans gravitate towards one another?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  Only thirty of us at a school of a thousand white kids, and where we were called nigger every other minute, you know, stuff like that.  But it still, it still turned out to be a really good experience for most of us.  For me, you know, and I did develop, you know, good, strong relationships with a lot of the white students, particularly ones in which, you know, were my teammates, you know, in sports that I competed in and stuff like that.  But also, I developed good, strong relationships with many of the teachers, most of which at that time were, you know, Jesuit priests either, you know, you know, still seminarians about to become priests or have already, you know, taken the vows and everything and were ordained priests.  But, you know, learned just so much.  I have to say, well, you know, I covered a great deal of subject matter in the four years I spent in that college prep high school.  But what's really important that I learned from them were just three things.  I learned--I learned to think critically, I learned to write, and I learned that there was nothing more important in life than service.
Story_ID: 641551
Speaker 1: Well all those--three of those things you weren't exposed to on as concentrated a level in the public schools (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Anyway service, I think, today is really, is a call, peo- people are calling out for the students need to volunteer to do something, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, in--St. Louis University High [St. Louis University High School, St. Louis, Missouri] actually took it to a whole 'nother level, you know, I mean, community service was encouraged of students, you know, from freshman year on.  But not only was it encouraged but in the senior year, your year as a senior student there, you were required to do a formal community service project.  And you could not graduate without having completed this community service project.  And what it was, you had to go out into the community, find some community activity that you wanted to be interest- that you were interested in, and you wanted to work with, gain permission and support from that organization to work with you, design a discrete project, write it up and do it and report on it at the end of a six week period.  And during that six week period, you were excused from classes.  You were expected to show up at that community service project every day.  And, so you're out in the world working, volunteering, but then you're accountable for that, for that experience, and you have to, you know, turn in a report at the end of it.  And that was required of every senior.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was, that was sort of a, you know, I have now spent, you know, thirty-three years in professional philanthropy.  All of my work has been mainly for non-profit kinds of organizations and, so human service, community service is what I am all about.  And what sort of sealed that trajectory for me was that community service project I did at the end, at the beginning of my senior year of high school.  From that moment on, I knew that I wanted to do something that was about service.
Story_ID: 641552
Speaker 1: When you were growing up, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Church was never a big deal in my, in my family.  Having--I converted to Cath- Catholicism as a result of being affiliated with Mr. Bischof's [Richard Bischof] family.  They were Catholic.  And, so at age thirteen, I converted to Catholicism.  And, so I grew from that point on, I grew up in the Catholic church.  They, you know, went to church--went to Mass, you know, every Sunday.  At the high school, St. Louis University High [St. Louis University High School, St. Louis, Missouri], we started every day with Mass.  So that was the church that I grew up in.  My sisters [Margaret Lindsey Crawford and Helen Lindsey]--my family just had--never had a real commitment to going to church.  And, so even to this day I don't think any of my family, my sisters, really deal with church very much at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I was thinking, too that, you know, despite the Civil Rights Movement and Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] dedication to service and important key people who served, in the public schools in the poor neighborhoods you hardly ever get a program, a formal program where service was for the students.
Speaker 2: No, that's a pretty modern phenomenon.  I mean, you know, just probably in the last fifteen or twenty years that you've started to see things like that happen.  But it certainly was not prevalent--present during, you know, my coming up years.
Speaker 1: Yeah that makes me think survival may trump, you know, service mentalities.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yeah, I agree.
Story_ID: 641553
Speaker 1: Did you take any kind of a leadership role in high school [St. Louis University High School, St. Louis, Missouri] around anything?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in a, in a cou- couple of things.  One of, you know, having atten- attended a Catholic private school, private Catholic prep school, I mean, that wasn't something that a lot of, you know, African Americans kids got to do.  But if you did attend one, you found out that there was a whole community like you (laughter) in various other private schools around town.  And as we became aware of each other, we started to coalesce.  And in fact, we--the students from my high school, and then there's a girls school called Rosati-Kain [Rosati-Kain High School, St. Louis, Missouri], and another girls school called Nerinx Hall [Webster Groves, Missouri], another boys school called Christian Brothers College [Christian Brothers College High School, St. Louis, Missouri].  And there were a number of these private schools, and we were, you know, sort of aware of each other because we came from the same neighborhoods, even though we went to, you know, different schools.  And we sort of coalesced and created a group that, I think we called ourselves the Black Assistance Union [ph.].  And what we did was, we did projects to raise money and to use that money to help students who were struggling to attend those kinds of institutions, you know.  Because of most of us were all there on scholarship.  Very few of us, you know, had parents who could afford to pay what it cost for one of us to attend those schools.  And we did this thing for probably most of the time that I was in high school, and for two years I was, I was the chairman of it, you know.  So, you know, it was a, it was a community service activity that we came to on our own.  We created on our own.  Nobody suggested we do this.  We just, you know, thought that, you know, we all had a sense of how much of a struggle it was for a family to keep a kid in--I mean a black, typical black family, to keep a kid in one of these private, you know, elite schools.
Story_ID: 641554
Speaker 1: You were in high school [St. Louis University High School, St. Louis, Missouri] when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.         I can, I can, I can remember that day so vividly because we all, we all reacted in our different ways.  And my particular--the administration of my school was very, very concerned about how the thirty black students in the building would respond to that news.  And we were all just absolutely stunned.  And I can remember at some point we all just sort of left our classes and, you know, gathered in the recreation room in the basement of the building.  And we're just sort of there, and we were just all just so completely stunned, we didn't know what to say, we didn't know what to do.  We were crying and we were--I mean, there was a feeling of hopelessness, there was anger, there was all of that.  And then there was one, there was one among us.  There was one senior at the time and his name was Bill Hayes [ph.], and probably Bill had the most extreme reaction to it.  Bill left school, just ran out of school, jumped in his car and drove home and he came back with a gun.  And we all, you know, when we heard that, we found out about that, we all gathered around Bill and tried to talk Bill into getting out of there with that gun, taking that gun back home.  And we succeeded in that.  And Bill did leave, took the gun back home.  But that day was just--it was devastating.
Speaker 1: Now there were riots in St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 2: There were some.
Speaker 1: In north St. Louis.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Like there were all over the country.  Did you go back to the neighborhood during that period of time or did you--?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  No, I didn't.  And, you know, it's interesting.  While, you know, many communities around the country erupted during that time, things happened in St. Louis, but nowhere near, with nowhere near the intensity as it happened in other places like, you know, Detroit [Michigan] and Newark [New Jersey], stuff like that.  And I think that has something to do with the particular community culture and psyche of a place like St. Louis.  I mean, I think, you know, St. Louis to this very day is a plantation community.  From--and I think you probably--that tone resonates with you.  You know what I mean when I say that.  That the black people in St. Louis have, you know, sort of been docile for so long that their response to stimulants--to stimuli that would enrage other communities and take them to civil disobedience just didn't happen in St. Louis, you know.  And it, and it really didn't.  It was like St. Louis was really quiet, you know, relative to other communities.  And it's like everybody was shocked, you know, this is years later, but everybody was shocked when St. Louis elected its first black mayor [HistoryMaker Freeman Bosley, Jr.], you know.  Nobody ever thought they had it in them (laughter).  So, but that was sort of characteristic of St. Louis.  You just don't look, keep your head down, don't make too much noise, don't get too noticed, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there was some disruption, but not as much as--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --other places so--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now that--this is early on in your--this was your freshman year or sophomore year when Dr. King (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was my freshman year.
Speaker 1: Freshman year.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was my freshman year--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of high school.
Story_ID: 641555
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts about career when you were in high school [St. Louis University High School, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, what I, what I thought, you know, from like, probably like most kids, you know.  As you go in high school and you--in the absence of adults guiding you towards something, you tend to gravitate toward what was, you know, a pleasing and pleasant experience in terms of your--the subject matter you studied.  So, you know, if you enjoyed math you thought, well, maybe, you know, I'll do something that has to do with math or if you enjoyed, enjoyed history, maybe I'll do something that has to do with his- history.  Well, I enjoyed history.  So, you know, from early on I thought that I would probably, you know, go to college, I would major in history, and then I would become a history professor.  That's what I thought.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I thought that right up until I had that community service experience when all of a sudden I said, "No, there's a different way that I want to live in the community and do what I want to do with my life."  And, so when I did, you know, ultimately go on to college [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I majored, I majored in sociology and minored in history.  And ultimately, you know, went to graduate school in social work [at the University of Chicago School of Social Service Administration, Chicago, Illinois] and in, and in business [at the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 641556
Speaker 1: When you graduated, were you, were you one of the top students or did you--were you--
Speaker 2: In my high school [St. Louis University High School, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, I was not one, not one of the top students.  I was probably in the top third, I mean, at the bottom of the top third.  But, you know, as I said, this was a--this was, you know, a class--my class, there were 228 students.  Every single one of them was, you know, number one or two in their graduating eighth grade class, you know.  So it was, it was a pretty competitive environment.  So I was, you know, I thought--had a respectable rank in my class being, you know, at the bottom of the top third of the class.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you graduated from high school in '71 [1971]?
Speaker 2: In '71 [1971], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now how did you choose your college?
Speaker 2: Well, remember I told you that I had an interest in, you know, being an historian.  And, so from very early on I thought I wanted to go to Chicago, University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] because, you know, [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin was there (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And all of these, you know, famous historians and everything were at the University of Chicago.  So even after my interest started to gravitate more toward, you know, something of service, University of Chicago was still the top of my school choices.
Story_ID: 641557
Speaker 1: I mean, they were basically the founders of sociology (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, I end up, you know, one of my--my advisor at U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] was--oh, my god, what's his name--William Julius Wilson, you know.  So I worked with him as a student, and I actually got a chance to work with him later on, you know, professionally when, you know, he was doing some work in the Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois], and I was, at that time, I was a program officer at the Chicago Community Trust [Chicago, Illinois] and, so we managed to hook up there too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So William Julius Wilson, who's now at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Is he, is he still at Harvard now?  Probably not.
Speaker 2: I think he's still at Harvard, now, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: He was at the University of Chicago then.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, the celebrated sociologist.  Now, he's your advisor.  And, okay.  So how did you like the University of Chicago?
Speaker 2: I hated The University of Chicago, and I loved the University of Chicago (laughter).  I loved the University of Chicago in that, you know, it truly was a rigorous learning environment.  And, so you felt like, you know, you knew you were getting a really top rate education.  I hated it because it was such a weird place socially, and there was, you know, a very strong strain of racism among the fa- among the faculty and as well as other students too and, so--
Speaker 1: How did--well, first is, how did that manifest itself?
Speaker 2: Well, in the classes, I had quite--I had a number of professors, and any number of my classmates who were African American could tell the same story where, you know, as a black student, you never got the benefit of the doubt.  You know, let's say, if you've done a paper and the professor has decided, "Well, you know, this is a, this is a B minus, C plus."  He's not going to give you the B minus.  He's going to give you the C plus.  Maybe even just a C (laughter), okay.  I mean, and that just sort of always happened.  And also, you know, being ignored, you know, in discussions, in seminars, you know, a seminar with five people in the room and you never get called on.  You know, come on (laughter).  Things like that.  I mean, sometimes much more subtle than that, but often that blatant, I mean, so I mean, I thought the University of Chicago was a very racist environment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know, if you wanted to work hard, and you'd be exposed to everything that was to be exposed to, you know.
Story_ID: 641558
Speaker 1: Now were there any other mentors at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], any--?
Speaker 2: In the undergraduate years there were a couple.  And there was a, really a couple of African Americans who were either employees of the school or faculty of the school.  In the case of employee, there was a woman by the name of Charlotte Goss [ph.].  And Charlotte was African American and worked in the, I guess, sort of the guidance or counseling office or whatever, you know, (unclear), an academic advisor.  And it seemed like every, every African American student knew who Charlotte Goss was, and at some point in their college career spent some time in Charlotte's office.  And not only that, but Charlotte invited the African American students into her home.  So she and her husband, Bill [ph.], I mean, they'd have Thanksgiving dinner and at Thanksgiving dinner for--at their home, you know, there would be all of these students (laughter) from the university.  And, so she was sort like, she was sort of like a mother figure to most of, you know, the undergraduate students at the University of Chicago.  Every single student of color knew who Charlotte Goss was.
Speaker 1: Is she related to [HistoryMaker] Margaret Burroughs?  Margaret Bur- Burroughs was Margaret Goss Burroughs.
Speaker 2: I don't think they're related.  And I'm trying to think where because I think, I think Charlotte's originally from Baltimore [Maryland].  I know, I know her husband, Bill, is and I thought Charlotte was from there too.  But I don't, I don't think she was related, related to Margaret Burroughs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's G-O-S-S?
Speaker 2: G-O-S-S.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: And, so that was one instance of where there were, you know, mentors.  And in addition to that, there was in addition to Charlotte there was--at one point there was a black vice president of the university, Walter--oh, god, what was his last name.  I think Walter Walker [Walter L. Walker].  Yeah, Walter Walker, and he was like vice president.  I can't remember what his particular area was, but he was the only black vice president at the university.  And his wife Sonia [Sonia Walker], they, I think were major supports for the black students there.  And again, invited the black students into their homes, you know, on numerous occasions and everything.  It was a place that black students could come to talk about the issues that they--I mean, the instances of racism that they faced, you know, institutionally and stuff like that and, you know, and could get, you know, understanding and analysis from the Walkers.  And, so that was, that was, you know, an important resource for black students on campus, and not just undergraduates but graduate students as well.  And then one other, I think, really important figure I would point out, and I'm trying to remember her name, but she was, she was faculty at the University of Chicago School of Social Service Administration [Chicago, Illinois], and I'm just blocking on her name right now.  It's Arnita, Arnita--I can't, I can't remember it.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: But anyway--Boswell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Arnita Boswell [Arnita Young Boswell].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was another person who, again, was a real advocate for the African American students and was a real, you know, sort of elder figure for them to come to for support and guidance, stuff like that.
Story_ID: 641559
Speaker 1: Now did you get a chance to meet and know [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  Yes, I did.  Just a lovely man.  Absolutely lovely man.  And, you know, it--and it's actually hard to sit in the presence of such brilliance.  I mean, he just radiates, you know, intelligence (laughter).  But I do remember having a number of inter- interactions with him.  And other really, you know, luminary faculty, I mean, like Edgar Epps, you know, in the, in the education department, who was not only, you know, a, you know, a brilliant, you know, educator, I mean, but again, he took a real personal interest in the African American students there and probably was the key element in the process and the proposition of whether, you know, an African American student succeeded in completing their Ph.D. in education at the, at the university [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  You know, I mean, he made the difference in so many folks' lives.
Story_ID: 641560
Speaker 1: I know the University of Chicago basically is an island in, on the South Side in so many ways, surrounded by the black community, and is considered at once, you know, the most liberal place in Chica- one of the more liberal places in Chicago [Illinois] and one of the, you know, more isolated in some ways (unclear) racist in another (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was an amazing collection of contradictions--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --is what it was.  I mean, so, yes, it was for--I mean, for the entire time that I lived in Chicago, the University of Chicago had the image of being a fortress, you know.  Basically set in the middle of Woodlawn, you know.  I mean, set in the nexus between Hyde Park and Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois], but all--but, you know, you always had the sense that, if the University of Chicago could get away with it, they would have built a ten foot wall, you know, along 63rd Street (laughter) to keep, you know, Woodlawn out and everybody else in.
Speaker 1: And by the same token, the interaction between Woodlawn and the University of Chicago is almost like experimental or something, in a sense.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: It's a laboratory for the school.
Speaker 2: Well, and, you know, I mean, it would be unfair to characterize the University of Chicago with their relationship with the community in only that one dimension.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, it was much more complex than that.  And, of course, you know, the university's relationship with The Woodlawn Organization [Chicago, Illinois] and the community development corporation [Woodlawn Community Development Corporation] there, I mean, I think the university was absolutely essential to a lot of the achievements of those organizations.  So, you know, I won't paint them with a broad brush, but still there was the image that the university wanted, and if it had its way, it could, would have preferred to have been separated from the community.  But in actuality, that wasn't, that wasn't the case.  There were an awful lot of, I think, important partnerships and relationships that produced things that just never would have happened without, you know, the resources and assets that the university brought to bear on it.
Speaker 1: So did you get a chance to meet Saul Alinsky?
Speaker 2: Never met Saul Alinsky.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I know he was in and out of Chicago, I don't know.  He was at the University of Chicago whenever he started in, I don't know, you know.  I know he was in and out so--
Speaker 2: No, well, I just never had a chance, never had a chance to meet him.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So were you able to--then, did you work on any of the projects in Woodlawn as part of your school experience?
Speaker 2: No, no, I didn't.  While I was an undergraduate student there, you know, I helped to pay for my education by working while a student.  But I always worked for the university in a variety of, you know, insignificant (laughter) positions.  But mai- mainly I worked within the library system of the university, you know, which is, you know, how I made money to supplement, you know, my living expenses while there.  But never worked for any of the community development corporations or anything like that.  But did ultimately and subsequently had relationships with those entities when later on as a professional grant maker, the organizations that I was working for, like the community foundation [Chicago Community Trust, Chicago, Illinois] and the Field Foundation of Illinois [Chicago, Illinois], were, you know, significant funders of many of the projects of those entities I undertook.
Story_ID: 641561
Speaker 1: So you graduated in 1975 [from the University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: In 1975.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you had a B- a B.A. in sociology?
Speaker 2: Yeah, B.A. in sociology.  And when I graduated in '75 [1975], I went, I went to work immediately for La Rabida Children's Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] working in the behavioral science department there, which was, basically, their social work--social services department within the children's hospital.  And I did that for about three years before deciding to return to do--to work on a graduate degree in social work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the early '70s [1970s] is the era of Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] and Breadbasket [Operation Breadbasket] and all that.  Did--were you a part of any of that?  Did you go and check it out?
Speaker 2: Not in any formal way but I mean, I would, you know, go to the meetings on Saturday morning and be there, for the, you know, the PUSH rallies and stuff like that, but I was not any, in any way formally involved in those institutions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And any--I mean, there was so much, there was so much going on in Chicago [Illinois], I mean.  What are some of the activities that impressed you or that you remember now when you look back as you're forming, I guess, you're developing into somebody going into the service?
Speaker 2: At that point in time--the earl- well, this is, this is sort of the mid, the mid and late '70s [1970s], right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So I came out of, I came out of school '75 [1975], so between '75 [1975] and '78 [1978] when I was back in graduate school, you know, basically, that was a period in my life where I had a young family.  And, so I was just--I was working at the hospital.  My wife at the time, Rachel [Rachel Washington Lindsey], was on faculty at Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois].  Neither one of us (laughter) was making very much money.  And, so at that point with a young and growing family, I'd have to say my attention was pretty much focused on just meeting those obligations, you know, during that period of time.  And I probably didn't really start to get focused and paying, you know, significant attention to, you know, the community change work and activities that were going on until I actually got back into school as a graduate student at the School of Social Service Administration [University of Chicago School of Social Service Administration, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Do you want to talk about what you did at La Rabida?
Speaker 2: Well, at La Rabida, I mean, it was just--I worked with, you know, chronically ill teenagers and was, you know, sort of a counselor to them and a liai- worked--sort of served as a liaison between, you know, the students and the medical professionals who were responsible for these young kids who were, you now, chronically ill, and sometimes, you know, critically ill.  I did that and found it, you know, thoroughly rewarding working with young people and, you know, them being impressionable and, you know, having a little chance to sort of, you know, make my little injection of values and perspectives and stuff like that.  But ultimately, I couldn't do that work long term because, you know, what happens with chronically ill children is that sometime they become acutely ill and sometimes that they die.  And I got close to a number of, you know, young people who ultimately died.  And that was just hard for me.  I mean, so I think people who can work in that environment and experience that over and over again have a very special makeup.  And I just--I discovered I didn't have it.  I mean, it was just devastating to me to watch these children die.  And, so that was a great push for me to go back to graduate school in that I knew I contin- I wanted to continue to work in some type of service milieu, but direct service was probably not the best way for me in- to be involved.  So I went back to get a professional degree so that I could work at the administrative and policy level.
Story_ID: 641562
Speaker 1: So when did you go back?
Speaker 2: I went back--let's see.  I think I started at SSA [University of Chicago School of Social Service Administration, Chicago, Illinois] in the fall of 1977.  And decided that, in addition to getting, to working on the master's in social work, that I could combine that with a master's in business administration [from the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois] in preparation for maybe one day leading some, you know, major human service or nonprofit organization.  And it turned out to be, I mean, in hindsight, it did turn out to be a pretty good decision because, you know, what I did was I brought together two rather disparate sets of training, you know, the social work and the business and two different--entirely different sets of skills, two entirely different sets of values, unfortunately.  But managing to bring them together turned out to be very good preparation for working in professional philanthropy because I understand the serving side, but I also understand the financial side just as deeply or just as intimately as the service side.  And, so having, you know, led foundations for the last twenty-five years, having put together that, you know, sort of unique academic background, turned out to be precisely the thing I should have done, if that was the kind of career I was going to have.
Speaker 1: Now did you have advice about that or did somebody say, "Hey, you know, check--you could be--" because I take it there weren't too many people doing that in those days.  In fact, there weren't any--
Speaker 2: Well, arriving there was a much simpler calculation than you think.  And, no, there wasn't, there was no one advising me to do that.  But I re- you know, I borrowed money to go to school (laughter), okay.  And the one thing I knew about people who got M.B.A.'s was that they made more money than people who just got master's in social work.  And, so I was thinking--I was making this calculation, well, I want to be able to make a little bit more money.  I want to be a social worker, but I want to make a little bit more money so I can pay back these loans.
Story_ID: 641563
Speaker 1: What's your impression of the history of black folks at SSA [University of Chicago School of Social Service Administration, Chicago, Illinois]? I mean, when you, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, SS- the history of black folks at SSA, I mean, that's an interesting question.  I think all the various departments of the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], certainly of the various professional schools of the University of Chicago, SSA was probably the most welcoming and the most nurturing of black students and certainly, probably the most aggressive recruiter of black students.  So if you, if you just lined up all of the departments and professional schools side by side and you started to count heads, the cluster of heads in SSA would probably be more than all of the rest of the departments combined.  So it really was a very positive environment for black students.  I mean, in my class, I think I was one of the smaller--one of the smaller classes of black students at SSA, my class of 1980.  But there were--there were over twenty students in my class, and there had been classes with as many, I think, at one time, as many as forty black students in it.  And that's out of a class of maybe 150 students.  And, so SSA for as long as I can remember has always been a very good and strong, nurturing environment for, you know, black students interested in social work and interested in being prepared at the professional level.
Speaker 1: In terms of the master--the M.B.A. program, were there many black students enrolled in the M.B.A. program?
Speaker 2: Never, never more than a handful.  In any given year, never more than a handful.  And at--I think, during the period that I was there, was probably one of the heydays in terms of a major presence of African Americans in the program at the business school [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois].  If you look at the graduating classes of probably 19--what, 1979 and nineteen seven--1980, if you look at those two classes, there's probably no period in the school's history where African Americans have been more highly represented than those couple of years.  But then you look at everything else and it's just a complete drop off.  I mean, it's just never been more than a handful and, you know, no, no particular commitment to recruitment or anything like that, you know.  So if you managed to get in there and if you managed to find the money, then you were welcome.  But the school wasn't out looking for you.
Story_ID: 641564
Speaker 1: Are there any parti- particular figures in your graduate studies that stand out, I guess, when you look back?
Speaker 2: You mean professors?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, probably--well, let's go back to SSA [University of Chicago School of Social Service Administration, Chicago, Illinois].  There was an African American professor there by the name of Durham.  And Earl Durham was--he taught policy and program evaluation, but he was, he was an organizer.  And, so he taught organizing classes too.  And Earl was my mentor.  I've got--I was instructed to bring some pictures here today and I've got a picture of Earl and I.  He has passed on.  He passed away at about age eighty about, about five years ago.  But Earl was just an incredibly knowledgeable and excellent teacher.  I mean, he could convey the material in such a clear way.  And all of the black students got to know him, you know, whether they had an interest in the clinical track or the policy track.  Everybody knew Earl Durham.  And I got into the habit of starting my day every morning in Earl Durham's office in the basement (laughter).  He had an office in the basement of SSA, and I'd come in every morning to get my shot of Earl Durham, you know.  And he mentored me while a student there.  We had a wonderful relationship that continued, you know, as I was, you know, entered my profession, and it continued throughout the time and up right until his death.  And anytime, you know, in my professional life (background noise), that I was dealing with a particularly thorny set of issues in trying to figure out a strategy for solving very difficult problems, I'd give Earl a call.  We'd get together, we'd talk it through, and I'd leave his office or wherever he was knowing what I had to do.  But he gave of himself that way, not just to me but to any student who came to him and all of the African Americans.  I mean, there were times when we literally were lined up outside of Earl's door (laughter) waiting to see Earl Durham.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now he--is he related to the writer Dick Durham [Richard Durham]?
Speaker 2: I think so, yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: I think so, yep.  But he was--he was at SSA a period of maybe about twelve years or twelve or thirteen years.  But he, when he retired though, he retired, he had left SSA and was, had an appointment at U of I [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  And when he retired, he retired from the U of I, the school of social work there [Jane Addams Graduate School of Social Work; Jane Addams College of Social Work].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anybody else in--
Speaker 2: Certainly no one in the business school [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois].  Absolutely no one in the business school.  I think in all of the years that I had, that I was either, you know, directly involved in the business school or, you know, in contact with other students who were, who were at the business school, there's probably, I can think of only one name that the African American students talked about as a person who had, who had--having taken any particular interest in African American students and that was a professor by the name of Richard Thane [ph.], and I think he was a mar- a marketing professor.  But other than that, I don't think anybody cared one way or the other whether black students were there or not, and nobody cared if they succeeded.
Story_ID: 641565
Speaker 1: What about fellow students?  Are there any, any of your fellow students that stand out, I mean, that you remember particularly from those--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --days?
Speaker 2: That's a hard one, Larry [Larry Crowe], because it's almost everybody (laughter).  I mean, we had, we had a shared experience, you know.  Basically, you know, getting through, getting through the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] for the typical, the typical African American student given what was typical of our level of preparation compared to what the typical--the preparation that was had by the typical white student, it was probably the most difficult challenge we were ever going to face, is getting through that school.  And I don't care whether you're talking about the college or the graduate, you know, departments or professional schools, it was probably the most challenging thing you would ever do.  And we all shared that experience.  And at the undergraduate level, a lot of us didn't make it.  I mean, a lot of us, you know, spent, you know, six years there in undergraduate school and still walked away without the degree.  You know, we were never really there in significant numbers.  As I look back to my class of '75 [1975], in my incoming freshman class, there were like forty-six of us, and we were one of the largest classes ever.  So forty-six African American students out of a class of 2400, you know.  So, but we, you know, many of us are still in contact with each other today.  You know, some of us have been, you know, become more distinguished (laughter) than others, have achieved more than others.  I mean, for instance, someone I remember from school is, you know, is [HistoryMaker] Brent Staples.  You know, and Brent Staples, is, you know, editor for, was it, New York Times [The New York Times]?  I mean, he's written a couple of books, 'Parallel Time' ['Parallel Time: Growing up in Black and White,' Brent Staples] was a book that he wrote.  I understand he has a new book out very recently.  You know, but, you know, Brent and I, we hung out (laughter).  But, you know, lots of people have come out and have become, you know, prominent.  Lots of people have certainly done very well in business.  But I can remember, you know, hearing stories about, you know, legendary people who were there who preceded me there, like the sister who ran the General Mills Foundation, [HistoryMaker] Reatha Clark King.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know, Reatha Clark King got her Ph.D. at the University of Chicago in the '50s [1950s].  My god, what a phenomenal accomplishment that must have been.  I mean, I mean, basically, she probably had to create, you know, lightning in a bottle to get a Ph.D. in (laughter), in physics at the University of Chicago at that period of time.  I'm sure she had to be the only one, you know.
Speaker 1: And you know, just a, just an aside here, but she had a similar background as you.  You know, her parents [Ola Mae Watts Clark and Willie B. Clark] were sharecroppers and--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 641566
Speaker 1: Now you're married at this point.  And you--I forgot to ask you how you met your wife and--?
Speaker 2: Well, Ra- Rachel [Rachel Washington Lindsey] and I, Rachel and I met at Regenstein Library [Joseph Regenstein Library, Chicago, Illinois] (laughter).  That's where we probably said our first words to each other.  I had noticed her on campus [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], you know, long before then.  Rachel was sort of--was an activist.  I wouldn't, I wouldn't describe myself as an activist, but Rachel was an activist.  Rachel was the, was the person who was going to show up at the rally, and she was going to, you know, raise her voice, and she was going to raise her fist, and she was going to be heard and make her point.  And, so I had noticed her before (laughter).  But we actually met, you know, and said our first words to each other on the steps of Regenstein Library.  And I think about a year after we met, we were married, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then, so by the time you started graduate school, you had like two--
Speaker 2: Yeah, by the time I started graduate school, I mean, so I started, as I say, in seventy--as I said, the fall of '77 [1977], and my first son [Josef Lindsey] was born in the spring of '77 [1977].  And then my second son [Marshall Lindsey] was born in the spring of '78 [1978].  So while I was in graduate school, we were, you know, building a family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And we were talking before we started the interview about her father, Mr. Washington who was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Herman Washington [ph.], yeah.
Speaker 1: Herman Washington, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he was quite an accomplished and interesting and wise man.  And, you know, it's a shame that his story, you know, hasn't been recorded and told, but he was, you know, the first black businessman manager for the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers.  I mean, which was quite a powerful position.  And for a black man to have attained it, it was just really a phenomenal accomplishment.  And that was Herman Washington, and he was active politically.  He never ran for office himself, I mean, but, you know, he was at some point, I think, a ward, you know, committeeman and something like that.  And certainly was a big help to a number of politicians and had very, you know, strong relationships with local black and white politicians, and was considered a friend of Mayor Daley the first [Richard J. Daley].  And, so Herman Washington was a pioneer, real pioneer.
Story_ID: 641567
Speaker 1: All right.  I just wanted to get that in there too.  And, okay.  So, now was it--it seemed like it would really be difficult to get these two degrees at the same time, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  It was the most, it was the most difficult thing I'd ever done, especially given I was doing it trying to work and deal with, you know, a young family at the same time.  And, so I mean, there was--this wasn't true of the entire three year period that it took for me to accomplish that.  But for part of that period, you know, I was working full time and in school full time at the same time.  And it was tough, it was tough.  It was, I mean, it really tested my mettle but, you know, it was something I had to do.  I didn't have a choice.  I had a family, had to support that family.  But, you know, I was also trying to get ahead, so I needed those degrees.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you were able, you were able to earn these degrees both in 1980?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I graduated--the degrees were awarded about a quarter apart.  So it's like I was--got the SSA [University of Chicago School of Social Service Administration, Chicago, Illinois] degree in, I think, June or August of '80 [1980], I forget which.  But then the M.B.A. [from the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois] was in December of '80 [1980].  So both of them were awarded in the same year.
Story_ID: 641568
Speaker 1: Was this after graduation that you started working for Chicago Area Foundation?
Speaker 2: I actually, I actually started working for Chicago Community Trust [Chicago, Illinois] before I graduated.  I mean, from the, from SSA [University of Chicago School of Social Service Administration, Chicago, Illinois] or--
Speaker 1: Oh, Chicago Community Trust.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I started working for Chicago Community Trust in May of 1980, so that was prior to my graduation from SSA and prior to my graduation from the Graduate School of Business at U of C [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois].  So that includes the period when I was working full time while still a full-time student.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you ever work for Chicago Area Foundation (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, the Chicago Area Foundation for Legal Services [Chicago, Illinois] was a found- a small foundation inside the big foundation.  The Chicago Area Foundation for Legal Services was focused on making grants to entities that provided legal services to the poor, okay.  But it was organized as a support organization of the Chicago Community Trust.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So while I was, you know, senior program officer of the Chicago Community Trust, I was also executive director of the support organization within the trust.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  All right, now I understand.  Okay, so, well, tell us about that.  What did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, as director of the Chicago Area Foundation for Legal Services, what I was responsible for was really both grant making and building the endowment of the support organization.  And, you know, in terms of grant making, it included making grants to local organizations like, the Legal Assistance Foundation of Chicago [Legal Assistance Foundation of Metropolitan Chicago; Legal Assistance Foundation, Chicago, Illinois] or Chicago Volunteer Legal Services [Chicago, Illinois] foundation or the legal aid program that was operated at the University of Chicago, Mandel Legal Aid Clinic [Edwin F. Mandel Legal Aid Clinic, Chicago, Illinois], all of those things were supported by grants from the Chicago Area Foundation for Legal Services.  But we were building the endowment through a mechanism where we worked with those entities, and we worked with their donors and basically approached their donors and used a matching mechanism where we said, you know, "Here, you support this organization year in, year out, you give an X number of dollars.  Well, we'd like to ask you, give those X number of dollars to the endowment, and we will give two X dollars to the organization that you were going to support."  So what we were doing was providing ongoing support, current ongoing support for the legal services program, at the same time, building an endowment that would exist in perpetuity, but benefit those very same organizations.  And, so I work with all of the big legal, legal firms in town and getting them to make contributions to this endowment at the same time that we're making grants to the legal service providers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this sounds like a more effective way of coordinating the money--or coordinating giving.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and actually, you know, sort of building the endowment in a, in sort of a synergistic way.
Story_ID: 641569
Speaker 1: Now in '81 [1981], it says here that you joined the Association of Black Foundation Executives.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Association of Black Foundation Executives is really the oldest affinity group of grant makers in the country, and it was started by a small group of foundation--of black foundation executives.  I mean, there were only a handful of them back when it was started forty years ago.  And it was started by [HistoryMaker] James Joseph, Ambassador James Joseph who, you know, was former ambassador to South Africa and also formerly the president of the Council on Foundations.  But he and a small group of other foundation executives started ABFE back, I think, in like 1971 or '72 [1972].  And basically, it has worked over those years to promote diversity and inclusiveness in the philanthropic workplace, as well as to promote greater giving by major institutions to programs and services that benefit the black community.  And, so I was--I joined ABFE, ultimately became a leader of ABFE, I served on its board for, I think, either six or eight years, I forget which, but was very much involved throughout the '80s [1980s] and early '90s [1990s] in that organization.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it continues to this day, you know.
Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm still a member today (laughter).
Story_ID: 641570
Speaker 1: Now were you a member of the Associated Black Charities, or did you interact with them?
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I guess you wouldn't be a member but--
Speaker 2: I interacted with them, but I was, I was not a member, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's see.  Okay.  It says that was founded in '85 [1985], I guess.  So now in '85 [1985] you moved to East St. Louis [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, that was, that was actually a temporary assignment.  I was, I was a loaned executive.  What had happened in that instance was the--there was an effort to create a community foundation to serve East St. Louis.  And leading that effort was former ambassador to the UN [United Nations]--what is his name?  I am really getting old.  Names just--
Speaker 1: Andrew [HistoryMaker Andrew Young]--
Speaker 2: McHenry [Donald McHenry].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And, so Ambassador McHenry, who is a native of East St. Louis, got involved in leading an effort to try and create a foundation there, a community foundation.  And he approached my boss at the time, Bruce Newman [Bruce L. Newman], who is CEO of the Chicago Community Trust [Chicago, Illinois], and asked if he could help him with that effort.  And my boss basically said, "Well, I've got this young guy working for me.  What if I loaned him to you for a year to help get this thing off the ground, get it organized, up and running?"  And, so my boss approached me about it, asked me if I was willing to do it.  I was interested and met with Ambassador Don McHenry.  And, so I spent about fourteen months straddling 1985 and 1986 actually being on loan down in the community of East St. Louis helping to build a community foundation there.  And that community foundation is up and running and still operating today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you had to, you had to commute?
Speaker 2: I had to commute, you know.  So, basically, I would, I would spend three weeks down in that community, and then come back to Chicago [Illinois] for a week, and then go back and spend another three weeks in that community--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --over, as I said, a period of about fourteen months.
Speaker 1: Now, those of us who have been to East St. Louis know that it is a challenge.
Speaker 2: That (laughter), that's an understatement. East St. Louis is one of these communities that was, you know, just totally destroyed by white flight, you know.  In its heyday, East St. Louis probably had, you know, about a hundred thousand residents, and was probably--now this is back during the heyday of the stockyards and meatpacking, you know, operations now that--Armour meatpacking company [Armour and Company] was a major anchor down there.  And, so this goes back to, you know, the '60s [1960s].  But by, you know, by the mid-'70s [1970s] though, all of that employment infrastructure was gone, the meatpackers had left, and there was, you know, white flight out of the community.  And, so it was just, you know, a result of such major disinvestment, East St. Louis, you know, became, you know, a community that was, you know, went from 80 percent white to 90 percent black in a period of less than ten years.  And with all of that disinvestment all you had was just, you know, an enclave of poor people and, so a tax base that couldn't support the provision of, you know, sufficient city services.  The largest employer at that time being the school system, most of the employees being residents, actually have not--even East St. Louis, but St. Louis [Missouri].  And, so there was a net export of resources out of the community.  And, so, you know, you look at East St. Louis and you look at social indicators, and that community probably would rank, you know, first in everything that's bad and last in everything that's good.  So, yeah, it was a very, it was a very difficult environment in which to try and build a community resource, especially given that, you know, de facto, almost by definition, those resources would have to be sourced somewhere else.  They didn't exist in the communities; we had to bring them into the community from other places.  And, so the challenge was getting those outside the community to actually care.
Story_ID: 641571
Speaker 1: --Were you trying to set up, I guess, as tasks for the East St. Louis Community foundation [East St. Louis Community Fund; Greater East St. Louis Community Fund, East St. Louis, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, what we were trying to do was, as I said, to build an endowment, I mean, so that the or- the organization could engage in grant making for community benefit but also to operate some needed community programs since they didn't exist in the community.  Then the foundation would have to sort of, you know, at least initially, operate them themselves.  And there were a couple of programs that it did operate like that there was a school to work program that the foundation operated that is working with young people who, you know, are in high school and putting them through a set of experiences and training that would make it easier for them to transition into employment, and then there is another program that looked at early childhood education and tried to expand the availability of services there.  And, so there are a number of small, but significant, programs that the foundation was able to operate, while at the same time trying to build this endowment on which it would ultimately begin to produce grant dollars.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were you able to really accomplish your mission?
Speaker 2: Well, in terms of getting it set up and ready to operate, yes, and to, and to raise the initial operating funds.  I mean, so I managed to raise significant support for the foundation from other foundations, including national foundations like the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] and the Edna McConnell Clark Foundation [New York, New York].  But also many local donors like the Monsanto Fund [St. Louis, Missouri], the Danforth Foundation [St. Louis, Missouri] and a number of other local foundations in the St. Louis [Missouri] metropolitan area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was there a, you know, significant local leadership in East St. Louis [Illinois] to--
Speaker 2: The leadership--the local leadership in St. Louis was--in East St. Louis was really the local political leadership.  I mean, this was the era of Carl Officer.  I'm sure you're familiar with that name.  He was mayor of the city at the time.  And the locus of power in the city was really just two poles, Carl Officer on one hand and then the head of the school board [East St. Louis School District 189].  I can't recall his name at the time.  But those were the two forces at work in terms of leadership in that community at that time.  And they didn't always get along well, and had different priorities for the community.
Story_ID: 641572
Speaker 1: So you came back to serve as assistant director of the Chicago Community Trust [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is 1986?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1986.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, served in that role of assistant director of the trust and basically, you know, in charge of programs and served in that capacity until, you know, I was recruited away from the trust in 1988 to become the CEO of the Field Foundation of Illinois [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, can you tell us about the Chicago Cultural Plan?  I know that the trust had something to do with that.
Speaker 2: Well, the trust was a major architect of that, but it got to be a major architect by virtue of being willing to bring significant dollars to the table.  I'm sorry to say this far along, I cannot remember much of the detail of that other than--but the trust, you know, was a major driver of it, of that by virtue of the dollars that it could bring.
Story_ID: 641573
Speaker 1: Now during the interim, you're going to tell us your favorite saying.  You remembered what it was, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, this is something that when my sons [Josef Lindsey and Marshall Lindsey] were growing I used to tell them from time to time, I'd remind them, when they get a little impatient and rambunctious, I'd tell them, "You know, every great leader was first a good follower."  And I still have occasion to point that out to them (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now one of my tasks is to ask you about the history of black executives in the, in the Chicago [Illinois] foundation community.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So can you give us kind of--
Speaker 2: Well, let's say the history doesn't even start until really the mid-'70s [1970s].  I mean, be- before that you'd be hard pressed to look around the Chicago philanthropic community and find any instances where an African American was, you know, even employed in the field let alone leading in the field.  With a few very notable examples, if you look back you would probably have found a couple of instances where African Americans were leading that function or were responsible for that function within a few corporations in town.  And notably, you can look back to Inland Steel [Inland Steel Company] and you think of Bill Lowery [HistoryMaker William E. Lowry, Jr.] and the work that he was doing there.  I mean, certainly Bill, you have to count Bill among the pioneers in the field.  There was a couple of other instances like Bob Carter [ph.], and I'm trying to remember the company that Bob worked for, may have been Quaker [Quaker Oats Company] at the time.  And then I think Motorola [Motorola, Inc.], there was an African American there.  I'm trying to remember whether, whether that was Roscoe Mitchell or somewhere, or somebody else.  But anyway, there were a handful of people in corporations and mainly the utilities though, I mean.  So like Commonwealth Edison [Commonwealth Edison Company] and Peoples Gas [People Gas Light and Coke Company].  There were some African Americans involved there, and the phone company, Illinois Bell [Illinois Bell Telephone Company] at the time.  But you look beyond the corporate arena and there was pretty much nothing.  There were no, no blacks really working professionally in philanthropy.  I mean, there were instances where they were there as support staff, you know, secretaries, administrative assistants and things like that but no program staff, no program directors or anything like that prior to about the late '70s [1970s] when that particular issue started to be transformed almost single handedly by one person, and that's Bruce Newman [Bruce L. Newman] of the Chicago Community Trust [Chicago, Illinois].  And Bruce Newman, who was white, and came to the community after being involved with The Cleveland Foundation [Cleveland, Ohio] as well as the state government in Ohio in the early '70s [1970s].  He was recruited to be the third executive director of the Chicago Community Trust.  And Bruce Newman walked in the door, I think, with an interest in and a commitment to affirmative action.  And, so in terms of hiring blacks in professional capacity, Bruce was one of the first ones to do it in Chicago.  And, so he led by example.  And I know one of the first people that he, that he brought on board was Joan Wood, who was the wife of Clarence Wood [Clarence N. Wood], who ran the--Clarence Wood at some point ran the Chicago human relations commission [Commission on Human Relations] and the Chicago human relations foundation [Human Relations Foundation of Chicago].  Joan worked for Bruce at the trust.  I think she had worked for him when he was at the foundation, The Cleveland Foundation in Ohio, so Joan Wood was certainly one of the first and then [HistoryMaker] Adrienne Bailey, who ran the education portfolio at the Chicago Community Trust.  Bruce Newman brought Adrienne in.  I think he must have hired her in 1973.  And in 1973, you could, you know, if you convened a meeting of African Americans working professionally in philanthropy in the entire country, you probably wouldn't have more than twenty people in the room.  And, so it was something extraordinary for Bruce to be reaching out like that at that time.
Story_ID: 641574
Speaker 1: So he brought [HistoryMaker] Adrienne Bailey in, and then also--ultimately, you know, my being in philanthropy was a matter of his professional, his commitment to affirmative action as well.  You know, I entered the trust as the first minority fellow, which was an outreach effort to try and identify talent in the black community, to bring them into the trust to learn about the trust and to bring their perspectives into the trust work and to begin to build a pipeline of, you know, of people prepared to take people--of African Americans descent, to take positions in the field as they open up.  And, so if you look at what Bruce Newman [Bruce L. Newman] did, and as I said, he led by example, because after he started to bring people into the field, then you started to see other private foundations around town deal a little bit more affirmatively as well.  And you started to get a number of blacks working in professional philanthropy.  But I can't say there was ever a huge number.  I mean, it's always been small, but an improvement if you're comparing small to none (laughter), okay.  And, but none of it, I think, would have happened really without Bruce Newman.  Now probably another person who has to take some credit for that would be Craig Kennedy, who ran the Joyce Foundation [Chicago, Illinois].  You know, Craig brought into the field a number of African Americans at a professional level as well.  But if you look over time at the people that the trust has cycled through, I mean, you know, including, you know, myself, you know, and I've had a career now in philanthropy that's spanned thirty three years.  My successor at the Chicago Community Trust [Chicago, Illinois], [HistoryMaker] Aurie Pennick, was first at the trust as an intern.  In fact, I worked with Aurie, and I, you know, say with pride that I think I tutored Aur- Aurie in this field, and it was wonderful that, you know, when I left the Field Foundation, that board decided to tap her to succeed me, and that's wonderful.  And if you look at so many of the other people who have come through the trust, I mean, Nelvia Brady [HistoryMaker Nelvia M. Brady], who was an education officer at the trust, left the trust to become, you know, the chancellor of City Colleges [City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  And the list goes on and on.  Everybody who has been through the trust and who came through there as a result of Bruce Newman's advocacy in affirmative action, have either gone on to assume leadership roles in this field or to take on other leadership roles either in the larger non-profit community or even in industry.  But to say that it's ever really achieved critical mass, I think that that's not a statement that could be made.  I think the numbers have always been small.  I think if you look and take a census of blacks employed in professional philanthropy today in Chicago [Illinois], my guess is it's probably no more than 10 percent of the positions that are held.  And that is a guess, but I think that if you, you know, did an empirical study, you probably would come up pretty close to that.
Speaker 2: How does that compare to the rest of the country, I mean, do you think?
Speaker 1: That's probably better than the rest of the country.  The rest of the country would probably be closer to 5 to 6 percent.
Speaker 2: How--what's the ratio in Virginia?  Or what roughly would be the ratio here?
Speaker 1: I could only make a guess, and there's no basis, you know, there's just nothing on which to base that guess.  But I can, I can say this with certainty, there is no other African American leading a private foundation in Virginia with the exception of a rel- relatively new health legacy foundation in northern Virginia.  And there's a sister by the name of Pat, Patricia Mathews [Patricia N. Mathews] who's running that.  But there has been basically no, no incidents of African American leadership in philanthropy in the State of Virginia prior to my coming.  And I don't know if you're aware of this, but even in Chicago I was the first African American to lead a private foundation in Chicago when I assumed, you know, leadership of the Field Foundation of Illinois [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right.  It was, it was well known.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We knew (laughter).
Story_ID: 641575
Speaker 1: So there's been improvement, you know, certainly compared to thirty years ago.  But there's still a great deal of work that needs to be done in this area.  And of course, in a period of contraction--of economic contraction, the commitment to affirmative action in this regard is weakened, you know, substantially.  I mean, that is, everything is, you know, sort of getting smaller, so there're fewer opportunities available.  Maybe, you know, when, you know, the ec- we come out of this economic decline you'll see another period of expansion.  But the pattern has been over the last forty years for there to only be incremental, small improvement in the field.  My guess is that, as I said, you know, probably only about 10 percent of the positions in Chicago [Illinois] are held by African Americans.  And in terms of the top leadership position, that is, you know, CEO, there can't be more than what, two?  Two right now?  I think, [HistoryMaker] Aurie Pennick at the Field Foundation [Field Foundation of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois], and--I'm trying to think.  There's got to be one other.  Well, there had been at the Woods charitable trust [Woods Charitable Fund; Woods Fund Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], but I don't know who's running that right now.  But it's been a, it's been a dismal history, and that's the--
Speaker 2: Well, Cleo--
Speaker 1: Well, Cleo Wilson [HistoryMaker Cleo F. Wilson], you know, led the Playboy Foundation.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But that was a corporate foundation.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, when Cleo retired, my god, Cleo, it's got to be ten years since Cleo retired.
Story_ID: 641576
Speaker 1: How does the foundation community work?  And I think, I think the general public, when they first think about a foundation, they think of--and I'm dumbing them down probably that, they think that rich people decide to just write checks who they want to give to.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it's--there are rules regulating foundations and what they do.  How does it really work and then--and why should we feel that we should feel we should be entitled to be a CEO of a foundation that has a lot of money, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, Larry [Larry Crowe], the--a proper response to that question is much more complex than you might imagine (laughter), okay.  And then, first of all, the simple answer is that, you know, well, it depends (laughter), okay.  But if you want to unpack that response, you've got to look at the fact that, well, what is a foundation.  Well, first of all, there're at least five different major types of foundations that exist in the country, and if you take a census of all of the foundations, there probably will be about eighty thousand of them, okay?  Now, but of that eighty thousand, probably only about 20 percent of that number are actually staffed organizations.  So by and large, most foundations are simply a trust document.  And it lives in the desk drawer of some trust officer or attorney somewhere in a bank or in a law firm, you know.  And, basically, all it is is the written instructions of the donor's interest and intent for the use of those dollars.  So staffed foundations are an entirely different phenomena all together.  But a- but across staff foundations, there still are different kinds.  There are private fam- there are family foundations where the resources belonged, belonged originally to the family and they put them in trust to be used on the community's behalf.  But the family, the living donor still has the, has the say as to what it gets used for.  And since it's their money, they can choose to spend it on anything they want.  Okay, and then there's a private independent foundation like the Field Foundation of Illinois [Chicago, Illinois] is a private independent foundation, where there's no longer a donor involved, the governing body is a group of civil, civic committed individuals who jointly meet and exercise fiduciary responsibility for those dollars, and they make decisions in terms of how the dollars are allocated across different needs in the community.  Then there's the public foundations.  One special case of a public foundation is the community foundation, which is not the wealth of a single individual or a single corporation or company but is a conglomeration of many trusts that are brought together under one umbrella, and those trusts may have different levels of restrictions on them specified the donor--by the donor as to how those funds may be expended.  There may be some portion of the, of the community foundation's dollars committed to unrestricted funds, which means that the board has the final say on how those dollars get spent.  Or there may be donor advised funds, meaning that they're, the funds are in trust and they are there as a discrete pool of funds, but there's a living donor and those funds have to be expended according to that living donor's wishes.  Or there's, you know, a restricted fund where the donor has passed on and their descendents are no longer available and, so those funds get expended, accorded to the wishes expressed in the original trust document.  So that's community foundations.  Then there's the public foundation that has to go out and raise its endowment in order to make grants.  So there are lots of different kinds of foundations, and they each operate according to a different set of rules that are specified by the Internal Revenue Service [IRS].  So I'm sorry to be so long winded about it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Yeah, well--
Speaker 2: --but it's a complicated notion.
Story_ID: 641577
Speaker 1: I think that's good.  I think if I was somewhat interested in this I'd like hear that.  I mean, if I was, you know, aspiring or whatever.  But, okay.  So let me get back to the chronology now.  You said in eighty--so we left you in '86 [1986] as assistant director of Chicago Community Trust [Chicago, Illinois].  And, so you were there for how long?
Speaker 2: I was there for eight years.
Speaker 1: Eight years, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I arrived in 1980 and I left in 1988--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to go to the Field Foundation of Illinois [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: All right.  So, well, tell us about that transition, you know, how'd it--
Speaker 2: Well, the way that it happened is that I was recruited by the Field Foundation of Illinois.  I had lunch one day--I got a call from the chair of the board of the Field Foundation one day, said, "Would you meet me, you know, for lunch at the University Club [University Club of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]?"  I went and--I knew the chair.  He was a fellow by the name of Leland Webber [E. Leland Webber], who had been president of the Field Museum [Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, Illinois].  And, so Lee and I got together for lunch at the University Club, had a nice chat for about an hour and a half.  And as we were leaving lunch and we're walking out the front door, it occurred to me only at that moment that I had just had a job interview (laughter).  And sure enough, I got a call from Lee later that afternoon.  He says, "I'd like you to meet the rest of the Field Foundation board.  Would you come?  Can you, you know, be available for a meeting on such and such a day?"  I said, "Sure."  And, so I went and met with them and had a nice conversation with like Lee plus three other members of the foundation board.  And the rest is history.  About a week later, I was offered the job.  And, so I started as the chief staff officer of the Field Foundation of Illinois in, I guess, May of 1988, yeah, having, you know, left the trust in March of '88 [1988] to make that transition.  And the Field Foundation, at that time, very well known.  Of course, the Marshall Field name is known all over the country, and certainly it is spoken with reverence in Chicago [Illinois].  But it was a sleepy little foundation that, for much of its existence, its grant making had simply been a matter of mirroring the grant making of the Chicago Community Trust.  And that makes sense given there were close relationships between the two institutions.  But there was not much proactive going on and there was not much relationship with some of the really community based organizations that were serving the community.  Mainly, the grant money was going to just the community's major cultural institutions, the universities and the hospitals.  And I'd have to say, if I'm proud of any legacy of major change that I was responsible for while I was there leading that organization, was to basically change some of that, and sort of increasing the diversity of the mix of grantees.  And, so that the Field Foundation had a reach more deeper into the community.  It continued its commitment to the major institutions, but a lot of the grassroots and community based organizations that had not, never before had access to the foundation had access under my tenure.
Story_ID: 641578
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know people in the community often feel like they're invisible to the foundation world.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: And there's a truth to that dynamic, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think what distinguished the Ken- the Field Foundation [Field Foundation of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois] was that, rather than being this opaque institution, we pursued a posture of an ethic of being transparent.  So we were open and accessible, and we tried to make all of our policies and procedures support that.  And, so we, you know, we insisted on making site visits in the review of every grant, so that there was a person to person exchange going on, rather than just the program officer responding to a piece of paper and making an impersonal decision, you know.  And, so we changed that, and we did information sessions where we would invite members, people of the community who were interested in approaching the foundation to come in and sit down and talk with us about how we do what we do, and what we do to make that process more transparent to them and, therefore, easier to negotiate.  And we tried to, you know, instill that commitment to openness and accessibility in all of our programs staff, and having very frank and candid and honest discussions with, you know, the grantees and to treat everybody with dignity because they had a right to be here, you know.  They weren't there as beggars.  The only reason this institution exists is to serve the needs of those people from the community.  And, so that was instilled in the program staff.  And I think over time, an organization that was already well respected in the community became even more respected in the community, you know.  And if you were to ask anybody about the Field Foundation today and say, "What are the characteristics that stand out?"  I think they'll say, "Openness and accessibility."
Speaker 1: Is it, is it, is it--did you have to basically think about how to reeducate the people in the community in terms of their approach to the foundation?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, because, you know, at first, you know, people don't--they don't believe this--what you're saying, "Look, if you want to talk to me, pick up the phone and call me.  I will answer."  You know, they're used to their phone calls going unanswered.  They--I mean, I had--there are some foundations, I mean, in every community, where you can, you know, submit a request for funding and you may never get a response from them, yes or no, you know.  I mean, in fact, some cases you may get a check in the mail or you may never get a check in the mail and never get a letter or anything saying why we didn't respond to you.  I mean, that, unfortunately, that is one of the ugly characteristics of our field, and there's still too much of it in practice today.  And what I tried to do first of all was to get program staff to start to model a different set of behaviors and then to get the community to accept the fact that we really were serious when we say, "Yes, we do want to hear from you.  You got a question, pick up the phone, give us a call.  If you need to come and sit down with us, yes, we will make time to do that."  And that, you know, that is part of the spirit of every institution that I have worked with, you know.  I mean, so that was--I mean, that was true, you know, at the Chicago Community Trust [Chicago, Illinois], and certainly I made it true at the Field Foundation, and it is, indeed, today true of the Cameron Foundation [Petersburg, Virginia].
Story_ID: 641579
Speaker 1: I know in a city like Chicago [Illinois] where sometime even city services are seen as proprietary (laughter).
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: That, you know, that you--we've talked about St. Louis [Missouri] and the attitude of the people in St. Louis to the government and even the white pop- population of the city.  So was part of the effort of the Field Foundation [Field Foundation of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois] to do outreach?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And to go--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So did have employees actually go out into the community?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we would, we would go out into the community.  And, you know, and it, and it struck many people as a novel notion.  But we were committed to it.  And, so we would go out into the community, we would, you know, accept speaking engagements in the community.  The Donors Forum of Chicago [Forefront, Chicago, Illinois] began having these little workshops periodically called Meet the Donor.  And we would always participate in those.  So we would come and sit there on a panel with a couple of other representatives of foundations and answer any questions the people in the audience had, you know.  But that was one way to do it, but the other way to do it is to actually go, you know, out into the community and meet in their venue and be there and be prepared to answer questions about what the foundation is, how it operates, what its rules and regulations are and why.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, you know, I have found, you know, telling one's--telling someone no who's asking for something that they really need is a really difficult proposition.  It's uncomfortable.  But I have found, you know, in the thirty-three years that I've done this work, that if you treat every person with dignity and respect, if you treat every person with the truth, if you deliver them the truth all the time, that even when you have to deliver them, you know, negative information, it can be received and you're still respected.  You know, I've told thousands of people no.  And they said, "Well, thank you.  I understand why that is your response."  And I think that is the way to go.  I mean, the amount of need out here will always outstrip the number of resources that are available.  So a lot of times you saying no, not because that isn't a good idea out there that needs some support, but because there are so many good ideas out there, and they're all coming at you at the same time and there's only so much money to go around.  So a lot of times you're saying no to things, that if you had the money, you would love to do.  And, so in that particular circumstance, you've got to be very careful how you deliver the message and how you treat the person who was there asking, you know.  And it is by nature an unequaled relationship.  They have need, you have something that can address that need.  They are there in front of you, and because they really, really need it and they really, really want it, they are nervous, they're anxious, and you have to find some way to make them feel that, indeed, it is an equalized transaction, that they have a right to be there, that you will respect their dignity to the same degree that they respect yours, and you will have a fruitful discussion even if the ultimate outcome is that they don't get the money that they want.  But then, you know, I also sort of operate out of this philosophy, anyone approaching a foundation should never leave empty handed.  They may not leave with the dollars that they were looking for.  But they're going to get some advice from me, they're going to get some technical assistance from me; they're going to get something from me that is of value that helps them along their way.
Story_ID: 641580
Speaker 1: In regards to accountability, what standard of accountability should--does the public have to demonstrate?  I mean, someone who wants to do something good, what standard of accountability do they have to demonstrate in order to get funded?
Speaker 2: They have to demonstrate that they have the ability and the intention to use the resources as best as they can, okay.  And, so they've got to demonstrate that they have, that they have a practice and a record of managing well, okay, to managing their finances well.  They have to demonstrate that they have the systems in place that would allow them to manage those funds well, and that they have the capacity to actually undertake the activities that they wish to undertake.  Now it may take some time, you know, getting the foundation to a full understanding of that, but there's lots of--a lot of that can be provided in terms of documentation.  I mean, so I mean, we look at your financial statements and, you know, if your financial statements, you know, don't add up, well, that doesn't give me confidence that you can manage this money that you're asking for.  If your, if your financial statements are incomplete, that doesn't give me confidence.  But if your financial statements are in order and that there's a pattern of your financial statements and your financial activity being in order over time, then that's a hurdle you can set to a side, and then we're free to simply look at the merits of the program you wish to seek.  I mean, so you've got to be well managed, and you've got to have the capacity to do what you say you want to do.  Now if you don't have the capacity to do what you say you want to do, then let's talk about how we get you the capacity before we talk about providing support for that particular program.
Story_ID: 641581
Speaker 1: Can you just discuss maybe the types of technical assistance, the--and what that really means and how that's offered to people who have a good idea--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --or have a good idea about something that they want to do for their community?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, let me, let me, let me speak within the context of the Cameron Foundation [Petersburg, Virginia] for a minute, because, you know, we're really big on capacity building.  We--over about, I think, twenty-two cents out of every dollar we spend each year is about capacity building as opposed to just supporting programs.  And, so we deal with organizations that present to us with all different levels of capacity.  They may be an organization that has been out there operating for twenty years, they've never had enough money to do what they want to do, so all they've done is just struggle along.  And that is the profile they present.  Well, how do we strengthen that so that they can provide more and better services to the community, particularly, because we live in a community that has just a multiplicity of intense need.  So we need every organization to be as high functioning as it possibly can.  And, so they can approach us and, let's say, they need help with fundraising that, you know, they need to know how to put together a fundraising plan, and they need to know how to identify appropriate fundraising staff or fundraising council.  Well, we may make a technical assistance grant available for them to buy that particular service.  I mean, not to buy, not to buy the activity, but to buy the knowledge to engage in the activity.  So we give them funds and they can, they can secure or hire a consultant to come in and work with them over a period of time, develop their fundraising plan, help them identify fundraising staff, and then the consultant leaves, but the knowledge is now resident in the organization.  So that's one type of technical assistance.  We may support the provision in the community of training workshops around any number of issues that are important to non-profit management whether that be fundraising or program planning and development or board development, securing and training volunteers.  And, so we will support classes that they can attend free of charge in order to get that training.  We also support- supported the establishment and operation of a non-profit resource center, which is sort of a one stop shop, where they can come and get online information and access to information about foundations or about other non-profits in the community that are working in their space, there may be opportunities for cooperation or collaboration or sharing of information or resources.  And, so we make that available, of course, at no charge to them.  And then, in addition to that, we will, from time to time, bring into the community experts in particular functional areas and basically convene all of the non-profits together, their staff and their board, to come and hear these experts speak on a topic of interest.  And again, that's provided at no cost to them.  So that's at least four different instances or four different types of technical assistance slash capacity building that we make available to non-profits that are out there.  And in addition to that, we spend an awful lot of time doing outreach, going out to the community and doing workshops where we teach the community about who we are, how we operate and how to access us.  And every member of our program staff is also a member--is also a potential provider of some limited technical assistance to any particular organization they're working with.
Story_ID: 641582
Speaker 1: Sir, what are some of the highlights of your tenure with Field Foundation [Field Foundation of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: With the Field Foundation, there were, there were a couple of things.  I think one of the things I'm most proud of there is the work that the Field Foundation did with Chica- Chicago Public Schools.  You know, we decided to take the individual school as the unit of analysis, in trying to help with, you know, school improvement.  So rather than, you know, set aside, you know, a pool of dollars that we would convey to central administration, we took the other route, and we decided to approach the individual school principals and to invite them to, you know, design projects and programs that would really help them improve education with an emphasis on things like pa- parental involvement in the school or teacher professional development or curriculum design and innovation.  And, so the individual schools themselves could come up with these programs, submit them to us, and then we would fund them.  And we did that over a number of years, and we did it when no other foundation in the city was willing to work with schools one on one.  Everybody else was trying to assist school reform through these, you know, big thirty thousand, you know, foot efforts, you know, of, you know, of top down, working with central administration just like that.  And we said, "Okay, fine.  You all got that covered.  We prefer to work on the ground."  And, so we worked with many individual public schools all over the city over a number of years and in creating programs of the schools' own designs, of the principals' own design.  And because of that, the principals were really committed to it.  They owned it and were invested in the success of it.
Speaker 1: Now did you get resistance from the--
Speaker 2: We got resistance.  We got resistance--
Speaker 1: --from the Chicago (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) on an ongoing basis from central administration, but we did it anyway.  We did it anyway until just a few years ago.  I think they had to stop it because central administration decided, basically, to take a bogart, you know, approach to it.  And, so I understand that [HistoryMaker] Aurie Pennick and her staff at the Field Foundation have now backed off of that because central administration is just making it so difficult to have that relationship with the individual schools.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, those grants represent power to--unfortunately, in a, in a tug of war sometimes.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And so, I'm very, I'm very proud of that.  I think, the other thing that I'm very proud of is, you know, the Field Foundation, although it's a small private foundation, it wasn't afraid to work on big issues, you know.  So we did a lot of work around housing and homelessness.  And we convened a number of policy summits around this issue, particularly public housing but not just public housing but homelessness in general.  And, so here was a, here was a case where a little foundation was able to get a brighter spotlight focus on a very big issue.  I mean, we had small dollars to bring to it, but it was--we figured it was worthwhile and certainly an accomplishment to have gotten more attention focused on it and getting some of the p- more of the right people at the table to talk about these issues.
Story_ID: 641583
Speaker 1: What were some of the top performing schools or organizations that you funded with Field Found- Foundation [Field Foundation of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Oh, god.  Larry [Larry Crowe], you're really taxing (laughter) my memory here, and at my age, recalling data that minute (laughter) is a challenge.
Speaker 1: I was just thinking that maybe there was something dramatic that somebody did or something that you really (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --that's really a great use of the money.
Speaker 2: Well, there--we did some work with, you know, there was this--this academy created this--a private academy created for young women in Chicago [Illinois], and there was a lot of controversy about that, having this, you know, just basically pub- public school created and devoted with all kinds of resources coming from all over the community and focused, but it was only going to serve girls.  Well, we didn't see anything wrong with that.  And, so we got involved with them and supported it.  And in fact, a member of our board, one of the few members of the foundation board got very involved with that effort.  And, so that's something, I think, you know, we were very proud of.  There was--also, we were instrumental in the early development of a new Catholic academy working in the Pilsen neighborhood [Chicago, Illinois].  I can't remember the name of it right now, but they came up with this model of pairing their students with employers as a way of defraying the costs of the student attending this private school.  And, but by the time the kid graduated, you know, as a senior, this kid would have all of this work experience that he would, you know, take on to college or to take directly into the job market.  And, so we were one of the very first funders of that, of that academy.  And, I'm sorry, I just can't recall the name of it.  But I understand that today, a hundred percent of its graduates go to college.
Speaker 1: That's good.
Speaker 2: And these were all, you know, and it's right there in Pilsen, you know, all of these, you know, Hispanic students who were, who were getting a quality education and going on, you know, to very successful lives.
Story_ID: 641584
Speaker 1: Well tell us about the trip, the move from Chicago [Illinois], I guess.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's interesting.  I had been at the, at the Field Foundation [Field Foundation of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois] for fifteen years when this opportunity came along, and it was literally a matter of being tapped on the shoulder.  I wasn't looking for a job, but I got a call from the head hunter who said, "We've got this client that is a health legacy foundation being formed in central Virginia, and they're looking for a CEO.  You know, can I come talk to you about it?"  And I agreed to meet with the head hunter and after hearing the facts of it, and the facts were a health legacy foundation, which means a foundation that started as a result of a public hospital being purchased by a for-profit corporation.  Federal regulations stipulate that the proceeds from such a sale have to continue to be used for charitable purposes.  So in most instances, a foundation, a private foundation endowment gets created.  And that was the case here.  Southside Regional Medical Center [Petersburg, Virginia] was purchased by Community Health Systems [Community Health Systems, Inc., Franklin, Tennessee], and the commitment was a--the hospital would give so much--many dollars to purchase the hospital, that would go to the foundation, and then Community Health Systems would build a new hospital within five years.  So from the community standpoint, it's a double win situation, they get both a new hospital and they get a resource that has never existed before.  Well, seeing something like that was very interesting.  And then, of course, the opportunity to build a foundation from scratch with significant resources to work with seemed like sort of a once in a lifetime opportunity.  So I--my interest was piqued and I pursued the position.  Ultimately, I prevailed and was offered the position and started here February 1, 2004.  And I walked into a building that basically had a telephone, a desk and nothing else.  And, so I built a staff and worked with the board to build guidelines and--I mean, operating procedures and programs, and we went from having no programs in February of '04 [2004] to making our very first grants in October of '04 [2004].  So we went from, you know, startup to grant making in a period of eight months, and we've never looked back.  We have proceeded, you know, to build a program that is diversified.  While healthcare and access to healthcare and human services are our primary focus, we also recognize there are many other determinates of health in this popul- in the population.  And, so economic development or--is an important focus for us as well; education is an important focus for us as well.  I mean, an educated community is a healthier community, an employed community is a healthier community and, so all of those things contribute to the health and welfare of the community as well.  And we even do a little bit of work around cultural enrichment and even a little bit of historic conservation.  So we built that programming, and we've been making grants supporting about a hundred, maybe about a hundred grants a year.  At our peak, we were spending about $8 million a year.  After the downturn of 2008, we've been spending only about--about, about 4 million, between 4 and $5 million a year.  And that, most of it goes directly in terms of providing operating support for community based organizations and special projects support.  But we also recognize that this is a community that has been historically absent of resources and absent of any type of organized philanthropy.  And, so the Cameron Foundation [Petersburg, Virginia] very quickly became at the center of many crossroads in terms of seeking access to resources for the community's betterment.  And, so we've operated this program--so far we've spent about $54 million since October of 2004 in this community benefitting all kinds of organizations.
Story_ID: 641585
Speaker 1: As I said, the vast majority being either human services and then healthcare, but a fair amount around education.  I mean, we've helped to improve the education school system here.  We've committed about $2 million back in 2006, I believe, at the end of 2006, to bring something called the Algebra Project to the Petersburg public school system [Petersburg City Public Schools] which, when we got started, only two of the school, of the, of the schools--of the city's five--seven schools were accredited.  Today, only two remain to be accredited.  The Algebra Project has been working in the school system for four years now.  It's a five year commitment that we made, and the Algebra Project will rem- has been training trainers, and so, they will leave eventually.  But that knowledge will--of how to structure a more effective algebra-math curriculum remains resident in the community after the Algebra Project leaves.  The math scores in the schools have gone off the charts.  We have schools scoring in the 95 percentile now, whereas before, you know, they were scoring in the 30 and 40 percentile--that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 641586
Speaker 1: That's what the Cameron Foundation [Petersburg, Virginia] has been doing.  And this--in doing it in--our service area is comprised of three small cities and four surrounding rural counties.  Here, Petersburg [Virginia], which is the central city, the largest of the three cities, but it is the locus of the greatest need in the area.  As I said, Petersburg was, you know, directly impacted by a couple of, I think, phenomena, one being white flight, but also, white flight in response to desegregation.  But the other thing was that, thirty years ago, Brown and Williamson Tobacco Company, which was a major employer in this community, left the community and the community has never quite really recovered from that economic blow.  And, so this particular community, which is the heart of the region, and because it is the heart of the region, it really sort of defines the region.  So if it prospers, the region is perceived as prospering.  If it doesn't prosper, the region is perceived as not prospering.  And, so lots of investment is focused on trying to sustain and create a renaissance of the Petersburg community.  And I'd have to describe it--it's not so much true today, but when the foundation began its work, the way that I described East St. Louis [Illinois] was a fitting description of Petersburg, and that on the social indicators that everyone would recognize, on those things that are good, this community scores the lowest, on those things that are bad, this community scores the highest.  Teen pregnancies, school dropout, what have you.
Speaker 2: You were saying, I think, that the community is 85 percent black?
Speaker 1: Eighty-five percent black, yeah.  Eighty-five percent black with a 40 percent illiteracy rate among the adult population.
Speaker 2: That seems, that seems curious in 2012 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 2: That's--
Speaker 1: Well, but several generations of failed public education will result in that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's what you get, you know.  And that's what this community has experienced: several generations of failed public education.
Story_ID: 641587
Speaker 1: Does the foundation [Cameron Foundation, Petersburg, Virginia] take the initiative in terms of projects, in terms of--do they--I mean, is there research in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we're both--
Speaker 1: --inspiring--
Speaker 2: We're both responsive and proactive.  And a lot of our work is driven by a community needs assessment that we commission every three years.  And, so we do this study of the community's needs, we get that completed, we look at ourselves, we dis- we disseminate our findings to the rest of the community, I mean to public officials, the non-profits of the foundations.  We share that information with everybody, and then we take what we've learned from that and we incorporate that learning into our grant making.  And, so we will tweak our grant making to provide greater emphasis on those issues which were demonstrated in the needs assessment as being most severe.  And we renew that needs assessment every three years.
Story_ID: 641588
Speaker 1: So you've been here [Petersburg, Virginia] eight years now (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've been here eight years, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you miss Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I miss a lot of things about Chicago.  I don't miss Chicago winters (laughter).  I don't, I don't, I don't miss the hustle and bustle of Chicago.  I mean, this is a much more slower pace of life.  Some might say more civilized pace of life.  And I enjoy that.  But there are so many things that a big metropolitan area like Chicago has to offer that I can't get here.  I mean like I loved, I loved theatre when I was in Chicago, and had a chance like any night of the week I could go and see a quality production, performance of theatre or go and hear a world class jazz musician play in a club.  I don't have those things.  I miss those kinds of things.  And of course, you know, Chicago, Chicago must have a hundred world class restaurants, has thousands of restaurants and probably several hundred that are world class.  My choices here (laughter) are somewh- somewhat more limited.
Story_ID: 641589
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?  Now did--oh, let me point--did you finish your Ph.D. at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't.
Speaker 1: You didn't?  Okay.
Speaker 2: It's interesting.  What happened there--I mean, I withdrew from the program right at about at the point that I was ready to take my qualifying examinations.  I had already, you know, gotten the first draft of my proposal approved and things like that.  But my life changed in that--well, first of all, in starting, in starting that undertaking, I was a non-traditional student to begin with.  I wasn't there to get a credential in order to qualify me to be an academician.  I was there to further stimulate my learning and my knowledge base in order to improve the work that I'm doing on behalf of the community.  And, so I was committed to being a practitioner.  And over time, there were more and more tension between the commitment to being a practitioner and the necessary commitment to being an academician.  And my, you know, the dean of the school and the professors I was working with were, you know, querying of me about when was I going to make the full commitment to the aca- the ac- to the academy.  And I was never prepared to make that commitment.  And then, so therefore, I looked at what was going on in my life.  At that time, my now wife [Kristin Anderson Lindsey] and I were talking about, you know, marriage and everything and, so my priorities were shifted, and then the fact that I thought that I was not going to leave the work that I was doing in order to get the Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you don't really regret not getting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, sir.  I don't regret it at all.  I mean, I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I still love the work that I do.  Getting the Ph.D. was something that would have, would have been wonderful for me.  It would not have had any significant impact on my career.  It might have had an impact on how I approach the work, at least in terms of the knowledge base I bring to the work.  But it wouldn't have impacted my career.  And, so because of that, it was really pretty easy to walk away from it.  Although I thoroughly enjoyed the, you know, the work while I was doing it.
Story_ID: 641590
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns--and you've already answered a lot of them--for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I look at my own life, I mean, what I would want for every single member of the African American community is an opportunity to be a high functioning and contributing citizen in this community, in their own community and to society.  That proposition is impossible without a good education.  And if you look at my own life, what is the reason I have been able to achieve the success that I have?  It's about education.  Not only is it, is it the reason that I am successful, education, as I said before, it's literally saved my life.  It is, it is why I am even here.  And, so my hopes and aspirations, I mean, for communities everywhere in this country, that some commitment at some point gets made to providing a quality education to every single child throughout their childhood on to adulthood.  And that is going to make such a difference in our local communities.  It's going to make such a difference in our society in general.  I mean, the fact that so much, such a large proportion of the African American community lacks the training and education to compete for jobs in an increasingly (pronunciation) technological society.  It's tragic.  And I just see the gap and the gulf getting bigger and bigger.  And so, if I hope for anything, it's hope for things that can change that.  But, more of our kids have got to get educated.
Story_ID: 641591
Speaker 1: Now where do you--do you have a big idea or a big project that you would like to complete before your career is over?
Speaker 2: To be honest with you, I don't have any anxieties in that direction.  I don't have--in fact, I don't say I have any major aspirations because I've had the experience of these past eight years.  I have to say, I mean, these eight years have been extraordinary.  I have had a--I've had the opportunity to not only work in, but to lead in what is essentially a laboratory for change.  And I came here with a set of experiences that, I did not realize, every single one of which has prepared me for the type of work, as well as the level of intensity and quality I can bring to that work right here.  It's like everything I did before led to this.  And this effort has been just incredibly successful.  We have built here a very effective and essential community institution in a very short period of time.  And I think that it will continue.  The board and my successor will continue in a similar direction. They'll continue to achieve really significant things that this community needs.  You know, I hope that one day that they will turn their attention to building a community youth center.  That is a huge need in this community.  So, you know, a multipurpose, comprehensive set of services all in a youth center, something that's going to draw in kids, you know, after school and provide, you know, before school services, after school services, and all kinds of other services, even during the school hours.  But to be a place where kids can come and to get something of value that is going to support them on into adulthood.  I hope that this foundation [Cameron Foundation, Petersburg, Virginia], at some point, starts to address that.  But in terms of having helped to create this thing here, I see this as the capstone project of my career.  I still have lots of good ideas.  I still have lots of energy, and I hope to take that on to my next position.  But I'm pretty sure it is unlikely that I am going to be more proud of anything I do after this than I am as proud of this.
Story_ID: 641592
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your family, now.  You've remarried and you've got two sons (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, I have, I have two sons, Josef [Josef Lindsey] and Marshall [Marshall Lindsey].  Josef is thirty-four, Marshall is thirty-three.  They both still live in Chicago [Illinois].  They both are highly educated individuals.  Marsh- Marshall has a Ph.D. in chemical engineering from the University of--from Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois].  Mar- Josef has a master's in fine arts from Columbia [Columbia College Chicago] in Chicago.  They have undergraduate degrees from--Josef from James Madison here in Virginia [James Madison University, Harrisonburg, Virginia], and Marshall from Case Western Reserve [Case Western Reserve University] in Cleveland [Ohio].  So they've done very well educationally.  They are building their careers now.  But, and doing quite well.  I'm sorry.  Get me back on track.
Speaker 1: Oh, family.  I was asking about your family.
Speaker 2: Oh, but anyway, so they live in Chicago.  And in 2000, in 2000 I remarried.  My former wife, Rachel [Rachel Washington Lindsey], who was dean of Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois] of the department of education, school of education, she and I split up in two--in 1996, and I remarried in 2000.  I'm married to Kristin [Kristin Anderson Lindsey].  Her maiden name is Anderson.  But she currently is CEO of a foundation as well.  She leads the Global Fund for Children which is based in Washington, D.C.  And the Global Fund for Children is an organization that works on child--on education and child safety issues, including child trafficking.  And they work with grassroots organizations in seventy-three countries around the world.
Story_ID: 641593
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you about before I ask my last question?  Or any point that we need to address?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No.  I can't think of anything significant that I've left out.  This has been fun (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So go ahead with your last question.
Speaker 1: Last question, it's similar to legacy.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You addressed that, but the last question is how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as always being willing to help and simply that.  I think, I think my entire life has been about helping, and I think that comes from a feeling or sense of obligation and owing back to all those people who helped me.  When I think about the Albert Fair [ph.] and the Alice Hudson [ph.], and the Richard Bischof, and all of those people who just made such--had such a defining impact on my life and who gave of themselves to make a better life for me.  I think the way I pay them back is by being willing to help so--
Speaker 1: Did your parents [Pearlie Coleman Lindsey and Handy Lindsey, Sr.] get a chance to see you successful and--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did they ever--
Speaker 2: Well, my father did.  My mother, you know, as I said, my mother passed when she was, you know, quite young, only thirty-seven years old.  And that was, you know, basically shortly after I graduated high school [St. Louis University High School, St. Louis, Missouri].  So she never--she didn't live to see me graduate from college [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  My dad did, and he saw me graduate from college, he saw me get my two, two graduate degrees.  And so, yeah, he has a sense of my success.  And he told me he was proud of me.
Story_ID: 641594
Speaker 1: This is a picture--in the middle, of course, is me, Handy Lindsey [HistoryMaker Handy Lindsey, Jr.], and to my right is Bruce Newman [Bruce L. Newman], who was the executive director of the Chicago Community Trust [Chicago, Illinois].  And to my left is Brooks McCormick who was chairman of the board of the Chicago Community Trust at that time.  And this is on the--actually, the day that I left the trust.  So that's March 24th, and that is 1988.  It's actually my birthday and the day that I left the trust, and they are giving me a birthday party and a farewell party will be later that evening.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This picture is a picture of me, of course, Handy Lindsey.  And I'm standing with [HistoryMaker] Aurie Pennick, who was interviewed by HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers], I think, in 2005.  Aurie Pennick succeeded me as president of the Cameron Found- of the Field Foundation of Illinois [Chicago, Illinois], and Aurie and I have also worked together at the Chicago Community Trust.  I don't remember--this is, I think it's December 2002, and I'm not sure what the event is.
Speaker 1: I believe that is a picture of me holding my diploma as I graduated from college [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  So that's got to be probably August of 1975.
Speaker 2: That's another graduation picture.  In the center is me holding my diploma, and that is December, December of 1980, I believe, graduation from the Graduate School of Business at the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois].  And to my right in the green coat is my wife, Rachel [Rachel Washington Lindsey], who was my wife at the time.
Speaker 1: And here we have, the very distinguished gentleman to my right is my mentor, Earl Durham, who was a professor at the School of Social Service Administration at the University of Chicago [University of Chicago School of Social Service Administration, Chicago, Illinois], and I can't remember of date of this picture.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this is me, basically enjoying playing my bass guitar.  This is at my home here in Petersburg [Virginia].  And I think that was three years ago.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And this is me dancing with my wife, Kristin [Kristin Anderson Lindsey], K-R-I-S-T-I-N.  And this is in April of 2001, and this is the occasion of--this is our party after we got married.  We eloped and got married in September and then held a big party for everybody in April.  That's all in April.
Speaker 2: This is another picture of me and my wife, Kristin.  And I think this is on the occasion of the rehearsal dinner for her cousin's wedding.  This was about four years ago.
Speaker 1: That again is my wife, Kristin and I, and I think we're at a fundraiser for the Adler Planetarium in Chicago [Illinois].  That picture must be about 2003.
Speaker 2: This is also a picture of me and my wife, Kristin, and we're sitting on the rocks at the Cape of Good Hope in South Africa.
Speaker 1: That's 2006.
Speaker 2: That's 2006.  And that is me at the same place, the Cape of Good Hope in South Africa.  But that picture was from 1995.
Speaker 1: And this is a picture of me in a grape vineyard in Montepulciano, Italy, which is Tuscany.  And got a friend there, a little boxer by the name of Oovoe, which means great [sic.].
Speaker 2: That was vacation by the way.  This is also a vacation picture.  This is the year 2002, I believe.  And my wife and I were on vacation in Spain, and I believe that's in a park in Barcelona.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me, (unclear) with the gray hair in my beard.  This is probably around the occasion of my tenth anniversary as president of the Field Foundation, so that must have been about 2008.  I mean, I'm sorry,  1998.
Speaker 2: And this is a picture--in the center is my cousin Brenda [ph.].  To my left is my youngest sister Helen [Helen Lindsey], and to my right is my sister Margaret [Margaret Lindsey Crawford].  And this is on the occasion of the funeral of my Uncle Pete [ph.].
Speaker 1: This is also a picture of me and my two sisters, Helen is standing, Margaret is sitting.  We're at Helen's home, and that's just on a family visit about--I think that's 1999.
Speaker 2: This is a picture--standing above me, it was my wife, Rachel at the time, and our two sons, Josef [Josef Lindsey] is on the right, Marshall [Marshall Lindsey] is on the left.  They were one and two years old at the time.
Speaker 1: This is also a picture of me and my wife, Rachel and my--our two sons, Josef and Marshall, and they are four and three at this time.
Speaker 2: This is a family vacation, myself, my wife, Rachel, Josef and Marshall, vacationing in Colorado.  And that's, I think they were about seventeen and eighteen at the time.
Speaker 1: This is a Christmas morning picture in Chicago.  Joe and Marshall are about five and six at the time.
Speaker 2: This is another picture of the same grouping and the same day.
Speaker 1: Is that your father [Handy Lindsey, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: That's my father sitting in the rocking chair.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I couldn't remember if (unclear).
Speaker 2: And this is the day of my oldest son Josef's graduation from James Madison University in Harrisonburg, Virginia.
