Story_ID: 598361
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea. Observing are Gideon Manasa [ph.], Lisa Makowski [ph.], Marcus Naylor [ph.], Bryant Scott [ph.], Dale Long [ph.], Roz Nixon [ph.], Bob Patton [ph.], Alex Zelatrev [ph.], Rich McKonville [ph.], and Charles Rogers [ph.] among others (laughter). I think there's others that have come in.  But ma'am could you please state your full name and spell it for us please.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Gloria Lynne.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: G-L-O-R-I-A, L-Y-N-N-E.
Speaker 1: And, and what was your birth name?  I know Gloria Lynne's a name, it's a little bit different.
Speaker 2: It's a stage name.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a stage name, right.
Speaker 2: That's what we call it, stage names.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your birth name?
Speaker 2: Well, it got a little mixed up.  I went on the Internet and I found that they had mixed it up.  Alleyne is my marriage name, but they said I was born Alleyne which is impossible.  My, my maiden name is Wilson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's W-I-L-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: So you were born Gloria Wilson?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Eleven, twenty-three, thirty-one [November 23, 1931].
Speaker 1: Okay, and where were you born?
Speaker 2: New York, Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date.
Speaker 2: Today's date is February 5, 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at 42nd Street, I believe, in Times Square [New York, New York].  We had such a time finding this place, but I think it's 42nd Street in Times Square.
Speaker 1: And it may sound, sound silly, but what is your occupation, we always ask this?
Speaker 2: What is my occupation?
Speaker 1: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 2: Sometimes you know I really don't know I've done a lot of things, you know, but I think my main occupation is singing.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 598362
Speaker 1: There are five lightweight sort of questions that management compels me to ask of everyone--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: The first question is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes I do.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Baked macaroni and cheese.
Speaker 1: You have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yeah, blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Autumn.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like the Bahamas.
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I think I do; I'm trying to think of it though.  I, I found this in the Bible and I thought it was wonderful, because usually we ask the Lord for everything, right.  And I found this where it said, "Bless the Lord oh my soul and all that is within me," [Psalms 103:1].  I thought that was so wonderful and I was really up in age when I found this.  I thought I had read it from stem to stem.  And I said isn't this interesting you know, because most people don't think about blessing the Lord, you know, we ask Him for blessings, so I love that, that's my favorite phrase right now--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because I just found it recently.  I'd say in the last ten years I found it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 598363
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family's history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [John Wilson] side.  But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Mary Curtis, M-A-R-Y, C-U-R-T-I-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: That's hard, I really don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, did, do you know where she was born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Lake Charles, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: You have a guess about when, you think?
Speaker 2: Well, she died in '72 [1972] and she was sixty-three years old when she passed.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace her side of the family?
Speaker 2: Slavery.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's the story?
Speaker 2: Well, I have aunts and uncles who were slaves.  They worked on plantations, and I had an aunt who use to interpret, because these, these slave workers were--they spoke French, Patois, and so my people spoke Patois and so my aunt was able to interpret what he was telling the slaves to do.  So we go back pretty far on that.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it goes back.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what are the names of some of the relatives on that side that go back that far?
Speaker 2: From what my mom told me, I had a, my great-great-grandfather who--he grew tobacco.  He grew--he was considered rich in those days.  He was Cherokee Indian [Native American] and his name was Isaac.
Speaker 1: Okay, would it be Isaac Curtis [ph.], or would it be, would it be a Curtis or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think so, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, maybe the name--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was he one of the ones that spoke, could speak Creole--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they all spoke Patois--my mother spoke Patois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they refer to it as Patois rather than Creole or--?
Speaker 2: Well, they called it both, but later that the, the name of the language is Patois.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: It's really just like broken French.  It's not all the, the words (speaking Patois), you know it's, it's like a game that they played and they would say (speaking Patois) instead of (speaking French), you know, it's a difference in the phrasing of the French.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories from that side of the family about life back in, in those days--
Speaker 2: Yes, lots.
Speaker 1: --about the, about the slavery days first of all?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, well can, can you tell us a story?
Speaker 2: My mother use to tell us stories and aunt and the hair would come up on you; but they would very often bury people who would just like fall into like comas and stuff like that.  They'd bury them alive, but sometimes they would have funerals or have wakes and these people would wake up during the course of their--people being, you know, they're being waked.  They would just wake up and say, you know, "What's going on here? I'm hungry," or something like that when they thought that originally they were dead.  There are so many stories that come out of Louisiana.  It's, it's really, really a long, long tale, but my mother exposed me to a lot of it, things that went on, like the slave masters and, and how some of the children had to go and, and stay with the grandfather, the great-grandfather for a certain amount of days and come back.  They--he really made slaves out of them too even though they were his children.
Speaker 1: Now this great- this great-grandfather--
Speaker 2: Yes, my, my great-great-grandfather, yes.
Speaker 1: --would, would he have been white, or considered black?
Speaker 2: He was Indian.
Speaker 1: Indian, okay, all right, so he was, he was a slave master as well as he--?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: That's when I learned that when I went, when I went to school after my mother moved up, up to New York [New York] and I was enrolled in school, I always wondered why they said that all slave people were white slave--they weren't.  We had black slave traders too.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so your great-great-grandfather, he was black and Cherokee or just (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he owned, he owned a lot of land, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 598364
Speaker 1: Any other stories from that part--now this, this is a fascinating part, part of the world a lot of things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, it is.
Speaker 1: --happening.  Did--were there any songs passed down from that side?
Speaker 2: A few, yeah, a few.  I'd, I'd said--I never done it, but I said I would do a whole album with songs my mother [Mary Curtis] taught me in the Creole language, because it's very interesting--maybe they would find it interesting.  I just never got a chance, around to do it.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite one, a favorite song?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do, but I like the one where, where they play games, (speaking French), and then they'd count (singing), "Un, de, tro."  You know that's a--it has a little melody to it and let's see, there were other (singing Patois).  I can't think of all of it, but it's melodies like that that my mom taught me because she was really well versed in the language.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She could sing in the language.
Speaker 1: And now, now did she go to school in Lake Charles, Louisiana?  Was she raised there?
Speaker 2: She went to third grade, and she could count as well as any accountant on the planet.  I'll tell you a little secret; she use to book numbers and you cannot book numbers unless you can count.  She went to third grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's see, so how long did she stay there before she moved to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: She was in her twenties and where my mom was born, she was born in bayou country, and you walk a few paces, you might fall into quicksand, or you might run into an alligator that might do something to you.  It was just very dangerous where she lived and she always wanted to get out of that, so she married my dad [John Wilson], 'cause he was coming through and she married him and came on to New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she was pregnant with me when she came to New York.
Speaker 1: Now, now did her family, you know, have, own property, property down there?
Speaker 2: Yeah they did, they owned a lot of property down there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah they did.  They lost it somehow through things happening, they lost land and--
Speaker 1: When you say somehow (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but they survived.
Speaker 1: --you mean, you, yeah?
Speaker 2: Well, with tax assessors and people coming down on people, you know, they can't pay their mortgage and things like that, you know, through the years, the, the different things change as far as property and holding on to deeds and things like that, so, they lost it, they lost a lot of property.
Story_ID: 598365
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met that your mother [Mary Curtis] tells or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father was a longshoreman, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your father's full name, can you sp- (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) John Wilson.
Speaker 1: John Wilson, okay and do you know his date of birth, place of birth?
Speaker 2: I sure don't.  He was eighty-five when he passed.
Speaker 1: And when was that?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: My father passed in '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and was he from Louisiana, too?
Speaker 2: No he wasn't, he was from the islands.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Trinidad.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was--so what's the story that they tell about how they met?  Do they have a--?
Speaker 2: Well, I think my mom said that he was pa- he worked on a boat, and I think he was passing through and they just met and became lovers and, and he was on his way to New York [New York].  He always wanted to live in New York he said.
Speaker 1: Okay. So he was able to book passage for her on the same boat and take her with him?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so this would be what, what in the, in the 1920s, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you said--so your mother was in her twenties when she moved to New York and set up?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did she move right to Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the first place they moved to--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Harlem, and stayed there.
Story_ID: 598366
Speaker 1: Let me ask you something about your father's [John Wilson] side of the family.  How far back can you trace the ancestors on his side?  Did he ever talk about--?
Speaker 2: No, this is going to sound crazy, but I never really met anyone on my father's side of the family, no one.  I don't know if he had a brother or sister.  I don't know his mother, his father, but that's typical in that day, you know, I'm sure you'll find a lot of people who didn't know somebody on one side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay and did, did he ever go back to--did he go back and forth or did he stay--?
Speaker 2: No, they never went back.  My mother [Mary Curtis] took me back once and she didn't stay.  She took me back when I was five years old to Louisiana.
Speaker 1: To Lake Charles, to Louisiana.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, but she didn't stay long, she didn't--?
Speaker 2: She went down to visit.
Speaker 1: Okay, did, did your father ever go back to Trinidad?
Speaker 2: He might have, he might have.  They were separated; they separated as soon as they got to New York City [New York, New York] so I really didn't grow up with, with my dad.  I knew where he was at all times, I mean I knew--had an address on him, but he and my mom were not together.
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean did he come into your life when you were growing, growing up, did he ever come by to see you or--?
Speaker 2: Sometimes, yes.
Story_ID: 598367
Speaker 1: Now, what, what neighborhood did you grow up in in New York [New York] in?
Speaker 2: Well I was born in Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York], that's right on Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard], 135th [Street], 136th [Street], 137th [Street].  I would say I grew up on 134th [Street], 135th.  We lived in the 40s for a spell.  In fact, I would say we lived all over Harlem [New York, New York] because in those days you know, you could get an apartment, you could move out of one apartment into the other, there was no problem.
Speaker 1: Okay, do, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Would, would you like to know?
Speaker 1: Yes (laughter), what is it?
Speaker 2: An early childhood memory?
Speaker 1: An earliest, earliest, yeah?
Speaker 2: My childhood memories are, are sort of, sort of mixed up, I mean they're not, they're not good, you know.  They're not memories that I, that I would cherish or would want to ever relive again.  It was hard and it was hard on my mom [Mary Curtis] too 'cause she was involved with people who were abusive to not only me, but to her too.  So when I'm at my lowest ebb I go back to my childhood, and I strengthen myself from that because I know that there was some power that helped me to survive to be here as long as I'm here and then plus when I was born I weighed three pounds.  I was an incubator baby and they didn't have much hope that I was going to be here in this, on this planet, at all, so I just feel very blessed.  I really do and I use it, I use that, that unknown power that we don't know anything about, I use it, I have to.
Story_ID: 598368
Speaker 1: Well, do you mind if I ask you something about--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, growing up in Harlem [New York, New York]?  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh wonderful, wonderful.  We had the, we had the Apollo Theater [New York, New York], which every week there were different shows coming through.  We had Minton's Playhouse [New York, New York], every week you could go there and see people like Billie Holiday.  They had the Cotton Club [New York, New York].  I was a little young for the Cotton Club; they wouldn't let me in.  I tried but, they wouldn't let me in (laughter).
Speaker 1: But you could get into the Apollo?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I would say that the sights and sounds were very encouraging for, for young people coming along in that day.  It was for me.
Speaker 1: Why do you say that?
Speaker 2: My--because the music was there.  People seemed to be about growing and learning and, and like my mom [Mary Curtis], you know, everybody was always doing something, you know.  Like you wouldn't think that a woman who had a third grade education would reach out to try to even book numbers, you know, which was a way of living, so the atmosphere was quite, quite positive.  I think most of the kids that came along when I came along they all, they all turned out all right.  You know, they ended up doing something that they wanted to do.  They followed their dreams.
Story_ID: 598369
Speaker 1: Do you remember--was any, anybody in your family associated with the Garvey movement when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mom [Mary Curtis] was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, well tell us about it, what did she do?
Speaker 2: Well she went to some of the meetings that he held and some of the sessions that he held then.  She told me about him and you know, we use to live right next door to the Schomburg library [Schomburg Collection of Negro Literature, History and Prints; Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] and--
Speaker 1: That, that was like the Countee Cullen [135th Street Library; Countee Cullen Library, New York, New York] then, I think?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And so one day my mom asked me were we getting any black history in school.  I told her no, so she went to the school and she wanted to know why we weren't taught about people like Garvey [Marcus Garvey] and Booker T. Washington and people of that sort.  So, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did, did your mother know Schomburg?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think she did and if she did she never said that she did, you know, but we lived right next door to them.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you know, that you know--
Speaker 2: We lived at 111 West 135th Street and Schomburg I think was 113 or something like that, that's on 135th Street.
Speaker 1: Arthur Schomburg [Arturo Alfonso Schomburg] himself was up in the library there on the second floor with his collection I think in 1930 by, by then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And Belafonte [HistoryMaker Harry Belafonte] use to go there and Sidney Poitier use to go there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the old Harlem History Club by any chance?  Do you remember hearing about that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, you, you would have been a little young I think for that but they were in their heyday in the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I think they finally went out in about 1941 and then, but, that's, but it was, from what I heard, was an exciting place to live because of the intellectual life going on--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was exciting.
Speaker 1: --and the cultural life.
Speaker 2: Because at the, at the time when I grew up Mary McLeod Bethune and Eleanor Roosevelt came to Harlem [New York, New York].  I met them, I shook their hands, my mother said, "Come on baby, shake these ladies' hands," you know, when I was about seven or eight years old, so it was exciting times.
Speaker 1: Now were, you, do, do you remember when Josephine Baker came back to Harlem?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, do, do you remember the street corner orators in Harlem?  The guys that would stand on the street corners and speak?
Speaker 2: You mean make speeches.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: Is there any particular story from those days that really stands out that you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the Barefoot Prophet [Elder Clayhorn Martin].
Speaker 1: Who's that?
Speaker 2: He was a barefoot prophet.
Speaker 1: The Barefoot Prophet?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a man that use to come through Harlem.  He wore no shoes and he dressed just like the, the people in biblical days and the kids use to follow him everywhere.
Speaker 1: This, this was a black man?
Speaker 2: I don't know whether he was black or white, because he was just, he was in between, but he, he roamed Harlem until they killed him.
Speaker 1: How did he get killed?
Speaker 2: He got murdered in a bar.
Speaker 1: In a bar?
Speaker 2: Yeah, which was rare because he never went into bars.
Speaker 1: Yes, it's hard to imagine somebody--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --barefoot (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --dressed like a prophet in a bar, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They called him the barefoot prophet.
Speaker 1: Okay, so about what time was it that--how old were you when he got killed?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I must have been about nine, ten.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting.
Story_ID: 598370
Speaker 1: Do you remember Daddy Grace [Marcelino Manuel da Grace] and?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  He had a church on 125th Street [United House of Prayer for All People, New York, New York].  That was inspirational too, because people would stop in the street and listen to that music coming out of that church.  And if you were walking along 125th Street, you had to stop and hear this music that was coming out of that church.
Speaker 1: They, they were known for their music?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now this is the first time I've heard that.  I've, I've seen the pictures of Daddy Grace on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --but I didn't hear about the music, never heard about the music.
Speaker 2: Fabulous, fabulous music.
Speaker 1: What, what style did they play?
Speaker 2: Gospel.
Speaker 1: Gospel, okay.  What about a Father Divine [Reverend Major Jealous Divine]?
Speaker 2: Well he was like another prophet, he grew all of these--he had land and he used this land to, to provide food for people who really needed it.  He was based in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], also in New York [New York] and other places.  So I think he was one of the good people.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  I'm thinking now, what, what--did you ever, did you all attend church regularly?
Speaker 2: I did--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and my mom [Mary Curtis] did too.
Speaker 1: Okay, so where, where was your church?
Speaker 2: A.M.E. Zion [Mother African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, on 137th Street.
Speaker 1: That's one of the oldest churches in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes it is.
Speaker 1: --in New York, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: --founded by James Varick in 1796, I think.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay, so was your mother an A.M.E. Zion member in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes--no, not in Louisiana.  I don't know about that, but I know she was in New York.
Speaker 1: Did, did you know what attracted her to the A.M.E. Zion church?
Speaker 2: I think the lady that we were living, in the building we were living--we were living in a brownstone and the lady that owned it, Mrs. Robinson [ph.], she was my godmother and she was member of that church so I think that's how my mother got involved.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you ever have, have occasion to go to the Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have.  I've done a concert there.
Speaker 1: All right, in those days Adam Clayton Powell's father [Adam Clayton Powell, Sr.] was, I guess, was pastor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was pastor of that church.
Speaker 1: Now, did you get involved in music in--?
Speaker 2: In the church?
Speaker 1: Yeah, was that your first exposure to music?
Speaker 2: Yeah in our church Paul Robeson's--
Speaker 1: I mean in terms of--?
Speaker 2: --Paul Robeson's brother was the pastor of our church.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: What was his first name?  I can't really think of his name, but he was Paul Robeson's brother [Benjamin Congleton Robeson], and he was pastor of the church for many, many years.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Robeson's father [William Drew Robeson], I know, was pastor in New Jersey of a church [Witherspoon Street Presbyterian Church, Princeton, New Jersey], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: He grew up in the church.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, okay, okay, so Robeson's father, all right.  So was that your first formal musical training in the church, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I would say so.
Speaker 1: --or participation?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say so, although I was a listener, my mother played the radio a lot and I'd listen to music, you know, secular music and, but my first entree with singing was with the church in, in the choir.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And also in the glee club at school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there a youth choir in church?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so how old were you when you first started singing--
Speaker 2: With the choir?
Speaker 1: --publicly with, with the choir, yeah?
Speaker 2: Oh, I must have been about eleven or twelve, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a favorite songs, or--
Speaker 2: A favorite song?
Speaker 1: --yeah, a favorite song or songs to sing in church?
Speaker 2: I have to think about that one, yeah.  There's so many beautiful hymns.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: 'His Eye Is on the Sparrow,' always is a beautiful one, you know, it's one that you remember and most people that's their favorite, you know.
Story_ID: 598371
Speaker 1: What about in the secular world?  Did you have favorite songs on the radio that you listened to?
Speaker 2: Oh many, many.
Speaker 1: Was there any per- performer that was you know, was your favorite (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was my favorite?
Speaker 1: --yeah--
Speaker 2: Sarah.
Speaker 1: Okay, Sarah Vaughan?
Speaker 2: So much--when I started they said, you'll never make it because you sound just like her.  I really didn't care, because I thought she had the most beautiful voice I'd ever heard, and if you're going to sound like somebody, sound like somebody.  But eventually I outgrew that, which I was very glad, it was better for me.  I always wanted to get to the point where if you heard a record, like when you heard Sarah, you knew it was Sarah.  When you heard Dinah [Dinah Washington], you knew it was Dinah.  You knew it was Carmen [Carmen McRae] when you heard Carmen, and I wanted to be the--when heard Gloria, you heard Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Lynne].
Speaker 1: Okay, now was--when you first started singing were you considered special, did somebody, you know, did people consider your voice special, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I think I was lucky because people like a Sarah or Carmen or Dinah, if they couldn't make a job, they would send me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm talking about as a kid, you know, when you first started singing.
Speaker 2: When I first started singing?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh well, I did my rounds.  I did demo work and worked in little nightclubs and stuff if I could get into them.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm talking about as a kid, as, as eleven or twelve in church [Mother African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: You know, when you first started, did you--when did you find out that you really had, had a special gift?
Speaker 2: Had a voice?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's hard because my mother [Mary Curtis] use to make me sing for her friends when they came over.  I sang in the choir.  I sang in the glee club, so I knew that I always could sing.  I knew that I could stay on tune, and you know, I had a voice.  As far as being professional, I had no dream of that.  When I went to the Apollo Amateur ['Amateur Night at the Apollo'], I only went because I wanted to see if everybody was saying, what they were saying was right.  Everybody was saying, "Oh you can sing.  You sing so good."  I said well, if I can make this then they're right and I did.
Speaker 1: Well how old were you when you went to 'Amateur Night' (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifteen.
Speaker 1: Fifteen?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 598372
Speaker 1: Let me go, go back a little bit.  Now, what, what, what grade school did you start at?  Or did you, did you go to a lot of schools because you moved around a lot or did you--?
Speaker 2: Well there's, there, there's a period where my mom [Mary Curtis] put me in a reformatory, so--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --that, those years, at least, not a year, about a year I was out of school.
Speaker 1: Well what happened?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: What happened?  You, you said that it was--
Speaker 2: I played hooky out--
Speaker 1: --a rough neighborhood you were living in?
Speaker 2: --I played hooky out of school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and she asked me to stop and I didn't stop.  I played hooky and would go to the Apollo Theater [New York, New York] to see the shows there.  So she couldn't stand it anymore so she put me in a reformatory, which changed my life.
Speaker 1: So she just enrolled you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so where did you go?
Speaker 2: You mean what reformatory?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: It was called Westfield State Farm [Bedford Hills Correctional Facility, Bedford Hills, New York].
Speaker 1: What was that like?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't, it wasn't good and then it wasn't bad.  I tell you I found, I found a lot of peace.  I found myself in that year, because at home I was being abused by my mother's boyfriend.  Things were not right at home, so getting away was like, it helped me.  It just changed my whole life around.  I don't think I'd be the person I am today if I hadn't gone through that.
Speaker 1: So that's a good--yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It really reformed me; you talking about reformatory, it reformed me.
Story_ID: 598373
Speaker 1: Do you think your mother [Mary Curtis] actually--when you look back on it, do you think your mother was trying to get you away for your own good in some ways when she did that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I, I, I know she did.  I know she did, you know, because my mom, she missed a lot of opportunities because she had a great voice.  She could sing, you know, when you hear me you hear my mama, you know.  So--but she missed it, you know, so I think that all that she instilled in me to keep me going because I had a voice too.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I was wondering, with all the wild things in the neighborhood [Harlem, New York, New York] you described and the things you don't like to think about and stuff, maybe--I just wonder if she consciously thought, "If I get my daughter out of here--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --maybe she'll have a better chance."
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, she did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were there any special teachers or mentors at, at Westfield [Westfield State Farm; Bedford Hills Correctional Facility, Bedford Hills, New York] that helped you?
Speaker 2: Well, there was one, what was her name? Mrs. Robinson [ph.], she, she encouraged me as far as she said, "When you go home you should pursue and try to encour- be--don't--keep your career going or get a career" because I use to sing all the time when I was there.  Other than that not too many because they were like guards, you know what I'm saying, you know, it was, you know, it was an institution.  You know, at night they locked you in (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's someplace in Upstate New York or--
Speaker 2: Yes.  I don't know if it's still there, but it was a huge place, huge, like a campus.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had time to reflect there and time to--
Speaker 2: Oh, time to reflect, I really did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a--any sort of singing outlet there?  Did they sing there, do music?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did they have a chorus or something?
Speaker 2: Well we had--we formed a group, we had like a choir, you know and we, we put on plays.  It was just like a regular--it was really like being in college, you know, like being in school.  We did everything, all the activities that you would do if you were outside, except you couldn't go out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you found it to be sort of a place of protection and peace on some level there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I found more peace than I had found in my whole life almost.
Story_ID: 598374
Speaker 1: How did you--how were you able to translate that into changing your life when you went back to New York City, back to Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: When I came back to Harlem, I had made my mind up, I said, well, I'm going to be somebody.  I'm going to try to pursue whatever I could pursue.  I'm fifteen years--I'm fourteen years old.  I had been away for a year [at Westfield State Farm; Bedford Hills Correctional Facility, Bedford Hills, New York].  I tried jobs, 'cause I didn't go back to school.  I didn't go back to school, and this thing from the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] came up and I went.  And then I got with several groups and pursued that, you know, with the quartets and things like that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, well tell us about the Apollo experience.  Now, you, you--they, people told you you could sing and you decided you'd go test it out and see how what, how it would work?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I just wanted to know if I could, you know, get through it because they said if you could get through the Apollo audience, you can get through anything, that's what they said.
Speaker 1: Now who like, now who was the host of the show and, and how long did it last, or when did it happen and what, what was the--
Speaker 2: Okay, here we go with these names.  Oh, and I'm in his book, it's a shame.  He wrote a book about Har- about the Apollo.
Speaker 1: Okay, it wasn't, wasn't [HistoryMaker] Hal Jackson, not (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't Hal Jackson.
Speaker 1: Trying to think of who--
Speaker 2: Well, it will come, but he was the host.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They had this guy, Pigmeat Markham who shot you off if you weren't--
Speaker 1: So that's what Pigmeat was doing before he started--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --making albums and things, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: He was--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --he would shoot you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he'd shoot the people off if they weren't good, you know, if you got booed then you got shot.
Speaker 1: So he had a fake gun and he'd shoot--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, okay, shoot you off the stage.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ralph Cooper.
Speaker 1: Ralph Cooper, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, Ralph Cooper was a host, okay.  Now in those days did they, did they show movies at the Apollo too, or did they just do--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they showed movies and then they had the show.
Speaker 1: Then they had, had the 'Amateur Night' ['Amateur Night at the Apollo']?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  But you know, I think, in fact I know I'm one of the first artists that ever worked the Apollo Theater without being known because that was the prize.  First prize was fifteen dollars and then you got a week at the Apollo.  So when I worked the Apollo nobody knew me, you know, at all (laughter) because I didn't was--use to open the show, you know, if you didn't get there on time, you wouldn't catch me.
Speaker 1: So, well, what happened with you?  Were you sort of, had some nerves, you know, before you went out, before this audience that--?
Speaker 2: Oh, I did, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did, do you remember what song you sung?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, you mean for the--when I won?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Don't Take Your Love From Me.'
Speaker 1: I mean, how many times did it take for you to win it?  Did you win the first time you went out?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  You only win once at the Apollo and then if you win, in those days you got--your prize was fifteen dollars and a week at the Apollo.  But I was lucky because when I did the week at the Apollo, people liked me so they kept calling me back to be an opening act; so I worked the Apollo many times, long before I made records--
Speaker 1: Now, can, can you--
Speaker 2: --even thought about making records.
Speaker 1: Can, can you sing us a little bit of the first song; I mean the song you sang at the Apollo?
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: 'Don't Take Your Love from Me.'
Speaker 2: (Singing) "Tear a star from out the sky and the sky feels blue.  Tear a petal from the rose and the rose weeps too.  Take your heart away from mine and mine will surely break.  My life is yours to take, so please keep the spark awake.  Would you take the wings from birds so that they can't fly?  Would you take the ocean's roar and leave just a sigh?  All this, your heart won't let you do.  This is what I beg of you.  Don't take your love from me.  All this, your heart won't let you do.  This is what I beg of you.  Don't take your love from me."
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the crowd reacted positively from the very beginning--you know after you sung that, they really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were a regular--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I became a regular at the Apollo.
Speaker 1: --at, at the Apollo?
Speaker 2: Yeah, which was a break, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something--you said it doesn't happen to everybody, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 598375
Speaker 1: Where did things go from there?  Did you work, work with--in, in other clubs then as a result?
Speaker 2: Yes, I started working in general clubs around Harlem [New York, New York].  Then I worked with a group, a quartet and we worked the Baby Grand [New York, New York], Rankers [ph.], Uptown [Clark Monroe's Uptown House] in Harlem.  And then I branched out, and started working solos and started working with people like Kenny Burrell and Ram Ramirez, you know, who, they were stars in Harlem those days.
Speaker 1: Tell, tell us about now, I have in the research that I have here says that you worked with The Enchanters, The Delltones--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the Dorsey Sisters.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Those were the groups?
Speaker 2: There were three groups, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now did you sing the lead in those groups?
Speaker 2: Sometimes, sometimes we'd augment, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there, there's a--so you did this for a, a while?  So you--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So the Apollo appearance [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] was in 1944, I guess, yeah and you were fourteen and--but you, and you performed largely in New York [New York]--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --in places in New York.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was there a certain place where you--
Speaker 2: Went to the islands a lot, yeah, yeah, I don't know how that happened to me but I, I became famous in the islands without a record.  I didn't have any records.
Speaker 1: Where, where did you go?
Speaker 2: To the Bahamas and Bermuda, places like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is all prior to 1958, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Before I had even thought about making records.  In fact, I didn't really know what records were.  And how I got on records, I used to do demo work, demo meaning if they wanted a record, wanted a song to be presented to Dinah [Dinah Washington] or Sarah [Sarah Vaughan] or anybody, you know, of that ilk at that time, you did the demo and they presented it to them.  And so since I had that kind of voice, you know, I did a lot of demos, for Sarah, for Dinah, for Carmen [Carmen McRae].  That's how I got on records.
Speaker 1: All right, so did, well were you writing any lyrics or music at this time too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, some.
Speaker 1: Can you remember the first thing that you, you, you wrote and the first time that you wrote a song?
Speaker 2: The first song that I wrote?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was a thing called 'Sometimes It Be's That Way.'
Speaker 1: About what time was this when you wrote that?
Speaker 2: That was early, early.  When I was still with groups, still working with The Enchanters or either The Delltones.  But after I got on records then I started--wrote this thing with Kenny Burrell.  He let me write a lyric to his song, 'All Day Long.'  And then further on down the road, Herbie [HistoryMaker Herbie Hancock] let me write a lyric to 'Watermelon Man,' so I lucked out there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then after that it was just, you know, write, if, if you think of something and then I ran into Ann Rubino, who is a great writer and we wrote some things together which became very popular.
Story_ID: 598376
Speaker 1: Now, I want to go back to, I guess 1958, you met Raymond Scott.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It says here that he sort of discovered you, or, or was able to make some big tran-?
Speaker 2: Well he discovered me because I was doing some demos and he heard a demo and he wanted to know who that voice was, and that's how that happened.
Speaker 1: Okay, now Raymond Scott, now he, he was a musician and--
Speaker 2: Oh, fabulous musician, yes.
Speaker 1: --he produced--what I understand he produced a lot of novelty type jazz pieces?
Speaker 2: Oh yes and what was the show, Coca-Cola show, or Pepsi-Cola show, one of them, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, well tell us about how, how you--so he heard one of your demos, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, and he wanted to know who the voice was, so it was, funny thing about that it took him a while to find me.  I think it took about three months before they discovered that it was me that had did the demo.
Speaker 1: That seems, seems strange now that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --they would hear this voice and, and nobody would be interested in who it is, you know (laughter) until he comes along to discover you.  So, so, so how did he change your, your life?
Speaker 2: Well, he got me my first record, you know.  So that was very important, and he worked along with me.  He gave me the best.  He gave me Kenny Burrell, he gave me Wild Bill Davis and Philly Joe Jones on drums, I mean how could you miss, Harry "Sweets" Edison [Harry Edison] on trumpet.  I had nothing but all-stars on my first album; so now when people say, well, you know your first album came out and it went to the moon, I say, "It should've because look who I had on to back me up," you know.
Speaker 1: Now, now what's the name of the first, that, that first album?
Speaker 2: 'Miss Gloria Lynne' ['Miss Gloria Lynne with Wild Bill Davis and His Group'].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I had all these all-stars, you know, he couldn't miss.
Speaker 1: So, were you aware of the record sales, you know, that sort of thing when you--?
Speaker 2: Not really, I knew by going to different clubs, you know, by doing different jobs, I could tell that the audience was aware of the music.  Because they would sing along with me or the place would be packed, or lines would be around the corner, you know, I said, "Well, something is going on here."  But to realize as far as sales and you know, I never, I can't really say that I have been able to survive or live on that.  My living has come from another, another course.  I can't truthfully say that I was supported as far as records are concerned, and I've sold a lot of records and I know that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the record company, you know, they, they do what they do.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know a lot of jazz music is not--well, in those days--
Speaker 2: They caused me to make, to make money, but I had to go out and get money.  I never really sat back and received royalties, you know, like it's supposed to be.  So I took that and you know, I continued to make records, but a lot of people told me this, "Well, why would you make, continue to make records if they didn't pay you?"  That was the only way I could make money.  If you don't make records and people don't know you're, you're here, so whether they paid me or not, I still had an audience that I could go out and sing to and get--be paid.
Speaker 1: Okay, for instance, like how much would you get for each record sold, would you, would you imagine?
Speaker 2: Well, when I first started I think it was 5 cent--5 percent, yeah, I never got it of course. That's what it said in the contract.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you never felt cheated or anything, or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you figured the tradeoff was worth it, worth it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I wouldn't stop making records you know, because, well when I, know what I had.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: It didn't make sense to me, I thought about it, I said, well, I shouldn't record, but after I gained a certain amount of audience they were there, you know, so I, I would go out and sing to my audience and they would pay me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Plus I had a kid [P.J. Alleyne] in school.  I had my mom [Mary Curtis] to take care of, you know, so I had responsibilities, so I had to continue to make records whether they paid me or not (laughter), you know.
Speaker 1: Now, were you married by, by that time, by '58 [1958]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how did you meet your husband?  Who, who was he?
Speaker 2: We were childhood, you know, sweethearts, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he grew up in the same--
Speaker 2: Yeah, same neighborhood [Harlem, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: --neighborhood?
Speaker 2: That I--same neighborhood.
Speaker 1: And what's his name?
Speaker 2: Harry [Harry Alleyne].
Speaker 1: Harry, okay.
Speaker 2: Alleyne.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and you've got--you had a son--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --by, okay, by that marriage, okay.  So you were married prior to '58 [1958] then, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What, what, what year were you married?
Speaker 2: What year?  Forty--in the '40s [1940s], I got married.
Story_ID: 598377
Speaker 1: What would you I guess describe as your, your particular style of music in those days when you first started out?
Speaker 2: They called it jazz, don't care what I sang.  I had a little operatic train- training.  We did things like 'Be My Love,' 'Intimate Soul' [sic. 'Intimate Moments']--they still called it jazz.  'I Wish You Love' came out, they called it jazz-pop.
Speaker 1: Okay so--
Speaker 2: So I really don't know.  I, to me, if you like a song and the song fits you and you fit the song, then you sing the song.  So I've had a lot of fun doing it.  I've sang funk, rock, whatever.  If I like the song, I'll sing the song.
Speaker 1: But you said--
Speaker 2: Now they can call it whatever they want to call it.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you said whenever you, you sing it, they called it jazz?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's--so--
Speaker 2: Because I picked my songs.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did, did your--when you first started, I mean, has your style of singing changed from when you first started out, did you--?
Speaker 2: In some ways, yes, I think.  It, it has grown a little bit.  I think I'm wiser.  I'm able to draw on what--all of my experience, vocally, that I've had.  I've worked with some of the finest musicians in the world, so I've had that exposure.  So yes, I would say it's, it's gotten stronger.
Speaker 1: Okay, there's a--now has anybody, I guess, other people, people have probably noted this, but I, when I hear you sing, you sound intelligent (laughter). I don't know.  You just sound like somebody that knows a lot more than, you know, maybe coming out, I mean, you, you just sound like you know something.
Speaker 2: Well, maybe I do. It could be.
Speaker 1: It is similar to Nina Simone or other people; you hear them articulate the--
Speaker 2: You know that, yeah, they articulate, articulate, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you spend a lot of time thinking about how you articulate a song, or do you--?
Speaker 2: Well, my mom [Mary Curtis] use to tell me, she'd say, "I want to understand everything you're saying on this record."  She'd say, "I don't want no -oops, no -ants." She'd say, "I want--I don't want to have to strain to understand what you are saying on a record."  When I'd go out to do a session, that's what she'd tell me.  "When you bring the record back to me I want to understand every word you're saying, Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Lynne]."  And I would do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 598378
Speaker 1: Do you have--I know the biggest hits you had, well the one that everybody talks about the most, it was on the Billboard charts in three categories, it was 'I Wish You Love.'
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And that came out in 1964?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us how that project developed and how you thought of it at the time?
Speaker 2: Well, that was the biggest album I had ever done with the--in personnel.  'I Wish You Love' had forty musicians, that particular album had forty musicians.  And so I was thrilled and I was working with Marty Paich, which was another thrill, you know.  He's, he's a giant in this business as far as music.  So I went to California to record and this was just wonder- wonderful time of the year for me as far as music was concerned and I took all my songs.  The one song I didn't take was 'I Wish You Love' because I didn't know it.  He had it waiting for me.  He said, "Well I'd take it to the hotel," he said, "and see if you like it, then bring it back the next day," and that's what I did.  I learned it in twenty-four hours and brought it back, so who knew, you know.  There's no way I would have said that that would have been the hit of the album, but it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A lot of musicians say that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's crazy. It's crazy.
Speaker 1: --that they don't, that they can't tell which, which one is the hit.
Speaker 2: It's crazy, the one that you say is the hit, it probably isn't because I learned that song overnight.  I really didn't know it and now when I hear it so much I say, "You know, I didn't even know that song," really.  I like to live with songs before I record them; that one I didn't get a chance to, so.
Speaker 1: Is, is it your favorite song now as you listen to it, or what do you think?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I like it.  I like it. I'm, you know, I'm very grateful for it and very thankful.  They say it's my signature song and who--how many artists got signature songs?  You know, that's kind of wild right there, you know.  That's, that's a, that's a big statement to make, that you have a signature song.  I mean, I didn't write it, you know.  It was just chosen for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he said when he gave it to me, he said, "It's tailor made for you."
Story_ID: 598379
Speaker 1: So how did it change your life when it came out?  Did it, did it--
Speaker 2: You know what it did?  I became a license clerk of Bergen County [New Jersey].  I went into court and was sworn in for a job that I needed very badly, and I got it.
Speaker 1: This is in New Jersey?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Bergen, yeah--
Speaker 2: Englewood, yes.
Speaker 1: --over in North Bergen [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had a house in Englewood, New Jersey and I wasn't working.  It seems to me that the jobs just fell out, because the pop people didn't really know me.  Only jazz knew me and jazz could not afford me, you know with this hit record that I've got, this monster record ['I Wish You Love'].  So I had to go to work from nine to five [o'clock], not that I'm ashamed.  I'm not ashamed of it at all.  In fact, I'm very proud of it because God gave me another side of my brain.  He woke me up, he said, "Hey, you don't have to take this; you can do this."
Speaker 1: Okay, so I, I would have guessed it would have opened up more concerts and more venues, travel.
Speaker 2: I would have guessed it too.
Speaker 1: But it--
Speaker 2: It did not.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: It did not and it was on every chart you could imagine.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: In fact, when I took the job in city hall, you know when you work in city hall, you have a key, I don't know if it's still the same way, but when I worked in city hall, especially small towns, you have a key, so if you get there first you can get in, you know.  I had to get two gold star detectives to take me to work every day because I was threatened.  Yeah, I was threatened, you know, because I had a hit record.  My record was all on the radio.  People were wondering, why the hell is she going to city hall to work with this hit record?  She's taking a job that somebody else could have; that's the way it looked.  But I needed that job or else I never would have taken it.
Speaker 1: That was the source of the threats, I mean, people, people were thinking that, that you, you don't need it, so--
Speaker 2: I didn't need it, no.  I had a house, my kid [P.J. Alleyne] was in school, my mom [Mary Curtis] was not well.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was your job again, you were--?
Speaker 2: License clerk of Bergen County.  You couldn't get a license unless I stamped it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so how long did you do that?
Speaker 2: I did it as long as I could, and I, I had to resign.  I just couldn't take the pressure.
Speaker 1: Well, from people calling and complaining (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, from people, people.
Speaker 1: That's incredible, that's an incredible story there.  That's, that's something that you wouldn't expect, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 598380
Speaker 1: So, well, what did you resolve to do when you resigned?  Did you know what you were going to do?
Speaker 2: Well, of course I went back to show business, you know.  I went back to doing what I do best.  But I took that time to try to get some arrangements where I could have steady work or get better jobs, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did you do any--a lot of the musicians I know that are, a lot of top musicians do more work in Europe than they do in America.
Speaker 2: But I had never been to Europe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Still haven't.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't go that route (laughter). So, well, what happened next, did you, you just toured, you toured the United States?  You had set up a--?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I went on tour with Redd Foxx, Jimmy Scott, Jimmy Wood [ph.], Jimmy Smith, Art Blakey, people like that.  We toured cities.  We did sixteen cities back to back.
Speaker 1: So was that like--well what's it like being on the road like that, sixteen cities?
Speaker 2: Well, you get tired you know, you get a little weary.  The audience are the only people that you have a saving grace with.  If you have a good audience, that lifts you and that supports you and it's like a, it's like a fork lift.  It lifts you, you know, you can be feeling down, I mean, and the audience, you know, they embrace you.  So you say, well, I can't let the people down, so I've got to go with them.  So the spirit just goes back and forth, you know.
Speaker 1: And did, do you, do you really--from what I understand or and you know, your fan base is really loyal.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean people that like you really--?
Speaker 2: Very, extremely, yes.
Speaker 1: So you feel that, that kind of energy when you perform (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah definitely, definitely, definitely.
Speaker 1: Does that keep you going?
Speaker 2: To have an audience of that base for so long, that's amazing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, similar to, yeah, Nina Simone or Betty Carter, or some of the other singers that are really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --may not be a household names everywhere, but they have a, a loyal base, yeah.
Speaker 2: But they have that base, yeah.
Story_ID: 598381
Speaker 1: Now, I hear that--well I read also that [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte had been a big influence on you?
Speaker 2: Yes he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was one of my mentors.
Speaker 1: Yeah, can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I was working the Copacabana in New York City [New York, New York], the lounge doing four shows a night and you couldn't repeat a show.  I mean you couldn't like, you know, do four same shows.  You had to do four different shows.  Billy Daniels was downstairs in the main room and Belafonte came to see him and he heard me singing in the lounge, so he said, "I've got to find out who that voice is."  So he came up to the lounge and he told me, he said, "I want you to do a special."  He was doing a special ['New York 19'] for Revlon [Revlon, Inc.], CBS and the rest is history.  I went from making five hundred dollars a week to thirty-five hundred dollars a week doing that one special show.
Speaker 1: I mean it so of just, it kicked your, your--?
Speaker 2: It kicked me and gave me a hit record called 'He Needs Me' because I did 'He Needs Me' on that show and it was embodied in an album, so, that's the power of television, you know, its, it's really powerful.
Speaker 1: Okay, who else was on that show with you?
Speaker 2: On that particular special, Joe Williams, [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll, Belafonte himself.  He was on it, Modern Jazz Quartet, a fabulous group.
Speaker 1: That's quite a, quite a special.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, this, this was in--this was before--
Speaker 2: In the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: --in the '60s [1960s], okay, all right.  So this was after 'I Wish You Love' came out?
Speaker 2: No, no, 'I Wish You Love' hadn't come out yet.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so before that.  Okay, so--
Speaker 2: My biggest hit in the '60s [1960s] at that time was 'He Needs Me' and that was because of the television show, because I did that on television so, everybody seemed to know it, you know.
Speaker 1: Now did, did you do any more television after that?  Did they--did--
Speaker 2: I did some.  I did the Tonight Show with Johnny Carson ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'] and a few other shows.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 598382
Speaker 1: Did you have a, a regular band?  I mean was it--were you performing with the same people most of the time?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was lucky, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Earl May Trio.  It featured Herman Foster, Grassella Oliphant and Earl May.  It was just the three of us.  You know it's, it's amazing because I did songs that had forty in personnel and when I would come out to sing I'd have three musicians and myself and these people accepted that music.  It was amazing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you think about--
Speaker 2: That's why I love my audience so because they accepted me raw, you know, what they heard at home, what they bought, they bought a record that had everything, the oboes, French horns, you know, everything.  And when they saw me on stage, I was there with three fabulous musicians that held it down and they accepted it.
Story_ID: 598383
Speaker 1: I want to backtrack a little bit and talk about school.  We got to, we got to recapitulate the school situation?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what, what, what--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't mean that you know, when I said left it, I didn't say I never went back to school.  I meant that I didn't get a chance to go back.  I've been back to school three times since I've been grown.  Music school, educational school, you know, anytime I get a chance to learn I'm, I'm there.  But I was on my way to Fordham University [New York, New York] when I did my first album and it hit, so I had to take time off to follow this album, pursue that.
Speaker 1: Before we even go that far--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --now you went back and finished high school first, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Now how did, I mean, where did you finish it?
Speaker 2: I finished it in Westfield State Farm [Bedford Hills Correctional Facility, Bedford Hills, New York].  When you go to reformatory they make you go to school if you're a certain age, yeah.  So I graduated there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, and, so how did it--well you, what were you going to major in at Fordham?
Speaker 2: Medicine.
Speaker 1: I'm, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Medicine.
Speaker 1: Medicine?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a doctor or even, you know, somewhere in the field of medicine because I was very sickly as a child, you know, being premature and you know--a little bottle of medicine like that (demonstrates) my mother [Mary Curtis] said would cost ten dollars, that was money in those days, you know, you paid ten dollars for a little bottle of medicine like that (demonstrates) because I was sickly, you know, I was--what, what did we use to say, poorly (laughter), you know.  So I always wanted to be a healer of some kind.  I always wanted to reach out to people who didn't feel good because I never felt good when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: You must, must have been a good student too, to--
Speaker 2: I was. Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you, when you came out--
Speaker 2: I would have gone to college at sixteen, yeah, easily, easily.
Speaker 1: And so on the verge of going to college--well you made the, a record--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you said--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in order to pay for college?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the record took off.
Speaker 2: Took off.
Speaker 1: So you never got back to college?
Speaker 2: No, until later years, I went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] to--I took a course out there, an adult course at night, Piano I and II.  I took that to strengthen my music, because by that time I was so far into music and really didn't know what I was doing.  You know, I said, well, you know, wait a minute I've got to, I've got to do something to turn this around.  I must know what I'm doing.  So I went back to UCLA, they had a music course and I took it.
Speaker 1: About what year is this?
Speaker 2: This is in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: In the '80s [1980s], okay, so this is further along the road, much further along?
Speaker 2: Yeah but then--and then in the Englewood--what I was doing in Englewood, New Jersey, they had an adult course at the school of education and I went back there.  I love school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Love it.
Story_ID: 598384
Speaker 1: Now, do you--you talked about becoming a healer and a desire to become a healer.  Are you conscious of that desire when you sing?  Because your, your voice is a very soothing, I won't say healing kind of a singing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I've been told--this is by soldiers that were in Vietnam that some of my music brought them through a lot of crises.  They, they found joy.  They found some kind of, you know, some kind of solace in my voice.  Also this is very, very, very weird, but there was a kid who could not walk, the doctors said that he would not, never walk.  When we did the special ['New York 19'] with [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, we did 'Birth of the Blues' which is way up there in tempo and this kid walked.  And they brought him to me when I was working in a club and told me, said, "This--you made this kid walk."  I, well I couldn't believe that, I said, "It was the rhythm, it was the rhythm."  The rhythm probably, spiritually hit the kid and the kid started moving, but before that he had not moved.  So these are the kind of things that I, I'm experiencing through life and if they're true, you know, thank God you know, whatever I can be to, to, or be used to do that.  It's a wonderful thing.  It's nothing wrong with it.  If you can help somebody, you help them, you know.  I mean, we're--even if you don't know you're doing it, you can't know everything.  You can't know--I didn't know about this kid, if they hadn't come to tell me about this kid, I never would have known it, you know, I ran home to my mother [Mary Curtis] and I screamed.  I just couldn't, I couldn't believe it.  I just couldn't believe that something like that would happen to me, or when the soldiers told me how, you know, they were so dedicated and they had, they felt peace when, you know, when they heard my music, I said, "Well, it's doing something."
Speaker 1: So it was part of an unexpected reward (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --for artists--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in some ways that people--
Speaker 2: Plus my tonsils were taken out twice.  They were frozen then they were cut out, so, you tell me.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: They were frozen and they grew back.
Speaker 1: You had determined tonsils (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 598385
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about your celebrity following.  I've been told that quite a few of the Hollywood crowd followed you, you know, wherever you sung they would show up.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So who were they?  Ava, Ava Gardner was mentioned.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she would come catch me when I was at Birdland in New York [New York], she would come to every show.
Speaker 1: Who were some other celebrities that followed your, your act?
Speaker 2: Anthony Quinn.  I've been able--I've been blessed, I've been able to sing 'I Wish You Love' just as close as I am to you for him, he and his wife.  It's so many; it's kind of hard for me to, to--
Speaker 1: Okay, I'll take you off the spot (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and Liza Minnelli calls me, she calls me her second mommy.  That's how close I am to that family.  But you know these are things, you know, you don't, you don't brag about them, they just happen to you, you know.  It was funny because she--I went to her wedding.  In fact I, I went right through the wedding.  I went to everything, every move that was made I was there.  And when I'd walk in she'd say, "Oh, my second mommy is here."  She had people like Tony Bennett, she had people like from the (Unclear) that were there and just a whole lot of celebrities and they turned around and looked at me like, "Well who is she?"  (Laughter) "Who is she?"  You know but, that's, that's the way it happens, you know, that's life.  You never, you really never know what's going to happen to you, or who is going to happen around, or where, you know, you just--things have happened to me that I never would have dreamt.  Like people say, "Well you're living your dream."  It's not.  Most people are lying when they say they're living their dream.  Most people, things that are happening to them, they never dreamt would happen.  They never dreamt this would happen, I know I didn't.
Speaker 1: Could you imagine some of these happening, things happening?
Speaker 2: Imagine, yes, imagine.
Speaker 1: Had you, had you not been involved in art on the level?
Speaker 2: I doubt it.  I doubt very much if some of the things and the opportunities that I've had to meet people and, and, and be loved by them and I love them, I don't think so.
Story_ID: 598386
Speaker 1: I was told also kind of during the break that you were on a Billy Eckstine special too, television show?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes it's on, it's on YouTube right now, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, for those listening.
Speaker 2: That's twenty years.  Twenty years flew by.  I can't believe it.
Speaker 1: And were, were you were on a special with Della Reese [HistoryMaker Della Reese-Lett], too?
Speaker 2: No, not a special.  We have an, an album ['Della Reese and Gloria Lynne and Al Hibbler'] out together, it's back to back.  She's on one side; I'm on the other side.  Also with Lena Horne, I have one with Lena Horne ['Gloria Lynne and Lena Horne'].  Who else?  Linda Hopkins ['Linda Hopkins and Gloria Lynne'], I think that's it, as far as back to back records and these are vinyls.  These are going back.  They're not CDs.
Speaker 1: Now, now do you have a favorite song of, of yours that you've done?
Speaker 2: That I have done?
Speaker 1: What's your favorite? Yes, that, that you've sung, well do you have a favorite song period?  Do you have a favorite song that you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do.  I've never recorded it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My favorite song I've never recorded.
Speaker 1: What is it?
Speaker 2: 'How Deep Is The Ocean?'
Speaker 1: Is there a reason why you've never recorded it?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Every time I go in the studio I come out, I say, "Darn, I should have recorded that," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite song of the songs that you've recorded; that you think is your best?
Speaker 2: I love all of them.  Sometimes I just do a song, because of the bridge.  You know what the bridge is, right?
Speaker 1: Oh.  The, the music--the part, part of the music that connects you to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that connects.  It's, it's just a bridge, you know, you're, you're doing the chorus and then there's a bridge and then you do, go back to the top of the chorus.  But sometimes I just do songs just for that; just so I can get to the bridge.
Speaker 1: Is there any particular song that comes to mind where the bridge is particularly compelling?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I just recorded one, 'How to Keep the Music Playing' [sic. 'How Do You Keep the Music Playing?']
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Michel Legrand, he wrote it.
Speaker 1: How does the bridge go to that? I just want a, like just for, just for an example?
Speaker 2: (Singing) "I know the way I feel for you it's now or never.  The more I love the more that I'm afraid that in your eyes I may not see forever and ever."
Story_ID: 598387
Speaker 1: When you look at everything you've done, to this point, are you--is there anything that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: I can't really say, because I really think that I've been guided to do the things that I do.  And sometimes I, you know, I don't take credit for it.  I always say when people say, you're a singer, I say, "No, I'm not singing a note. I'm just flowing and being, being--it's, it's just coming through me," you know.  Because I hear it, I hear the notes that I make, I'm amazed too, (laughter) you know.  It blows me away too, so how can I take credit for it?  So I really don't think that I could just say, well, would I change anything because I didn't start anything, you know what I'm saying?  I didn't--I, I had the will to do it, but I mean, I, I had help and I mean and a great deal of help.  I, I guess because I'm deeply spiritual I really believe in spirits.  I had to, when I was growing up you know, I was beat damn near to death, you know, so I had a lot of time to, to reflect on people and what they do and how, and I pray a lot, you know.  Prayed when I was tiny.
Story_ID: 598388
Speaker 1: Just wanna return a minute to the lyrics.  Now do you--are you, are you actively writing songs today?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what are your themes?  What, what are you writing about?
Speaker 2: Sometimes its gospel, you know.  Sometimes it's purely spiritual.  I don't really say its gospel.  I think when you praise your maker that's it; you know what I'm saying?  It doesn't have to be gospel; it doesn't have to be secular.  It's just the words of praise.  And people say, "Are you deeply religious?" I'm not, I'm not religious in any respect.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't really
Speaker 2: Have a faith that I'm crazy about?  No.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you do feel spiritual? It's just that--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, very much so.  So maybe I'm on the plane where I'll find what it is that, it is that makes you religious, maybe I'll find that, but right now, all my life I've never--I've been looking, searching and I pray and I meditate, you know, and think on things and analyze and read the Bible, you know, take what I need from it and that I don't need, I leave it.
Speaker 1: Okay. Are you still associated with the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion church?
Speaker 2: Sometimes I go there and sometimes I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's, it's a neighborhood problem, you know, I live in Jersey [New Jersey], now they're in Manhattan and Harlem [New York, New York], so that excuses me from not being present at church on Sunday (laughter).
Story_ID: 598389
Speaker 1: What are some of your favorite musicians?  I mean you've performed with so many people and I know you've got the Kenny Burrell here and [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones, Bobby Timmons, Philly Joe Jones.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I mean, do--
Speaker 2: Masters, they're masters.
Speaker 1: Do you have any stories about any of the musicians you worked with that you could share with us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'll tell you this much, they all love to cut the fool in music.  When I say, cut the fool, I mean come out on stage and get it done.  You know, let's--we're going out here and do this show--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --very positive.
Speaker 1: Okay you're talking about some serious fool cutting?
Speaker 2: Serious, serious fool cutting, yeah.  Cut the fool largely like my mother [Mary Curtis] use to say, largely.  Because I'm lucky you know, to have worked with these musicians, lucky. I feel lucky, 'cause you learn so much from them, you draw from them, you know, I mean it's, it's amazing.
Speaker 1: Is, is it your sense that the right musicians get in the position to--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Now I've got a bunch of young musicians that work with me and one of them said to me, it was so funny, he said, "Did you write 'It's Magic'?"  'It's Magic' is from the '40s [1940s], you know, so I'm glad to contribute to that because they learned a new song.  They learned a song that, that they didn't--wasn't even--they weren't even born when it was popular.
Speaker 1: Is there any, any--I mean, how do you feel about today's music and musicians, or the direction that music is going?
Speaker 2: I hear some of them that are going to be around a long time, you know, because they're the comers.  You know, we're going, they're coming.  I hear some of them that will, will be here to bring music and to bring joy, you know, and I hear some that won't be around for a minute, you know.
Speaker 1: Who are some of your favorites today, or the ones you think are going places?  I won't ask you about the others (laughter).
Speaker 2: Singers?  I like this little girl Toni Braxton.  I like her voice, and I think she has longevity.  I like Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles] because she has a good voice, and she can always sing, you know, know what I'm saying.  I love the acting and all the stuff that has to go along with it now these days.  You have to have the whole package.  You've got to know how to dance.  You've got to do this; you've got to do that.  When I came along, it wasn't necessary.  You got in front of the mic and you sang a song to the people.  She sings; she has a good voice.  I like this little girl Alicia Keys too.  She's, she's very talented.  She's multitalented.  She writes well.  I think she's got longevity.  Like Belafonte [HistoryMaker Harry Belafonte] hipped me to it.  He--when I--when he, when he put me on the special ['New York 19'] he said, "Never worry about fame, worry about longevity," and that's what I worried about.  That's why I'm here I think.
Story_ID: 598390
Speaker 1: Now, many of the musicians and personalities that really like your music and are close to you have been involved in politics as well--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --and [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte is certainly one. [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory is another.  I know there's--
Speaker 2: We just did something in Washington [D.C.], yeah, together.
Speaker 1: Okay now, now there's a story I've been told about Dick Gregory, that--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --that you can tell us it's--?
Speaker 2: You mean when he came to my house?
Speaker 1: Yes, I think so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he came to my house and the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] came right with him.
Speaker 1: Now this is in what, nineteen sixty--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what?
Speaker 2: Sixty, around '62 [1962] or '61 [1961] or something like that.  No, no, because I didn't get my house until then. Let's see, '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Had to be, yeah.
Speaker 1: So the FBI was following him around because he was involved in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were all in the bushes outside.
Speaker 1: --Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were all in the bushes.  My mother [Mary Curtis] went out there and said, "Listen, it's cold out here," you know, "Listen, you're following this boy and this boy is going to be here for a minute.  He's going to be here for a minute, so you might as well come on inside."  They said, they said, "You think--we're not who you think we are," you know, "we're not the FBI."  And my mother, my mother said, "I know who you are.  I know who you are."  They followed him everywhere he went, everywhere he went.
Speaker 1: Did they ever come in?  Did they come in and--
Speaker 2: No, my mother said, "You come on in and have some coffee, have something to eat or something if you want to."  I think a couple of them came in.  But they followed--Dick, Dick Gregory had it hard.  He had a hard time just because he knew things you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah he was one of the most popular young black comedians around at one time, during--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.  But he was smart and he was intelligent on top of it, you know.
Speaker 1: He really became a lecturer, more of a lecturer--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --later on in the late '60s [1960s]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --on college campuses and television shows as well.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, so do you, you maintain a close relationship with Dick Gregory all these years?
Speaker 2: Well. we sort of split because he didn't know where I was staying and so this meeting that we had in Washington was really one--a reunion type thing, you know.  So now we know how to get in touch with each other.
Story_ID: 598391
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done at this point is there--what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: A highlight or something like that?
Speaker 1: Your, your, your legacy, I guess your major contribution?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm proud of the fact that with Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Mahalia Jackson, they called me, we raised sixty-four thousand dollars in one evening for the cause, you know.
Speaker 1: Now this is, when is this?
Speaker 2: This is during Martin Luther King's days, when he was here.  I'm proud of things like that.  I couldn't walk.  I said, "I cannot walk, I cannot march," I said, "but I can sing anytime you call me."
Speaker 1: Now, did, did you have trouble walking in, in those days or did you--?
Speaker 2: I just didn't like to walk.
Speaker 1: Didn't like--okay.
Speaker 2: I guess that why I'm like I am today because I don't like to walk period.
Speaker 1: Okay, now I, I've, I've heard about chapters of CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] bringing in Mahalia Jackson--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --for fund- you know, and she--for fundraising?
Speaker 2: She could raise more money in one hour than you could do in a year.  I don't know how that lady did it.
Speaker 1: So did, did you feel--so see you felt an obligation to help, know you--
Speaker 2: And I felt honored.
Speaker 1: --making contributions?
Speaker 2: I felt honored.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you know Dr. King personally?  Did you get a chance to know him?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Well what was your impression of him?
Speaker 2: He was a leader, super intelligent man, for the right thing, for peace and that's what got him killed.
Story_ID: 598392
Speaker 1: As a woman here in Harlem [New York, New York] and, well, you were in New Jersey I guess, at the time that Malcolm X was speaking, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did you ever meet him?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Well what did you think of Malcolm?
Speaker 2: Malcolm was--how would you put it--very forceful, should've listened to people around him who loved him, you know, more.  To me, he, I think he used his intelligence the wrong way, because he was super intelligent.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you think he should have done, or do you have any thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: See, in those days the Muslims, you know, they were, they were like gung ho and I just think that they should have sat down at the table, and let's talk about things you know, instead, but they were very rational, you know, they were very gung ho and if you didn't do what they said do.  You know, this is--they said that this is what happened to Malcolm, you know, they turned--Malcolm turned against them, or something, they turned--but they should have sat down and talked it out, you know.  They were just gung ho in those days, wild, you know, wild, yeah, wild, I'll put it that way, wild, too wild.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 598393
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: That's hard.  That's hard in that I know that there are whole families living in shelters, not because of dope, not because of anything--they go to work every day, and they come back to the shelter to live.  That's hard.  That's the one thing that I think--feel is very, very hard, that children--they watch their mother and father go to work and come back and they live in a shelter.  To me, that's not America.  That's not America, black or white.  You've got white families that live in the shelters.  You have black families that live in shelters; that should not be in this country.  So if I could change anything, I would start there.  I would change that immediately, and then about the starvation that we have going on in this country.  They don't talk about that, so I would start there.  Kids have no business going to bed with nothing to eat, not in this country.  Families should not live in shelters and go to work every day, because they can't afford to pay rent.  They have to live in shelters.  So if I were to be bitter about anything, I'm bitter about that because I've been homeless and I know how it feels because you can't pay your rent.  And in this country if you can't pay your rent they will put you outdoors, regardless of how old you are.  My last eviction was in Riverdale, New York [Riverdale, Bronx, New York] and I told the man I said, "I'm sixty-nine years old."  He said, "It makes no difference."  Snow was as high as this thing over here and they put me out in the streets.  So yeah, I'm kind of, kind of gung ho on that.
Speaker 1: Well such a thing sounds like a--well, not that it's not bad for everybody, but, but for you, for that to happen to you seems like such an aberration, you know, it's like--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Well, I went public with it.  I went on Channel 4 [WNBC-TV, New York, New York] because I had gotten involved with a record company that wrote checks for my, my rent and they bounced.  I couldn't blame the landlord.  He let me stay there as long as he possibly could, you know.  So I went on Channel 4 and exposed it, I had to.
Speaker 1: Okay, but, well, so this is when, how long--
Speaker 2: And Sue Simmons--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: --Bill Cosby, they paid my rent and then got me back into my apartment.
Speaker 1: Now, now this was not--that's not, that's not, that long ago (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, this been, yeah, like yesterday, like yesterday.
Story_ID: 598394
Speaker 1: I know you've, you've received quite a few honors in the last couple, couple of years now.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, god, so many, so many.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, you were honored by [U.S.] Congress--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --can, can you tell us about that?  Now, John Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.] is a big jazz fan--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he loves music.
Speaker 1: --as well as one of our--
Speaker 2: He loves music.
Speaker 1: --most conscientious congressmen, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he put me in that book of Congress [Congressional Record].
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the occasion?  How, how did he do this, what, what happened?  Tell us what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, I--
Speaker 1: It was 2007.
Speaker 2: --to tell you the truth I really don't know.  I, I went to, to--
Speaker 1: It is, it's 2007.
Speaker 2: --raise money (laughter) twice when I went to Washington, we went to raise money.  You know it, it's about raising money for funds for the needy, not greedy.  And, and then this happened to me, you know.  I guess that's the way they showed their appreciation.  It's about you know, helping the needy, you know, even if I'm needy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they--from, from what I understand, they proclaimed--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --Gloria Lynne Day?
Speaker 2: --yeah, May 23rd.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Every May 23rd is Gloria Lynne Day in Washington, D.C. (Makes sound) I'm not over it, you know, I'm just not over it yet.  I'm kind of cockeyed about it, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, I've seen the proclamation this big official--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --proclamation with--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, something.
Speaker 1: --the congressional seal on it and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And then it's in the, the book of Congress.  And they have to go on the floor and, and, and state this, you know.  They have to get up in Congress and state this.  He had to say, "I, Congressman John Conyers say that [HistoryMaker] Gloria Lynne," such and such and such and whatever.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: Now, could you dream that that would happen?  You see that's--people don't dream that.  Like a lot of people say, "Oh, listen I'm living my dream."  That's not true, you cannot dream that your name would be nowhere in the book of Congress.  How can--how you going to dream that.  You can't dream that.  That's not a dream.
Speaker 1: So then I, I heard that you had bipartisan--
Speaker 2: Or that there would be a day named--I have a day in New York [New York] and what day is that, September 27th is my day in New York.  I have a day in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I think that's in October. Now I have one in Washington, D.C. named after me, nobody dreams that, nobody.
Speaker 1: And, and you get bipartisan support too from what I understand (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Sigh) No.
Story_ID: 598395
Speaker 1: I just want to backtrack a little bit and pick up--we were talking about you being the clerk for the County of Bergen [Bergen County, New Jersey], you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --at one time and how many other jobs have you had that were not related to singing?
Speaker 2: Oh a slew of them.  First of all I, I started doing temporary work.  You know, when you temp--when you work temp you might be on one job for a week, another job for another, but it gave me a lot of experience, so when I started getting weary of it I took one job permanently--Bank of America [Bank of America Corporation].
Speaker 1: Now, this is--
Speaker 2: --I worked in the headquarters, not in the bank, in the headquarters.
Speaker 1: --this is in California?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you had initially gone to California to--
Speaker 2: To do a record for the record company that folded when I got there.  (Laughter) It just went kaput.
Speaker 1: So here is [HistoryMaker] Gloria Lynne doing temp work--
Speaker 2: Yeah, temp work.
Speaker 1: --in California.
Speaker 2: And I had a record on the charts then, the record that I did for them.  After I did the record they went out of business, but that record charted.
Speaker 1: What--I know, as we, we were talking during the break, we and the, the multitude who are here (laughter) about the, about the fact that something, I guess, with all the public honor there's no, that there's no financial compensation for it, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I mean you get, you get--you have all these days named for you and people love you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you are recognized all over the world, but there's no, no, nobody saying, well, let's make sure Gloria Lynne's rent is paid for the rest of her life--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --which is what they do in some countries.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: They actually do that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but do you have any ideas about what, what would be ideal, you know, in this, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, I wish it would change, I mean not just so much for myself, but for artists that are coming in the business, I mean you hate to think that because you were ripped off, or because you were not treated fairly that everybody else is going to be treated--I wish there was a way that they would just be able to seize that, stop it.  You know, make sure that artists get what they're supposed to get.  If they can do the work then they should be compensated, that's what I would love to see and that's why I love John Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.] so much because he is trying to stop this.  He's trying to get in there and get it somewhere where people are protected.  See, there's no protection.  There's really no protection in this business.  If you get a bad manager who steals from you, he can go la la, you know.  If you get a record company that steals from you, they can go la la.  See, there's no law that governs that situation.  So I would love to see something like that happen, you know, in fact, I would go to [U.S.] Congress and ask them, plead, I'd plead and ask, please, see that these artists get what, you know, what they've work for.  So many of them die and they don't have any money.  They don't have any insurance.  They don't--it's very bad.  It's really very bad.
Speaker 1: I think I read somewhere, well in fact, I heard it on public radio that there was not a single recording artist in the United States that hasn't been cheated by record companies.
Speaker 2: Honest to god, it's terrible.  It's really terrible.  And I don't understand it because they make enough money.  It's a lot of money.  Records bring a lot of money to the--not only to the company, but there's enough for the artist.  Now, there are certain artists, I don't know they've got that we don't have, or, you know, but they get paid.  Their royalty checks would--is enough money that you've never seen before in your life.  You know how I found out about royalties, really?  I did a song called "Sweet Pumpkin" in my first album ['I'm Glad There Is You'].  Ronnell Bright wrote it.  Ronnell's first check--now this is one song in an album, he only had one song in that album--his first check was seventeen thousand dollars.  I hadn't seen a dime, for that one song.
Speaker 1: Now how did that happen, now, that he gets--?
Speaker 2: Because he wrote it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the, the songwriter is guaranteed a certain amount of compensation--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they get--
Speaker 1: --that the artists--?
Speaker 2: --they get paid and the publishers, they get paid.  He called me--he wasn't calling me up to, to boast, he just called me up to thank me.  And I said, oh geez, I said--he said seventeen thousand dollars was his first check off that album.  He had one song on that album.
Speaker 1: So is there any--how does that breakdown I guess, politically or even racially?  I mean is there a--do you see any, any correlation between who gets paid and who doesn't?
Speaker 2: It must be, I just haven't figured that out yet because there are artists that are getting paid.  I mean, not every artist in the world is, is--you take--you think Elton John don't get paid for his music?  Elvis Presley is dead and he's still getting paid for his music.  He's dead, so.
Speaker 1: So, so do you think that we, we--what we need to--?
Speaker 2: It needs to be put before the--it needs--I don't know if it's the government. I guess it's the government, yeah, it needs to go to the government and say, "Here, look at this, look at this."
Speaker 1: You're saying it's the industry that needs to be regulated?
Speaker 2: It needs to be--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --because this industry has no government thing as far as--when I went--you know I get social security because I'm old enough to get it, okay.  When I went to get my social security, they said they could not believe how much money I was going to get, because they never reported my social security, so they couldn't--they were amazed.  They said, "Miss Lynne, we can't believe this."
Speaker 1: They couldn't believe the--
Speaker 2: That's how it affects--that's why I say it's a governmental--it needs to be handled by the government.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 598396
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family.  Now, you're no longer married are you, or are you?
Speaker 2: No, my husband [Harry Alleyne] is dead.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we were separated, and we were divorced.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we remained friends.  He was my buddy, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you have a son who's a musician, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Well tell us about him?  What's his name?
Speaker 2: His name is P.J.  They call him P.J.  His name is Richard Alleyne, but they call him P.J. [P.J. Alleyne].
Speaker 1: Okay, and he's an arranger and a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he produces.  He plays guitar, plays a little trumpet, he--because he grew up around music.  He always was taking some kind of music in school, so he has all that under his belt.  The only thing that I'm kind of--I'm not bitter about it, but, because I've learned to live with it, but the diploma that he has, he can't take to no agency, you know, he went to School for Young Professionals [New York, New York].  He graduated with--the same school that Miles Davis' son went to, they came up together.  P.J can't take that diploma nowhere, so my money that I spent on him, to educate him in this business is just gone down the drain.
Speaker 1: What, the school was not accredited or something?
Speaker 2: It was accredited school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's still in New York [New York]; it's called School for Young Professionals.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He can't use that to go to any agency--excuse me or get a record contract, or anything.  If he doesn't do it on his own, it's not going to be done.  So when I do seminars and I speak to mothers, I say, "Be careful how you educate your children.  Make sure that you're educating them so that they don't have to go through problems with this diploma that you're trying to get them."  I'm a living witness.
Story_ID: 598397
Speaker 1: Now is, is there anything I have not asked you that we need to touch upon before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Oh we've got to that part?  I'm just getting into it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh.  Well we don't have to--
Speaker 2: Bless your heart.
Speaker 1: --we can come back (laughter) and do some more.
Speaker 2: Bless your heart.
Speaker 1: We can come back and do some more.  But is, is there anything, or that you think I should have asked that I haven't asked, or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Is our gallery have any questions here that (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, maybe the gallery has--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You could tell him the Redd Foxx story.
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  About Redd Foxx.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm hearing something about a Redd Foxx story.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  About your mother [Mary Curtis] and you being mad at him (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Oh I hated him.  I hated him.
Speaker 2: What--
Speaker 1: She's talking about Redd Foxx, you know, I, I traveled with him, you know we did, I think sixteen, sixteen cities back to back.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well Redd Foxx was a really into--this is when he was doing his albums.  He had the most gaudy albums and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --they were called blue material, yeah.
Speaker 1: But this--you know I was a teenager when that happened to me.  That was with The Delltones and we were playing some blues joint out in Jersey [New Jersey] and Redd Foxx was head, headlining the bill, you know, we were just there, like background for him (laughter).
Speaker 2: He was at his raunchiest then, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So that's, that's before--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --he went on television and such, so--
Speaker 1: And my mom came--
Speaker 2: --so what's the--?
Speaker 1: --my mom came to see us, so I looked up in the audience and my mother was just all over the place.  She was just (makes sound), just laughing and carrying on.  I had never seen my mother come out of herself like that in my life over nothing.  So I hated him, you know.  I just went back and told him, I said, "Who are you to make my mother laugh and, and, and come unglued like that."  I just couldn't, I couldn't--when you're a kid like you're something else, you know.  He--I can't tell you what he said about my mother (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, don't.
Speaker 1: He used the F word about my mother.  He said, you know, hey, (laughter).  So we ended up being very good friends though, that's how we met.  I told him, I said, "You can't make my mother laugh like that, my mother is a--." She was, she was country, but she was sophisticated, if you understand what I mean.  And I had never seen her act that way, you know, and Redd Foxx was the cause of it.  He made her laugh and she was crying and (makes sound) and flying all over--legs was flying all over.  I said, "No, this is--you can't do this.  You can't do this to my mother," you know.  But he ended up being my buddy.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: That is a good story (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, we ended up being good friends.
Speaker 2: That's quite a story.
Speaker 1: Yeah, if I needed a dollar I'd go to him and get it, you know, yeah.  That's how good we ended up.
Story_ID: 598398
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So any other stories about celebrities that we--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: It's in--did I bring you a book?  I brought you a book, right?
Speaker 1: I didn't get it yet.
Speaker 2: It's in the book.  It's in the book.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But anyway I was, you know, Ray Charles, when I was touring with him, he wanted to know--he asked my manager, said, "How does Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Lynne] travel?"  So he said, "She travels commercial," you know.  He said, "I've got a plane; they can fly on the plane with us."  So my group, Earl May and Grassella [Grassella Oliphant] and Herman Foster, we all got on the plane.  We were very grateful, you know, for him to take us on, on the plane with him.  He had his own pilot and stuff.  And his whole band was on there, so it was kind of fun.  And one day I looked and Ray was nowhere to be found on the plane.  I knew that he should have been on the plane.  So I said, "Where is Ray?"  They said, "He's up in the cockpit."  So I said, "Doing what?"  They said, "He's up there flying the plane.  He flies the plane with the--." I got up, went to the cockpit and there he was flying with this--with his pilot.  I saw this with these two (points to her eyes).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So did that--was that an unsettling experience?
Speaker 2: I never flew with him again.  I couldn't wait to get off that plane.  Even though the, the flight was smooth, I can't say anything bad about the flying, and Ray was having a ball.  He had the thing.  He was handling it.
Story_ID: 598399
Speaker 1: There's got to be some, some more, now how (laughter)--I'm looking at our gallery here and I think they, they--are there more stories we need to talk about?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  She was so sick.  I went to see her--that was at--on Amsterdam [Avenue] and (unclear).  What's that jazz club?
Speaker 1: It's a one name club, isn't it?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes, it was the very well known jazz club and Jon Voight came to see you and (unclear).  When we told her that he was there, he'd, he'd just won an Academy Award [Oscar] and she was excited.  She was so sick, she had a fever and they didn't think she was going to be able to perform that night.
Speaker 1: The place was packed.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And do you want to tell the rest about that show?
Speaker 1: Well, what happened?  I don't know, what happened?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And when you went up there--
Speaker 1: Tell me (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --and there were standing ovations every song, he fell in love with you and then after that--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Took you out to eat.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --we went to Suttons [ph.] and--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, we, yeah--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --we, we were there until five--he was supposed to catch a plane at six o'clock in the morning to go back to California.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we took him to go get chicken and waffles.  We took him to Harlem [New York, New York].  So now when time comes to pay, you know, he, he says--he went in his pocket and took out his, his credit card and this particular card--Suttons, was on 155th Street and, and St. Nicholas Avenue.  They didn't take credit cards.  He was so--the man turned red as a beet.  He said, "Oh my Lord," he says, "What am I--?"  So I said, "Well, you--we'll pay for it, you know."  He didn't have a dime, big star.
Speaker 2: Jon Voight, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, big star, walking around with just a credit card and a few pennies.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, is there anything else we need to mention before we close out this session?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I don't know if you want to tell him about Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Chicago, please tell, tell us about Chicago?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: What, what about Chicago?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  We, you know, what you told me to do.  You told me to stand by.  Do you want them to know that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, okay, okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: All right.
Story_ID: 598400
Speaker 1: Well, my last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, like most people, a good person and followed the path; made some people happy, you know; helped some people while I was helping myself.  I really would like to be remembered that way, as very spiritual.
Speaker 1: All right, well thank you so much for sharing with us (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, thank you.
