Story_ID: 614214
Speaker 1: --The interviewer for The HistoryMakers and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] David Lattin, L-A-T-T-I-N, last name.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Lee.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Twelve, twenty-three, forty-three [December 23, 1943].
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm in the on premise department at Republic Beverage [Republic National Distributing Company, LLC], which means we advertise all the new brands.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: It's right here in Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Is 05/11/2010 [May 11, 2010].
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 614215
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: What is it?
Speaker 2: Red.  And I'd like to elaborate on that a little bit.  If anybody went to my house and looked they would never think red is my favorite color because everything is in black and white, but red is a bold color and if they read my book, 'Slam Dunk to Glory' [David Lattin], they would know that Lloyd [Lloyd C.A. Wells] was my mentor and he was into red and so red is the color.  It's a very bold and bodacious color.  It just means something good, red does.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food?  What do you like to eat?
Speaker 2: Fish and the, the fish of choice is salmon.
Speaker 1: And what about your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: The summer, the summer months is my favorite time of the year.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like Mexico and Hawaii.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: The judge (laughter) and sometimes I relate to everyone as the judge and people have--are not used to it, kind of dumbfounded by it; they don't really know what, exactly what it means, but let's get into that later.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 614216
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your family and I'd like to begin with your mother and her side of the family.  Can you tell me your mother's name and where she was born and when, if you know?
Speaker 2: She was born in 1903.
Speaker 1: What is her name?
Speaker 2: Elsie, Boyd [Elsie Boyd Davis] is her maiden name, B-O-Y-D.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: Just outside of Shreveport, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother.  Did she share any stories with you about her growing up in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: You know, not really.  We didn't talk about it that much, but she was a sweet person and she was the secretary of the church and she was always trying to help everybody.  I mean, she would take food to people in need, or people in the hospital and she would always, always try to help and she was just a very, very, very, very sweet person.
Speaker 1: Do you know--did she attend school?
Speaker 2: She did, she went to the third grade until she, she dropped to work.
Speaker 1: And what type of work before she started working at the church, do you know what she did when she was coming up before she started working at the church?
Speaker 2: That's all I remember is her being the secretary at the church and that was her only employment that I know about.
Speaker 1: All right.  What about your grandparents, your mother's mother and father?
Speaker 2: You know I didn't know much about them.  They had, were all--they had all passed before, before I was born, so we didn't discuss it.  We didn't talk about it very much.  And so that was just something that we just kind of slipped by, slipped in, through the cracks I assume.
Speaker 1: Do you know their names?
Speaker 2: Josephine [Josephine Boyd (ph.)] was my mother's mother's name and John [John Boyd (ph.)].
Story_ID: 614217
Speaker 1: All right.  What about your father, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Courtney Lattin and--
Speaker 1: Where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Shreveport [Louisiana] as well and he passed when I was six.
Speaker 1: Do you know whether there was a story about how your mother [Elsie Boyd Davis] and father met?
Speaker 2: I don't know and we never talked about it, so I, I, I don't know how they met.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about your grandparents on your father's side?
Speaker 2: I didn't know them and I don't, I don't know their names and so I never had contact with them and I'm sure they apparently had passed before I was born as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, tell me, tell me about your father and what he did for a living and what your relationship was like with him?
Speaker 2: It was minimal because he worked on the railroad and wasn't home very much and so we, we did have a bond but it wasn't, we never had a chance to really bond because he was--I was six when he passed away.
Speaker 1: What do you remember most about your dad?
Speaker 2: That he was a guy who smoked a cigar and sat on the sofa and told stories and he was a jolly guy, he was a nice guy, a nice person, got along with everybody from what I could tell and, and that's about it, I mean, he used to sit me on his lap and read stories, but that's about all, that's about it.
Story_ID: 614218
Speaker 1: Do you think that you received any characteristics from your mother [Elsie Boyd Davis] and father [Courtney Lattin], what would they be?
Speaker 2: From my mother, yes; my father, no; my mother, yes, kindness and respecting others and not allowing little things--she never allowed little things to bother her and she never carried a grudge and so those are the things that I learned from my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you grew up in, in Houston [Texas].  Now I want you to tell me about the earliest childhood memory that you can think of.  What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well, I just remember you know, you know, some of the things like walking to school with the, with the other kids in elementary school and, and talking and having to deal with all the, all the things that little kids have to deal with when they walk, go back and forth to school and not having any sisters and brothers to talk to, you know, and just with having to deal with my friends.  I just, I kind of remember that, walking to school in the cold, in the rain and the bad weather and, and just having friends and not having brothers and sisters.
Story_ID: 614219
Speaker 1: So what were some of the things that you did since you didn't have any siblings?  How did you occupy your time?
Speaker 2: Well, just doing the little things that kids do.  I wasn't--there wasn't much television during those days.  There was a little TV, black and white, went off at, at midnight, you know, then this big thing would come over the TV and it, then it was out, so there wasn't that much TV to look at, so my mother [Elsie Boyd Davis] was, always had a book in front of me when I was at home after I finished playing with the other kids in the evening she always brought me a book.  She thought it was important that I learn to read and try to do well in school.
Speaker 1: What type of books did you like to read?
Speaker 2: It seems like the ones, the ones that as a youngster you know, I would read what youngsters read, you know, comic books, some were comic books and sort of reading the textbooks.  I got to tell you more about the textbooks.  When I was a little kid the, the African American kids got the torn up textbooks that the white kids were throwing away and so we all, we were always reading behind so to speak you know, but, but they were still reading and reading was so very important, so.  I just remember reading those books as well.
Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about the time let's say between the--this age, young age, as early as you can remember up to age twelve, which will take us through elementary school [Blackshear Elementary School, Houston, Texas].  Tell me about the community in which you lived; if you could, take me on a, a, on a tour of a square block of your home, what, what would, what would we see?
Speaker 2: Well, there was, there was lined streets with trees and lawns, everybody cut their grass.  My mother was renting at the time and it was a, a decent neighborhood.  There wasn't much crime, black on black crime there and I just remember playing with the kids in the neighborhood all the time.  I remember also, there was a (Unclear) park that was probably about half a mile from where I lived, where the big boys were playing basketball and we use to, the little boys, use to go to, to the gym and sat and watched the big guys play and as the gym would close late in, in the evening at about 9:00, 9:30, we would get a chance to play, get a chance to throw the ball around out there for about ten minutes and then the gym would close and we'd have to go home.  There were only two, two baskets, so you know, the little boys had to watch the big boys play.  I just, I remember that very, very well until I was big enough to play.
Speaker 1: So how old were you before you were able to play?
Speaker 2: I remember in the eighth grade I, for instance, I went out for the basketball team in the eighth grade and got cut and so I was, I was hurt big time.  I said, "Hey wait a minute."  I went home and told my mom, I said, "What's up with this?  They cut me on the team, cut, I mean, I can't, I'm not going to be able to play."  She said, "Well, relax; try again next year," you know.  That was her attitude, you know, it was very positive.  "Don't worry about it, you'll get better, you'll get bigger and stronger, you'll be better." It's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you had--I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: No, go ahead.
Speaker 1: So you had to be probably twelve or thirteen before you were allowed to play?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Correct, we couldn't play (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 614220
Speaker 1: Well, okay, we're still on this tour around your house (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of your friends in the neighborhood?  Do you remember who any of your neighbors were or the friends that you played with?
Speaker 2: I do remember there was--I had a friend who lived maybe three, two blocks, a block and a half away, his dad was a postman and then I remember all the kids that we use to play with, we use to play football out in an open field so to speak, close to where we, where we lived and, and in the summer we--there was a place called Polar Ice [Polar Wave Ice Skating Palace, Houston, Texas], it was an ice skating rink where we weren't allowed to skate there, but we were allowed to go make money, help clean the ice.  We would skate and clean the ice and scrape it down and put water on it and make it ready for the, for the Caucasians who were going to, could play, could play there, could skate, but we, we couldn't, but we could you know, we earned a living--not a living, but we earned some pocket money for doing it, for doing that.  I remember that very well.
Speaker 1: What about the stores in your neighborhood?  Who owned the stores?
Speaker 2: Jewish people owned the stores.  Jewish people owned all the grocery stores and mostly--they didn't have convenience stores like they do now with service stations, that's, that's later, but they don't, they didn't have those kind of stores, so they were just small, maybe one or two of those in an area that, that you could walk to.  So they were the ones that owned the stores.
Speaker 1: Do you remember whether your, your friends that you played with, the people that lived in your neighborhood had both parents in the home?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, they did.  I remember clearly that they had both parents in the home.  In fact, probably, I want to say 95 percent of them had both parents in the home.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what other professions they might have been in; you said one of your friends' fathers was a postman?
Speaker 2: One was a postman.  The other--there was, there was some guys, two of them, I remember their dad did construction work.  There were three of them where their parents--one parent was a teacher and those are the professions I, I remember very well.
Story_ID: 614221
Speaker 1: Were there any other extracurricular activities that you were involved in, maybe like the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] or did you, was there a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was, I did, I was a Boy Scout and I did go to the YMCA, in fact, the YMCA was another, was a place, another outlet where we could play basketball.  They had two goals there.  You know, they had six goals, I take that back, they had six goals there so there were plenty of baskets to play on there.  I remember going--my mother [Elsie Boyd Davis] would make sure I got to the Y as I got older.  So yes, the YMCA and, and I was a Boy Scout as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you remember anything about the Boy Scouts, or is there a story about being a scout?
Speaker 2: You know, just that we, on, on Saturdays we would go to Camp Strake [Montgomery County, Texas], that's the one that's still here now that the Boy Scouts go to.  On the weekends, you know, we would go down there maybe one weekend out of--every two or three months and spend the weekend down there.  We would cook the wieners on a stick and we would play around with each other during the day and they would, you know, it was just a, just a fun deal.  It was nice being around the other kids and we just had fun like that.  Probably fifty, sixty young boys at a time would be there.
Story_ID: 614222
Speaker 1: Now we're still talking about elementary school age.  Tell me about school.  What elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Blackshear Elementary School, that's here in Houston, Texas and still there believe, believe it or not.
Speaker 1: And so tell me about your experience?  What type of student were you?
Speaker 2: You know I, I--you know I wanted to play, you know.  I wanted to play and so it was kind of tough to get me to concentrate because I wanted to play all the time.  I had a lot of play in me.  I was always playing and so I was an average student, I mean I did--you know, my mother [Elsie Boyd Davis] was always on my, on me about you know, getting the homework done and making sure that I did fairly well in school.  So I was probably average.  I remember being an average, average student.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of your teachers?  Was there anybody who was influential in your life that was (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember anybody special in elementary school, high school [Evan E. Worthing High School, Houston, Texas] I did, but not in elementary school.
Speaker 1: In elementary school were there any activities that you were in inside the school?
Speaker 2: No, we just wanted to get out of school and get--watch the big boys play basketball (laughter).
Speaker 1: During this time was religion a part of your household?
Speaker 2: Big time, you know, my mother, you know, I was in church at least between three and four nights every week; I mean, prayer meeting, choir rehearsal.  There was--I spent most of my time at the church in the evening when she got off from work; I mean, that's basically what we did all day on Sundays, you know, Mondays and Tuesdays and Thursdays, I mean we were always in the church, always in the church.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church that you attended?
Speaker 2: St. John Baptist Church on Dowling [St. John Missionary Baptist Church on Dowling, Houston, Texas], still there.
Story_ID: 614223
Speaker 1: Moving on to--well before we move on, let me ask you this: if, if you had to think of a sound or a smell, or a sight that would take you back to that time, what would you say?
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] and my mother [Elsie Boyd Davis] was, insisted that I learn to swim so I was, I use to be at, be at the pool in the summer.  So one day we were swimming at the pool and we heard a, sounded like a firecracker or something, fireworks and it went on for about ten seconds and then it, it didn't go away after about fifteen or twenty seconds and then, then I saw everybody running and getting out of the pool and running, running down to the corner and what I--what I didn't know then there was that Black Panthers were in the building and the police officers, the white police officers were, were shooting inside the building.  Not only were they shooting bullets, they were shooting teargas as well and so I, I can remember the smell from the, from the teargas.  It was awful and I remember the, the gunshots.  I could see the police officers and, and they were ducking because the, the Black Panthers were shooting out and they were shooting in and then the building caught fire after about five or six minutes, the building caught fire and then my mother came and got me and then we were off and she said we're out of here, we're gone, you know, let's go and I just remember that smell, awful smell from teargas.  I don't know if anybody--if you ever smelled teargas it's a horrible smell; so I just remember that very well.
Story_ID: 614224
Speaker 1: Now, moving on to junior high school or middle school, what was the name of the school that you attended?
Speaker 2: Miller [William E. Miller Junior High School, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Miller and tell me about your experience there?
Speaker 2: Well, I got cut in the eighth grade.  I was at Miller.  And we use to bus from like Sunnyside [Houston, Texas] probably about fifteen miles to Miller and then they built a school when I was going to the ninth grade--that was the eighth grade, and then they built a new school in my, that was closer to where I lived.  It was called Attucks [Crispus Attucks Junior High School; Crispus Attucks Middle School, Houston, Texas].  And so when they built Attucks, then that gave me a chance to, to play--to get in and play in, in the ninth grade.  So in the ninth grade I ended up being the best junior high school basketball player in the City of Houston [Texas] and then I just grew; overnight I grew from 6' to 6'6", to what I am now.  I use to be 6'6".  I'm 6'5" now, but I grew to 6'6" in one summer (laughter).  And then all of a sudden, now, you know, I'm this, this, this great junior high school basketball player, I'm doing very well.  I did very well, the best player in the city.  And so, well okay, I'll let you go; that's, that's where we ended up and I ended up being the best player in the city in basketball and I won a 50 yard dash and all that other stuff, but it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were very active in sports?
Speaker 2: I was very active because I, you know, I learned after I got cut, I found out, I realized that I had to get better and I had to get in shape so, running the stairs at Rice Stadium [Houston, Texas] and riding my bicycle over there and running seventeen hundred stairs a day really made my legs very strong and it made me a much better athlete.
Speaker 1: So okay, this was the summer before you went to high school?
Speaker 2: To, to Attucks.
Speaker 1: To Attucks.
Speaker 2: Junior high--I was in the ninth--from the eighth to the ninth grade.
Speaker 1: So that's when you decided to--?
Speaker 2: That summer.
Speaker 1: That summer, okay--now, you talked about sections, I just want to go back and, and just fill in some blanks here.  You said Sunnyside, so Sunnyside is a section (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Houston, in Houston, it's on the other--its south, it's Southeast Houston.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's where you lived?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay and you were bused to another part of town?
Speaker 2: Before then we were bused from--my mother [Elsie Boyd Davis] had a house built in Sunnyside, okay, and so when she had the house built they didn't have a school close to where, where we were living, so we had to--all the kids bused back to Third Ward [Houston, Texas] where I was going--Sunnyside to the Third Ward to where, to where I was going before, so they use to bus us in.  Then they built a new school and so the new school was closer, so we, that's when I went to Attucks and actually it worked out okay for me because it gave me a chance to play.  The, the talent got thinned out you know, and it gave me, gave me a chance to play and that, that was a good thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you moved from one neighborhood to another.  Were you living--you said you were--originally your parents were renting a house and then your mother bought a house and--?
Speaker 2: She, she built it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She built it?
Speaker 2: --had built it brand new, brand new house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, and it was really something for an African American lady who was just a secretary.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell me what year was this that you entered into junior high school?
Speaker 2: Let's see, we're talking about I want to say the late '50s [1950s], '58 [1958], '59 [1959], somewhere there, somewhere in there; or maybe about '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: Okay, in 1955 you were thirteen going to the seventh or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: --eighth grade at, at Miller?
Speaker 2: At Miller.
Speaker 1: Okay, that was '55 [1955], okay.
Speaker 2: So we, we won a state championship in high school when I was sixteen in 1962, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did it (unclear)?
Speaker 2: --we're talking about two years later, so probably we're talking about '60 [1960], '60 [1960] somewhere, '61 [1961] or '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: Okay, now because you didn't have any brothers and sisters, did you have cousins that were close to you?
Speaker 2: I did not have cousins, just the boys in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Story_ID: 614225
Speaker 1: Now you, you said very quickly about how, how you built up your stamina, stamina to be able to, to play the following year during that summer that you grew.  Can you tell me again, you, you said you rode your bike to--
Speaker 2: Rice Stadium [Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Rice Stadium, okay--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and what did you do?
Speaker 2: Ran seventeen hundred stairs a day in the sun at about two o'clock in the afternoon.  I knew nothing about nutrition.  I don't know why I didn't pass out (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you were ready once you got to the new school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because it was--and actually even though I was running the stairs I was playing basketball as well, so I was getting my skills together and I was getting stronger and then I found out I could jump and then the rest is history.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now, what high school do you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to Worthing [Evan E. Worthing High School, Houston, Texas], Attucks [Crispus Attucks Junior High School; Crispus Attucks Middle School, Houston, Texas] first and then--Attucks was Worthing and then they built another, a bigger high school, senior high school and that was Worthing, so I left Attucks and went to Worthing.
Speaker 1: And tell my about the experience there?
Speaker 2: At Worthing?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It was a good experience for me because in the eleventh grade, when I got to the eleventh grade then I was high school All-American and I was the first high school All-American from the State of Texas in basketball at that level and so things started to really happen for me after that because the day that I was All-American, yeah, I got to tell you this story.  They was announcing that I was All-American, the principal announced on the PA system that, you know, "We have an All-American in our school in basketball and it's Big D [HistoryMaker David Lattin]" and all that stuff you know, so everybody was--had a great time with that and so I got home that afternoon and somebody had called my mom [Elsie Boyd Davis] and gave her this pitch about I was the high school All-American, so I had my feet propped up on the coffee table and she walked in the door, she said--I'll never forget this, this is funny, she said, "Okay, Mr. High School All, All-American, it's okay that you are high school All-American, but get your foot off my coffee table."  I said, "Yes ma'am, yes ma'am, yes ma'am."  (Laughter), "You still can't put your foot on my coffee table."
Speaker 1: Your mother, was she very supportive?  Did she come to your games?
Speaker 2: My mother never saw me play but once when I was playing for the Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters].  If I told my mother that--she couldn't tell you what a rebound was.  She knew nothing about the game, didn't really care.  All she cared about was that I was having fun and I was happy, so she knew nothing about the game at all.
Speaker 1: Did your grades get better?
Speaker 2: My grades did improve.  There was a teacher by the name of Ms. Douglas [ph.] in high school and she was an English teacher and she was quite serious about making good grades, about everybody making good grades, so she would stay back and make sure that all the athletes, not just me, but other athletes as well, if they weren't studying like they were suppose to then she would make sure that, that they got their homework together before they left school.  And actually she would stay until after basketball practice was over and we would go down in her room and she would, she would work with everybody, make sure that everybody got their grades together; because it was very stressful going to school, being an athlete and then having to--and the last thing you felt like doing was studying after practice, so you know, it's very difficult.  The athletes have to, have to, they have to compete in the classroom the same, just like everybody else, there's no excuse.
Speaker 1: Were there rules in place that said that athletes had to have a certain average?
Speaker 2: No, there was, there were no rules in place that they had to, but everyone was aware that they, that that's this was what they needed to do.  I mean, the guy--the kids were not like the kids are now, you know, you could talk to us, you know.  If somebody said something that made sense, I mean, most, most of us would listen, so, it's nothing like it is now.
Story_ID: 614226
Speaker 1: You spent most of your time playing basketball.  Let me ask you, when was the very first time you got your first basketball?
Speaker 2: My own basketball?  I, I guess when I got my own basketball when I was in the ninth grade [Crispus Attucks Junior High School; Crispus Attucks Middle School, Houston, Texas]; when I had my own ball.  Yeah, my mom [Elsie Boyd Davis] bought me a ball, so I had my own ball.  But the, but the other part of that story is that there was still no place to play because we didn't play outside.  We, didn't, we--no one played outside, like they do in New York [New York], right, the guys play outside.  We didn't play outside.  We played in the gym.  If we didn't play in the gym we didn't play.  So, even though you got a basketball, you still got to have a gym, you know, you still need a basket to shoot on, so.
Speaker 1: So tell me what else happened during your high school years [Evan E. Worthing High School, Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: In reference to, to--
Speaker 1: To anything that happened, academically--?
Speaker 2: It was, most of it was athletic, you know.  I won the high jump as a--and I won, I won the district and I was defeated by a guy who I beat in the district at the same height, at about 6'5" and I won the 50 yard dash when I was in the, in the ninth grade and, and it was all about athletics, about sports.
Story_ID: 614227
Speaker 1: Okay so you had not--okay.
Speaker 2: But I knew of him. I knew of him because he was such a great player (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay so what we are talking about is the fact that you do have a half-brother?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was his name?
Speaker 2: Roland.
Speaker 1: Roland?
Speaker 2: Lattin.
Speaker 1: Lattin [Roland Lattin].  Okay, but you didn't get to know him until when?
Speaker 2: Until I was in the eleventh--tenth or eleventh grade [at Evan E. Worthing High School, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: I mean, he was actually on his way out then at another school across town.
Speaker 1: And you had some distant cousins as well?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but we, you know we weren't--I did, but we weren't close.
Speaker 1: And can you tell me why your mother [Elsie Boyd Davis] wanted you to learn how to swim?
Speaker 2: Yes, because all of my cousins had drowned, you know, and so she, she was petrified that in the beginning that I didn't know how to swim and that she was so afraid that if I didn't learn to swim that I would drown as well.  And being her only son, not that she wouldn't've been excited, because she had other kids as well, but she was determined that I would learn to swim.
Speaker 1: And, and these fellas drowned in the bayou.  And we were talking about the neighborhood.  How close is a bayou to where you lived?
Speaker 2: Actually lived--miles away, I mean, Houston [Texas] was loaded with bayous so probably I want to say, I'll just say maybe five miles, six miles away--the closest one to where we lived.
Speaker 1: But children would actually go there to swim?
Speaker 2: To swim, absolutely.
Speaker 1: But you had a city pool that (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had a pool as well.  I had a pool as well, but you know, kids will be kids, you know, especially boys, not girls, the boys.
Story_ID: 614228
Speaker 1: So now when you get to--you're in high school [Evan E. Worthing High School, Houston, Texas], in high school, are you preparing to, to go to college?  Is, is someone encouraging you to go to school?  Are you looking at basketball as your way to go to, to college?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely.  In fact, if I had to--if I didn't have a scholarship I couldn't have gone, so, I, I knew--and after being All-American, I knew I was going to college and I knew I was going to get a scholarship, I mean, I had over three hundred offers, I mean, and people was--started writing in ninth grade as high school All-American.  We started getting letters all over the place, I mean, I had, had letters of inquiry.  They were inquiring about who I was and I'm telling you right now, I got one from the University of--I got one from Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee].  They had no idea I was African American.  They were just recruiting All-Americans.  They didn't know I was a black guy.  If you read my book ['Slam Dunk to Glory,' David Lattin], it said, it talked about Adolph Rupp said, "You'd think they would have put an asterisk by this guy's name to let us know he's a black guy and this is not who I want," (laughter).  So anyway--
Speaker 1: Okay, so let's, let's talk a little bit more about that.  Tell me what All-American means?
Speaker 2: All-American means that--it's quite simple, is that you did something better than the players below you, so to speak, you know and that you averaged more points, you got more rebounds, your team won more games and you were the leader because you can't--you have to be the leader to be an All-American, if not the leader then you can't be All-American.
Speaker 1: And so the schools are recruiting All-Americans.  What other schools sent letters and who did you consider?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I mean I got some, I got letters from your--school in your hometown, NYU [New York University, New York, new York] a letter and USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles,, Los Angeles, California], I mean, Wichita State [Wichita State University, Wichita, Kansas], I, I mean just, everywhere that you--almost everywhere that you can name, there was--now there were some conferences where Kentucky [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] played that had no African American players there, so no, they did not try--they did not send a letter of inquiry, from them, but I did get, get letters of inquiry from, from other people, from other schools, from a lot of schools.  And I, you know, and, and my mother [Elsie Boyd Davis] was overwhelmed that all these schools were interested in her little boy.  It took her forever to get over that.  She said, "Wait a minute, just because you're playing basketball, I can't believe this."  So anyway, to answer your question is yes, there were a lot of schools interested and, and I guess some of them didn't know I was African American, they didn't know I was black.
Speaker 1: What schools were you considering though?
Speaker 2: Well, Texas Western [Texas Western College of the University of Texas; University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas] was one.  I went there to visit.  You could visit three schools then, you know, in those days and Texas Western was one.  And I'll tell you why Texas Western, out of all the places I went, is because Bad News Barnes [Jim Barnes] and, was a great basketball player there before you know, before me and he challenged me to come there, come and break all his records.  And so that intrigued me you know.  I said, you know what--and that's what, why I ended up going there.  The other thing is, is that when I was being recruited one of the things I looked for was a coach that would allow my friends, give my friends a scholarship as well.  In other words--I took--I explain that in the book, I said listen, if you want me you have to take five of my friends and they weren't basketball players, they were all football players, but I, they were good football players that played on a team that wasn't very good and so they didn't get recruited and so if I didn't take them with me they wouldn't, they would not have had a scholarship.  So I was using my strength and, to get them a scholarship as well.
Speaker 1: So tell me who these friends were?
Speaker 2: These were guys who lived in my--who basically lived in my neighborhood.
Speaker 1: I know, but tell me their names?
Speaker 2: Everett Moody [ph.], Everett Moody, John Chandler [ph.], Wilbert Jones [ph.], Robert Taylor [ph.] and Melvin Adams [ph.] and let me expand on that just a little bit.  They were all very good students and they all graduated and they were all successful and did well.
Story_ID: 614229
Speaker 1: Who was your mentor at this time?
Speaker 2: Lloyd Wells [Lloyd C.A. Wells] was a guy I met and that's another story.  I don't know if you want to hear that story or not (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, I want to hear your story.  I want to hear your story about Lloyd Wells.  How did you meet him?
Speaker 2: He was actually a friend of the principal [at Crispus Attucks Junior High School; Crispus Attucks Middle School, Houston, Texas] and he was a photographer.
Speaker 1: And tell me the principal's name as well?
Speaker 2: Allen Norton [Allen E. Norton]--and so one day when I was in the ninth grade, Allen Norton, the principal told Lloyd, he said, "Listen, would you come down to the gym?  I want you to show--I want to show you my new prospect, my new tall, skinny guy."  I was a tall, skinny guy.  "I want to show him to you, all right?"  So Lloyd came down, went to the gym to see me, to see who I was and the first thing he told--when he saw me playing with--on the B team, he said, "Listen, you have to get him off the B team to get him with the big boys.  He can't learn anything playing with the little guys.  You've got to get him with the big boys," and so the principal relayed that message to the coach.  The coach didn't like it.  He said, "No, he's not ready yet we can't--."  He said, "Get him on the varsity."  (Laughter) So anyway, to make a long story short, that, that's how I got on the varsity and again, Lloyd was taking pictures and he was a photographer for one of the local newspapers and was a sports writer as well and that's how, that's how we got to be friends, you know, he started doing stories on me and taking pictures and we got to be friends and our friendship just took off from there.  He was like--he didn't give me money like a father would give you money, you know, stuff like that, you know.  We were just good friends.  He was a mentor and I learned a lot from him and not just, I, I learned a lot from him, a lot of athletes coming along during those days learned a lot from him.  He was friends with a lot of guys; Otis Taylor for instance, who was all, all-pro wide receiver for the Kansas City Chiefs for years was also a--Lloyd was also his mentor as well; and Warren McVea, so anyway, there's probably thirty guys and also a mentor for Muhammad Ali (laughter), if you can believe that, but anyway, that's another story.  I'll tell you about that later I guess.
Speaker 1: So who's idea was this, I mean was it your idea to bring your friends along, you know, to college, I mean to get them scholarships?
Speaker 2: That was my idea and I mentioned that to Lloyd.  I said, "You know Lloyd these guys are not going to school, man, if I can't get them in."  So, he said, "Hey, I think, I think it's a good idea if you can use your strength to bring, to bring them along then why not, you know, do what, do what you have to do," and that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they all went to--
Speaker 2: We all went to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] together (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Tennessee, Tennessee State.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Tennessee State.
Story_ID: 614230
Speaker 1: Tell me about your first year?  Well, let me ask you, did you go to your high school prom [at Evan E. Worthing High School, Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: And tell me, tell me about that?
Speaker 2: I, I took Miss Wheatley, Arnetta Faine [Willie Arnetta Faine Boson] was her name, very, very beautiful young lady and she and I went together.  I don't remember how we got hooked up, but she was Miss, Miss Wheatley and that was good.
Speaker 1: Now, let me see, you graduate in 1963, is that right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: How did you prepare the summer before you went off to college?  What was going on during that time?
Speaker 2: Well, I was--first of all it took the entire summer to decide where I was going to go and I really didn't make up my mind until the last minute to go to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], so, you know, and then I was playing basketball all day and, and, and, then trying to make up my mind as well, so, between trying to make up my mind and playing basketball, you know, it was, it was just basically what I did.
Speaker 1: So your--tell me about you were--your, your, your senior year--we talked about the ninth grade and your accomplishments then, but your senior year you had a very good year too, is that right?
Speaker 2: Correct, I was All-American again.
Speaker 1: All-American and M- MVP?
Speaker 2: Oh, that, I was the only, I was the number one basketball player in the State of Texas.  Since I was the only high school All-American in the State of Texas (laughter) and that, that automatically made me the number one player and so, and, and then we won the state championship, you know.
Speaker 1: And your average points there were twenty-nine points?
Speaker 2: Twenty-nine points a game, well, it was twenty, twenty--the year before 29.3 and then I went to play 29.7 the next year.
Story_ID: 614231
Speaker 1: So finally you decide Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] is where you're going to go and I guess you negotiated your friends to come along so that's why you go to the school, so tell me about that?
Speaker 2: You know, the, the coach was delighted that he could help the other guys, you know--the basketball coach, because he had to get with the football coach to get this done.
Speaker 1: What were their names?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: The coach?
Speaker 1: The coaches, yes--
Speaker 2: Harold Hunter was the basketball coach and I don't remember the football coach's name, but he was delighted to help him out you know, and then to his delight, when he, after the guys got there he saw that they were good football players.  They were excellent football players.  So he was delighted about that.  So, and, and I was happy, you know, for about a minute (laughter) and then I, was (laughter) and then I got--I decided that was not the competition that I was seeking to play against and so I left (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you mean?
Speaker 2: --I left Tennessee State after about half a quarter.
Speaker 1: Tell me--tell me what you mean by that, that you, that wasn't the competition you were looking to play?
Speaker 2: Tennessee State was an African American school [HBCU] that played with African American players which is a lot of basketball players, I mean, a lot of good basketball players played in the conference that they were going to play in, but it would not allow me to play at the level that I won, won the championship in.  It wouldn't allow me to play at that level because they would have had--they played AA [ph.], played NAIA [National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics], which is a, a lower level then the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association].  And so I wanted to play on a higher level against better athletes, not that--I don't know--I'm not sure that I played against better athletes.  It was a misconception during those times that those, that some of those teams--players--those schools weren't, couldn't play at that other, next level, but they could have, but it wouldn't have allowed me to play at the level that I wanted to play on, so I was disenchanted with that, so I went home.  I just left and went back [to Houston, Texas]; called Coach Haskins [Don Haskins] and all the coaches that had been trying to recruit me before were aware that--the word got out that I left Tennessee State and that I was back home again.  So I called Coach Haskins and he said, "Oh yeah, you know, we'll get you down here," you know, and so anyway, that's how I ended up there.  And I wanted to go there out of all the other schools because of Bad News Barnes [Jim Barnes].  And actually I really wanted to go there in the beginning, but they didn't--they weren't going to take my friends, so, it forced me to go to Tennessee State, but I really wanted to go Texas Western [Texas Western College of the University of Texas; University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas] anyway, that's really where I wanted to be, except for the University of Houston [Houston, Texas].  I got--that's another story.  I'll tell you about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me.
Speaker 2: Well, actually I would have been the first African American to go to U of H.  They didn't have any African American players there at all, then, when I graduated from high school [Evan E. Worthing High School, Houston, Texas].  Guy Lewis, the coach, was a very good friend of mine and, but wanted me--he needed one more year and then they had to recruit McVea, Warren McVea, who was an African American football player first, before they brought the basketball player in.  So he wanted me to go to junior college and come back.  I did not want to go to junior college, so that's why, that's why, that's why I missed going to the University of Houston and that's when they, they brought in Elvin Hayes and Don Chaney in the following year and the rest is history about what happened with those guys.  They all--they did very well.  But I would have gone to the U of H, that's really where I would have gone and Guy hadn't agreed to take my friends yet, but I think I could have talked him into it (laughter).
Speaker 1: So instead of going to junior college like they wanted you to, you just went to Tennessee State (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to Tennessee State (unclear).
Speaker 1: --okay, instead of waiting on them, because actually--?
Speaker 2: I played--I would have had to play down several levels to play at a junior college, you know, to go to a junior college and then it, it would have been just for one year, but I didn't want to waste a year playing at a junior college and then come back.  Elvin Hayes and Don Chaney and I would have ball played together if I had done that.
Speaker 1: And after that one year was over U of H--University of Houston, did they actually integrate so that you could (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They did integrate the next year.
Speaker 1: That--the very next year--
Speaker 2: The very next year.
Story_ID: 614232
Speaker 1: Now you're ready to go to Western right?
Speaker 2: Texas Western [Texas Western College of the University of Texas, El Paso, Texas].
Speaker 1: Texas Western, I'm sorry (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's all right, Texas Western, that's all right.  (Laughter)  That's okay don't worry about it.
Speaker 1: And so tell me about your experience there when you first get there and--
Speaker 2: I'm telling you when I got to school at Texas Western I had never seen so many basketball players in my life.  In fact, I mean and I, I had the red shirt you know, because you have to--when you transfer you got a red shirt back.  I guess you have to wait a year now or two--a semester probably (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's what red shirt means?
Speaker 2: Yeah, red shirt means that when you change schools you have to wait a semester before you can be eligible to play.  So when I got there it seemed like they had, they had ten players--twelve players on the varsity, they had a freshman team, had twelve players, you're talking about twenty-four.  Now, they had another seventeen or eighteen players that were red shirted there as well, I don't even know where they got all the money from.  When I walked in the gym I looked around, I said, what's going--where are all these guys coming from?  So then I had to go and prove myself of course, but that's okay.  I might have proved myself.  I had to make my presence known and all that stuff.  And so I played the red shirt year, that was in January and then that following year I had to play on a freshman team because now you've got to play fre- you had to play freshman ball versus whether you're eligible for the varsity.  So then the next year is when we won the national championship, so I had to play freshman ball and then we won a national championship the next year.
Speaker 1: What about your academics?
Speaker 2: At Texas El Paso [University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas]?  It's like anyplace else, I mean you know, you, you play basketball in the afternoon, you go to mess hall and you eat and then you go to the study hall and you study and I'm telling you the last thing you feel like doing is going to study after you finish practice, that's not what you want to go do, but you have to do that.  I, and then you've got to get up the next morning and go to class just like everybody else and do all the things that all the other students have to do, so it's, it's very, very stressful being a student athlete.
Story_ID: 614233
Speaker 1: So tell me more about your preparation for the, the tournament [1966 NCAA University Division Basketball Tournament]?
Speaker 2: At--well, you know, we, we really didn't have to change anything, you know, we did everything the same every night anyway.  We controlled the tempo, whatever that means.  We controlled the tempo and we played the same, so going into the tournament we didn't have to do anything different.  We just did what we always do and you know that, that was good enough to win.
Speaker 1: Now, well, let's, let's talk more about some of the, the people who are in the landscape of things, some of the coaches and some of the players.  Tell me who's on the team with you?
Speaker 2: Bobby Joe Hill was the, the other All-American and Harry Flournoy, Nevil Shed, Willie Cager, you heard, you heard that name before, Orsten Artis was a guy from Indiana, other, other, and Flournoy was from Indiana as well and the other, the other guys were from--Bobby Joe was from Detroit [Michigan], Nevil Shed was from New York [New York] and Willie Cager and Willie Worsley from New York as well.  Now there were other guys on the team, but those were the African American players that played most of the time.  Jerry Armstrong was the other African--was the other white guy that played on the team that was an excellent player as well, that fit right in to whatever we were doing.
Speaker 1: And he actually didn't play in that NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Didn't play in the championship game.
Speaker 1: --the championship game.
Speaker 2: No, he didn't play in the championship game.  He was a little bit hurt, but then he understood the significance of that.  Coach Haskins [Don Haskins] said he was playing his best players, but actually trying to prove a point and he proved the point he was trying to prove, that African American basketball players could play at any level.  He didn't have to have anybody in the game with him, so they could do what they needed to do.  They were very discipline.  We were very disciplined and a good team and that was the bottom line.
Speaker 1: Well tell me about some of the games leading up to the championship?  What was it like to play against different schools and your travel?  We're talking about a time during civil rights, a lot of action going on; King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] assassinations; all of these things going on, you know, well actually they, they hadn't happened yet, but the March on Washington was in '63 [1963].  Talk about what was going on in the, the school there, any student involvement in rights, civil rights?  Give me a feel for what was going on on the campus?
Speaker 2: Well, in El Paso [Texas]--it's a very liberal place, not like any other place in Texas especially during those days, you know, the, the border was right across the street so to speak, and the people--I talked about that in my book ['Slam Dunk to Glory,' David Lattin], is that those were the friendliest people in the world at, at Texas Western [Texas Western College of the University of Texas; University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas], I mean in El Paso.  The whole--this, the whole town was built around the school and I remember the first day I got there.  When I first got there and I was watching the news at night and they were talking about [HistoryMaker] David Lattin is here in town.  We can't believe we got Big Daddy.  And you know, and I was listening to all buildup that they were giving me and, and they were going--they wanted, well they thought about charging everybody for practice because the, the stadium was loaded just to see me practice.  And I said, you know, this is--now I know I'm in the right place, you know, because it was such a friendly town that any--there was, there was a family that would invite the players out to eat dinner.  Every night you could go someplace to eat dinner with a family.  It was, it was just a friendly, friendly place and, and a very pleasant place to be and since there was not much to do there, either you studied or you're playing basketball, one of the two.  So, it was a great place.  El Paso was a great place and since we had a great coach and you know, everything worked out fine.
Story_ID: 614234
Speaker 1: Well tell me more about the coach as well, who he was?
Speaker 2: Well, Coach Haskins [Don Haskins] was a guy that grew up in Enid, Oklahoma and didn't have very much contact with African Americans.  There was one that lived down the street from him that he got to be friends with--I talk about, I talk about that in the book ['Slam Dunk to Glory,' David Lattin] a little bit.  They got to be friends and Coach Haskins got a scholarship and this guy didn't and this guy was a great player and he didn't get a scholarship, you know, because of his color.  And so Coach Haskins always felt very bad about that and that's when he first found out that African Americans were, were really good basketball players and they were good athletes and you know, they had to choose to, to do whatever it takes to win.  So Coach Haskins was a guy who coached defense and his belief was if he could teach you good team defense that you--most of the guys learned offense on the playground that you would do okay.  If once he could just, you know, teach you great defense and it worked like a charm because he had good athletes.  He had the athletes to do that with so that, that worked perfect for him.  He never won another championship again, so it--and being such a great coach and talked about, and, and, and when you talk about the athletes that, it means a lot because now you're talking about how good they really, really are.
Speaker 1: Now I understand that there is different ways or different styles of, of basketball.  What kind of basketball did you play?  Let--though let me ask you this too, what position did you play?
Speaker 2: I played center.  I played center, in the middle.
Speaker 1: And what kind of style of basketball?
Speaker 2: Well, we played in, in high school [Evan E. Worthing High School, Houston, Texas] we, we all, all, all our youngsters there played in--up tempo basketball.  We played very fast.  And then we all had to adjust to Coach Haskins' style when got to El Paso [Texas Western College of the University of Texas; University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas], which means when he first--when I first got there he said, "Dave [HistoryMaker David Lattin] listen, I know you can average thirty points a game here, there's no question about that, but what would you rather do? Would you rather average thirty or would you rather win?  So you've got some great teammates here as well, you don't really have to average thirty, you know, you just need to take control of the middle, you know, rebound, you're going to score some as well, but you don't have to score thirty for us to be successful," so he convinced me of that and it was--since we kept winning you know, no complaint because basically all you--all I, I really want to do is win, so whatever, whatever I have to do to make the--help the team win, that's, that's what I did.  So with, with Coach Haskins that that was his, his whole scheme was to change the tempo of the game and make the team play the way he wanted to play and take them out of their tempo and we were successful doing that.
Speaker 1: So that, that was the strategy to make the other teams come to where you needed them to be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's correct.
Speaker 1: --as far as the tempo of the game.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 614235
Speaker 1: What about--I, I guess this is before, but before, before you actually got to college, I wanted to ask you about the Jewish Community Center [Houston, Texas] where you played, was that another place that you played, was able to use the inside courts?
Speaker 2: Correct.  That was, that was when in high school [Evan E. Worthing High School, Houston, Texas] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so that was (unclear)?
Speaker 2: --in twelfth grade--late eleventh and twelfth grade.  I really started to play a lot of basketball then and at the Jewish Community Center was the first time I played against white players.  The director there was Marvin Blumenthal and I got to be very close friends with him and he thought all the kids should be playing together, that we shouldn't be separated, you know, we should play together and so that was a great experience for me as well.
Speaker 1: There weren't a lot of basketball games on television at that time were there?
Speaker 2: Hardly any basketball on television at that time and so, you know, you didn't--you couldn't learn from the pros, you had to learn from watching the big guys play, the bigger guys play.
Speaker 1: Were there any college games on TV at--I mean, in your town (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, I can tell you a story about this.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother [Elsie Boyd Davis], who wasn't a basketball fan had--I use to call home during that year we--during that season that we won a championship.  I would call home and say, "Mom, Mom," I was happy we won the game, I, you know I scored, got eighteen rebounds, got twenty-five points and my, my mother's favorite player got to be Elvin Hayes and so she would tell me, "Oh really, that is fantastic, but guess what, Big E got forty points and twenty-five rebounds, blocked ten shots."  (Laughter) I said, "Mom."  All I could do was shake my head, but Elvin Hayes Big E, was her, was her favorite player.
Speaker 1: So what happened next as you, as you're playing your, your first year [at Texas Western College of the University of Texas; University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas] and your team is playing different schools?  Were there any problems I would say, since we were talking about civil rights, on the road as you traveled to play different games?
Speaker 2: Yeah I know if you saw the movie, the movie was probably 85 percent accurate, and--the movie, 'Glory Road,' but to answer your question, no we did not.  We played in the West and we, we didn't play--some, some--most of the schools we played had African American players, except for maybe Utah [University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah] didn't, BYU [Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah] didn't, but most of them did not, but we, we didn't experience any of those things you saw in the movie--that's the movie.
Speaker 1: Um-hm and you still in touch with Lloyd Wells [Lloyd C.A. Wells]?
Speaker 2: He passed in '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: In '82 [1982]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, but I, oh, I'm talking about that time that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I'm sorry, 2000--2002, I'm sorry, 2002.
Speaker 1: But I'm talking about this time, while you're still in college?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes, talked to him almost every day.
Speaker 1: Now, you said your, your favorite, favorite phrase was the judge. Tell me where did that nickname or where--was that a nickname for Lloyd Wells?
Speaker 2: That was the nickname for Lloyd Wells, but Lloyd Wells called everybody the Judge and that's where it came from.  He called everybody the Judge.  I got to tell you this story--this other story about Lloyd.  We were--after that we--okay, go ahead.
Story_ID: 614236
Speaker 1: You were going to tell me a story first, so let's go back to the story you were going to tell.
Speaker 2: Let's get my train of thought together here.  Oh yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: You ready for that?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: We, we were defeated our last regular season game of the, the year.  Coach Haskins [Don Haskins] called a curfew--we were playing the next day, we were playing the next day and we had to travel from Cincinnati [Ohio] to Wichita, Kansas to play the game and so he called a curfew and we didn't, we didn't make the curfew (laughter), so Coach Haskins said, "Okay you guys didn't make the curfew so I'm going to make everybody stay up on the plane, nobody can go to sleep, you all--you guys can't sleep," and Coach Haskins wasn't going to start me and wasn't going to start Bobby [Bobby Joe Hill]--these two All-Americans.  So I called Lloyd [Lloyd C.A. Wells] and, and I said, "This guy says he's not going to start us man."  To make a long story short, Lloyd met us in Chicago [Illinois] where we were changing planes and sat next to Coach Haskins on the plane and said, "Listen now are you going to cut your nose off to spite your face.  You're not going to start Dave [HistoryMaker David Lattin].  You're not going to start Bobby.  You ain't never getting here again.  What, what are you doing?  You've got the best team in the country; you're not going to start the best players?  Are you serious?"  So Coach Haskins didn't start Bobby anyway and he started me though, but he did start me and so we were down by about three points with about oh, maybe about eight minutes to play in the second quarter, so he put Bobby in the game and then we were up by halftime by seven or eight and so to make a long story short, he, he thought about it and he said, wait a minute, I mean I've got All-Americans in my league on the bench and we're not winning, so he put the--I mean, it's like having a car with no spark plug.  You need a spark plug to make the thing go.  So he put Bobby in the game and we were successful in winning, that was the first game.  That was the first game in the tournament [1966 NCAA University Division Basketball Tournament].
Speaker 1: But before you got to the, the tournament you had to play a lot of good teams, right?
Speaker 2: A lot of good teams all the way through; Arizona State [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona] where Coach Haskins had never beaten them at Arizona State before; New Mexico, New Mexico, New Mexico State [New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, New Mexico]--we beat, beat a lot of good teams.  We beat some teams that were marginal, but we beat some great teams as well and I, you know, and I guess that some people say well, okay they beat Eastern Oklahoma or somebody, I mean, who is that?  Who were they and that's no big deal, anybody can beat them, you know, so it took them a few minutes to figure out who we were and, and then we finally started to get ranked and started to move up after, after about, after we were about nineteen in a row.  They figured, they figured out who we were.
Speaker 1: How did you handle all of the publicity because everybody was writing about you, all the news sportscasters and, how did you handle that, I mean--?
Speaker 2: Well, Coach Haskins was the kind of guy, the more we won, the higher we got ranked, the more difficult practice got (laughter) because he kept thinking you know, wow, these guys are going to get the big head and we were already a very cocky team and he kept thinking, well, you know, I can't let these guys have a letdown because they're winning all these games, we can't let them let down, you know, and that's what he's thinking.  I'm thinking inside of his head the reason why practice is getting so difficult, but we you know, we just, we just kept winning because we, you know, we were, because we were good enough.  And so--and I guess he was right, you know, we should practice harder, we--don't let up in practice, you know, work harder because the team--as you get, as you win more games, teams know that you're at nineteen, twenty games in a row that they've got a chance to bump you off, so they work twice as hard to beat you.
Story_ID: 614237
Speaker 1: So what--who were some of the really good teams that you beat to get to where you needed to be?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we beat the, the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas], we beat Kansas, you know, they were the Big Eight [Big Eight Conference], Big Eight champions and the Cincinnati-Missouri Valley [sic. Missouri Valley Intercollegiate Athletic Association] champions, these are all--these guys all won conferences and so they were great teams--Jo Jo White, I don't know if you ever heard of him or not; Walt Wesley [Walter Wesley] played at Kansas at that time and so they were great teams.  The team Oklahoma City [Oklahoma City University, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma], the bas- the first team we beat in the tournament had a big--a guy who was averaging like twenty-one rebounds per game and they'd, they'd had only been defeated like three times.  They were a great team and you know, we had to beat them; had a great rebounder, you know, we, we had to check him, put him in his place so he couldn't do what he wanted to do and so you know, we beat some, some really good teams and I'm not sure, I'm not real sure if Kentucky [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] was the best team we played.  I kind of lean towards Kansas, it seems like they were the hardest team to play against.  We played a--beat them in an overtime and that was a very difficult game.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now let's talk about moving up to the time of the tournament [1966 NCAA University Division Basketball Tournament] and you said that you all continued to play the way you were playing, so take me through the steps of what has to happen to--for you to get to the final two teams to play to win the tournament?
Speaker 2: Well, Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], Kentucky had to beat Duke and we had to beat Utah [University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah], who were conference champions as well.  I kind of, you know, I'm not sorry we beat them, but I kind of hate that they didn't have their great center who had broken--had a broken arm or leg or something and couldn't play.  I kind of hate that because I wanted to play against him.  He wasn't there so we, you know, we defeated them quite easily, not easily, but we, we beat them.  Coach Haskins [Don Haskins], I've got to tell you this story.  I know you saw the movie 'Glory Road,' it looks like Coach Haskins called--you didn't see the movie, but anyway, okay; Coach Haskins called all the players--all of the white players and the black players in the movie, he called them in, in the gym and said that just the black players are going to start; that's not what happened.  Coach Haskins--Adolph Rupp was setting a press conference that day--
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: --Adolph Rupp, he was the coach at Kentucky; had mentioned at a press conference that five African Americans could not defeat his five white players, in a press conference.  So, Coach Haskins called the other six--the other five--Bobby [Bobby Joe Hill] was my roommate--called the other five African American players [Orsten Artis, Willie Cager, Harry Flournoy, Nevil Shed, and Willie Worsley] into my room right after the pregame meal and told us what Rupp said--repeated, you know, and he just stood there for a second and all he said was, "It's up to you," and he walked out of the room.  He didn't say anything else.  In fact, he didn't say anything before the game.  He didn't say anything at halftime.  He didn't say anything at the timeouts.  He didn't say anything.  He just said, "It's up to you."  The only thing he did was substitute.
Speaker 1: So what did you think when he, when he told you that?  Did you believe that Rupp had said this?
Speaker 2: You know, you know, it, it was years later before we--I really thought about it, you know, because when you're getting ready to go to battle on court, you really don't have time to think about what someone else said, you know, you don't want to get your mind clogged with anything else but what you--your purpose is to go out and win, you know, I, I, I didn't hear him say it, Coach Haskins said he said it, so, you know, that's all I know.  And all I know is that all I wanted to do--I couldn't wait to get on the court to play against Kentucky, not because they were all white, that didn't have anything to do with it because I tell people all the time if--when you go to the boards you don't have time to look and see what color a guy is, you really don't care, you just want to go on and get the ball.  If you're going to dunk on somebody it doesn't matter, you're not going to dunk on him just because he's white or whatever--he's black, you just want to dunk, you're just going to do what you have to do.  So, we didn't have time to think about them being all white, I mean, that's, that's not what we had time to do.  We, we only had time to concentrate on trying to win, so if they'd had several black players it wouldn't have mattered, we still had to do what we had to do.
Story_ID: 614238
Speaker 1: So there was more of camaraderie between the players on either team, black or white.  I think it, is this true that it really was the coaches who might have had that state of mind whether, you know, my players are all white and these players are black, or the black and white thing, but is it true that the, the players really didn't have that animosity for one another (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --or did they?
Speaker 2: No, I, I, you know, that's a good question because I've heard that question asked of Pat Riley and some of the other players.  They didn't--it wasn't their id- it wasn't their idea to have--not have African American players on the team.  It didn't have anything to do with them.  In fact, they would have welcomed African American players, but the coach didn't want them.  The AD [athletic director] wanted them, board of directors, schools, student body--everybody wanted African American players but the coach didn't.  So, he was very powerful and he didn't want any, so nobody--everybody was afraid to go against him, you know.
Speaker 1: And, and we're talking about Adolph (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Adolph Rupp.
Speaker 1: --Rupp.
Speaker 2: Correct, Kentucky [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: Tell me about him?  What do you know about him personally (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not much really, I, I, not much really other than I know he grew up in a city, in a town--he grew up in Kansas and I know there were--no African Americans could stay there.  They could come in and work in the daytime in the city, but they--no African Americans could stay in the city after six o'clock p.m. and they could come in the morning at six, but they had to be gone out of the city by six.  So, that's the kind of environment that he grew up in, so that's really all he knew and he refused to change.
Story_ID: 614239
Speaker 1: With all the publicity about you and, and your team, to keep you from not being so cocky you said that the, the coach [Don Haskins] would make you work a little harder, but did you begin to see that it wasn't this tournament [1966 NCAA University Division Basketball Tournament] and the players--it wasn't just about you and basketball, but that there was a bigger picture?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely and of course, in the beginning we were just playing basketball, but you know, later in life, you know, the next year for instance--right after the game no reporters came to our locker room to talk to us.  Nobody brought--put mics in front of our face to, to get an interview or anything.  And so you know never--we didn't think about it that much, you know, we just were anxious to get back to El Paso [Texas] where everybody--we had a lot of love there, in El Paso.  It's just that the newspaper guys were stunned, you know, they didn't know what to write after the game because, you know, they thought it was going to be a walk over.  They didn't know what to say, you know, this team with five African American players on, on the court beat all white Kentucky [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky]--it was impossible, can't happen.  They really did not know what to say or what to write.  They were just, they were just stunned and, and no one after the game mentioned anything about five African American players had defeated all the white boys at Kentucky, nobody talked about that, not until next year when it really, when it really hit home and Sports Illustrated wrote articles and started writing and stuff about all of the, the African American players that had beat all white Kentucky, that's when it really, really, really hit home.  No one said anything in the beginning because it took a while to catch on to what had happened.
Speaker 1: This, this--well, walk me through when you got off the bus to play this, this game, I mean, this, this changes history for the N- NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association]?  Describe for me that game.
Speaker 2: You know, getting off the bus, first of all, we're living in a hotel where the Duke team [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] and all its supporters stayed in the same hotel as we did.  We didn't have hardly anybody there, just Bobby Joe Hill's brother and sister and a few others from Detroit [Michigan].  And they had "Go Duke" all over the place, I mean, I mean we couldn't hardly even walk out of the door, everything was Duke, Duke, Duke, Duke, Duke, Duke, Duke, not, nothing for Texas Western [Texas Western College of the University of Texas; University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas].  We didn't have not one little sign, not anything.  So the bus driver, I told the story about the bus driver, the bus driver in my book ['Slam Dunk to Glory,' David Lattin], where I was the last one to get off the bus, you know, I'm always the last one to get off the bus.  I would get--I was getting--I was disembarking and the bus driver said to me, "Why are you playing this game?  Why are you wasting your time?  You cannot beat Kentucky.  You cannot beat them.  They've got a white coach and that's Adolph Rupp. You, you African American guys think you can beat Kentucky?  You're out of your mind, are you crazy?  Why don't you just get back on the bus and let me take you back to the hotel and just forget about this game."  (Laughter) So anyway, I didn't say anything, I just looked at the guy, you know, and proceeded on to the, to the game.  I saw him after the game; he didn't say anything he just kind of looked straight ahead.
Speaker 1: So how it--because you said that everything, there was no signs and you had very few supporters there.  What was it like walking out onto the court?
Speaker 2: Wow, you know, with the Confederate flags flying all over the place and you know, all the signs you know, just, you know, some of the things that I can't tell you that were said (laughter), "We got them by the toe now, they can't get away, it's all over."  (Laughter) But it was, it wasn't intimidating for me.  I never felt for one second that we were going to lose.  I was hoping, I was hoping that I could stay in the game, you know, because, because the referees can control the game because they can just call fouls at random and control the game if they need to.  This was a final game with every, every, with everyone looking, so I guess they called, called it as close to being right as they could.  I had four fouls anyway, but that's as close as it could be.
Speaker 1: So you felt that the refs were more or less true to form?
Speaker 2: I thought as, as well as they could be.  I, I, I mean there were fouls--the first foul against Pat Riley was not a foul, you know, and if you look at the tape over and over, and over, Pat--I talked to Pat about it--he said, "No man, it was a foul," you know, but still again I had to live with that.  So I had to be very careful that I would--couldn't, couldn't foul out of the game.  I had to be very, very careful.  There were things I just couldn't do, I mean the coach had complained about the--about me, and the game and, and I talk about that in the book a little bit.  The night before some of the games the coaches complained that they couldn't let me get away with some of the things I was doing, you know and I wasn't really doing anything, but just working harder under the basket doing what I do, you know, and that's about it, but--
Story_ID: 614240
Speaker 1: So tell me about the, the tipoff or what do you call it when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The jump ball?
Speaker 1: The jump ball (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Pat stole the tap, but I knew he was going to do that, I mean, we knew he was going to steal the tap.  I mean, the ball never left the referee's hand--he hit it, you know what I mean, we knew he was going to do that, but they called it.  During the season now, apparently they hadn't been calling it.  The announcer said that it was the first time that Pat Riley had been called for that, but he had been doing it all year, but the championship game with so many people looking, you know, I guess they had to call that.  And I would have been terribly embarrassed to let Pat Riley beat me on a tap (laughter).  I told him that.
Speaker 1: But, but once, once you came out do you get to practice before the game actually starts?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely, right before the game starts?  Yes, we practice and shoot around, look around, I mean, I (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what, what did you do at that game?
Speaker 2: Well I stared; I went down and stared at the Kentucky team [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky].  I went out at half court and looked at them.  I just stared them down, just looked right at them, didn't say anything, just looked at them and did what I had to do.  In fact, I had scouted them the night before and I knew that they were not trying to get the ball inside.  Inside, meaning they weren't trying to get the ball to the guy under the basket so he could score, so they were an outside team.  So I knew that that would allow me to roam around and help my teammates out on the floor because they weren't trying to get to my man, they weren't trying to give him the ball, which was a terrible mistake because I would leave him under the basket to go help my teammates.  So if they had been trying to give him the ball that would have been a plus for them that's for sure.  So, I got, I scouted them the night before.  I knew exactly what they were going to do and my, my plan worked perfectly.
Story_ID: 614241
Speaker 1: And let's talk about slam dunking because I didn't realize this, but was slam dunking banned from that point on until 1976?
Speaker 2: Not that year, not the following year, but the--it took them a year to make it happen.  Coach Rupp [Adolph Rupp] had dunking outlawed in high school and college for ten years after that dunk on him--on Pat [Pat Riley].  Pat was the recipient of the dunk (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, tell, tell me the story; first tell me what a slam dunk is?
Speaker 2: A slam dunk is when, when you go jump way in the air and you bang the ball down in the basket, you know.  And the basket is ten feet high, of course, so you have to jump fifteen feet high to do that.  And so Pat was playing the middle on the zone and, and I said, said it before, probably wasn't his fault, you know.  When you play in a zone you play an area, you don't play a man, and so Pat being the man on the team, you thought, well, you know, I've got to go and challenge this guy because the guy that was--should have been guarding me was Thad Jaracz, who was just kind of standing there, you know, and he was just, you know and Pat decided I'm going to go up and try to stop this--wasn't the thing to do, I mean, he should have just (laughter)--if a guy's got the jump on you he's going to slam dunk on you, you've got to, you've got to get back, you've got to get out of the way because you could get hurt, you know, so, but that's what the whole slam dunk was about.
Speaker 1: So everyone on your team knew how to slam dunk?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely--well, the, not everybody, Bobby Joe [Bobby Joe Hill] and the little guys didn't, but it was--Cager [Willie Cager] did it against them the next game as well.  He had a dunk on them as well, but that was, that was one of the things that I did all the time.  I mean, practiced it and practiced it and practiced--I practiced it in practice all the time and also you know, I did it in the game, I mean, my game wasn't about all slam dunking, but it's sort of like an intimidating factor, you know, once you dunk on somebody, the next time the lane just kind of opens up and just lets you go, you know.  LeBron James can tell you about that (laughter).
Speaker 1: So this--they were very intimidated be- probably because they hadn't seen it so much because they didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They didn't do it.
Speaker 1: White teams didn't do this at all?
Speaker 2: No, no and the intent was to, to send a message from the beginning to let the Kentucky players [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] know we're here to win and if you're going to beat us you're going to have to do something different from what--than you've been doing and so to elevate that game to that level was almost impossible for them to do, to elevate their level to beat us.
Speaker 1: And how was Coach Rupp able to have dunking just eliminated from basketball for ten years?
Speaker 2: He was a very powerful figure.  I mean, here's a guy that won four championships in his career and always had a winning season and he had a lot of influence over the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] and so he got with them and said, hey, we don't need to do this; let's outlaw this dunking and had it outlaw.  That means that guys like Kareem [Kareem Abdul-Jabbar] who were coming behind me, could not dunk.  There was no dunking, dunking for Kareem in, in college.
Speaker 1: So, it came back in, in '76 [1976] and how did that come about, do you know that, how it came back into the game?
Speaker 2: You know, they finally sat down and thought about it for a second and said, wait a minute, what are we doing here; we're killing the game or what, and they said we have to bring it back and they brought it back--and just like that, overnight, it just came back, dunking.
Speaker 1: Do you think some players then really took advantage?  I know was it Shaq [Shaquille O'Neal] that use to break the backboards?
Speaker 2: Still do (laughter).
Speaker 1: Has to pay for that now?
Speaker 2: Right, probably make him pay for it.  Yeah, its, it's a part of the game.  Even though the baskets--Shaq's a seven footer, the basket's ten feet high, but he's still got to, you know, if somebody is trying to block the dunk, you know, or whatever, trying to stop you from doing, you've still got to make it happen, so it's just part of the game, it's just part of the game.  I mean, guys do it randomly; they do it all the time now.  You see dunking all the time now.
Story_ID: 614242
Speaker 1: So what was the score, the ending score and how many points did you score during the championship [of the 1966 NCAA University Division Basketball Tournament]?
Speaker 2: The score was 72-65.  I scored sixteen points.  I was five for ten from the field, six for six from the foul line and missed the third quarter--foul trouble, of course (laughter).  So I didn't play the third quarter and so I mean, I could have had more points you know, but the object was to win the game.  The points wouldn't--weren't important as winning and all of our winning.
Speaker 1: And I think you really talked about why the coach didn't put in any white players even though they were--
Speaker 2: Good enough to play (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in his eyes--they were good enough to play.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And he said he was putting in his best players--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --but he did not put in, who was it?
Speaker 2: But he said in, in the meeting that he was just going to play just the African American players.  The guys were--all the guys came to my room and he said, "Just you guys are going to play tonight and it's up to you," and that's it.  And I know the reason why he said that is because of what Coach Rupp [Adolph Rupp] had said in the press conference--what he said he said.
Speaker 1: So countdown--ten, nine, eight--what's going through your mind?  What's going on on the court?
Speaker 2: You know, you know, I was saying to myself as this thing was ending that, you know what, this is really great and I'm enjoying this and I want to do it again next year.  And when my, my teammates were cutting down the nets and they were running around jumping up and down and screaming I was sitting on the bench thinking to myself, you know, I want to do this next year and Coach Haskins [Don Haskins], Haskins was looking at me, he said, "Hey man, you know, you just won it.  How come you're not jumping up and down like everybody else?"  And I just wanted to get to the phone to call my mother [Elsie Boyd Davis], you know, I wanted to share it with her, so I just wanted, I just wanted--that's what I really, really wanted to do was get to a telephone.  And I mean, I enjoyed it like everybody else and it, it was a great thing, but I never expected to lose.  I never expected to lose that game from the very beginning.  I didn't think they could beat us, it wasn't because they were all white or because they were, they were the number one team in the nation.  I just didn't believe they could beat us and that's the way I felt about all the teams we played that had African American players on them too, so it didn't matter.  It just, just who, just, I just didn't believe they could beat us.  Any, any--I didn't believe any team could beat us at that level.
Story_ID: 614243
Speaker 1: So when did you realize that this game and this win for you was going to actually be something that changes basketball?
Speaker 2: It wasn't until later, you know.  When we finally realized that this had, this game had made a big, a big--it was a big deal and it had forced process.  Guys, guys progressed and really started to expand and got kids scholarships and we didn't think about that way in the beginning, but what happened was those--after those teams down in the South started to recruit the African American football, basketball, track all of the African American players, well then it opened the doors for the other students to get in school as well.  They had seats.  The black schools were filled.  They had seats that were untaken, unused and so they, once they did that then everything started to open up for everybody.  So that's what made it better.
Speaker 1: Yes.  So now, after the game tell me what, what goes on in your life after the game is over and you go back to school?
Speaker 2: Well, you know the plane couldn't land at first because the, the, the runways were packed with people and it was great being able to get off the plane and speak to our fans and riding the parade back to the campus [Texas Western College of the University of Texas; University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas], that was great and being national champions, very difficult to express what that's about.  That means that you're the best team in the country and there are a lot of good teams in the country so you finished number one, that's incredible, that's, that's an unbelievable feeling.  The other thing is, is that it's only for that moment because now you've got to go back and do it again (laughter).  Now you're got to go back and try do it again so, so, so it was fun enjoying it that summer, going home [Houston, Texas] that summer playing in the park, playing with the other kids in the park and being a national champion and being on all the talk shows and being asked questions about what it was like and all, that, that was all great as well.  So I thoroughly enjoyed that.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what talk shows you were on??
Speaker 2: Well, yes, the local radio stations like KYOK [KYOK Radio, Houston, Texas], KCOH [KCOH Radio, Houston, Texas], you know all the talk shows.  I know it was radio stations and TV stations in El Paso [Texas] and then there were some, some phone calls from stations around the country as well and it was--you know, it was just great being a champion.  I mean, I mean that's what you work for.  I mean, you go--some, some people go through life as, as athletes and never get to be champions and so it's, it's great being a champion, it really, really is.  It's a good feeling.
Speaker 1: That year too Bill Russell becomes the first black head coach for the NBA [National Basketball Association]. What, what were your thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I, they, they--somebody had--I think Bill was what, thirty-six then, thirty-five, thirty-six, yeah, but I remember them asking Bill Russell, you know, "You think you're getting a little old to be playing and coaching?"  And Bill Russell's response was, "You know, at this level either you can play or you can't play."  And I remember him--that, that was really something that he was a coach and apparently a very good one because they continued to win.
Speaker 1: So you go back to college that summer, you know, you have all of this publicity, what happens in the fall?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we, I was a junior then and the worse thing could have happened was Bobby Joe [Bobby Joe Hill] hurt his ankle, I wrote--and if you look at that game you'd see where he hurt his ankle in that last maybe three minutes of the game against Kentucky [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] and he never healed, he never healed and he came back, came back to play and then after about the first couple of games he just dropped out of school, got married, had a child and just kind of lost--his basketball interest just went away, the weirdest thing ever happened and so now you know, we're missing you know, a great player on our team and, and so we, we were a good team that year.  We won twenty-four games and lost six, but you know, we weren't as good as we were when he was there.
Story_ID: 614244
Speaker 1: Do you graduate?  You said you were a, a junior [at Texas Western College of the University of Texas; University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas] then, right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about your senior year?
Speaker 2: Well I left early.  My class had--went to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]--remember, I went to Tennessee State, so my class at Tennessee State was graduating.  So how it work is when your class graduates then you're eligible to be drafted in, in, in the NBA [National Basketball Association] that year; so you don't have to wait until your senior year--as long as your class is graduating, you know, that's when you actually started school.  So what happens is you have five years to play four; so it allows you to transfer to another school and, and be a red shirt and still be eligible to, to play, but you're eligible for the draft, so.
Speaker 1: So what was it like being eligible for the draft then?
Speaker 2: It was great.  I was with the first round and I was--oh my goodness that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So tell, tell me what, what does first round mean?
Speaker 2: First round means that there, that--there're twelve teams in the league or thirteen teams, or whatever it was, whatever it was then and if that team makes you their first pick--there are probably seven, six or seven or eight drafts where they can draft--you've got the first round and the second round.  The first round means you're the first player they pick in the first round and then they go to the second round and if you get drafted in the second round then, then you go in the second round instead of being in the first round, and then the third round, they keep going on and on and on, which means if they draft you in the first round they, they've got a pretty good idea that you're a pretty good player.
Speaker 1: And what team drafted you?
Speaker 2: The Golden State Warriors, San Francisco Warriors.
Speaker 1: San Francisco [California]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a beautiful city.
Speaker 1: And this was in 1967?
Speaker 2: In '67 [1967], '67 [1967], '68 [1968] you know the season goes over, '68 [1968], no '68 [sic. 1967 NBA draft].
Story_ID: 614245
Speaker 1: Do you remember where you were when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], when King was assassinated?
Speaker 2: Let me think about the year.
Speaker 1: It was '68 [1968] and I think he was (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember when it happened and you know, I should have written it down, but I guess it--was it '68 [1968], so I was at, I was at, I was at San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, so you played for San Francisco [San Francisco Warriors; Golden State Warriors] for one year and then what--you were traded (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Phoenix Suns--well no, the expansion draft.  They, they had an expansion--two new teams came to the league that next year, it was Phoenix and Seattle [Seattle SuperSonics; Oklahoma City Thunder] and so they can pick players off the team, off--they have to get their players from somewhere right, so they get them off the other teams that have got players, which is okay because I was playing behind Nate Thurmond, you know, it gives you a chance to play.  And the first exhibition game I got into a fight, scored twenty-two points--not a fight really, hit this guy on the head and broke my hand and missed the whole season.  The guy--the game was about over, had twenty-two points and the guy was going--it was an exhibition game in Flagstaff, Arizona and the, the, behind the basket is real close to, you know--there's not that much room, the guy shoved me going full speed and I just turned and swung at him and hit him on the head and broke my hand, broke this bone, it didn't heal for the whole season.
Speaker 1: So what happened after you healed up?
Speaker 2: Well, the season was about over then and there were two things going on and that was the Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters] were offering me more money than I was making in Phoenix and so there was also the ABA, which is the American Basketball Association, so I had some choices.  I decided, I decided that, well, I'll go play with the Trotters and for a year and see what that was about and then I left the Trotters after that year and went to the ABA and played there two year--three years and then with back to the Globetrotters and then after that I played three--two more years with them and then after that the career was over.
Speaker 1: So let's talk about, what team did you enjoy playing on the best?
Speaker 2: I actually enjoyed playing in the ABA the best at Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh Condors] and Memphis [Memphis Tams]--mostly Pittsburgh.  I got a chance to play the position I was--should have been playing all the time which was, was strong forward, playing against guys my own size and I averaged twenty-three points a game for about the last forty-four, forty-four games of the season, had a good year, had negotiated a nice, big fat juicy contract coming in and then the team folded and you know, it just kind of a downer, you know, and actually sometimes it takes a while to be a pro because--especially when you change positions, change from, change from back to the basket to facing the hoop, playing forward.  So it, it was taking me a minute to adjust to that, so I finally started to make that adjustment.
Speaker 1: And what, what was it like playing for the Globetrotters?
Speaker 2: Well, the Globetrotters was a show, I mean, you, you know, you run up and down the court and you play and I wasn't a funny guy, you know, I was what you call a straight guy.  I would just score points and get rebounds, you know, so (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who were some of the other players?
Speaker 2: Meadowlark Lemon and Curly Neal [Fred "Curly" Neal], that's who you'd always--Bobby Joe Mason, there was a guy you might and may, may not remember him.  Jackie Jackson [Jumpin' Jackie Jackson] was one of the guys who was on the team, from New York City [New York, New York].  And the, the two guys that you would remember would be Meadowlark and Curly for sure.
Speaker 1: And they're the ones that, that did all the (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Funny stuff, yeah, what people, people wanted to see them play.
Speaker 1: But actually the team was really a good team, I mean, they actually, I mean, played against another team.
Speaker 2: Globetrotters?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the team that they played against traveled with them, you know, and they were just part of the show as well, you know.
Speaker 1: And so when did you leave the Globetrotters?
Speaker 2: The last time?
Speaker 1: The last time, yes?
Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977], 1977.
Speaker 1: And what made you leave?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I just thought well, I've played long enough and, and it was just time to get out, so there I was.
Story_ID: 614246
Speaker 1: Did you ever finish your degree?
Speaker 2: I did in '07 [2007], Belford University.
Speaker 1: And what did you--?
Speaker 2: Business.
Speaker 1: Business administration?
Speaker 2: Administration, right.
Speaker 1: So now from '76 [1976] well, '77 [1977] what happened next in your life (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I got, I actually got in the beverage business, where I am now, you know, I've owned several businesses between that.  I had a rental car company for a while.  I had the business where we took care of people who were mentally challenged, I had that business as well and so, and then I've been a landlord, a landlord for years as well(unclear) housing and we survived, my son and I would buy and sell apartments and single family homes as well.  So I've done all of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Have, have you ever married?
Speaker 2: I have been married once, one time.
Speaker 1: Okay and your children, you, you alluded to a son, but do you have any other children (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have a son, a son and a daughter.
Speaker 1: And what are their names?
Speaker 2: Clifton Lattin and Leslie Smith [Leslie Lattin Smith (ph.)].
Speaker 1: And how old are they?
Speaker 2: My son is forty-seven and my daughter is forty-eight.
Speaker 1: And what do they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Almost as old as me (laughter).  Don't tell them I said that.
Speaker 1: And what do they do for a living?
Speaker 2: My son is still in real estate as well and my daughter is a paralegal.
Speaker 1: And you talked about the beverage business.  Tell me about the beverage business and that's what you do now?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: So tell me about this business, the name of the business and what it is that you do?
Speaker 2: Republic National [Republic National Distributing Company, LLC] is the name of the company I work for right now and I work in on premise, which means that we advertise all the new brands that are coming out, in fact, this business has new brands coming out every day.  So we make sure that our customers get to see them and, and purchase them.
Speaker 1: Okay, and is there anything else that you do?
Speaker 2: Well, starting a couple of businesses right now, a transportation business I'm working on right now and that's not quite ready yet, but it, it should be in the next--I don't know probably within a year.
Story_ID: 614247
Speaker 1: Let's talk about--we're going to come back to your life, but I just wanted to get your, your feedback on the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] and the students that, that play sports.  There's been a lot of controversy about whether student athletes should be paid.  What's your opinion on that?
Speaker 2: I certainly think they should be paid.  If you know, we're in a lawsuit now--class action lawsuit and what I (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You said, we're, you said, we're, who is we are?
Speaker 2: Well, there are several athletes--there are two guys from the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky] that played--that we played against on, on that as well in the lawsuit; and Harry Flournoy and I and there are so other--I don't have all the other names, there are probably eight of them other than us that, you know, in the lawsuit--they signed up for the lawsuit.  But what it will do is, this--they'll have to change, eventually they'll have to change and it'll--for those kids that are unborn, the kids that will be coming up in the future, it's going to help them because they should--they'll get paid.  I think it's unfair and they wonder--if anybody would ever wonder why kids are leaving early, they leave school early, it's because they need the money.  I'm sure they would stay longer if they could get paid, it wouldn't be--their, their parents wouldn't have to struggle.  They don't have the money and so, the, the NCAA take in billions of dollars, billions, billions and so it would be nothing to pay the kids maybe thirty thousand [dollars] a year, you know.  I mean that would be nothing for that.  They earn the money.  They work for it.  They play every day, so why not pay them, instead of have them starve to death.  So, they can't get--they don't want them to work.  They don't want them to do anything, so it's unfair that they don't share revenue with the youngsters.  So I'm hopeful and--I'm hopeful that this thing will go through, it will be okay, so we'll see.
Speaker 1: So you're hoping that it will change so that they could--because they--most of the students do get scholarships and sometimes it's not always a full scholarship--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --but yet they cannot work while they're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Correct.
Speaker 1: --they're playing.
Speaker 2: Very unfair.  It's a, a primitive rule.  These people--the ones who are there now will be gone later and the young--the new youngsters will certainly change, I'm sure will change and allow the athletes to be paid.
Speaker 1: Do you think they should share in some of the endorsements?  They don't get paid for endorsements, or do they endorse--do they have endorsements in college (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They don't get paid for anything.
Speaker 1: Will they be allowed to do that as well?
Speaker 2: They should be, they should be, absolutely, like for instance, entertainers get, you know, get royalties for everything that's played--with, that they play, that's been played on the radio and played in a club, they get royalties, I mean, so, why shouldn't we.
Speaker 1: Some people look at it though, is that if you're getting paid, then you're a professional.  Will that affect those who want to go on to play professional ball?
Speaker 2: No, that, again, that thinking is primitive and outdated and the, the, the--they don't want to, they don't want to change--they're going to have to change, you know, change is good.  It's all about change--we're all--everything is going to change, it's not going to stay the same.  You can't keep doing things the way you were doing it fifty years ago, it doesn't work.
Speaker 1: Do you think by them getting paid that many of them who would leave to go onto pro ball would stay in school and get their degrees?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely, absolutely, absolutely, I mean most of the guys are leaving because they are starving to death and they have to leave.  You know, they have no choice.  And the kid--I'm, I'm certain that more kids would stay in school, I mean they won't make the mega bucks that they make at the next level by staying, but, they'll have, they'll make enough where they can stay in school and be comfortable.
Story_ID: 614248
Speaker 1: Back to your life.  If you had anything, if you had your life to do over is there anything that you would change?
Speaker 2: I'm sure there are a lot of things that I would change.  I think about my life, I'd probably, probably work harder at my game and I worked very hard, but, you know, I could have worked harder at my basketball game, that, that's the one thing I can think of, you know, and so there are a lot of other things that possibly may have changed, but, but I don't know.  I, I may have to sit and really think about that.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you have not done that you would like to do?
Speaker 2: There're some things I'd like to do and I still plan to do.  What I want to do is to be able to sit down and talk to youngsters about some of the mistakes I made and some of the good things I did as well.  And I'm hopeful that I can pass some things on to them so it would help them better, make them better people, you know, girls and boys, you know.  In fact, when I'm speaking to youngsters I always tell them, I always give them my email address and if any of them ever need advice feel free to call me or email me, whatever you need to do, you know.  And I give free advice, it doesn't cost anything; no one's ever done it, but if they do I'm prepared to talk to, to them and help them whichever way I can, especially because you can't possibly get this experience unless you're this age, so as a youngster you don't have--you have no idea what's in front of you.  You, you really don't know--you're trying to make decisions and if you make a, if you make one bad decision--what I impress on them all, the thing is, if you make one really bad decision you can never--decision, you can never recover from it.  You make a bad decision, a real bad decision, you can't recover from it; you go to jail, you got a record, that's--I mean, it's done, it's written, it's all over you.  So you have to be very careful not to make that bad decision.  So, and if you need to--I tell them all the time if you need to talk to somebody, then talk to somebody, I mean, I'll be glad--I'll talk to any, any of these youngsters.  I'll talk to anybody and explain to them why they cannot afford to make a, make this bad decision because it's going to cost them for the rest of their life.  So, those are, those are the things that I try to impress to them and if I can save one, that's better than none, you know, you just never know if you can save a youngster or not, you just don't know.
Story_ID: 614249
Speaker 1: What message do you want to send to the future generation?  I mean this video is going to be available fifty, a hundred years from now. To the future generations, what do you want to say?
Speaker 2: Is--every single day try and make yourself better.  Try and make yourself better.  Never get satisfied with what, what you doing.  I don't care if you making a trillion dollars a week, try to make yourself better and don't be afraid to change to get better you know, because if it makes sense to make yourself better then you have--and it will make, it will make sense to change eventually, because nothing will stay the same, just continue to get better, that's what I try to tell kids all the time.
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: That, that I did something good to help someone, something, something.  I did something to help someone.  I mean that's very important to me.  When I'm gone, you know, somebody can reach back and say, hey, okay, we learned something from this guy, something good.  That's what, what, what I want my legacy to be.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there anything that we have not talked about that you would like to talk about?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we, we talked about my mom [Elsie Boyd Davis] a little bit, but she was a great influence on me and she meant a lot and she was such, she was, she was a good person and she meant well, never said anything bad--I never heard her say anything bad about anybody and she never held a grudge and she always tried to help.  She did her part to help and that's basically the way I am.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I'd like to thank you for sharing your story and we look forward to having you among all the many wonderful people who have done so many important things in America, not only in the African American community, but for America as well.  So thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Well thanks for having me.
