Story_ID: 86441
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Florence Cawthorne Ladd.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born June 16, 1932 in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation.
Speaker 2: I'm a writer.
Speaker 1: All right.  And there's more though--isn't there more?
Speaker 2: I was a psych-, I trained in psychology.  And for a number of years, I taught psychology, did psychological research, and then I went into academic administration.  And I had a variety of interesting posts in academia, primarily, well, exclusively in, in New England.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And one time, you were director of the Bunting Institute?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I was director of the Bunting Institute at Radcliffe [College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] from 1989 to 1997.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is April 11.  The year is 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Cambridge, Massachusetts at my home on Larch Road.
Story_ID: 86442
Speaker 1: Now, before we get into depth, there are five lightweight "People" magazine-ish type questions that--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --only require a short answer.  And the first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Truly, is that a question (laughter)?
Speaker 1: It's in the (unclear).
Speaker 2: Asparagus and strawberries.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And shad roe when it's in season.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like all seasons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  A village in Burgundy in the--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Cote-d'Or of Burgundy, a village called Flavigny-sur-Ozerain where we have been going for summer vacations and spring and fall when we can since 1984, '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: Now can you spell that for us, please?
Speaker 2: It's, it's a village where the film, "Chocolat" was made.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Flavigny, F-L-A-V-I-G-N-Y  hypen S-U-R hyphen O-Z-E-R-A-I-N.  Those are around a creek.  It's a small, it's a walled town.  It's, it was declared one of the most beautiful villages in France about a decade ago.  And since then, it has been a destination for tourist groups and for film companies.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My husband would say, it's "looking forward" because I, in phone conversations, and I wasn't even aware of it when I'm expecting to meet with somebody.  I guess I say, "looking forward", or looking, not looking forward to seeing you, but just "looking forward".
Story_ID: 86443
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, let me ask about your family.  I guess the origin of your family, how, how far can you trace your family background?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side, I can trace it back to a great-grandmother, a paternal, her paternal grandmother.  On my father's side, a great-grandmother also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there, is there any stories passed down through your family about life, say, in the 19th century or any stories of slavery or for Civil War or--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah.  On my mother's side, where I, I just know more about my mother's family.  It's been more interest in family history on the part of members of her family.  And some cousins in particular have been interested in maintaining ties to an island off North Carolina, Portsmouth Island, where my maternal grandfather, my mother's father, Henry Willis, was born in 1875, I believe.  I should know that exactly.  His mother, presumably, was born on the island.  We're not clear about that.  She was part Cherokee and part African or African American.  We visited the island with a family group a year ago in April and it was my first time there.  It was, the occasion was a homecoming for descendants of islanders.  The island is no longer occupied.  It's maintained by the National Park Service.  I believe there's a lighthouse on the island where there are residents, but the community that is there, it's there in the summer, primarily spring and summer when there is transportation to the island.  And there are a few houses that have been maintained or rehabilitated.  And one of those houses is Henry Piggott (ph.)'s house which is a house where my paternal--let's say, no, it's my mother's father's family lived, when my mother's father was, was born
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There is no record of his paternity.  And only when I visited the island, I realized that--my mother's father was named Willis.  His brothers and sisters all had different last names.  And once there, I learned by looking at tombstones and records and meeting people, that they were the last names of the other families on the island, and our family was the only black family on the island.  I wrote a poem about that visit which I'll give to you at the end of our session.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it, it's about, about that great-grandmother, what I imagined her life must have been like, and about what must have been a very painful death.  She was burned to death.  She was cooking oysters outside, roasting oysters in long billowing skirts.  Her skirts caught fire and, and she went up in flames.  And I heard about that all my childhood.  That's, that's one, one of the stories, how she died.  But it was not until--I didn't feel it, I didn't experience the emotional power of it until I went there and heard the story from other people, people who had grown up on the island, or whose parents had grown up from the, on the island.  And they knew all of us because in our--well, everyone in our group as being related to the Piggot-Willis family, the only black family.  And they all knew the story of, of how Rosa (ph.) died.
Story_ID: 86444
Speaker 1: On my father's side, my father's family from Virginia, his father came--his father was born in 1869 and came to Washington [D.C.] with his family around, about four years later, so it would have been 1873.  He went to elementary school in Washington to the Mott School and left school, I think, at the end of elementary school, eighth grade, and went to work at the Government Printing office in Washington where he was a printer's assistant for all of his working life and developed some, something of a reputation among printers for inventing knives, printers' knives.
Speaker 2: What's a printer's knife, I mean--
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I, I've seen them, you know.
Speaker 2: I think (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: I think so, I think so, I don't, I don't know.  I don't even know that we do that kind of printing now.  Anyway, and my, his wife, my material grandmother was also from Virginia.  I don't know how they met.  My grandfather had been married and widowed.  And my grandmother was his second wife.  He had three children by his first marriage, and another five children by my grandmother.  And they lived not far from us in Washington, so I saw a lot of them.  I, in terms of day-to-day acquaintance and knowledge of my father's side of the family, I, I knew them much better, saw them much more frequently than I saw my mother's family in North Carolina.  But because of the interest in history and legend and family lore, I know more about my mother's side of the family.
Story_ID: 86445
Speaker 1: And now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us and--
Speaker 2: William Cawthorne, Jr., William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Cawthorne, C-A-W-T-H-O-R-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what's his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born April 6, 1900.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what kind of person was he and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father--what kind of person was my father?  My father was a very genial, upbeat person.  And for most of my life, he was the clerk messenger to the Board of Education in Washington.  And that's the, the school system in Washington [D.C] was segregated, so it was a segregated board, you know, it's the black Board of Education, yeah.  And he had an office at the--it was the Franklin School, which is where the Board of Education met, and where there were administrative offices.
Speaker 1: Now, now did he grow in Virginia?
Speaker 2: No, he grew up in Washington.  He was born in Washington, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  And did, did he go to school in D.C.?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he went through high school.  He went to Armstrong High School in Washington, which was the trade school, the technical high school.  He didn't go to college.  He was the only one of his siblings who did not go to college.  And I think it had to do with his being the eldest of the next group of children.  He had to go to work to, to contribute to the family income.  And his brothers and sisters went to college.  I don't know that he ever resented that.  I think he was proud of their accomplishments and interests.  He was fond of mechanical things.  He liked repairing everything, clocks, automobiles.  He was very fond of cars, radios.  Sometimes he would take them apart and put them back, get them all back together.  And when television arrived, he became interested in finding out what was inside TV boxes.  He was also a very skilled cabinet maker.  And I think if he had had his choice, that would have been his, his career choice.  He, he had a small informal basement business making bookcases, screen doors, screens for the family, and, and for neighbors.  He was, he was very, very busy always.  He was very active until his death.  He died in 1975 of cancer.  And as I recall, he only allowed himself to surrender to his illness two weeks before his death.  I mean, he kept going and doing and denying, and only went to the hospital to stay the last two weeks of life.  I was my father's son.  My, my parents, I think, both wanted a boy, the first born, and I came along--
Speaker 1: Do you have any siblings?  I mean--
Speaker 2: They had a, another child, Ella Louise who died in infancy.  She had some sort of cardiac malfunction.  And then, my sister, Ethel, came along.  And at that time, I was five years old, but already, my father had designated me his son.  And I got the full treatment, I think, that a son would have received until puberty when my mother pointed out to me that I was indeed a girl.  And there were some things I should either cease doing or do in secret.  She didn't say it just in that way.
Story_ID: 86446
Speaker 1: What kind of things would, would you do with him, you know, (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I did everything.  He [William Cawthorne, Jr.] was fond of watching the trains come and go.  We'd go to the Union Station or to a freight yard and watch the trains.  We went to the airport to watch planes, planes come in.  I was his carpentry assistant.  I knew the names of the different kinds of tools.  And he'd ask me for the Phillips screwdriver, and at age four or five, I knew a Phillips screwdriver.  The toys that I remember, his, his buying for me or having a part in.  Well, I got an ele-, an electric train when I was five years old.  It really wasn't my train--it was his train (laughter).  And I, I had footballs and basketballs, and he would take me to watch football practice.  He was, he followed, he played football when he was at Armstrong High School and knew the coaches and continued to go and visit.  I'd run along.  He gave me a .22 rifle when I was about 15 years old, 14 or 15, and he used to take me to a rifle range to shoot with the expectation that I would go hunting with him.  It was around that time that my mother said, look, enough (laughter).
Speaker 1: And how did you feel about all that at the time?
Speaker 2: Well, the estrangement that separated me then from my father was painful 'cause I, I really didn't know how to deal with my mother's intervening in, in the way that she did, rather powerfully.  The other, the other--I was fond of playing chess, too, at that stage.  And she told me if I played chess with boys, I should lose.  It was not lady like; it was not feminine.  And it wasn't going to serve me well if I won.  And she also said--first, she said no football, and then she said no tackle.  You shouldn't have boys falling on you (laughter).  And then, no touch football.  And the things that I used to do with my father, going to basketball games, and that sort of thing began to take on a different character.  I did--I stopped sitting with him at basketball games, and sat with my friends, sat with other girls--didn't follow the games closely.  And, well, I guess, my mother successfully feminized me.  But I, I was the classical tomboy, loved it, and, and I feel that it was an advantage in that I didn't grow up feeling that there were things I could not do, I should not do, because I was a girl.  I felt I could do pretty much anything I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and, and by the time these, these things were presented to you, these restrictions were presented to you, you pretty much didn't, you didn't feel accepted, did you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think my character had been shaped.  And I, I knew, I know, I was never fond of doing some things that girls did, I don't think.  I mean, I had, I had dolls.  My mother will tell you that I wasn't fond of playing with dolls.  I used to play doctor with them and dismember them and play surgery (laughter).  I know I was, I was very father identified.  I don't know that I was male identified, but father identified.
Speaker 1: Well, did, did this change, like hurt my father's feelings?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.  He, he lost his buddy and he used to call me buddy, and then he stopped calling me buddy, called me Florence.  And we used to ride, I mean, after, when I was in late adolescence, we were, we would ride in silence.  I mean, if he, he were taking me some place, it was as if we didn't have any more to say to each other.  And we had a hard time learning to be, to renew the conversation.  And I, I think it was not until--well, until I was well out of graduate school and in my first marriage that we began to talk again.  And as I talk about it, I, I feel time was lost and regret, regret the silences and wish that I could have kept on being buddy in some way.  My, my sister was my mother's child.
Story_ID: 86447
Speaker 1: Now tell us about your mother.  Now, what was her full name and, and how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Eleanor Willis, E-L-E-A-N-O-R, Willis, W-I-L-L-I-S, Cawthorne.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: She is 96 years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --and she was born--
Speaker 2: 1906.
Speaker 1: 1906, okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: In New Bern, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now New Bern now, where will that be in relationship to a major city in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: It's coastal, it's--
Speaker 1: Is it near Charleston [South Carolina] or--
Speaker 2: It's near Greensboro [North Carolina] which is not major, near Beaufort [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It's on the coast.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's where my grandfather came at 16 and when he left the island [Portsmouth Island].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, that's a historic part of the country.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and--
Speaker 2: The Outer Banks would be--well, the Iron Ports is south of Hatteras, and the sort of the last of the Outer Banks on to Carolina.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, now what was she like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  It's where, I thought it was sitting around, you know, but what, what is she like?
Speaker 2: My mother is, is a force still at 96.  I mean, she's losing some of it.  She's a very intelligent, determined, vain, complex woman.  She is, she, she was a teacher.  She went to a Normal School in North Carolina, Winston-Salem Normal School.  It was a two-year Normal School, taught for a couple of years before she met my father.  She met my father at a funeral.  One of her cousins had gone to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] to medical school and met my father's sister, married her, and brought her back to New Bern, North Carolina from Washington, okay.  While he was treating--this is my mother's cousin, we call him Uncle William--while he was treating typhoid cases in 1929, his wife, my aunt Hattie (ph.), died of typhoid.  And my father and his parents and rest of the family went to Hattie's funeral.  And it was Hattie's funeral that my father and mother struck up a relationship.  I've always found that amusing.  And in any case, they married the next year, and she moved to Washington [D.C.].  And, I think in Washington, you needed a bachelor's degree to teach.  She had--I was born two years later, and my sisters were born.  And when she wanted to--and renew her teaching credentials or start teaching, she had to go back to school.  And when, when I was eight years old, my mother went back to college.  She went to the Teachers College in Washington for a few courses.  And then she transferred to Howard and went on a part-time basis over--I think a four-year period--until she finished her bachelor's degree.  She is one not to, (unclear) time away, she, she used her time rather economically, and would read her university level assignments to my sister and me as bedtime stories.  She took a course in the Greek Classics.  And so, I heard Euripides and Sophocles and Aeschylus between the ages of nine and twelve.  She took a course in British Romantic Poetry and I learned something about Shelly, Wordsworth, Tennyson, and Keats.  She took a course in Latin American Novel.  In any case, she, she had all of that with us, and it was just a way of getting her homework done.  And I didn't realize that, that was unusual, of course, if you don't know what other people's childhood experiences are like.  I didn't know that was unusual until I went to high school, and a teacher asked us to make a list of books we remembered from childhood, childhood readings.  And I made my list (laughter).
Story_ID: 86530
Speaker 1: So, okay, you were going to tell us--
Speaker 2: Another anecdote about my mother [Eleanor Willis Cawthorne].
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 2: When she realized the National Gallery [of Art] was air conditioned, on very hot days in the summer, she would take my, my sister [Ethel Cawthorne] and me, to the National Gallery for the day.  It was not only air conditioned.  When the restaurant opened there, it opened on a non-discriminatory, non-segregated pol-, policy.  And so, it was a place, maybe the place downtown where one, before 1954, could, could dine.
Speaker 1: So, so you're saying that--and this is important for people who watch this tape, I think, in the future, saying that when you were a little girl, most of Washington, D.C., the nation's capital, was segregated?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.  Yes, schools were segreta-, segregated, public facilities were segregated.  Transportation, as I recall, was not segregated.  I mean, one didn't have to go to the back of the street car or the bus in Washington, but virtually everything else was.  And the more upscale department stores didn't want blacks to try on clothes, or didn't allow blacks to try on clothes that they were buying there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was Southern.
Speaker 1: Yes, well, you know, I think it's an important point to make this.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, it's hard for people to imagine that now, you know.  So, so you all would spend all day in the National Gallery.
Speaker 2: The National Gallery.  I was about eight or nine or ten years old, and my sister, five years younger.  And my mother would take her reading or correspondence or sewing--I remember her taking sewing.  She would settle in on one of the those comfortable sofas.  And my sister and I would go on the docent's tours of the collection.  And then after going on the tour, I would take my sister on the tour.  The guards knew us by name, Florence and Ethel, and they would ask us not to run up and down those marble floors.  We had a wonderful time making up stories about the paintings.  And I, I learned a lot just by walking through the Gallery day after hot day on those tours, and knew that collection in a way that I will never know another collection.  I, I think that experience contributed to my becoming a collector.  Before I had any money really, I, I, I bought original works of art.  And I'm very grateful to my mother for, for caring enough and taking the time to give us that kind of exposure.
Speaker 1: That's unusual.  That's a special type of a--
Speaker 2: Special, she's, she was unusual.
Story_ID: 86531
Speaker 1: Now give us a sense of some of the, you know, sights and sounds and smells of childhood in the neighborhood you grew up in.
Speaker 2: There was a playground across the street, a school, attached to a school.  I think it was, it was the back of the Cook School, and there was a Margaret [Murray] Washington Vocational School across the street.  And there was a huge playing field for baseball games.  I wasn't good at baseball, but for football, too.  There were, as I recall, a lot of boys in the neighborhood.  There was a commercial area around the corner on North Capitol Street.  And the only white playmate I had was a girl named Frieda (ph.), as I remember, whose family was Greek and they had a variety store.  And then when we went to school around five or six, we went to different schools.  And by the time we were seven, we didn't talk to each other anymore.
Story_ID: 86532
Speaker 1: There was a, a sense of--
Speaker 2: Did you, well, (unclear) they're not the same, but did you, did you, did it cause you to reflect on the state of, you know, of things, you know?
Speaker 1: At seven, at age seven, no.  I, I, I don't think I interpreted it until I was in my teens, no.  For the most part, our contacts were with other blacks.  And one can live a very insulated life in segregated Washington [D.C.] without having contact with, with white people at that time.  The teachers, all the teachers in the schools I attended were black.  The dentist was black.  The doctor was black.  If we had to see a lawyer about something, it was a black lawyer.  We'd go by--I've forgotten what street it was--but my father would point out the office of an architect, black architect.  It was a black middle class in Washington.  I, I think it's the end of the 19th century.  And by the time, by the middle of the 20th century, it was a very large, well-established black, black middle class.  A lot of people worked for government.  Politically, I was aware of not being able to vote, you know, that being, living in Washington meant being disenfranchised politically.  And I really didn't have a sense of political life in terms of candidates and campaigns until I went to graduate school in New York state--
Speaker 2: Now, that's--
Speaker 1: --because there were no, we were aware of national elections, but we, we didn't vote.
Speaker 2: Now in those days, you're saying people of Washington, D.C. could not vote?
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It wasn't until--what this, what this, late '60s [1960s] maybe?
Speaker 1: I don't, I don't know when, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I, I was certainly, yeah, I, I, what was I aware of?  In high school, I became more politically, oh, conscious, I guess.  And it was through high school seminars run by the American Friend Service Committee that just expanded my, my world view.  And through those seminars, that I learned something about pacifism, Quakerism, Soviet Union, and began to look at the U.S. political system critically.
Story_ID: 86533
Speaker 1: Now I want to go back to grade school, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about grade school.  What grade school did you attend and, you know, and tell me like--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  I went to Slater-Langston [Elementary] School [Washington, D.C.].  I went to, I went to a nursery school before that.  I went to a nursery school at Margaret, I think it was Margaret Murray Washington Vocational School, which is kind of a vocational school for girls, and they had a, a nursery school component.  And my mother [Eleanor Willis Cawthorne] is fond of saying that I started school at two and a half.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was happy to be free of me at two and a half (laughter).  And then I went to kindergarten at Slater-Langston School which was, which went through fifth grade.  In sixth grade, I went to the John F. Cook [Elementary] School.  I went to Shaw Junior High and to Dunbar High School, the celebrated Dunbar High School.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, Shaw, Shaw Junior High School, went to Dunbar High School, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yep.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I didn't want you to go, against the (unclear).
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But, but the grade school now.  Now, now tell us about your grade school experience?  How was that?  Did you like school?  (Simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I loved school.
Speaker 1: I mean, you seemed to have a very--
Speaker 2: I think I loved school.
Speaker 1: --very structured environment at home.  It's kind of bent toward school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And as I recall, my, my parents were involved in the school.  I mean, they knew the teachers.  They went to meetings.  In, in my elementary school, there were some teachers from famous families.
Speaker 1: Who are they?
Speaker 2: My first grade teacher was Mrs. Burleigh, the daughter-in-law of Harry T. Burleigh, the composer.  The second, Miss, Miss, Miss Tanner, Henry O. Tanner's--I think, niece, taught second grade in that school.  And it probably had to do with segregation, you know.  I, I think that they were women who might have had higher asp-, aspirations.  They might have been doing other things if they'd had more opportunity.  In any case, that's--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, right, like you say, you were basically a tomboy in grade school, you were saying.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I don't know that I carried that into the classroom.  I knew, I knew I was smart.  I mean, I, I, I felt--well, first of all, when I was in first grade, it was a joint class, as I recall, a first grade and a second grade are the same classroom.  And I'd do all the homework on the board.  I'd do the first grade homework, the second grade homework, and then I was just sitting there, you know.  And other people were still doing whatever was on the board.  It wasn't homework, you know, the--wherever they put on the blackboard.  And it was the second grade teacher, Miss Tanner, who allowed me to paint a mural.  She put up some brown paper across a board in the back of the room.  And when I finished all the work that was on the board, I was allowed to go and paint (laughter) a mural.  It was a Dutch scene, as I remember, with tulips and windmills.  I certainly had no talent for painting, but it was a way of keeping me busy.  And I, I didn't do second grade formally.  I went from first grade to third grade because I'd, I'd done the second grade and--while I was doing first grade.  And, and that, was, was very reaffirming.  I think my parents had made feel I was bright, but I knew I was bright then.  I, I--and I remember, and I was also very--I don't know.  I was very coachable and in the classroom, I behaved like a girl.  I didn't challenge anybody.  I didn't do the kinds of things that got boys into trouble.  I mean, I, I, I knew enough to be a girl in the classroom.
Speaker 1: Okay, you know.
Speaker 2: I haven't thought about that until now.  And so, somehow, I, I separated the, the kind of behavior and suppressed some interests, I think, and, and conformed to the expectations for, for girls in the classroom.  And it was okay for a girl to be smart.
Story_ID: 86534
Speaker 1: Tell us about your teachers.  Did you have any, any--I mean, a, aside of the famous names, did you have any teachers that took a particular interest in you and your development?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a fourth grade teacher, I can't remember her name.  But I remember becoming interested in science in fourth grade.  In fifth grade, I remember Mrs. Gary (ph.) who was a pear-shaped, sort of overweight teacher, who rarely got up, but who with great authority, dignity, and beauty, presided over the fifth grade.  I can still hear her voice, and I remember being just fascinated by math at that time.  I also wrote poems in elementary school and won some prizes, really trite, embarrassing poems (laughter), patriotic poems, one that began, "Hurrah, hurrah, for MacArthur" (laughter).  And the prizes were generally in war stamps, saving stamps.  This was toward the end of World War II.  What else do I remember?  I remember my sixth grade teacher.  It was in the school across the street, the [John F.] Cook [Elementary] School.  I rather liked her son, Raymond, and, and, Raymond and I had a kind of sibling association which was nice.  Girls who were friends, there was a girl named Clara (ph.), and then there was a girl who came in the sixth grade who was taller than I was.  I had been the tallest in the class and teachers lined you up by height.  And Elizabeth Slade (ph.) came to the school and she was taller, and I didn't have to walk it--I wasn't the last one in the girls' line anymore because Elizabeth Slade walked behind me.
Speaker 1: It make you feel better?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), yeah.  I guess I didn't want to stand out in some ways.  In junior high school, there was a wonderful teacher who taught history, Nellie Quander.  And it was Nellie Quander who raised consciousness about race and nationality and patriotism.  She told us explicitly when you go to see those cowboy movies, you should cheer when the white men fall (laughter), and don't cheer when those, when the Indians are killed.  And she was just very clear and didactic on the subject of, of, of race and national allegiance.  And if there was anybody who really made me begin to think subversively, if you will, about the United States government, it was that teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you, you know what her background was?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know she was very well educated.  I mean, I--she was one of a great number of teachers I had in junior high and high school who were over-prepared.  And certainly at Dunbar [High School, Washington, D.C.], there were a number of teachers with PhDs because they couldn't get jobs in colleges and universities.
Story_ID: 86535
Speaker 1: Alright, now you went to Dunbar [High School, Washington, D.C.].  Well, you went to Shaw [Junior High School]--
Speaker 2: Yep.  I, I--
Speaker 1: --yeah.  Middle school first, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a junior high school.  There are three or four memorable teachers there, Nellie Quander, Ms. McNeil (ph.), an English teacher.  No, that was high school, Ms. McNeil.  It was Ms. Hansberry (ph.) in junior high and Ms. Hans-, it was Ms. Hansberry.  It was in junior high school that, that she asked for books we had read.  And that's when I, I learned that what I had been exposed to were not traditional childhood books, books for children.  There was another teacher, an art teacher, who's my homeroom teacher, Lucille Davis Roberts (ph.).  She was my homeroom teacher for three years in high school, and she was a studio art teacher.  I don't think I learned much about art history from her or much about how to look at art, but she certainly encouraged students to, to make art.  And we did a lot of drawing and painting in, in homeroom.
Story_ID: 86536
Speaker 1: And then Dunbar [High School, Washington, D.C.], and Dunbar was a very powerful experience.  It, it was the academic high school for all black students in Washington [D.C.], so people came from all over the city.  It was very competitive.  In a class of 364 students, I think I was eighth or ninth in my class.  And that was, you know, after having been first in my junior high school.  I learned a lot in, in that school.  And we were taught that we had to be better than white students at the next level when we went to university, to college university.  We were taught that the expectation was very high.  Everybody who went to that high school was expected to go to college.  And I think something like 95 percent of the students in my graduating class went to college.
Speaker 2: Now, who were some of the teachers there that, that were outstanding?
Speaker 1: Mr. Douglass, he was a son of Frederick Douglass (laughter).
Speaker 2: A son, not a grand-, or--
Speaker 1: He's a son, yeah, he was elderly.
Speaker 2: What was, what was his--
Speaker 1: He taught English.
Speaker 2: What was his first name?
Speaker 1: Mr.--I mean, what did I learn (laughter)?  I don't remember.
Speaker 2: Okay.  He taught English?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I have a friend who--I'm sure she remembers.
Speaker 2: Did, did they ever talk about the fact that he's a son of Frederick?  I mean, did he--
Speaker 1: I didn't make a lot of it.  He was, he was a teacher there.  I mean, I, no, only, only, afterwards, I learned some things about the backgrounds of those teachers.  Dr. Nixon, he was called doctor, he was a biology teacher, wore a lab coat, made us all feel we should, we were premed in high school.  The famous Miss McNeil.  And then, Alma Thomas, and I can't remember--I think she was teaching at Shaw [Junior High School].  Her paintings are in major galleries now.  She was an art teacher in junior high school.
Speaker 2: Now, now back to Miss O'Neil, she's a famous person?  I mean, Miss McNeil?
Speaker 1: Miss McNeil, yeah.
Speaker 2: McNeil?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I, I don't, I don't know.  I mean, I, I'm trying to think it was somebody else from--Lately, the assistant principal was Miss Brooks who is an aunt or a great-aunt of Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham in that Brooks family.  I, I can't recall some teachers' names now but--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --it was a very, very interesting, challenging faculty.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And Dunbar High School in D.C. is a, is well-known all over the country, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 86537
Speaker 1: So what, how, were there any teachers or any incidents in high school that, that made you think about psychology?
Speaker 2: Well, I was taking physics.  In, in high school, I wanted to be--when I went to high school, I think in junior high school, I was interested in becoming a chemist.  I knew about Madame [Marie] Curie (laughter).  I read a biography of Madame Curie.  And I decided I wanted to be a chemist and I was, I took a chemistry course.  I think I took chemistry courses in tenth and eleventh grade.  I don't, I don't know, I took biology one year.  I can't remember now, but I was fond of chemistry.  I was good at it.  And I used to hang out in the chemistry lab and, and play chess, and cleaned test tubes and do whatever else the chemistry teacher wanted to do.  I sort of made myself the chemistry teacher's assistant.  And then in my senior year in high school--well, in, after eleventh grade, summer of eleventh grade, I took a typing course.  And my mother [Eleanor Willis Cawthorne] that summer, was taking a correspondence course from Penn State University [Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania] in abnormal psychology because she was preparing to teach in special education, or I don't know, she just always took courses.  In any case, she had me, for typing practice, type her papers.  And so, I'd type papers about Freud and Freudian theory, and things I can't remember now about the [Stanford-]Binet test, a paper about an early mental institution in France, and it looked easy.  I mean, it sounded easy and I enjoyed reading it.  And by the end of when I went into twelfth grade, I had such a terrible time with the physics teacher, who didn't, didn't like girls, I don't think, didn't encourage us, that I decided I couldn't be a chemist if I didn't do well in physics, and maybe I'll be a psychologist.  And so in my college yearbook, it says, "to be a psychologist".  It was a very bright, extremely bright, student in the, in the physics class, Gloria Green (ph.).
Speaker 1: Now this is in high school or--
Speaker 2: In high school, high school, high school.  And she went from Dunbar High School to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I don't know what happened to her at MIT.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she must have been one, I mean, she must have been the only black woman student in her class at MIT.
Story_ID: 86538
Speaker 1: Now, when you were, right now, were you an active, popular girl or were you more subdued or--
Speaker 2: Well, I had become more subdued.  I, I was in a kind of clique with the, with the girls who would rather be bright than glamorous, but I really wanted to be glamorous (laughter).
Speaker 1: You wondered if the glamor girl (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes, I don't, I don't know (laughter), I don't know.  I didn't have a lot of choice though.  I wasn't terrible glamorous.  And the boyfriend in high school, George Burke (ph.), was a relationship that I think his mother and my mother [Eleanor Willis Cawthorne] arranged.  His father and my father [William Cawthorne, Jr.] had been lifelong friends.  And by my senior year, I guess, junior or senior year, it was important to have someone to take you to formal dances.  And there were--one bought evening gowns--I guess, they still do.  I don't know.  And, you know, there were, there were proms and, and somehow George and I were thrown together.  It was not the great romance of either of our lives, I don't think, but it, it was my first dating experience.  And it was tolerable (laughter) and extended into college.
Story_ID: 86457
Speaker 1: We're talking about high school and your introduction to psychology, I guess, and--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And, and again, thanks to my mother [Eleanor Willis Cawthorne].
Speaker 1: Yes.  So you say, you, you were dating [George Burke (ph.)] in sort of an arranged--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous).  Okay.  But you did have a social life in high school (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, there were parties.  There were baseball games and football games.  And people took all afternoon to walk each other home (laughter), often stopping by the Jones, Mr. Jones' drugstore, where there was a counter with just about six stools.  And you could, you know, spend all afternoon over a cherry coke or a root beer float, and just sit there and gaze at the Jones girls who were a bit older and very pretty and listen and, and try to, try, try to become a little more worldly.  On my own, I some-, I made my way downtown.  I used to go down to Dupont Circle to buy the New York Times and that, that was really a very sophisticated thing to do (laughter).  What else?  Going, going to the libraries was a high event.  My mother used to take us to the Library of Congress.  It was a period when she decided that was a place where she could work and that, that, that was fun.  There were a lot of family events.  Weekends were family times.  I don't remember hanging out much, you know.  Films, movies, they were called at the black theaters, the Lincoln, the Republic, and the Booker T. on U Street.  That was a Saturday afternoon event--compulsory pretty much, you, you had to go the movies.  And then, there's the Howard Theater, which was a major performance theater, a, a place where bands, big bands played.  I remember in high school, I cut school one day to go hear Count Basie.  And the lines were, I mean, just around the block, so I did get into the first show, and I decided to wait in line for the second show.  And by the time, I got home, it was after dark.  And my parents were very upset--one, because it was after dark.  And other people had come home from school and my mother called around.  I've forgotten, I didn't, I didn't cut, I never cut school by myself.  I always did it with two or three other people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I cut school with George Burke once.  And we, we had heard that an art cinema had opened in downtown Washington [D.C.], and they were opening on a non-discriminating basis.  And so one day, we decided we'd go downtown and it was around 15th and F Street and it's in the afternoon.  We must have been in twelfth grade by then.  We went to the cinema.  The young white woman in the booth, the ticket office booth, and we asked, George asked for two tickets.  And I don't know exactly what she said.  I think she said, no, I, I can't sell them to you, or something like that.  And we didn't hear her until, you know--well, we didn't want to hear her.  And George asked her what she'd said.  At that point, a white man appeared behind her in the booth.  And he said something like, niggers aren't allowed in this theater.  That's how I heard it--I, I mean, I really don't know the words.  And George and I turned away and we walked for blocks in silence.  And then we turned on each other with a lot of anger and fear and resentment.  And I, I recall that as the, the first time I was exposed to discrimination.  And I, I was about 16 years old.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that's an interesting reaction, you know, reminds me, reminds me of Langston Hughes' poem, you know, about "A Dream Deferred", what happens when people react to--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Story_ID: 86458
Speaker 1: Well, now, when, when you were on a verge of graduating from [Dunbar] High School [Washington, D.C.], did you know you wanted to be a psychologist?  Was that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's, that's what it says in the yearbook--to be a psychologist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, you graduated from high school in what year?
Speaker 2: 1949.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and did you know you were going to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Eleanor Willis Cawthorne] knew that I was going to Howard (laughter).  My, my sister [Ethel Cawthorne] had been ill.  And my parents were looking at their finances.  My sister had had a mastectomy at 14.  And, anyway, she--I, I guess I was in, I was in college when she had the mastectomy, so they didn't, they didn't know that was coming.  Or if they knew, I didn't know.  And in any case, they were thinking about their finances.  And I remember their asking me, if I wanted to go--I think I must have been in high school--if I wanted to go to graduate school or professional school after college.  Hello.  I mean, now that I think about that, it was in a way shaping my future and, and planning ahead with me and for me, in, in, in, in a way that determined what happened or what would happen.  In any case, they explained what graduate school was and the professional schools they told me about were law school and medical school.  I don't think they told me about any other schools and I wasn't interested in law or medicine.  And so I, I said I'd probably go to graduate school after college.  And, mind you, I hadn't gone to college.  In any case, so when I went to college, my--when the choices of college came, and I would--the guidance counselor wasn't very good in our high school.  I don't know about--in, in case, my mother stepped in.  And she said she wanted me to have a balanced social experience, and she felt that I would have a better social experience at Howard.  And I had, in the earlier conversation--and I'm not telling this sequentially--that they explained that if I wanted to go to graduate school, I would have a, a better graduate education elsewhere other than at Howard.  But if I wanted to go to law school or medical school, I would have a better chance of getting into law school or medical school at Howard.  And so, I should go to--go away for undergraduate school.  Anyway, it was, it was that kind of discussion, which I'm, I don't think I thoroughly understood then, and I'm, I'm not clear about it now because I didn't understand it then.  My mother was concerned about my having--my dating, and she was already concerned about marriage, that I--well, I don't think she thought I was a, a strong candidate.  In any case, and I think she had an eye on the people I would meet at Howard and the men I would meet at Howard.  So I went to Howard.  And I went to Howard with mixed feelings because some of my friends went away to school.  And, and by that time, by the time I got into college, I, I felt I should have left home.  I lived at home.  And by that time, my sister was becoming ill, and--
Speaker 1: (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Sorry?
Speaker 1: Her, her illness, was it very tough on (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yeah, yeah.  She was my mother's child.  I was my father's [William Cawthorne, Jr.] child.  And it was very hard, very hard, and it was just the two of us.  In any case, I made good friends at Howard.  I had a terrific educational experience.  I had a social life, surprise, surprise.
Story_ID: 86459
Speaker 1: I got a fellowship, a travel fellowship in my junior year [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.], which took me to Europe, which really changed my life.
Speaker 2: Oh, you went to France and Switzerland?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and to Italy and England.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But it, it was really France that was the transformative experience because of the people I met there, and one, one person in particular.  I used to hang out with the Howard Players.  And at that time, Owen Dodson and Anne [Margaret] Cooke and [James] "Beanie" Butcher and--were running the Howard Players.  It was a first rate college company, college theater company.
Speaker 2: So did you, were you, were you involved with (unclear)?
Speaker 1: I, I ushered (laughter) and critiqued (laughter).  And, no, I was never on stage.  I made good friends among the players, had a nice time.
Speaker 2: Now, let me backtrack a little bit to France.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: Now, you said it was a transformative experience, and how did it transform you?
Speaker 1: Well, I--the, the trip over, for one thing, was enlightening.  It was a nine-day trip by boat, a student, student ship, nine days from New York to Le Havre.  And on that ship, I was bunked with students from Brooklyn College [New York, New York] and from a small college in Chambersburg, Pennsylvania.  Other, other white--well, they were all white students, except for me.  And it was my first intimate cross-racial experience.  Once in France, I discovered in Paris, I discovered a sense of freedom that I hadn't--felt I had been deprived of, you know.  I, I felt something had been released.  And I felt the people were seeing me, not in terms of race, but seeing me for who I was, maybe seeing me in terms of nationality for the first time.  And I, I hadn't particularly felt American, you know, until going abroad.  So, a, a lot of insights into identity occurred to me.  I had the good fortune to have a, a contact from my professor at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] to a professor at the Sorbonne [University of Paris] who referred me to a clinic where the women who interviewed me, a psychologist, Nadine (unclear; in French), discovered in the first 15 or 20 minutes that I knew nothing really about psychological tests for children, which is what I was supposed to observing there, that I knew very little about psychology in general, that I knew nothing about wines.  I knew nothing about cuisine.  I knew nothing about the Communist Party.  And she took me under her wing, and she made me her project, and she, she made her, her lifelong project.
Speaker 2: Now you were at the Sorbonne?
Speaker 1: The, no, I was, I was attached to a clinic at the L'hopital Henri (unclear; in French) which was a clinical psychology unit.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, so this is a learning experience all the time you're there?
Speaker 1: She was wonderful.
Story_ID: 86460
Speaker 1: Did you meet any of the American expatriate artists over there or anything?
Speaker 2: I, I met, yes, I, at that time, the names didn't register, you know.  I met a lot of people.  I met--I used to go Gordon Heath's nightclub.  Now they, Gordon Heath was black and a folk singer, gay, and I, I knew about him through Owen Dodson who told me to be sure to go there.  And it was 1952.  I, I, I met people whose names didn't stay with me, you know.  I was really kind of concentrating on psychology.  It was a Haitian psychologist I met, and (unclear; in French), and he's somebody I, I wish I had followed and kept in touch with.  But I certainly wasn't aware of an expatriate community.  I, I didn't have that kind of awareness.  I remember going to see Mahalia Jackson, Mahalia Jackson, as they said for the first time there.  I, I was really an innocent, naive, and I wish now as I look back, that I, I had lived out that time differently, wish now that I had stayed (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you meet any, any of the Francophone African students, or, or that--
Speaker 2: Haitian--
Speaker 1: The Haitians--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or those from--what is that now, the, the French Antilles [French West Indies] and--
Speaker 2: I, I didn't meet Francophone Africans.  There weren't being there then.  The people from the Antilles were there, yeah, and, and, and--
Speaker 1: So, around the time, they're pub-, published in (unclear) offer kind of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, they are still, yeah.  Anyway, and I came back for a senior year, came back with a bicycle.
Speaker 1: And you rode your bicycle?
Speaker 2: No, I bought, I bought, bought a bicycle--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a Rog, which I still have.  The bicycle is 50, 51 years old.  And, and I came back, I came back a different person.  I, I came back more, more politically, even more politically aware and engaged.  It was during the McCarthy years.  I came back with a better sense of what Communism was about, having been to some cell meetings there, not taking again all of it because my French wasn't good enough, but--but, but, un-, understanding, understanding why it was a threat to the U.S.
Story_ID: 86461
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now by the time you get back, yeah, the McCarthy era is starting up and, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was getting ugly.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: Anyway, my sister [Ethel Cawthorne]--I'd graduated in 1953 from Howard in June.  My sister died in August of '53 [1953].  She was 16.  And she had just a massive array of tumors, and finally a, a spinal tumor and brain tumor.  And my parents were devastated, especially my mother [Eleanor Willis Cawthorne] who has not yet recovered.  I guess you never do, you know.  And, and there was by that time, I had been--well, a lot of things had happened.  I was trying to decide whether I, whether I should go to graduate school, whether I should leave, or maybe I should stay around, do another year of college, a post-graduate year because I had taken a creative writing course with Sterling Brown which I, I enjoyed immensely.  There were two other students in the class, a guy named Ken something, and Toni Wofford--the world knows as Toni Morrison now.  Anyway, and I talked to my parents about whether I should stay, and take another year because I wanted to be a writer, I thought, maybe instead of a psychologist, and they discouraged it.  My father [William Cawthorne, Jr.] said you've won an important scholarship to the University of Rochester [Rochester, New York] which we can't replace.  It was full tuition.  It was a very generous scholarship.  And my mother said, you can always write on the side.  You've got to be able to make a living, she said.  And then she added, besides, no one may ever marry you.
Speaker 1: She was very concerned of (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And on the day I finished my PhD orals and called home to tell them I had finished, my mother answered the phone and she said, that's very nice, dear, it's the most important thing that you will have done until you get married.  And that was just the expectation for, for our generation.
Speaker 1: Well, how did you feel about that at the time?
Speaker 2: Well, I felt, I felt that those five years I had put in, weren't being recognized and celebrated in the way I wanted to hear it, and that she valued more a domestic role, you know, being, being a wife more than having a PhD in psychology.  I, I, I really found troubling, but that was part of our history and her wanting me to be more feminine, you know, stop, stop playing football.  I'll lose at chess.
Story_ID: 86462
Speaker 1: What was the University of Rochester like (unclear)?
Speaker 2: It was, it was a lonely place (laughter).  The town, the university was terrific and supportive.  There were three African American students in the graduate school.  I won't remember the name of the chap in chemistry--called, name's gone.  But in the psychology department, Bernie Holliston (ph.) had gone ahead of me.  We'd had the same advisor at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] who had a good connection to the department chair at Rochester, and he had advised Bernie to go and Bernie got a good financial support and because Bernie was doing well there, he advised me to go.  And I went.  So there were the three of us in the graduate school.  The department, the faculty, and the student body was largely Jewish.  I sort of became Jewish in (laughter), in style and eating practices during my years there.  The town was nicknamed Smugtown, USA.  It was a very closed company town, a, a relatively wealthy upstate New York town with Kodak--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Kodak.
Speaker 2: --and, and Xerox there.  It was a very white town.  It's hard to find housing.  And that was my first encounter with face-to-face, close the door in your face discrimination, in looking for a place to live in the vicinity of the university.  But the university was very supportive, a good faculty.  It was very strong in social psychology at the time and that was my concentration.  I did a field, my field work at a Veterans Administration Soldiers Home in Bath, New York.   It was lonely.  Some of it was, it was, some of it was--I guess, you're always lonely in graduate school or a lot of time, it's solitary time.  I used to go to New York a lot.  I had a boyfriend in New York, a composer, Noel DaCosta, from a Salvation Army family, a very, a very honorable decent, decent fellow.
Speaker 1: When did you meet him?
Speaker 2: His sister introduced us.  His sister worked in a lab at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And when I was, I guess a senior, I had a, a job in the lab.  I did statistics for the lab in the medical school, and he came to visit her.  He was in graduate school at Columbia [University, New York, New York], and, and that's how we met.  And I was really smitten.  I don't think he was, you know, always kept a certain distance and was very closed.  And in any case, I went to see him as often as I could, learned a lot about music, about contemporary music.  Anyway, and he had, he had a good deal of success as a composer.  He died about a year and half ago.
Story_ID: 86463
Speaker 1: Now, it's ironic.  Rochester [New York] is another home of Frederick Douglass.  I don't know if you thought about that when you were there but probably not.  Okay, all right.  So now, after the University of Rochester, you, after you got--you were there like five years?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You got your PhD in '58 [1958]?
Speaker 2: '58 [1958], yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  So you, you, let's see.
Speaker 2: And my, my dissertation was on "Interests, Activities, and Attitudes of Institutionalized Aging Males", which grew out of my observations and research at the Old Solders' Home in Bath, New York.  So I was thrust into gerontology before it was a field.  Luckily, I heard about a job in Boston [Massachusetts].  And I say luckily because by that time, a number of friends from my department, in the psychology department at Rochester, had come to teach in the Boston area.  And so, I had friends teaching at Tufts [University, Medford, Massachusetts] and, and BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts].  And I don't quite know how I heard about the job, but there was a new organization called the Age Center of New England, which had an affiliation with the Department of Social Relations at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and the Harvard Business School.  And it was based in the Vendome Hotel at 160 Commonwealth Avenue, classy working address.  And that was my first job as a research associate on a project that had to do with attitudes toward old people.  And I spent a good deal of time interviewing kids--
Speaker 1: About their attitudes about old people?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  And I did that for two years.  It was a two-year contract.  And then my--I, I got married in '59 [1959].
Story_ID: 86774
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to talk faster.
Speaker 2: We're rolling again.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And your, now where did you meet your husband [Ulysses Grant Shelton, Jr.]?
Speaker 1: In Washington [D.C.].  In--I think I was aware of him before I went to high school.  We were in the same class in high school at Dunbar [High School, Washington, D.C.].  And I had a terrific crush on him in high school, but he was going with Doris Hagens (ph.).  And so, it wasn't until I came to work in the Boston area that I asked somebody to look him up for me.  It was Irving Zola, a sociologist.  He was a graduate student at the time who told me he could find anybody pretty much in the Boston area.  And--
Speaker 2: How did you know he was here in Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, he had gone to Harvard College and he had stayed on in Boston.  And within, I don't know, I'd been here maybe a couple of months.  And Irving Zola found him for me.  Ulysses Grant Shelton, Jr. and our families had known each other.  My mother had taught one of his brothers in fourth grade.  I knew something about the Shelton family.  And I, I was still smitten when we met again.  And I think he had forgotten Doris Hagens by that time.  And we had, I--a relatively short courtship.  And we were married in March of 1959, I, I think, yeah, March of '59 [1959].  In any case, it was a five-year marriage.  It was an interesting marriage.  I--he was teaching math in English High School in Boston.  We were married in Washington at the chapel, the chapel in the Howard Divinity School.  And the marriage, I think, pleased our parents a great deal.  Somewhere early in the marriage, I think we realized we were not entirely ideally suited.  And I, I, I, I think there were some other issues, too.  I think there were some psychological issues, probably on both sides.  In any case, we, we, we married.  And we lived in Cambridge [Massachusetts] on Ellery Street and by that time, my appointment at the Age Center [of New England] had come to a close.  The project had ended.  I got a teaching job.  It was my first teaching job at Simmons College in the psychology department where I was an assistant professor.  And he was teaching at English High School which was just around the corner.
Story_ID: 86775
Speaker 1: I think the--some, some, some of the tension had to do with ambition.  I, I think I was more, more ambitious for both of us than, than he was.  In any case, I urged him to apply for a Fulbright because I wanted to go abroad again and he applied and we were sent to Turkey.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So he, he won a Fulbright--
Speaker 1: To teach math, yeah, in a Maarif (ph.) college.  It was a Turkish--the equivalent of a junior college, I think, or a upper level high school.  Lycee (ph.), it was a lycee, kind of, in which instruction in technical subjects was given in English.  And he, he taught math in the college in Eskiehir here, which is on the Anatolian Plain, halfway between Ankara and Istanbul.  In the first year, that was '61 [1961], '62 [1962], I didn't work.  I, I spent my mornings writing.  I wrote some poems and short stories, and I started a novel that year which I abandoned.  It was about him primarily.  In any case, the second year, we taught, we both taught the second year.  We were assigned to Istanbul.  He taught at Robert at, he taught at Moda College which was on the Asia side of Istanbul, and I taught at Robert College on the European side.  We lived in downtown Istanbul in a very charming apartment that had been prepared for the British Vice-Consul who had been recalled.  And we, we had, we had a very, a very good income by Turkish standards, so we, we lived very well and traveled a lot in the Middle East and, and in Europe, around that time.  James Baldwin was in Istanbul that year, and visiting at Robert College where I was teaching.  And he and his entourage came every Wednesday night to our house for dinner.  In this country, we were in the midst of civil rights protests and demonstrations.  And, and through Jimmy Baldwin, we would get news of what was going on or some firsthand reports because he, he went back and forth.  His biographer, David Leeming, was also teaching at Robert College at the time.  David was very young, just out of Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], and sort of attached himself to Jimmy as his archivist, and followed him and followed his life very closely.  And I guess about five or six years ago, brought out what is, I think, the definitive biography of James Baldwin.  It was a high time for me especially, intellectually, culturally.  There were a lot of journalists who came through, and just a lively expatriate community, American and British in Istanbul.  And people stopped in Istanbul.  People traveling from the East stopped.  It was, it was very interesting.  I felt the kind of tensions there--some of them culturally related.  The limitations of living in an Islamic society certainly in (unclear) here.  My husband [Ulysses Grant Shelton, Jr.] felt that I should not go out alone because Turkish women didn't go out alone, and I should wear my arm and shoulders covered.  Well, I'd come with a lot of sleeveless dresses to a warm place.  In any case, and so there was a certain tension about, about being a woman in, in an Islamic country.  And when we moved to Istanbul, I really broke out of that and had my own income and my own teaching post, my own friends, and an adequate command of Turkish by that time, not as good as Grant's Turkish was.  He had a very good ear and was mistaken for a dark Turk sometimes.  People didn't believe that he was not Turkish.  He spoke with it with such fluency and accuracy.  In any case, that, that year was, I think the year that ended our marriage.  So when we came back to the U.S., we were ready to be divorced.
Story_ID: 86776
Speaker 1: And it was then that I realized that I had to be a little more fiscally responsible than I had been previously, and sought a post-doctoral fellowship, because I begin to take my career seriously at that time.  I took a post-doc at the Harvard Medical School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] in a program in community psychiatry, which was run by Gerald Caplan, and it was a program designed to bring psychologists, social workers, and psychiatrists out of hospital settings and into work in, in city settings.  At that time, Boston [Massachusetts] was being transformed by the urban renewal efforts, the federal urban renewal programs.  And I became interested in ways in which individual lives and family relationships, neighboring relationships were being changed by the federal bulldozer, and started, I started meeting with architects and planners.  And I managed to have some very useful field assignments, one with the Boston Redevelopment Authority and the other at Berkeley, at the University of California at Berkeley, where I was based with the planning department for a three-month period.  And I had the opportunity to learn something of the language of city planning, and to begin to develop measures, attitude, tests, social science measures, to address some of the problems that architects and city planners were confronted with.  I became very interested in cognitive mapping and developed a technique of having children map their neighborhoods, learn something about neighborhood boundaries where children spend their time in neighborhoods, mostly adolescents, that sort of thing.  And that work led me to the Ed School at Harvard [Harvard Graduate School of Education] where I was appointed as a lecturer and research associate on a project called Pathways to Identity, which focused on identity formation issues in the lives of black boys, boys who went to two Roxbury Schools.  And we followed over a period of years.  And I contributed to a book based on that research.  The book is called "Different Strokes" and it came out around the time--there was a television program of the same name, so it was very confusing.  But, no, we weren't affiliated with the TV program.  It was a publication--I think it came out in 1979 finally.  Westview Press published it.
Story_ID: 86777
Speaker 1: After the Ed School, somewhere in there, I met Jack Ladd.  I was visiting friends in Mexico.  I went to visit some friends who were on sabbatical in Mexico City.  And when I got there, I realized they were in the midst of their divorce, and I didn't want to spend time with them watching them separate the records and deciding who would get which books.  And so, I went off to Southern Mexico and met an archaeologist named John Ladd in Oaxaca. We met in '67 [1967].  We were married in 1969.  Michael Ladd was born in 1970.  And Jack Ladd died of a heart attack in 1971.  And when he died, I was a fellow in the program at the Bunting Institute [Cambridge, Massachusetts] which wasn't called the Bunting Institute yet.  And I, I felt being there in the company of scholarly women, caring women saved me professionally because I think I would not have been able to have maintained a regular job.  I was in the state of shock and collapse with a 13-month-old son, and with four stepchildren who were being very well taken of their mother.  But I, by that time, I had some attachment to them and to their mother, Helen Ladd who, when, and we were in Dubrovnik in Yugoslavia [now Croatia] when Jack died.  We had been on a long summer, a summer-long trip across Europe which was largely for Martha Ladd, who then was 15.  And a friend of Martha's went along with us, and Michael, of course, who was an infant.  And, and when Jack died, of course, we notified--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on one second.  (Unclear) sirens pass.
Speaker 1: Well, Jack would have been, was an archaeologist at Peabody Museum at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  In any case, when we arrived back in the U.S. with his body, Helen Ladd and I think that all the other children--the, of the three children who were at the airport, and Helen and I embraced.  It was our first--not our first meeting, but our first embrace 'cause I, I had met in connection with picking up the children and dropping them off.  And we have, over the years, stayed more than connected.  We, we are family.  When Michael was four, he became referring to Helen as his half-mother.  And I tried to explain to him that was not a kinship term.  And he said, well, if, yeah, if the children, if, Andy, Jenny (ph.), Jeffery (ph.) and Martha are my half-brothers and sisters, Helen is my half-mother (laughter).  And I realized that, that was something he was fixed on and by that time, I knew something about that, that child, that once he made up his mind about something, that's what he would live out.  And Helen has had that kind of a relationship with Michael and, and with me over the years.  It's been, been rather extraordinary.  It's, it's an interesting story.
Speaker 2: It is.
Story_ID: 86778
Speaker 1: You were only at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for a brief--well, yeah.
Speaker 2: I was at the (unclear) Ed School [Harvard Graduate School of Education] from--
Speaker 1: Until '77 [1977], yeah, it has to be.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what, yeah.  I was at Harvard until '77 [1977].  I taught at the design school from '72 [1972] to '77 [1977].  And then I didn't, well, I didn't get tenure in the planning department at the design school.  And I got my first--I then moved into administration and, luckily, landed at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], where I was the associate dean in the School of Architecture and Planning.  Well, a lot of good things happened to me.  I had the chance to go to China about two months after starting the job there.  Bill Porter, who was the dean, en-, encouraged it.
Speaker 1: And that was a new relationship for Americans to go to China (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah, it was one of the early cultural exchange programs.  I went for a month with a, a women's group.  I learned some-, I learned whatever I know about academic administration, I learned in those two years at MIT with Bill Porter as a very interested, intelligent mentor.  He's an architect by training, and I'm very grateful to him for, for launching me, I think appropriately in academic administration.  He decided he would step aside in '79 [1979].  And I realized that I had peaked as a psychologist in, in architecture and planning.
Story_ID: 86779
Speaker 1: And it was at that point that the deanship at Wellesley College [Wellesley, Massachusetts] summoned me.  And I went there as dean of students and, in fact, moved there, moved from this house to the house that was the dean's residence, Oakwoods on campus, on the Wellesley campus.  I had met Bill Harris, but we were not married, and we were not continuously involved with each other although his relationship with Michael [Ladd], which began when Michael was four, was continuous and steady and loyal and mutually affectionate, which is not to say they haven't had major debates, if you will, along the way.  But Bill, I met Bill when Michael was four years old.  And on Bill's second or third visit, Michael went running to the door and said, are you going to be my new daddy?  Because by that time, he knew that he was the only kid in his class whose father was dead.  And Bill said, with no hesitation, yes.  And they launched a, a wonderful relationship, and it, it took me 10 years to come to terms with it and to decide yes, yes, I'll marry you.  And so, Michael was 14 and had gone off to boarding school when, or was about to go to boarding school, when I think I sorted things out and realized that I wanted to marry him for his sake, and not because he was being a surrogate father for my son.  And with Bill, came two more children.  He has two children by his previous marriage.  And that's how I happened to have six stepchildren and son, Michael.  And it was around that time that I took a detour.  I, I think my life at Wellesley College grew very narrow.  I loved the college and enjoyed the privilege of being in a college of that quality, of that intellectual quality exclusively for women.  Certainly, the faculty are men and women, but the student body is a very interesting student body.  And there is something very college-focused there.  And I had worked in the university and at some point, just felt my world was getting more and more narrow.  And I had become very interested in the issues of students from abroad who were at Wellesley, especially students who came there from third world countries.  And I began to learn more about their expectations and their circumstances.  And by the end of year four, I announced that I wanted to leave at the end of my fifth year at the college to work in, in national education.  People told me I was mad.  You don't leave a good job like that with how, you know, with, with the possibility of saying to--for the uncertainty of working at national education.
Story_ID: 86780
Speaker 1: Well, again, I was lucky, and landed the consultancy with the Institute of International Education, which was conducting an assessment of the South African Education Program at the time.  It was a program that had been running for five years, which brought black South Africans to the United States, for undergraduate and graduate level study.  And they wanted to know, the foundation said, supported the project, wanted to know how black South African students fared in the U.S. colleges and universities, if they went back upon completing their degrees, and if they found were commensurate with their training once they went back.  And that's what I did that year--interviewed black South Africans in the U.S. and in South Africa.  It was '84 [1984], '85 [1985].  It was not a comfortable time to be in the beloved country.  I had just been married to Bill Harris who was very concerned about my well-being there.  And I went out the first, the first time for a month to get acquainted with the terri-, territory, and make arrangements to work with a, a colleague there, Herbert Vilakazi, a sociologist. And, and then when I went out again, I stayed for three months.  And one month there felt like 10 years.  Three months there felt like 30 years.  Herbert asked me if we would mind using his car as we drove around the country.  And I said, no, Herbert, why should I mind?  He said, well, from time to time, they try to plant bombs in my car.  And this was in the, it was the year that the first stay-aways began and the, the drive to defeat apartheid began.
Speaker 2: The stay-aways, you mean the students that are who?
Speaker 1: Everybody--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --no, everybody stayed away from work.
Speaker 2: From work?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So the black population of Soweto [South Africa] didn't get on the train to come in and turn on the power, so that Johannesburg [South Africa] could run.  And it was true of all, all, all the cities.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) And it worked, like, you know, (unclear) in South Africa, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, it was.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) It would have been a (unclear).
Speaker 1: Anyway, after that, I couldn't go back to being a dean of students, could I?  I, I had seen the world from the underside of its belly.
Story_ID: 86781
Speaker 1: And so, I inquired about working for an international organization and went, landed, work with Oxfam America based in Boston [Massachusetts].  And I worked--I was taken on to develop an education department for Oxfam America.  It was toward the end of the Ethiopian crisis and all the development organizations at that time had more income than they had had, and had come to the realization that they had to educate the U.S. public and particularly, U.S. students about third world conditions.  And so many non-governmental organizations [NGOs] developed education programs at that time.  I did that for two years, and then income dried up.  People stopped giving to us generously.  The education department was closed down while I was away on vacation in France, and I came back to find, one, I didn't have a staff (laughter).  And I'd been kicked upstairs, and I was made associate executive director which meant I did a lot of things.  I did fundraising.  I was the liaison to the U.N. [United Nations]. I did the Geneva runs and that was okay.  And I, I think it was the--well, I was one of the older staff members and, and I had some credibility, I guess, when I talked about education, when I talked about what I knew through those Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] students about some third world conditions.  And I had had the, I had the South Africa experience behind me.  And through Oxfam, I went to India.
Story_ID: 86547
Speaker 1: All right, we're rolling.
Speaker 2: And I, I think I had mentioned Oxfam and--
Speaker 1: Yes, I know.
Speaker 2: --and going, going to India for Oxfam America which was a, another important trip for me.  At the, after four years of Oxfam America, I was burnt out, as are a lot of people who worked for those organizations.  So I was thinking at that time, that I would move to Putney, Vermont where I have a house.  And while I was in the midst of making that kind of move, I had a phone call from Ann Colby (ph.) for the search committee for the directorship of the Bunting Institute.  She said, you've been nominated to be--someone suggested that you should be on the search committee, but you've also been nominated for the directorship.  What do you want to do, Florence?  I said, well, I've been on a lot of search committees, Ann, but I've never been director of that institute which I love because that's the institute that--where I was when I was widowed.  And so, I, I went ahead and became a candidate and got the job.  And I, I was in--we were away for the summer.  We were in (unclear) when the call came from the then president of Radcliffe [College, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Linda Wilson, who called to tell me that, that I'd been selected.  And I, I was, I was pleased, more deeply pleased about it than I had thought I would be.  And I knew it would be my last job.  I mean, I went into it knowing that I wanted to stay until I retired.  And that I wanted to give back to that place some of what I had gained from it.  And so I, I came into it with my whole heart and mind and time and for eight years, it was a centerpiece of my life.  It was wonderful.  It was, it was 95 percent wonderful.  Then there's the five percent that's administration and you're struggling about the budget and a few difficult personalities, but it, it was a fine way to crown what had been a very interesting career.  During that time, and the Bunting Fellowship Program at the time was exclusively for women.  We had fellowships for 40 women a year in a variety of disciplines.  And so, each year, with something like 5 or 600 applications, you had the chance, the chance, one, to see some of the most interesting work that women are doing in a variety of fields in the visual arts, in creative writing, in physical sciences, math, social sciences, and to select the best and the brightest, and then throughout the year, have conversations with them and hear their public lectures and listen to their career issues.
Speaker 1: Well, who were some of the ones of the best and brightest of--
Speaker 2: During my time?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Anna Deavere Smith, painters--
Speaker 1: Nell, Nell Painter?
Speaker 2: No, no, I, no, no.
Speaker 1: Oh, painters.
Speaker 2: Visual, visual artists, Maxine Yalovitz-Blankenship; Marilene Phipps, who's Haitian American.  Writers, well, (unclear) made a comeback.  She did a second time.  Then Mary Karr.  Lucy Grealy who committed suicide recently.  Her book, "Autobiography of a Face" got a lot of critical acclaim about four years ago.  I, I should have them all in my head.
Speaker 1: No, that's okay.
Speaker 2: I don't necessarily.  I, I, I think, the, the performance artists and visual artists and creative people are names that are probably best known, Naomi Pierce who is a microbiologist.  Anyway--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Just so if I get a sampling.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Paula Vogel, do you know that name?  She's a playwright.  And, and, well, and some of them have gone on since then to collect the Pulitzer Prizes or Guggenheims or whatever.
Story_ID: 86548
Speaker 1: During your last year at Bunting Institute, you're working on a--well, last, well, I don't know for, I guess, during the, your tenure as director of Bunting, if, as you, you working on a novel.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  Now I tell people it took seven Julys 'cause I only had my summer vacations to work on that novel.  And it was published in 1996, and "Sarah's Psalm", it was well received.  It won a--the fiction award of the Black Caucus of the American Library Association.
Speaker 1: And I just want to pause here and say, that's pretty, they're pretty tough, right?  They read a lot of black literature and anything.  They read a lot of literature, period, period, and they, they're, it's a pretty tough group, you know.
Speaker 2: It was auctioned for film by Tim Reed.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And it, it's used in some courses.  It's made its way into, into the curriculum of some universities.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know.  Can you tell us what "Sarah's Psalm" is?  I mean, there's a, I see it, you know, there's a--
Speaker 2: Well, well, the book, or the idea for a book did not occur to me as fiction at first.  As a social scientist, I thought I should perhaps develop some case studies of women, African American women, educated and well-travelled, women like myself, who were not represented in the social science literature.  And so, in the, in the '80s [1980s], I started looking more closely at my friends and associates.  And it was when I was in Senegal, I met a woman, Carrie Simbin (ph.), a woman with a, a PhD living abroad, living a very interesting, complex life.  I told her that I wanted to interview her.  I didn't tell her on first meeting her.  I met her in 1980.  When I went back to Senegal in '82 [1982], I told her that I wanted to interview her, to write a case, case study about her.  She said she didn't want to be interviewed.  She declined.  She said that I really wanted to tell a story about myself.  And then she said, what you imagine about my life is much more interesting than the day-to-day to tell.  And it was that combination of things that, that changed it from the idea of writing a case study to what I imagined.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now Carrie Simbin (ph.) is married to Oosmon (ph.)?
Speaker 2: She was at the time, yeah.
Speaker 1: You had (unclear) coming?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah.  And certainly in the novel, there's some general allusions to, to her situation.  She became a very important figure for me to, to think about, but the character, Sarah, is a composite of, of a lot of women--women, women I know.  And, and by the time it reached the printed page, it was--the character was just very far removed from Carrie and far removed from, from myself, certainly the early stages in the life of Sarah, are the only stages were drawn from my own life.  But it's called (unclear).  It was described as a coming of age, novel, or a woman coming into her own, and she comes into her own abroad in, in the way that I think I have at various stages of my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, it's been--reviews of the book have said it's about African American women, male/female relationships, African American relationship, colored, prejudiced, religion and Pan-Africanism, tradition versus adventure technology, romance, class and race, you know, all of that.
Speaker 2: It's all of the above, I think, yeah, yeah, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think of it as a woman's story, and I think of it as a, a book that has to do with the, the evolution of one woman in, in a very complex context.
Story_ID: 86549
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, now, let's see, so how did, how did the book do commercially?  Did, did--
Speaker 2: It was, it was a Boston area best seller for a few weeks.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Have I earned back my advance?  Not quite (laughter).  I, I, I don't know.  I mean, I get the quarterly statements and don't look at them.
Speaker 1: It's, it's--
Speaker 2: It's still selling, I think.  It's, it went into paperback, and the paperback has been reprinted.
Speaker 1: It's been described as an in-, intellectually stimulating book which a lot of popular books are not described as.  So I don't know.
Speaker 2: And, and it's been described as literary fiction.  In a recent conversation with an agent, she asked about the manuscript that I finished recently.  And she said, well, how should we describe this?  I said, well, I've had the experience of being literary.  I want to be commercial.  I, I, (laughter), and she said, well, we have a category that's called literary and commercial.  I said, that'll be fine--right, right in there (laughter).  And the manuscript is called "The Spirit of Josephine".  Josephine Baker appears as a ghost to--and in sort of channeled through a woman named Violet Fields who's in her late 60's.  She lives in Paris where the novel is set.  She's at the end of her career as an entertainer.  She's estranged from her family in the U.S. and from a brother who disappeared during the Korean War.  And in the course of the novel, she makes some connection again with her family through a niece who comes to Paris [France] in search of her aunt and in search of a career in show business and the reconciliation comes about, and she dies happily ever after.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you ever meet Josephine back then?
Speaker 2: Never.  And one of my real regrets is not knowing enough when I was in Paris to know that she is probably performing some place and I could have been in the same space with her.  I have retraced her steps.  I have gone to Paris and gone to every place, every address I can find where she has performed, where she performed, or where she lived.  And I've been to the Dordogne to see her chateau, which is an immensely impressive, and, and an expression of her grand ambition.  I've been interested in her, her life for a long time, interested in her as an expatriate, as a woman who found herself abroad.  And, and I'm currently working on collecting material for an anthology to appear around the time the centennial of her birth which would be the year 2006.  And Karen Dolton (ph.) has agreed to be my collaborator on this project.
Speaker 1: That's sounds very--
Speaker 2: It's exciting, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 86550
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are there any other literary projects you're--
Speaker 2: You bet (laughter).
Speaker 1: There's always (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  I'm working on a collection of poems.  And some of them are about African American figures or African figures, often in the background or in dialogue with white figures in paintings, okay.  There is--well, but many, many of them are 19th century paintings.  There's a painting by Winslow Homer called the, the "Old Mistress Visits".  I believe that's the title of the painting.  And one of the poems is about that painting, about what this white mistress might be saying to, or thinking about the three black women, one of them holding a child.  She has come to visit in their cabin, and I believe the painting was done in 1876, so it's after slavery, but not too much after slavery.  It's a poem about, about that.  And there's also a, a poem, which "The Progressive" magazine is to publish sometime this year about a painting ["Nude Study of Thomas McKeller"].  It's called the mod-, "An Artist and His Model".  The model was Thomas McKeller; the artist, John Singer Sargent.  And it's a frontal nude male, African American, in a pose that can only viewed as a pin-up pose.  And the, the poem is about what the artist and the model had to say to each other and what that work's about.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What and what and one set of poems is about that theme.  I'm also hoping to finish some Carolina poems that were inspired by the visit to my grandfather's birthplace.  I'm working on a project with--and this is a different project, not a poetry project.  It's a research project in part with Marion Kilson who's an anthropologist who is white, married to Martin Kilson who's black.  A few years ago, Marion published a book called "Claiming Place", a collection of interviews with and portraits of biracial children, offspring of black and white parents.  She interviewed a number of them.  My, my son, Michael [Ladd], was one of the people she interviewed.  She's now returned to the subject with the idea of interviewing mothers of mixed raced children, of biracial children, and she's asked me to collaborate with her on the project.  We began by interviewing each other, by having a conversation about our remembrance of what we told our children about race, what we learned from them through their racial encounters, what their racial identification has, was, or is.  And I think it's going to be a very interesting project.  We're, we're just starting it and we'll be conducting in the next three or four weeks of her interviews.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then there's another novel which is in my computer now.  It's a novel I'm struggling with a bit.  All the characters in the novel are white.  Somebody said, what about the servants?  I said, they're white, too (laughter).  And it's, it's a novel that begins in Paris [France] and it's about an academic family that's dysfunctional.  It's from the point of view of the wife who has been long suffering and who, on being widowed, breaks out of the cage she's been in.  I'm not sure whether it's a novel about widowhood.  It's a novel about transgression, I know that, and it's going to take a while.
Story_ID: 86551
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: Well, I have to, at this moment in history, 2003, in the midst of a war initiated by the [President] George W. Bush Administration, I, I have to talk about my hopes for the black community in the context of my hopes for this country, which I hope will somehow survive this catastrophe we have been drawn into, and somehow make amends with the international forces we have alienated, so that we can somehow recover the progress toward peace and reconciliation internally that we need to recover.  Right now, I think a lot of things are on hold.  The black community, and it's hard to think of the black community monolithically as one general group.  There are many strata, many levels, a lot of diversity among us blacks.  It's, it's, it's the poor, the disenfranchised, the poor, the poorly housed, the unemployed blacks that I think we need somehow to be more involved in the lives (unclear).  And I'm not sure that we can rely entirely on the goodwill of federal forces and government, federal or local.  I, I'd like somehow to have some conversations with people about the spirit among the founders of the Urban League and, and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and what their visions were, what kind of programs and initiatives they thought were going to lift us all as, as some of them climbed.  The, the numbers of black men in prison, those numbers are just distressing.  I read some place recently that I've for-, forgotten the city, the town, or the state that 17 percent of the population of black men under 35, something like that in prison.  I, I, I think the black middle class has become more comfortable than we've ever been and, and more removed.  And I speak for myself, too, more removed, than, than I should be from some of the issues that affect women who look like me, who are not well educated, not well off, and who can't live on that social security check that's coming.  I, I don't know what the future is, but whatever the future is, it's linked to the future of this nation.  And, and the struggle right now, I think, is to reconstitute the Democratic Party and bring to the minorities in this country some of the New Deal, the spirit of the [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt era maybe, some of the energy, the initiative that was in the aftermath of the depression and some of the, the enlightenment of the [John F.] Kennedy Administration.  And it's not since the Kennedy Administration, maybe in the [President Jimmy] Carter Administration, but not, certainly not since the Carter Administration that I have felt that there has been genuine interest in the future of African Americans in this country.  My son [Michael Ladd] is planning to move to France.  And I am encouraging that because I think he and, I hope his offspring, will have a more livable, content future abroad.
Story_ID: 86552
Speaker 1: Now, at, at this point in life, I know you have other projects planned and things in the works, but what will you see is your legacy at this point?
Speaker 2: My legacy (laughter)?  Well, family comes to mind first.  In its--and it's not the right use of the term legacy.  I mean one can't talk one's children, I guess, as legacy.  But some, some of, some of the values that Michael Ladd has incorporated, some of the values that Jennifer Ladd and my stepdaughter, Jennifer Ladd and Jeffrey (ph.) Ladd, in particular, are living out are part of a legacy that I hope I have contributed to.  The next generation that is dedicated to justice, that at least in the lives of those three people, that they make some genuine sacrifices to make the parts of the world they touch a little better.  Michael, through his creative work; Jenny, through her philanthropic work; and Jeffrey through his, his day-to-day efforts in Seattle [Washington] in environmental work.  Beyond that, I hope my writings are a contribution to what is called legacy.  I, I think books matter and I hope I have time for a few more.  I hope the art I have accumulated enlarges the lives of some people who should see it or who do see it beyond this room, this house.  I, I think people should leave property better than they found it.  And, and so, what, what I bring to the houses that I have some responsibility for, I guess, would be a part of a legacy.  I don't know, I haven't thought about that.
Story_ID: 86478
Speaker 1: Well, well, my next question, of course, ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?  That's slightly different from legacy so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'd like to be remembered as an author.
Story_ID: 86479
Speaker 1: I was curious, what, what do you think about this kind of a project, oral history project, like the one that you're participating in?
Speaker 2: I, I think it must be an amazing experience for you on the other side there--just the chance to talk to a lot of people.  It's a, it's an enviable opportunity.  And what you are collecting, you, it's, you're just amassing a great deal of history, information, ideas, which would be otherwise lost or would be ephemeral.  You, I think, at least in my case, are enlarging my understanding of my own life.  And I think giving people a sense of being historical figures and taking one's time in history a little more seriously while we still have time, I think, to reflect on it, write about it, enlarge on it, sift through it, and determine what's, what's worth saving, and what isn't.  It's a chance to put one's life in perspective.  It's a better than therapy (laughter), and a valuable contribution to, to a group that is underrepresented in general in terms of everyday lives and, and accomplishments.  If you look at yesterday's newspaper or tomorrow's, African Americans often appear in the metropolitan section for having done some sort of dastardly deed, or having been victims of something or other.  And it's a way of bringing a little balance to the picture.  And I thank you.
Speaker 1: Thank you as well.  I thank you very much.
Story_ID: 86480
Speaker 1: I'm with my son, Michael Ladd, in New York, November 2002.  The occasion was the gala for the Studio Museum of Harlem.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next, Larry.
Speaker 1: I'm still working on it.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  That was a portrait taken about in the, in the early '90s [1990s], probably 1989, 1990.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, very good, next.
Speaker 2: Grandfather Henry Willis, my maternal grandfather.  And on the lower left, he's shown with my mother, Eleanor Cawthorne, Eleanor Willis Cawthorne.  And it's another picture of him on the lower right.  The pictures were taken in New Bern, North Carolina, where my mother was born.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Hold steady, Larry.  You're pulling plastic just a little further.  I'll get my (unclear).
Speaker 2: It's kinda stuck right there in the (unclear).
Speaker 1: It's okay to pull it.  I need to re-, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  If you want to leave it, okay.  Go ahead with first one, I mean, yeah, go ahead (unclear).
Speaker 1: My mother, Eleanor, she was Eleanor Willis then, in 19-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  --25.
Speaker 1: --25 [1925].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And my parents, Bill and Eleanor--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  1930.
Speaker 1: --in 1930.  Now, that was taken in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Oh, just read (unclear).
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  Go first.
Speaker 1: My maternal grandparents, Florence Willis and Henry Willis; Lawrence Willis from whom I was named; and my cousin, Charles.  And on the lower right, I think that's, I think it's my aunt Hattie.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, okay, next, please.  Let's go, upper left, upper right, so maybe you want--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right, early pictures of the subject herself (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: There I am as an infant on my mother's lap.  These scenes were all taken in Washington [D.C.].  I must have been about two or three years old in the--yeah, just, two years old in the upper right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Three years old in the pictures at the bottom.  And the one on the lower right was taken in front of a fountain near the Capitol in Washington.  And I look very girlish, very, you know, the, the pictures--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Look like you're going out hunting.
Speaker 1: No, no, but she dressed me (laughter).  There's one picture that--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next slide.
Speaker 1: Oh, my gosh.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Upper left is (unclear).
Speaker 1: There, there I am, at three years old, upper left, with a jaunty hat on.  Upper right, with a friend of the family, Novella (ph.) Chambers.  Lower left, in the vicinity of the, the Capitol, where the, that interesting figure in the background.  And on the lower right, there I am, daddy's girl, in my father's embrace, looking like I'm trying to pull out of it.  I was a cute kid (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next, please.
Speaker 1: My sister, Ethel.  I must have been about six years old there.  Upper right, with my father's maternal aunt, Lucy, who was a family favorite.  And my sister's next aunt Lucy, and I'm on the edge of the chair.  And, lower, lower right, there I am with my sister, Ethel.  And I must have been about, like about six years old.  The upper right, I'm eight years old.  It was 1940, I was eight years old.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next, please.
Speaker 1: Why, I have no recollection of that, that scene.  Are you sure--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Are you ready?
Speaker 1: --you found that in that--oh, it's Ethel, it's my sister.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's your sister?
Speaker 1: All right, that was taken in, on Portsmouth Island, North Carolina in April 2002.  It's--no, wrong, can you correct it?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  It was taken in New Bern, North Carolina, it was New Bern.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: It's a house where my mother was born.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And, and I visited with my cousin, Charles Boardley and my cousin, James Rudolph Carter.  Charles Boardley is in the center, and Rudolph Carter on the right, which may be the left.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Can you spell Boardley for us?
Speaker 1: B-O-A-R-D-L-E-Y.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great.
Speaker 1: And the house is at 209 Jones Street in New Bern, North Carolina.  And I thought for a few months that I was going to buy it (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Ohh.
Speaker 1: Then I had some second thoughts about who would let that happen--. On Portsmouth Island.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Say that one more time.  I (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a house on Portsmouth Island, no longer occupied.  It was occupied by my maternal grandfather's family.  And we, his descendants, are visiting in April 2002.  And Bill Harris took the picture.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That, that was (unclear) one.  I think that's (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yes.  I mean, that's, that says it all, doesn't it?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, go ahead.
Speaker 2: The bride on her wedding day, being her marriage to Ulysses [Grant] Shelton [Jr.], March 28, 1959.  On the left, the bride's parents, William and Eleanor Cawthorne.  On the right, the groom's parents, Ulysses Shelton, Sr. and Mary Shelton.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: The parents were very happy about that day.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I guess they (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  I was in a daze.  Wait, you skipped over--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  (Unclear) one at City Hall.  Was that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, I'll look.
Speaker 2: It was a bright day in May in 1984.  And Bill Harris and I were married at the City Hall in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Shall I say (unclear)?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  No, that's fine.
Speaker 2: We, we were both 50 pounds lighter then (laughter), and had all of our hair (laughter).
Speaker 1: These are all when--photos here for the most part?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, the reception, the famous reception.  That was fun.  The reception was in the fall at the Cambridge Boat Club.  Now, a lot of that was put together at the--for my retirement, so they, they would be the Bunting [Institute] years, I think.  I mean, I think that's all that you'll find in there.
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: Do you know the name Ellis Haizlip?
Speaker 1: Yes.  He's a host from Soul on (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's right, that's, yeah.  He emceed our wedding reception.
Speaker 1: Did he?
Speaker 2: And I thought of him because Ellis had, for my first wedding, Ellis had a designer friend of his design a dress for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother, however, who was in competition with Ellis (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Huh.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)--because she thought he wanted to be the mother of the bride (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Are you, are you in this one?  This photo, it's such a good photo.  Are you in this one?
Speaker 2: Yes, I am in that one somewhere.  There I am in that one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Where, where am I in that?  I would be in the back probably.  I was probably, yeah, there I am with a red--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in the band of red.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: There are a lot of them.  It was one for every year.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: This is (unclear) here in '90 [1990].  She's right here.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Saw there once in a while, it just (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's the Bunting Fellow, Sister Fellows of the Bunting Institute of Radcliffe College in the fall of 1990.  I'm on the upper right with the red band on my neck.  I was director of the institute.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Right, thank you, next, okay.
Speaker 2: What is (unclear) here?  Is there anything in that, that one you want?
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  That was taken in 1989 when I became Director of the Bunting Institute at Radcliffe College [Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, very good, next.  Here we go, got them all (unclear).
Speaker 1: It's the, it, it would, it would have been August of 1970.  Mother and son, Michael, and it was taken in Westport, Massachusetts, where we were on vacation.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, very good, got it, next, okay, go ahead, please.
Speaker 1: 1969, Cambridge, Massachusetts, on my wedding day, with, on Jack Ladd's arm.  We were married in the garden of our house on Maple Avenue in Cambridge.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, got it.  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: In Burgundy, in the village of Flavigny-sur-Ozerain, at the entrance to our house which was built in the 15th century.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, good, next.
Speaker 1: It's one with Bill.  It's--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: A cafe in a town near our village.  On the left, the Hamiltons, Chas (ph.) Hamilton, his mother, Pamela, Sam Hamilton, and on my left in the picture, Bill Harris.  The photo has been taken, it was taken by Chuck Hamilton.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: They took--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).  Okay.
Speaker 1: It's Florence Ladd, the author, taking herself seriously, a little too seriously at the Bachrach Studio in Boston, 2001 or 2002--2002, I believe.
