Story_ID: 113621
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you state your name and spell it for me, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: Yes, Colonel Roosevelt J. Lewis, Jr. and that's R-O-O-S-E-V-E-L-T, Joseph, J-O-S-E-P-H, Lewis, L-E-W-I-S, Jr., retired colonel, United States Air Force.
Speaker 1: What is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: August 25, 1943.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Greenville, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: We're in the Chappie James Museum, Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: September 6, 2007.
Story_ID: 113622
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm gonna ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, blue; my wife's favorite color is red.
Speaker 1: And what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Blue Bell ice cream (laughter).
Speaker 1: When you go on vacation, what is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like the beaches. We have a beach home, south Mobile County in Coden, Alabama.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Coden?
Speaker 2: C-O-D-E-N, Coden, Alabama and we spend as much time there as possible but prior to our owning that property, Dauphin Island, south Mobile County is a favorite place for my wife and myself. We used to visit there, but we've been to the Bahamas, we--we like the beaches, we've been to Hawaii and the Thai beaches and Philippine beaches, you get the idea.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: The summer. I love blue sky and white clouds.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, I won't go into great detail, but in Corinthians, there these three: faith, hope and love and the greatest of these is love [1 Corinthians 13:13].
Story_ID: 113623
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your family and let's begin with your mother.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me her name and spell it for me please?
Speaker 2: Yes, Clara Nell Lewis, C-L-A-R-A, middle name Nell, N-E-L-L, Mitchell was her maiden name, M-I-T-C-H-E-L-L, Lewis.
Speaker 1: Do you know where she was born?
Speaker 2: Greenville, Alabama in Butler County, its forty-four miles south of Montgomery, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Do you know what year she was born?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was born in 1924.
Speaker 1: And what about her parents?
Speaker 2: Yes, Martha Mitchell, Martha Stinson Mitchell, a very strong lady, my grandmother, maternal grandmother born in Greenville, Alabama also.
Speaker 1: And her father?
Speaker 2: Her father was John and John Stinson [sic, Mitchell], Grandpa John is--what I heard about as I grew up he died many, many years before I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know the names of their parents?
Speaker 2: No I do not.
Speaker 1: Your grandmother, did you know your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, Grandmother Martha Mitchell died about '96 [1996], she was 97 years old at the time.
Speaker 1: And what do you remember about her?
Speaker 2: She was a disciplinarian in a way that most people don't understand, she could take a look and the pillar of salt would freeze. She had fourteen children, seven boys and seven girls.  My mother Clara was the oldest and she had to help raise the rest of those kids and she was a disciplinarian also, but a very loving, very giving mother.
Speaker 1: Did--you spend with your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Oh I did, in fact growing up as a little kid, I suppose I was about six years old the first time mom and dad let me spend the week on the farm with grandmother and grandfather and all of my uncles and aunts, and I can remember just being totally fascinated with the idea of cows and hogs and what have you and corn and things growing and I was a very inquisitive kid.  Still to this day my family think of me as a kid who always asks "why?" "why mom?" "why dad?."  I grew up to be a chemist (laughter), I graduated in chemistry from Tuskegee because of that, but one fantastic memory with my grandmother, she probably saved my rear end and was able to get me out of the pen of a beautiful black and white bull.  I didn't know what a bull was, and I didn't know that a bull could really hurt you.  The bull was named Bill Jones that's what they called this bull, and I got up very early in the morning as everybody did, it was new to me but I basically sneaked out around the back of the house and ended up out to the pen and played with his nose and talked to him and fed him and what have you, and I ended up because we became great friends, I got into the pen and my grandmother, evidently sensing that I was missing came to the front door, saw me in this pen and my grandmother who was quite old at that time obviously ended up coming out to the pen very quietly. Basically going in, getting me out and of course the bull ran after her and she climbed over the fence, but this was a very mean bull.  My grandmother saved my rear end, and I understood what grandmothers can do when discipline is required.  I did not climb in the pen with (laughter) the bull any more.
Story_ID: 113624
Speaker 1: The farm that they [Lewis' maternal grandparents, John Mitchell and Martha Stinson Mitchell] lived on, did they own the land?
Speaker 2: No, they were tenant farmers. It was on the Williams Plantation in Butler County, Greenville, Alabama.  The Williams family goes back many, many, many years.  They had slaves, they had plantations and the--only after I grew up and really started doing research with my wife's [Carolyn Adams Lewis] family did I understand the place that my uncles would go and get the tractors and what have you to go to the field as they would say was in the "quarter."  I only realized as a grown up in recent years that the "quarter" meant that that was the place that slave quarters were located.  The Williams Brothers, the plantation owners, there multiple brothers, they had thousands and thousands of acres in Butler County, and I've heard stories over the years, but basically the consensus was that they indeed had tenant farmers and they were perhaps a benevolent kind of plantation owner in the latter days.
Story_ID: 113625
Speaker 1: Was there any talk about any of your family being in slavery?
Speaker 2: My great-grandmother on my father's side, Lula Lewis, says that she was a "missy girl" during the Civil War.  In my estimation, a "missy girl" was basically someone just coming into puberty as a young girl and she remembers soldiers coming through and what have you when she was a youngster.  She died in 1957 at 117 years old.  She was one of the oldest people in the country at that time as I understand.
Speaker 1: So you never had an opportunity to meet her, you would've been very--.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes.
Speaker 1: Did you meet her?
Speaker 2: And we were very close, as a little kid, again I would go to Greenville [Alabama] with mom and dad because they had left Greenville as youngsters, gotten married and my mom was seven months pregnant with me when my dad actually was called to go overseas.  So he had taken my mom back to Greenville to have her baby, me and she lived with her mom on the farm and I was born on the farm in Greenville, the Mitchell Farm, but I also knew my grandmother, Rosie [ph.] Lewis, and my great-grandmother, Lula Lewis, and she over 100 years old would sit on the porch and she would have me come to her and I have this, this great memory of sitting on her knee and she would jump me on her knee.  She was an Indian, there's Creek Indian on both sides of the family, and also there are whites on both sides of my family and obviously Negro on both sides of my family, so we're a family of Heinz 57 Americans.
Story_ID: 113626
Speaker 1: So I wanna go back to your mother's [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] side of the family.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then we're gonna go to your father's [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] side.  So, your grandmother [Martha Stinson Mitchell], we talked about your grandmother and your grandfather [John Mitchell] didn't know well.  Did you know any information about your grandmother Martha, about her lineage?
Speaker 2: Yes, Martha Mitchell grew up there in Greenville [Alabama], was in fact a tenant famer with her husband who was a Mitchell.  She initially married Tommy Scott [ph.], my grandfather, my maternal grandfather.  They had two children, Clara Nell and Willie J. [ph.], and of course they got divorced and she later married my grandfather Mitchell and he raised my mom and my oldest uncle as his, and of course I mention my grandmother had fourteen, seven boys, seven girls. But I have great memories of my maternal grandfathers, both of them, Tommy Scott, who loved to fish and my mom got that from him and my grandfather Mitchell treated me as, well his grandson and he loved to fish also, and would take us fishing, my uncle that I'm two weeks older than.  He would take us fishing on the creeks and he was an Indian and he could catch fish when no one else could.  I don't know how or but he was just very good at it.  He also was somewhat of a medicine man.  He knew the various roots in the forest, ginseng root, Sampson snakeroot, various things that I've heard of over the years, and growing up I knew that he would go out into the woods and collect these things and send them to Gallatin, Tennessee where believe it or not, over the radio when I was growing up, there was a late-night station when I was a young teenager I would hear the music when I'd be studying, but also you could order ginseng and you could order Sampson snakeroot and those kinds of things and I remembered as a little kid, my grandfather, of course going out digging those things up and sending them off and I remembered Gallatin, Tennessee also as a place that he sent these boxes to.
Speaker 1: And this was your Grandfather Mitchell or Scott?
Speaker 2: Yes it was Mitchell.
Speaker 1: Mitchell, okay.
Speaker 2: Scott was a farmer also, but his mother, great-grandmother Adams, was a mulatto and she had a very large farm and cows and hogs and everything and she ran her own farm.  So the Scott side of the family, Adams side of the family where whites, and mulatto as they came down and they had land and farmed as long as they lived.  It disappeared when they passed away, it did not come down the family lineage, but I knew my great-grandmother on my mother's side and my grandfather on my mom's side also.
Speaker 1: Your great-grandmother and grandfather?
Speaker 2: My great-grandmother but not the great-grandfather Adams; he was white.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 113627
Speaker 1: Any other stories about your grandparents [John Mitchell and Martha Stinson Mitchell] on your mother [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis]'s side?
Speaker 2: Oh my, yes they loved to fish and my mom inherited that I suppose, she could catch fish in Mobile [Alabama] in the Mobile River or down Dauphin Island in the Gulf when no one could catch them, and she taught us to fish growing up and most of my family my brothers and sisters loved to fish and loved the water, but my grandparents as I recall were very, very hard-working people.  I understand now that they had large families because they had a farm to sustain, and the way you did it was to have as many kids as possible because those were farm hands and the kids grew up and after growing up, they eventually would come to Mobile to our home and then transition and move out, get married and there was a succession of folks who came to our home as they grew up and left the farm, but my grandparents stayed there until my grandfather Mitchell passed away and my grandmother was then induced to come to Mobile.  My uncle Willie J. [ph.] and my mom got her a home and she lived by herself for many years until a younger daughter came down and stayed with her until she passed away, but my mom cared for her for many years, but we were very close.  I have to say across the board we had a very closely-knit family on all sides.  The families came together, the families knew who you were, they made a point--my mom and dad to take us back annually to what was called "the big meeting" at the various churches that the families belonged to.  At least once a year, you were expected to show up in Greenville [Alabama] to be seen and to introduce the rest of the children to the extended family and it did not matter whether you were in New York or Chicago [Illinois] or Detroit [Michigan], or wherever you were, you came home to Butler County [Alabama] and you went to the church.  My father's side of the family at the Ridge, Ridgeville [ph.] Baptist Church for him or on my mom's side of the family you went to the church and the church grounds were cleaned and people brought trunks with cakes and fried chicken and, oh my goodness, all the things that you could ever think of eating.  It was a big affair and we went to those when I was growing up and even after I was away in the [U.S.] Air Force and what have you, mom and dad would say "will you be home this particular time, we're thinking about going to Greenville this year?"  So those kinds of things happened and even after mom and dad were elderly, one of the things that we did as siblings were to get together and to take them back to see people they hadn't seen in thirty, forty, fifty years at times, just an amazing experience.
Speaker 1: Your grandparents, Adams, I just wanted to go back just a minute, were they too in Greenville?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were outside of Greenville on a farm in Butler County.
Story_ID: 113628
Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis], talk to me about your relationship with her, you're the oldest of how many children?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest of eight, we had an absolutely incredible relationship. My mom was truly a giver in the best sense of the word.  She was a mother in ways that I suppose only mothers understand because when I look at our growing up in the neighborhood, our house was a very large house in the neighborhood--had been the home of the owners of a dairy farm in what was called Toulminville, part of Mobile, Alabama and my mom would sit on the porch in the rocking chair and we had a swing and as the neighborhood grew and kids would come by, they gravitated to our front lawn and to our front porch because mom would bake and she was a stay-at-home mom and she shared everything with everybody.  She became the keeper of the kids in the neighborhood when other ladies went to work and what have you, and my mom learned how to sew as a little girl in Greenville, so she made clothing for the little girls in the neighborhood routinely.  If a little girl going to the park, later as our neighborhood developed, if the little girl had a torn dress or if she looked a bit disheveled my mom would tell one of my sisters, she would call out to the kids and invite them in and while the kid would be playing, she would go in and she always had what she called "remnants" cloth that she bought at a place called Hammel's Department Store in the basement in Mobile, Alabama.  She would get the remnants of the cloth and she was a gifted seamstress, she would look at you, size you up and she would lay the cloth out on the bed and she would get the scissors and cut it out, cut out the pattern whatever she decided to make for you.  She would sit down to her Mercury Sewing Machine that my dad [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] bought for her, it was an electric sewing machine and later used, but the older ones I saw her sew at the older machines too, she learned on both, but my dad bought her a Mercury Sewing Machine and she would zip through the cloth and what have you and she would have my oldest sister take the little girl in the bathroom and try the dress on, bring her back out, she would pin it up here, there and she would have her take it off again and she would sew that one up; she might make two or three more and hand it to them. She was a very giving person and that was not only with the clothing, but food, when people in the neighborhood were in need, this was before we had Goodwill Industries, this was before there were charities in our neighborhood.  Mom and dad without saying anything, would call somebody and say "hey, why don't you drop by this afternoon."  The kids ate with us. There would be times when there's no room around the table, there may be twelve, fourteen kids on the porch and what have you.  Whatever we had, they had.  My dad worked at International Paper Company, a laborer and I never understood how so much could go out of the house. And as a youngster growing up, there were times when I would think, "my goodness we could have more, if so much didn't go out," but I learned as I matured that that was truly their gift, their contribution back to the world, but my mom was the leader of this, she was a neighborhood leader.  Nobody, but nobody misunderstood her giving nature.  Many times I suppose she was taken advantage of, but she knew that was part of it, but my mom truly was a very, very special person and she passed away of breast cancer almost two years ago now.
Story_ID: 113629
Speaker 1: Did she [Lewis' mother, Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] share, now you told me that she was a gifted seamstress, and did she learn from her mother [Martha Stinson Mitchell]--?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes.  My mom grew up helping take care of a huge family, so she had to be an outstanding cook, because she did the cooking for this family that had to go to the fields in the morning.  She did the cleaning, she did the washing and what have you.  She did the motherly things when my grandmother was with child again, but in Butler County, Alabama, it's my understanding that pregnant women went to the field and they did field work.  I have to say that the stories about my grandmother actually hoeing corn and cotton and what have you and being able to pick over 200 pounds of cotton a day are stories that I look back on.  She was about 5'10", 5'11" and 200 pounds probably, nobody misunderstood though that she was a real woman and when she said something that was law.  I learned that in Greenville [Alabama] in the farm community and what have you, that's the way things had to be.  When you were told to do something you got it done.  My parents grew up like that and they made sure that we understood what discipline was about.  They would not tell us to do anything weird or anything, my dad [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] would make a suggestion and we got it done.  My mom on the other hand might say something twice, but if she had to say something more than twice, we understood there were consequences.  So my mom growing up understood this kind of discipline and instilled that discipline in us.  My mom was very athletic, as a young kid she played basketball, she was in the 4-H Club, won ribbons and what have you, a very energetic person.  She loved to read, she read the newspaper everyday of her life--magazines--she kept that in front of us too.  She wanted us to learn things, education was extremely important although she did not have a college education, she made sure we did.
Speaker 1: She did have a high school diploma did she?
Speaker 2: She did not have a high school diploma. Neither mom nor dad had a high school diploma.
Story_ID: 115592
Speaker 1: I just want to go back a little bit on your mother's [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] side before we go forward to talk about the Adams part of the family which was your [maternal] great-grandmother, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that?
Speaker 2: Well, it's my understanding that the name Adams was given to this part of the family.  They were mulatto offshoots of plantation owners and they did not give them their name, they set aside a name for them and that line was called Adams.  They also had privileges for example, they were semi-recognized in town. In fact, I had I suppose it would be a great-great aunt that was said by everybody who knew her that she was one of the most beautiful people you could absolutely imagine and she was married to my father [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.]'s uncle, Alec, Alexander, on my dad's side, he married her and he was quite jealous she was such a beautiful person she would go to town and because of her lineage she could go into the store, Planter's [ph.] Store, the department store in Greenville, Alabama downtown and she could get what she wanted and they realized, they knew, "okay, that's one of the Adams" and later my grandmother, great-grandmother could come in, she could get things.  That was not always true of the tenant farmers who came to town once a week on wagons initially in the olden days, and then there was a gentlemen, a Womack [ph.] in the area that had a truck and he would drive this truck into town and he would make the rounds to the various farms to the tenant farmers, would get on the truck and they would come to town, buy what they needed and go back to their various farms, but it really is an interesting thing when you go back and you see the intertwining of the families, it is an amazing thing to try and separate them out and my dad has told me more than once, "you'll get gray hair doing that," studying the family.
Speaker 1: Did you, Adams was the name that they gave the mulatto line, did you know what the plantation owner's name was?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was in the Williams family that went back, again, a generation before.
Speaker 1: So they were the Williams family?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 115593
Speaker 1: Tell me your father's name?
Speaker 2: Roosevelt Lewis. He was born in Greenville, Alabama of Rosie Lee [ph.] Lewis, the daughter of Lula Lewis and my dad grew up and had basically a very hard farm life.  He was the firstborn of Rosie, out of wedlock, my dad lived with his maternal grandmother and was raised by her, Lula Lewis, who ended up 117 years old, but he was her heart.  He lived with her, helped her as she got older and what have you.  She started him with a bank account as a little kid, he remembers getting--on your birthday you got a pair of bib overalls, that was a big deal back then, the fact that at twelve years old his uncle gave him his first gun, a .22 rifle, and he was a crack shot, he was a marksman in the military.  In fact he scored in the expert range, and I had to try and match that so that I--in the military, but my dad grew up as a farm boy, but not only was he a farm boy, but his grandmother Lula was the widow of Bully [ph.] Lewis, his grandfather and he was killed during World War I.  So Lula Lewis was a very unusual person in Greenville in Butler County because she got a widow's pension from the government.  A government check was most unusual for a Negro during that period.  She was a very, very well-respected woman, in fact one of her good friends was Miss Annie Williams, who was the plantation owner's mother. They were elderly together, but she made it a point to look out for Lula. As things would happen, she wanted things done right, but my father grew up as this farm boy.  He hunted, he did not learn to fish with a line as you would say, and he says, "Look, that gets on my nerves, that is too slow. If I want to go fishing, I know how to get fish."  My dad and my uncles have told me of exploits of my dad, diving in. He was a fantastic athlete, he would go in and they would what they call "hand fishing", "feeler fishing."  They would dive in go under the bank and they would feel the big, big fish, catch them in the gill or in the mouth, a huge catfish and come bring them up and throw them up on the bank.  I've actually seen it done on TV many years later, but this is what kids did, and if there was ever anything that the bravado and the accolades needed to be given to someone, my dad was the ultimate competitor.  He could out run all of the folk.  They had bicycles at that time and he and a couple of buddies would ride a bicycle to Montgomery, Alabama, forty-four miles at that time on Highway 31, winding road.  My dad grew up as just a chiseled specimen 5'10", he weighed 210 at the height of his weight in the military, but really a very physical specimen.
Story_ID: 115594
Speaker 1: One of the things he [Lewis' father, Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] did when I was a youngster was that he came home from work and all of the young men in the neighborhood who went to Central High School were out and Herman Smith [ph.], a neighbor on the right side of us on the corner, and a good friend of Henry Aaron [ph.] had made the football team and he was talking about he was the fastest guy on the team and there were others who said no, no they were the fastest and what have you, well my dad came home and they said "Mr. Lewis, Mr. Lewis, how about making sure there's no cheating?" My dad was very well respected in the neighborhood, in fact even the men would say, "Mr. Lewis, oh he's a man, he's a real man," that kind of respect. But it was an amazing thing because my dad said, "Well, all you have to do" and they said, "No, we want you to call it off so there's no cheating.  We're gonna see who's the fastest."  Well, it took so long with them talking back and forth to each other until finally my dad says, "okay well I'll just run with you so I'll make sure." And he outran the kids in the neighborhood, these are the teenagers who were the bravado guys, and my dad just ran away from them and they will never live that down, it was that kind of thing, but they looked up to them because he was a provider.  He loved his family with all of his heart and he wanted the family taken care of and absolutely nothing was going to interfere with his family and nobody was gonna do the wrong thing involving his family, and you knew that there was a line there.  He was a remarkable man who was very close to all of us.  With my siblings, with each one, he had a great relationship with each one of us.  I'm the oldest and my mom [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] used to look at me sometimes and say, "Oh my goodness, you're just like your father."  Course that was a great compliment, but on the other hand I knew at that point that whatever she had suggested that I get done I'd better go on and get it done quickly.  My dad as I mentioned was an unbelievable competitor and I think that has come out in all of his children, some more than others.  He was a boxer in the military. He left Greenville, Alabama and ended up as a medic during World War II.  He served in two of the toughest locations during World War II in the Pacific, Guadalcanal and Luzon.  My dad was wounded; he would never talk about it, only two people of the people from his medical unit survived.  He and another gentlemen and I met him when I was fifteen, he had become a Merchant Mariner.  His ship had docked in Mobile [Alabama] at the foot of the street there and he was on Liberty. And as this fifteen-year-old kid who had just made the basketball team, I talked dad into getting me a pair of Converse basketball shoes so I could jump higher and my dad knew exactly what was going on, but he agreed, came in from work, got me and we went to the store, the department store, we were he headed down to the slope to Hammel's [Department Store], and this man was walking up the sidewalk coming toward us and my dad started to slow, and I'm talking to him trying to get him to understand I'm gonna score lots of points and this and that, and my dad slowed and I kept looking slowing down and finally I said, "dad?" and I looked up, and there was this man walking toward us who had slowed also and they walked up, they looked at each other and the man put out his hand, and they grabbed and they shook hands and then they just hugged, and they couldn't talk for a very long moment, and this gentlemen looks at me and he points and in essence "is this your son?" kinda thing, and my dad nods and he grunts and they just look back and they are slapping each other on the back and they're just in a moment that was very, very heavy.  As I look back on it, it's remarkable to have two men go through Luzon and Guadalcanal together, survive it, and to come back and to see each other walking down the street these many years later, but my dad invited him to dinner on that Sunday afternoon, this was on a Friday evening.
Story_ID: 115595
Speaker 1: On Sunday, the word had gotten out, all of my uncles in Mobile [Alabama] came over.  The kids were not permitted to--even, the fifteen-year-old could not hear about war, so we all ate and we were out in the yard playing and what have you, but my uncles asked all kinds of questions. They were too young to go to the war.  My dad [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] didn't do too much talking, he would not talk about the war [World War II, WWII], but this gentleman told some of the things that they went through and my uncles, all who loved and respected my dad, they knew on another level some of the things that he did.  As a six-year-old I climbed up on a chair trying to find out what was in a box in the closet in mom [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] and dad's bedroom, I'd seen that box there all of my life and I'd never seen the box down or opened.  I climbed up and I was trying to get it, and I got something trying to pull it off, and it did come crashing down.  Mom and dad had gone to town, I was there, they hadn't gone to town, they'd gone to the grocery store a block away.  They came back early.  It crashed down, fell on the floor and all of these medals came out, all of these brightly colored things and I got on the floor trying to scoop them up and I didn't know what they were at the time, I was about six probably and my dad cleared his throat in the doorway, I turned around and looked, I put them back in the box.  He came over he did not scold me, he did not raise his voice, he just took the box and he said, "Junior, you see this"?  I said, "yes sir," "I don't ever want you to bother this again," and I said "yes, sir."  He took it, he put it back up there again in plain sight and I never bothered the box again.  I've always wanted to know a bit more about his military history, but he would not talk about it.  I remember as a young kid when he came back from the war, he would roll out of bed, hit the floor and yell, "get down, get down," and my mom would tell me "everything's okay, it's okay, your daddy's just having a nightmare," she would talk with him and gradually it went away, but he did have nightmares for, oh my, until I was probably seven, eight years old.  I remember the cold sweats, sitting bolt upright in the bed kinda thing, but he went through an awful lot, his unit was overrun by the Japanese, and a lot of folks lost.
Speaker 2: With some research about what happened, what can you tell us about what you believe happened?
Speaker 1: Oh, there were things that went on, obviously wartime is rough, I can tell you that when I went off to Southeast Asia, my dad was very concerned about me but he was very strong, and he made sure that mom was fine, that my brothers and sisters were fine--"oh, he's off in the military, he'll be fine," and the notes and things that I wrote back and my notes and their notes to me, it was always very positive and very supportive and he was the most supportive person in my military career, extremely proud of me in a way that was not overbearing or anything, just very quiet, pride that I grew up to be a military colonel.
Story_ID: 115596
Speaker 1: My dad [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] had heart problems after a series of events during the Civil Rights era.  I was in the military at that time, but the [President John F.] Kennedy Administration decided that companies in the South would have to integrate, would have to give opportunity to qualified Negroes and let them progress in the job market also.  My dad had worked for International Paper Company since he was a sixteen-year-old brute kid who was hired on a day laborer basis for one year.  The foreman would ask no questions about age or anything because he worked so hard, he would invite him into the gate every morning he went and he worked in what was called a pulp mill, this is where you haul in a wheelbarrow the cake that you boil the chips into to make the paper, the pulp.  He was around the liquor, the acid. So it was the kind of thing that was a very hard job, after one year they hired him on fulltime, he outworked everybody, as I said he was quite a strong, a very healthy individual.  Well during the Kennedy administration, investigators came in and said of International Paper Company, "you cannot do what you're doing in the South, you must integrate these jobs.  If an individual knows a particular job or has the aptitude, you must let that person work up the line and qualify in these jobs."  What I didn't know as a young kid, young officer in the military traveling overseas, assigned overseas, my dad went through an extremely tough time because not only did the white unions oppose him, but the black union opposed him because my dad, a very inquisitive person also, as a laborer worked with the engineers and construction guys when the pulp mill was built, he knew how things worked because he asked questions and he saw them doing it, he was there with them, so as a consequence he knew how things worked in the plant and the people that he worked with, the whites would come in, they would learn the job, he was there with them around them all the time and they would trust him to watch things while they went to get a bite to eat or when they needed to be off for a couple of hours, he would stay there and run their machine for them.  They gave him the job of basically being a filler in the plant, although he was a laborer, they knew he knew how to do all of these jobs and he was a favorite of the foreman because he covered for them in every way.  Well as it turns out when the rules were changed and everybody had to start to work up to prove that they could do a particular job, the whites and the blacks opposed it because they said, "well look he's the guy that teaches all the new folk who come in. The regular operators don't want to be there wasting their time, he's the guy who teaches the folks, he knows how to run all of this, he'll end up as our boss." Well there were, as I understand it from others years later, there were death threats, my dad started carrying a gun for his safety. There were threats, but he ended up working from the bottom to the top, and was really a papermaker and he became a guy who went to the top of the pulp mill because he knew how to operate it all, he had been there when it was built have done things, but on his shifts, people would sabotage the mill process.  They were seven stories as I understood it, and he would be up watching, checking on a particular thing and people would change valves and change the different solutions and various things all up and down the towers, and then various things to try and make things fail, and there was collusion because nobody wanted him to keep doing it, so he would go back and he was constantly fixing things and he ended up having a heart attack and over the years he had four heart attacks, and was medically retired from International Paper Company, but he gets credit for pulling so many other blacks in there and teaching them the machines as operators and teaching them the papermaking business because he could really just pick up the pulp, and in his fingertips he could tell you what grade it was of, what it needed to be of, particular grade.
Story_ID: 115597
Speaker 1: But my dad [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] was a very, very strong person, he just died last year, a year ago in August, a very tough time for all of us because he was really a great strength in our family. And basically I think after losing mom [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] the year, almost a year prior, it was almost like he did not want to go on, but he had serious problems and with his heart and she had taken care of him for years and he wanted to go home to be with her, but two remarkable people and no one could have had better parents.  They insisted on the great foundation for us. They insisted on an education for all of us and they worked to make sure it happened, they both made sure that they attended our various events in school.  We had great expectations, because mom and dad set the bars here for you. "We're concerned about those other kids in the neighborhood, but you're gonna get your lesson," and that was one of the things that my mom would say and to the kids in the neighborhood she would ask, "are you doing okay in math?" I mean she would ask the question, and if Mrs. Lewis asked a question all of a sudden the kids would perk up, and we had a couple of kids in the neighborhood who could start to get a bit rowdy and my mom would bring them in and put them in a corner and have them get on their knees. And there's a minister, Billy Ray Lindsley [ph.], who lived next door to us when he was growing up, he and his brother used to spend lots of times with my younger brothers, they grew up together in our home, but he looks back and he says, "I'm a minister today because Mrs. Lewis put me on my knees most of my life".
Speaker 2: When your father, I wanna go back.
Speaker 1: Surely.
Speaker 2: Because you said a lot of things and you know I let you go on, but there are some questions that I have. The box with the medals, did you ever have an opportunity to see them and know what they were?
Speaker 1: No, in fact we had a fire in the house in 1959, the house burned, that closet burned and I never got a chance to do that and I respected my father, who said "leave that alone" and I did.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 113636
Speaker 1: --Sent him [Lewis' father, Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] through medical school--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: So although he did not have a high school education, he did not have a high school diploma, obviously he was bright enough to become a medic in the Army.
Speaker 2: So they trained him to be--.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: A medic.
Speaker 1: Yes, he was trained a medic.
Story_ID: 113637
Speaker 1: What was your father's, father's name?
Speaker 2: I have--.
Speaker 1: Henry Caldwell, C-A-L-D-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, and how many brothers and sisters did he have?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, and some came after, he had--.
Speaker 2: If you can't think of it, it's fine.
Speaker 1: Eleven.
Speaker 2: Eleven?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: And that grandfather, that was, do you know his--because you said that he was born out of wedlock.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Right, and then did your grandmother [Rosie (ph.) Lewis] marry?
Speaker 1: Yes, she married a Lewis, but a different set of Lewises.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: George Lewis, my grandmother Rosie married George Lewis, not in the same family of Lewises though.
Speaker 2: The--where your grandparents lived, did they own the land?
Speaker 1: On my--.
Speaker 2: On your father's side?
Speaker 1: On my father's side, they did own the land, my great-grandmother [Lula Lewis] owned land on a large farm left to her by her husband Bully [ph.] Lewis who was an entrepreneur of sorts.  He bought land, had land and in fact it is said that part of the courthouse in Butler County [Alabama], the courthouse is on land that he use to own.  When he died it is said that Lawyer "Peavy", who later became Judge Peavey came to the house and said "Lula, you know they are not gonna let you keep this land and everything now that Bully's gone, you better let me take care of it for you," and he set things up and the land is no more in the Lewis family now.  The interesting thing is that as a young [U.S.] Air Force ROTC Cadet in 1965, no it's 1964 in summer camp, Sewart Air Force Base in Tennessee, across the hall from me was a University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] student, ROTC student, by the name of James Peavy.  I called my parents--that first weekend we couldn't go anywhere--I called them and said there's a James Peavy from Greenville, Alabama here and he has this unbelievable accent just like the people in Greenville and da-da, and my dad [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] told me in no uncertain terms, "Junior, leave it alone." In essence, don't ask any questions, don't go into it, it's over and done, leave it alone," but I have always remembered from a little kid, I heard about the Peavys, Lawyer Peavy taking the land, left the farmland, but the rest of the land, he "took care of it" and of course the Peavys, the Peavy family in Greenville is a very, very wealthy family.
Story_ID: 113638
Speaker 1: You told me a lot of different memories, but what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's easy, my father [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] coming home from the War [World War II, WWII].  We were living on my grandmother [Martha Stinson (ph.) Mitchell], maternal grandmother's farm and my grandfather [John Mitchell]'s farm, the Mitchell Farm, they were tenant farmers, but on their farm where I was born.  My mom [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] had gotten letters during the War, sporadically she'd get a batch and she'd sit down and read them and what you have you. But there was this heightened awareness, the War is over now, your dad is coming home, your dad is coming home, and sure enough there was this car that came that--the clay dirt road out to the farm and it was going awfully fast, the billowing dust behind it and what have you, and it was a taxi and in Greenville [Alabama] one black guy had a taxi and he served all the areas.  Well, he actually pulled up in front of the house, and before the car actually stopped it seems this man jumps out and he's in uniform, and I was out playing with my uncle Bubba, I'm two weeks older than he is, and we saw the car coming and we were doing something and I remember looking up when the man in this uniform jumped out of the car, and instinctively I knew, I ran toward him with my arms out and I remember being picked up and around and around and around and around, and I remember my mom off the porch just bouncing, and he had both of us in up in the air and I tell you, I clearly, I remember this and giggling and going on and my mom, the happiest person on earth at that time.
Speaker 1: Was this the first time that you saw your father?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. We've always been bonded at the hip so to speak, very close.
Story_ID: 113639
Speaker 1: Tell me what it was like living on the Mitchell farm as you were growing up, who were your friends and who were the other tenant farmers?
Speaker 2: Tenant farmers?  The farms there were quite large and as a young kid I didn't get to go to any of the other farms or anything like that.  I remember being taken to the gin when I was probably about eight-years-old visiting, I got a chance to ride with my uncle on the tractor and bounced on the roads and what have you and the gin [ph.] I found out later and I understand now was kinda like a meeting place for the workers, especially the teenagers coming out of the fields and what have you and they made their plans for Friday night or the weekend and that kind of thing.  So I have a little bit of an appreciation for that kinda thing, but I did not venture out from the farm on my own or with anybody.  I was quite small, but even beyond that the stories that I had heard growing up were stories about snakes, and I am not fond of snakes at this moment let me just put it like that but there were snakes on the farm. There was the corn crib that you had to go out to get corn to bring in to take to the gin to be shucked and what have you, and although I did go out and into the corn crib with my aunts and uncles at times, they watched out for me.  I was a city kid, I was a kid from Mobile [Alabama] who didn't know any better, so the idea of a snake being in the crib was something they protected me from.  The idea of snakes crossing the path when you were going to get water, there was an outhouse, there was a number ten tub that you took a bath in.  You had to walk a good block and a half down, "down the road" they would say, but you would go down this hill to a common spring that came out of the hill, and next to it, my grandfather had, my grandfather [John] Mitchell had a built-up wooden pen and there were fish in there, his minnows and he fished with live minnows and he kept them alive in there, when he would catch them he would put them in there, but there was another common area where you would dip your bucket in, and I was a small kid so I had the small buckets.  You would probably in not understand, but cert [ph.] buckets were about so high, aluminum I would suppose, or metal buckets with a sealed top on it, you could push the top on it.  Well, these didn't have tops, you would dip them in and you would bring the water back and you had to climb up that hill, but that's how you got your drinking water, so you had to send kids to get water for cooking and for everything else and for bathing, you know it gets to be interesting so you didn't bathe everyday (laughter), this was new to me, so the things that I learned on the farm was that I did not ever want to be a farmer, and the idea of going to the field, well my grandmother and grandfather put that out of everybody's mind, "no, no he is going to the field," but they did manual labor, they picked cotton.  I've never picked cotton; I've never used a hoe to chop cotton or to dig the weeds from around the corn in a field.  Now at home, my mom [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] had in Mobile on our adjacent lot that we owned, she had a garden every year and she planted butter beans, and peas and okra and I hated okra because in the summertime if anything got on you it would make you itch forever, but I learned those things.  We had a fig tree in Mobile, and I hated to go to pick the figs early in the morning because if that got you it itched also.  I was not a farmer, but my mom loved having those things around her in Mobile.  We had a cherry tree. We had a pecan tree. So those things were very special to her from her childhood.
Story_ID: 113640
Speaker 1: I was asking you, was there a story about how your mother [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] and father [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, they had known each other in Greenville [Alabama] from the time they were probably six to eight-years-old.  My father's uncle was dating my grandfather [John] Mitchell's daughter at one point, and there was a 1934 Terraplane later as my dad grew up.  He had seen her, but the family, my grandmother, my great-grandmother [Lula Lewis] bought a 1934 Terraplane car, very fast car for the time and my uncle drove it and my dad would ride with him as this youngster. So he would drive out to try to date my great and my grandfather Mitchell's daughter and they would pass by on the way to where she lived and from time-to-time they would stop, as they do in the country wave and chat with people and he would see her at those times.  Later in school, he would ask her after a basketball game because she played basketball, if she wanted to do this or do that next week, what have you and she said "oh no I can't date, I'm too young" and this kinda thing, but he found out that she liked Baby Ruth candy, so that became the way to her heart.  My dad would go to town, buy Baby Ruth candy and he would walk her from church from time-to-time when they were teenagers, but as I mentioned my dad left Mobile [Alabama], left Greenville, went to Mobile at sixteen, started working at International Paper, but he would come back on a regular basis and they basically pledged themselves to each other as young teenagers, and when my mom was old enough he came home and told my grandmother Mitchell and grandfather Mitchell that they were getting married at Ridgeville [ph.] Baptist Church on this day, this time and if you don't want to miss the wedding, and from the stories I've heard, my grandmother was sweeping the yard when he told her. And she said, "Did you ask anybody?" and he says, "Well no ma'am, you all know that we're gonna get married" and she says, "Young man, that's not what I asked you," and evidently there was a kinda of smartness about him, remember my grandmother didn't take anything with anybody.  The story goes that she turned and got about three licks with the brush broom before he could get outta the way, but my mom was concerned at that point and decided that he needed to ask her father, Mitchell.  He was gonna have none of it, so when he went to ask him, he says "I understand you came here and you're saying there's gonna be a wedding.  Who says there's gonna be a wedding?" and he said, "I said, there's gonna be a wedding and I'm coming to pick her up and we're getting married at this time, we'd appreciate--."  He says, "You'll appreciate the fact that I'm wearing my .38", and he pulled back. And dad supposedly said, my uncles verified this, and he said "Yes sir, I see your .38 and I appreciate that, but you'll appreciate that I'm wearing my .45," and everybody knew that dad was an expert shot.  My grandfather Mitchell at that point said nothing else.  Mom got ready on the appointed day and time, they did in fact get married and they spent the rest of their lives together, but they had laughs about that all the time and my grandmother Mitchell and my dad had a great relationship also.  My grandfather Mitchell always said, "now he's a hard worker and provider, but you'd better be careful cause he'll eat you outta house and home" (laughter) but they had a great relationship, and again family came together and they were always together with all of the kids and everything.
Story_ID: 113641
Speaker 1: So they [Lewis' parents, Roosevelt Lewis, Sr. and Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] moved to Mobile [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: They moved to Mobile, lived with my father's aunt, Lilly Womack [ph.], at the time, and she basically had a home on Bay Bridge Road in Mobile, in Magazine Point, Alabama, north Mobile community.  You've probably heard of Plateau, Alabama [also known as Africatown]. They are right together there, next to the International Paper Company mill there, and many people from Greenville [Alabama] and from the farms would come to Mobile, live with family initially, and then move out on their own, and that's what my dad did.  He had lived there, then got his own house that he had rented in Magazine Point near another relative (unclear) aunt and he and my aunt moved to Mobile, and lived there until I was born. And of course, he got called by the military. International Paper Company, a Mr. Friend [ph.] who was Major Friend, he had been my Major in the First World War, he was the boss of the Paper Mill, he was the big president of the company there at that mill. And he had seen how industrious my dad was, and what a hard worker he was, and he had him take care of his car, wash, wax, service the vehicles and that kinda thing.  So my dad did that for a while before he went back to the paper, the pulp mill, after Mr. Friend--when he got back from the War [World War II, WWII] he went back to the pulp mill. But Mr. Friend got him out of his initial call, civil service call, and said the pulp industry is a key industry in the war and we're keeping all of our workers. Well, my dad ended up, after things were getting pretty tough, he was extremely patriotic and my dad wanted to go, so Mr. Friend did in fact let him volunteer, got his physical and all of this bit and they got him in, processed him and everything and then he finds out mom is pregnant, so of course before he's shipped overseas, he took her back to Greenville.
Story_ID: 113642
Speaker 1: So now when he [Lewis' father, Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] comes back and you are now born--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --where did you live?
Speaker 2: We moved back immediately to Mobile [Alabama], went back to the house that they had rented, it's up on the hill. In fact, it's gone now and there's a road in there, but I remember those, those days as a little kid because our aunt on my mom [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis]'s side lived down on Bay Bridge Road and when we walked down this path, there was a lady that lived on the right side, Ms. Tempee [ph.] that was a descendant of Cudjoe Lewis of the last African slaves that came to this county on the boat Clotilde. This group of people lived in what was called--Africatown [Plateau, Alabama] now--but many of those descendants as a little kid growing up, they lived in that area and Ms. Tempee was one of these descendants of Cudjoe Lewis who was the leader of this group of Africans that were enslaved and brought in by the Meaher family back in, right after the [Civil] War and as it turned out, I remember her, because she was so old and wrinkled but she always wanted to see that boy, "bring me that boy, let me see him" and my mom would have me dressed up and starched and ironed clothes.  Everyday all of my aunts and uncles and everybody talked about the day, "she always had those first two kids starched and ironed, if they bumped into you they'd cut you with their creases and things," but as there were more kids that went away, obviously and people didn't do that kind of thing very much anymore either as I recall growing up, but they lived in Magazine Point [in Mobile County, Alabama] and shortly after that dad bought our farmhouse in Toulminville [Alabama] for $4,400.00 and we moved out there.
Speaker 1: Where did your father get $4,400.00?
Speaker 2: There was loan, he had the G.I. Bill, he also, he worked two jobs, he would work at the paper mill and then he would work as a stevedore, remember my dad was very muscular and he worked a second job as a stevedore, and he got the loan, bought the house and of course that was an awful lot of money at that time.  It was a four-room house with a center chimney, with fireplaces in three of the rooms, the bedrooms, the living room. And of course in the kitchen you had the potbellied stove that had the pipe that went into the chimney and everything went out the top and the chimney, the fireplaces and everything fit into the one big chimney, very tall ceilings, twelve-foot high ceilings, the front porch was my favorite.  The porch went all the way across the house, and it was wood at the bottom and screen at the top, so we had wind, air coming through all the time.  The tall ceilings and the tall windows you would let them up and at night the air would go through the house. Really big house and a back porch and later the back porch was enclosed and a bathroom was put in, but initially there was an outhouse. There was no such thing as an inside bathroom, initially when I was growing up, and yes, I must be three hundred years old (laughter).
Speaker 1: How old were you when you moved to this house?
Speaker 2: About five years old at that time.
Speaker 1: And how many brothers and sisters did you have at this time?
Speaker 2: We had a newborn, let's see Bunny is four and a half years younger, we moved in the house and Bunny was born, so I was, I was almost five and she was born in the house, that was the norm back then.  We had what was called midwives and she was the last one born at home, all of the other kids were born at Providence Hospital in Mobile [Alabama], and the family doctor was Dr. Henderson [ph.], in fact I bought my first airplane from him, a later story.  But I was almost five at the time when we moved into the neighborhood.
Story_ID: 113643
Speaker 1: Since we were talking about your siblings--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --tell me all of your siblings' names?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm the oldest of eight, the next sister, Gloriest Evona Lewis.
Speaker 1: Gloriest, can you spell that?
Speaker 2: G-L-O-R-I-E-S-T, Gloriest, Evona, E-V-O-N-A, and I named her.  Mom and dad let me name her and they don't know where I got the name from and I don't know where I got the name from, but that's what I named my baby sister and we were very, very close, she was just a neat, neat person, outstanding in school and just very perky, very private though, and just a beauty.  She, as I look back on it, although she died at eleven in a fire in the home, she was just a favorite of the kids in the neighborhood and many of the students who went to school with her, now when they meet me they will talk about her even though this was in, in third, we were in third grade together or we were in fourth grade together and it's an amazing thing because she was just so popular and she was just a neat, neat person.  The next oldest is another girl, Patricia Ann [ph.] Lewis.  My sister Pat is an educator in Mobile County [Alabama], she teaches English and art, a Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama] grad, she followed me to Tuskegee after I had graduated she came in, and I have to admit Pat ended up with my tennis conference championship jacket and other things and I haven't been able to get them back from her yet.  I couldn't fit in them anyway now, but Pat is an educator who has pushed very hard for years to get young people in college and has in fact brought her kids to the Fly-In, the Annual Tuskegee Airmen Fly-In that I conduct here, and I have done Tuskegee Airmen seminars at her school, high school with 1,700 plus students.  The next oldest is Norman Alvin, Norman is an electrical engineer by training, worked for Bell [Labs] in Birmingham [Alabama] after getting out of the [U.S.] Navy.  He spent a tour in the Navy, got out went to school and then worked for Bell Labs.  He then worked in the electrical engineering world for a while and he is currently in Mobile at Providence Hospital where he is the technical engineer for their recovery rooms, their intensive care units, he takes care of all of the monitors and the electrical engineering work for that system, and his wife is a nurse there, she's an RN [registered nurse] on--at that hospital.
Story_ID: 113644
Speaker 1: The next oldest is Chinaester Marie.
Speaker 2: Spell that please?
Speaker 1: C-H-I-N-A-E-S-T-E-R, Chinaester Marie.  Chinaester is another one of those free spirits that is a giving, loving person who graduated in sociology, she taught for a while but she was quite involved in the Civil Rights Movement as a young kid in Mobile [Alabama]. She was involved in the marches and what have you and was a leader in the Youth Movement in Mobile, was arrested a number of times and of course my parents did not tell me this, I was away during the War while things were going on.  Chinaester is a minister at this time.  Her husband passed away about three, four years ago.  She has three boys and they're all grown and married now.  After Chinaester Marie, we have Ronald Andrew.  Ronald is another electrical engineer, graduated from college, went to North Carolina.  He was invited to take a job as a panel engineer in the Carolina Light and Power Company [Carolina Power & Light (CP&L)] there in a small town in North Carolina, did well there, came back and I helped him work an electrical problem with a plant, the George Washington Carver foods plant in Opelika, Alabama. A Tuskegee Airmen has this idea while he was, during the War that he wanted to have a food-processing company and he wanted to name it George Washington Carver Plant.  He asked me four different times help him do it, on the fourth occasion he says "If you will help me do this, I will indeed give scholarships to your students that need flying time" and of course that was an offer I couldn't refuse, so I ended up putting a year and a half of work to get a building refurbed and set up and my brother Ronald came down and took care of some serious electrical problems, and later continued to work there and he still works there.  The next one is Joseph Martin.  Joseph is a college grad who is with his wife who's in the military at San Antonio [Texas] in San Antonio at Randolph Air Force Base, Texas.  Joseph works in the healthcare field there as an independent contractor. And then there's the baby that was the surprise, Robert Griditt, Robert, G-R-I-D-I-T-T, Robert Griditt was the baby that mom [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] and dad [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] had after I graduated from college.  I took all of the kids, brought them to Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama], showed them around, took them down to Greenville [Alabama] and we spent two weeks away from home.  Mom and dad ended up conceiving Robert. Robert is married also an electrical engineer in Huntsville [Alabama].  He's done some remarkable classified-operations at Redstone [Arsenal] modifying helicopters that are performing in the War right now, but a very bright young man and many people look at us and say you must be--father-son because we look so much alike, but Robert is married and their first is on the way, the wife is seven weeks, we just learned that a few days ago.
Story_ID: 113645
Speaker 1: That was--now when you move into the house in Toulminville [Alabama], and your father [Roosevelt Lewis, Jr.] paid over $4,000 for this home, how much land was with the home?
Speaker 2: Okay, he bought three lots, the lots were 50-feet wide and we have, we have a 100-foot wide lot that the main house is on, the old farmhouse and he bought the lot next to it so we have 150 feet across and it's about 200 deep.  This was a dairy farm that was bought by Mr. Rhomer, R-H-O-M-E-R, and this developer sub-divided it into lots and sold it so nothing of the farm remained except a block away, an actual block away, was the--actually the working dairy building.  We actually lived in the home-home of the owners and the building that was one of the working buildings was actually dressed out and made into a home and some people moved into that, they were probably about the ninth or tenth family that moved into the area, but Toulminville when we moved in, was a suburb of Mobile [Alabama], it was not developed.  There was a pond behind our house, about 300 yards behind the house.  There were fish in this fairly large pond, it was later filled in and homes and streets along the place now, but as I remember it, it was a very long walk from St. Stephens Road through not really good streets, they were paths at the time, they were rutted roads at the time.  Part of the property on the way you had to come across the property that was owned by the board of education where they put in the school, you drove past or walked past the one-room school house that was there, the Rosenwald School and there was this huge place right in front of our house that turned out to be Carver Park, they made it Carver Stadium, it became a baseball, football, all-purpose park for Negroes in the area, and this is where the Mobile Black Barons, I'm sorry the Mobile Black Bears played the Birmingham Barons, the old Negro League players played right in front of the house, the great battles in high school football between Central High School [Mobile, Alabama] and Mobile County Training School [Mobile, Alabama] happened right in front of the house. So I grew up with a fence around the park, but they were gates and right across on the opposite corner from where I lived was tennis courts, two tennis courts and basketball courts, and there were the football fields and the baseball fields so I grew up playing sports there.
Story_ID: 113646
Speaker 1: Now Toulminville was not a--it was suburb of Mobile [Alabama], but there weren't many blacks that lived there when you moved there, this was in what 1948?
Speaker 2: Yes, this would have been in the '40s [1940s] there were not many blacks, in fact, I remember my community at the time was nothing, it was just lots and Mr. Rhomer would bring people out and sell them lots and pretty soon another family would start building a house and eventually a house would be there and then another and another, so the community grew up around us.  There were three anchor families on this particular land, the family that I remember being the first family there was the Williams family, Mr. Henry Williams lived there with his wife, Ms. Lorene.  She and mom [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] became great friends, and they over the years like dad [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.], they had lot of kids, mom and dad had, I think they ended up with about ten or maybe eleven, I left home and they were still having kids.  The next family to move in was the Aaron family, Henry Aaron was the youngster who grew up over me, of course, the world knows him as "Hank Aaron, Mr. Homerun," but Henry was just a very shy, bright easy-going kid in the neighborhood that all the families loved because he was a good kid. And when mom and dad would go to the store or had something from time-to-time he would watch us once in a while, and as I grew up a little older, I watched Henry develop as a young man, and his friend Herman Smith who lived next door to us across the street on the right side, they played baseball, and many kids in the neighborhood played baseball and they would come from all over to play and I saw them playing with the--with the big guys and we would watch in the park [Carver Park] on Saturday afternoons and Sunday afternoons and watch them with their uniforms on and they played ball. But growing up they also played what I would call is broom ball, it was something special for one of the guys to be designed, "it's your turn to get the broom this week or this time" and the idea was to find a broom in the neighborhood that was a large broom, you absolutely needed a large broom handle, cut the broom off and the idea was to bring it to the park so that you could play broom ball and they used, I'm gonna use the words they used, soda water tops.  In the olden days you went to the store and you got the little sodas, you popped the cap and the cap went down into the dispenser and you got a collection of them after a while, and they would send me from the park--when they would bend them up and they could not throw them very well--they would send me to get the tops from Henry's grandfather, Mr. Aaron, who had a little store, and this little store had a coke machine and you would open it up, get the little bottle and people would hang around the store, so there were lots of tops and Mr. Aaron would give me a brown bag, empty the tops in it for and I would go out and walk on the grass and then watch both ways and of course the guys would watch, "okay, now you can cross the street" into the park, it was very little traffic in the neighborhood at that time, and then they would play broom ball and they would throw the tops, and they could break the tops about six feet it would seem like to me and I think really that's how Henry developed these absolutely incredible wrist and the hand-eye coordination because they things would come in and he would look them right in and right at the last possible moment when he was about to cross the plate, just a snap, just a whip action and he could hit the home runs with the tops.  They had designated areas, but also in playing ball he was a tremendous baseball player as the world knows now, and Henry ended up just being one of the great folk who came from the neighborhood and who did quite well.
Story_ID: 113647
Speaker 1: Now in the neighborhood itself--now you talked about his, Henry Aaron's [later, Hank Aaron] grandfather had a store.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What other establishments were in the neighborhood--well let me ask you this question, when you think about sounds, smells and sights of the neighborhood, what comes to mind?
Speaker 2: Calmness, peace, there were trees, lots of trees in the neighborhood, pecan trees, cherry trees, that had been on the dairy farm. And there was lots of open land that were the lots that became the streets and what have you. There was a pond and I remember the area on the way to the pond behind our house had cattails, lots of cattails and of course you could go to the pond and there were lily pads and frogs and crawfish, don't say "crayfish" (laughter) crawfish, there were crawfish in the pond and as I remember as a little kid we had some kids in the neighborhood behind me who would catch the crawfish, come to my house, because everybody gravitated to our yard and they would get a can, a soup can or a can with the top cut out, they would make a little fire, and we were not supposed to play with fire, but these kids were a lot bolder that I was, the Riley [ph.] clan and the Wrights [ph.], the Wrights that lived behind us and they would ask me to go in the house and get salt and pepper and they would cook the crawdads and of course, yes I have tasted crawdads cooked by kids in the backyard (laughter). Kids will be kids and we had bullies in the neighborhood.  The kids in the neighborhood that were well behaved and what have you, mom [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] welcomed them into the yard, the kids who were a handful and who did not want to stick by the rules, they tended not to come into the yard because mom was known to put a switch on someone who needed it if necessary--
Story_ID: 113648
Speaker 1: --So these were black and white children?
Speaker 2: No, we lived in an all-black neighborhood, segregation was enforced. And as I look back, I knew that theaters were segregated, if you went to the Saenger Theatre you had to go buy the ticket, go outside, go up in the balcony and sit in the balcony.  I knew from hearing things from time to time that if you went downtown, you could walk across the Square on the angle, but you couldn't stop and sit in the Square in Mobile [Alabama], the Admiral Semmes Square.  I learned as I grew up much later, that Mobile had a very good reputation in terms of blacks and whites and the racial situation that was there as compared to Montgomery [Alabama] and Birmingham [Alabama] and Selma [Alabama] and other places.  I learned at an early age though, even though that was perceived to be the case because we were an international city because the ships came in and people from all over the world got off the ships and it didn't matter what color you were if you got off a ship, you could go in sit down, and eat or do whatever downtown at the various establishments, you could do it if you didn't speak English.  If you were Spanish or if you came from the Philippines and you spoke English or if you were any other race it didn't matter, but if you were black and from the area, you were not supposed to go into those places, it was not integrated.  I grew up seeing "white only," "colored only" on the water fountains, on the restrooms, on the various other things.
Speaker 1: But even in Toulminville [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: In Toulminville we only had homes.
Story_ID: 113649
Speaker 1: We had one store, Riker's [ph.] Store, one block south of St. Stephens Road and that's where we traded.  We went to trade there initially. Later in the neighborhood we got a store that was built right next to the Aaron family [Hank Aaron's family].  That store was owned by a Jewish gentlemen who had the thickest glasses I had ever seen and perhaps even now, but he lived in the store, he ran the store, he set it up and ran it and supplied the neighborhood with smaller things, the smaller items, day-to-day items. And of course, I went to the store for mom [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] and other people in the neighborhood, the elderly people in the neighborhood, the Smiths, Herman's family when he was not available, he was away, I ran errands for them.  You did that when you lived in my neighborhood, but there were no strip malls or stores or anything as we know it now.  There was Riker's Store where you went on the weekend, on Friday or Saturday to get your meats, the--we had the butcher there, we had all of the things in a grocery store and it wasn't that large, probably less than 2,000 square feet, but it was the store that everybody traded at. And the other store that was a block away that you got day-to-day things, bread, milk, sugar, salt, baking powder because you started from scratch with everything.  You got that from this store and it was quite small, he lived in the back and there was a front room with things and of course his counter, so there was not a lot of development in the neighborhood, it was a truly a community of just homes until the park [Carver Park] came, and when the park came then that was the magnet for everything and later they built Booker T. Washington Middle School on the west side, I'm sorry the east side of the park, on the north side of the park was Toulminville Elementary School, there was the park, to the south were all homes, to the west were all homes and we had the Aaron's Store, very small little store and eventually across the street from that and across from the Toulminville Elementary School that had the Rosenwald building, they built what was called Dixie Gardens, a project, one of the early, early concrete-block projects, and that has just been, they've started demolishing that, urban renewal kind thing, because they were very, very small, I think about 1300-square feet or so, two-bedroom, little kitchen, front room as they said and of course many, many people grew up in that neighborhood, but Toulminville [Alabama] was known as being just a very family-oriented place when I grew up there.
Story_ID: 113650
Speaker 1: Now you talked about the park [Carver Park] and the tennis courts, is that where you learned to play tennis?
Speaker 2: I did, Mr. Bivens, James Bivens [ph.] and I just saw him at our Heart of Mary High School reunion mass here in July.  Mr. Bivens was one of those early Negroes who was hired by the city and he taught table tennis, basketball, he was over the recreation center on Davis Avenue [Davis Avenue Recreation Center], he worked there, he also worked at Providence Hospital later, he worked two jobs and had lots of kids too, but Mr. Bivens used to come out and play tennis with other gentlemen and I thought they were elderly at time, but they were all college-educated individuals who had been exposed to tennis, and as a young kid I went out and I would run balls, shag the balls for them and at the end of their playing, they might give me fifty cents and that was a big deal at the time, but eventually they would get tired and I would get an older racket and Mr. Bivens would let me hit the ball for a bit, he was younger than most of the others, and I picked up tennis at that point.
Story_ID: 113651
Speaker 1: Tell me what elementary school you went to?
Speaker 2: Toulminville Elementary School, a block from my home across the park [Carver Park].  It had a Rosenwald one-room school house that had been constructed as a part of the Booker T. Washington and Rosenwald legacy.  Mr. [Julius] Rosenwald owned Sears and Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Company], provided materials for schools, one-room school houses for black communities.  Dr. Washington, Tuskegee University [formerly Tuskegee Institute in Tuskegee, Alabama] founder made an agreement with him, "I will provide the teachers if you will provide the materials," and they agreed that indeed there has to be community ownership, so they would not give the building to the community, they provided the teachers, they provided the materials, but the men in the community had to build the building.  So the community took ownership of those buildings and the teachers taught there--who taught there came from Tuskegee and from Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and from Bethune-Cookman [University, Daytona Beach, Florida] and Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama] and what have you, and there's a great legacy in those one-room schoolhouses.  That's where the black community's education came from, and I can say that I did spent one year, first grade, in a Rosenwald building in Toulminville there, they added on up to sixth grade the year I was a young kid, and they put me in Morning Star Church.  We held school in a local church that was three block away from my house.  At Morning Star Baptist Church, the teachers taught there, and as the community grew, of course I went through, first through sixth grade there.  Mrs. Charles [ph.] was my first grade teacher, Ms. Snowden [ph.], a beautiful lady, my second grade teacher and Mrs. Harris [ph.], third grade, fourth grade, Mrs. Ward [ph.].  The only "D" I got in classes in penmanship, my fourth grade, and of course fifth grade, Mrs. Gilliard [ph.] and Mrs. Scott [ph.], sixth grade.  These were all very committed teachers, they absolutely wanted you to get your lesson, they expected things of you and you did learn because they did teach us.  Mrs. Charles, my first grade teacher was a great influence and many, many, many years later after I graduated from college and was in the military, Mrs. Charles saw my mom [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] and remembered me as one of her favorite kids over the years, and I talked to her and she said things I did in school back then.  It's amazing, but I truly enjoyed school, sixth grade I left Toulminville Elementary, went to--.
Speaker 1: Well was that Toulminville Elementary or Morning Star?
Speaker 2: Toulminville Elementary, we only went to Morning Star Church while they were building--.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: The rest of the school, adding onto the Rosenwald School to make it the Toulminville Elementary School.  Nineteen-fifty seven [1957] my family converted to Catholicism and I went through seventh and eighth grade at St. James School and Church in Prichard, Alabama, a Catholic church community, a parish that's fairly close to the Toulminville community about two and a half, three miles away, so mom and dad drove [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] us to school back and forth, and others rode with us.
Story_ID: 113652
Speaker 1: What type of work was your father [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] doing at that time?
Speaker 2: My father was a laborer at International Paper Company the entire time.
Speaker 1: Oh, so he stayed at the paper company, okay.
Speaker 2: And provided for the--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --family, he also worked at times as a stevedore part-time and he also went to school under the G.I. Bill at one point at Bestida [ph.] College in Mobile [Alabama].  There was payment for the G.I. Bill, he was a medic, the closest thing they had to anything like was cosmetology, he knew all the bones, the facial things, he knew the body, so they recommended that he go through that, he did, got his degree in cosmetology, but this was again the G.I. Bill, it was a paycheck for GIs who were out of school, and although he never did any of that, it was again what all the G.I.s did, they went to school most of them that we knew in our neighborhood went to school so that they could get indeed get another paycheck.
Story_ID: 113653
Speaker 1: All right, so now in the Catholic school [at St. James Catholic Church in Prichard, Alabama], how much of a change was that for you coming out of Toulminville [Elementary School]?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was quite a change, at St. James seventh grade and eighth grade, first of all there were religion classes, catechism and what have you and the history, I was really taken by the history of the Catholic Church and there's a lineage from the beginning 'till now, that fascinated me.  I also made great friends there. My mom [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] and dad [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.], especially my mom, extremely religious, very, very loving people, very giving people as I've mentioned and I, I excelled there in seventh and eighth grade and before I knew it, it was time to go off to high school.
Speaker 1: Now what religion was your family, were they Baptist before going to--?
Speaker 2: Yes, we were Baptist.
Speaker 1: To becoming Catholic, okay.
Speaker 2: Now, in high school a tremendous change.
Speaker 1: Wait, before you go further, I'm sorry to interrupt you, but were you taught by nuns or teachers?
Speaker 2: By nuns in high school and--.
Speaker 1: In, in at St. James?
Speaker 2: No, we had lay teachers at St. James and of course we had just white priests, but we had lay teachers who were black at St. James; high school--absolutely the opposite.
Story_ID: 113654
Speaker 1: What school was this?
Speaker 2: This was Heart of Mary High School.
Speaker 1: Heart of Mary, spell that.
Speaker 2: Heart of Mary, H-E-A-R-T.
Speaker 1: Oh, Heart.
Speaker 2: H-E-A-R-T, Heart of Mary High School, Mobile [Alabama].
Speaker 1: And what year did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went off to high school, I graduated in '60 [1960], so this would have been 1956, '57 [1957] school year.  I went off to high school. Well, the kids in high school had gone to Catholic school, most of them, all of their lives and they had grown up together from diapers on and many of them knew each other, all of them knew each other it seemed.  The kids from St. James Parish came in,  and it was like an outside group coming in, so automatically you had to make all new friends, and also you had to get acclimated to a number of things, number one, you're in school and you change classes now and you do these things and that was new for me, you also--they put me in the "B" class, my freshman year, first semester, that was new for me because I'd always been a very good student and the third thing, although when we went to stores or what you have you, you interacted with whites as a young kid rarely, but the nuns were white, the Dominican nuns from Wisconsin and they absolutely gave us the idea that here is the expectation.  Now, we had had that in our schools prior to that, but I understood right away this was serious business.  This was during the Civil Rights era; we learned an awful lot of things.  They taught us things about the world, for example before [John F.] Kennedy announced for president or anything, we were told "there's a possibility of a Roman Catholic running for President.  Now, we want you to find out what the ramifications of that."  Well, I knew nothing about that, but I did learn about that, the nuns were no-nonsense.  We walked in the class, we got down to business.  My favorite class in high school, Sister Tomaze [ph.] looked like about a fourteen-year-old, absolutely beautiful face, that's all you saw of course, but this lady was brilliant, she taught general science and she gave me a love for science that I carry today in my heart.  Remember I grew up asking "why, why, why?"  Well, this was a teacher who answers, who taught that there's a periodic chart and here are things that happen in nature, and yes these are the things that you do to make other compounds and what have you. And in my first exam there I made an "A" on the exam, and she made a point to let the class know "that as you can see we're making a lot of progress, and Roosevelt congratulations, you lead the class, you made a perfect score."  Well my new-found friend and my best friend in high school, Charles Perkins, made ninety-one.  There was no way that he was gonna let me make a hundred and he not top that.  This was a very outgoing, very effusive individual, very talkative by nature who was an outstanding athlete.  He was a basketball player, he taught me how to play basketball, he taught me basically how to get along with the other kids there and was kinda initially, "Look, come and go with me," (laughter), so I ended up interacting with my classmates and getting to know them after changing from the "B" class to the "A" class the second semester, because of Charles, he made my transition very easy because he had known all of these kids all of his life and he had all of a sudden blossomed because I was a challenge in school, so we ended up just working very hard for the grades and other things, but Charles was just a great friend and I ended up at Heart of Mary studying the "Van Nostrand's Scientific Encyclopedia," about three and a half inches thick from my freshman year to my senior year, I went through that book and I have to accredit Heart of Mary and that book for my making an absolute incredible score, I scored in the 96 percentile on the National Organic Chemistry Exam, the Standardized Test here at Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama] at the middle of my freshman year and I had never taken anything in organic chemistry.
Story_ID: 113655
Speaker 1: My scientific interest was such thought that I had read so much and I recognized things, also I learned tremendous things at Heart of Mary [High School, Mobile, Alabama] because Sister Wilma, my classroom, my homeroom teacher taught English and made sure that we knew the root words of things, for example, "that's from the Latin, it means, that's from the Greek, it means" and it permitted me to do very well on scholarship exams coming out of Heart of Mary and that permitted scholarships that allowed me to attend Tuskegee University because we had a fire in our home '59 [1959], burned our home, the savings, about $4,000.00 for me to go to medical school because my parents had known since I was a little boy that I wanted to be a doctor. Our family doctor knew that and had kind of egged me on, giving mom [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] and dad [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] books to take home for me and what have you, but with the fire and losing my sister [Gloriest Evona Lewis] and what have you, medical school was out, but my junior year at Heart of Mary I won scholarships my senior year.  I won scholarships and I really and truly wanted to go to [University of] Notre Dame Notre Dame, Indiana].  That was too far away with the trauma the family had gone through, even though I could have gone there on scholarship.  Mom and dad did not want me to leave home and go that far away.  So I had read the biography of Dr. George Washington Carver as a young kid at Heart of Mary and I knew that I wanted to come here and I was going to be the next Dr. George Washington Carver, research scientist, and I did indeed come to Tuskegee and I have to give it to my mentors, my teachers at Heart of Mary.  They made sure that I had a very good foundation to go anywhere, and I enjoyed that.
Story_ID: 113656
Speaker 1: The fire, how was the fire started at your home?
Speaker 2: This is very hard to talk about even now, but mom [Clara Nell Mitchall Lewis] and dad [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] had a talk about redecorating a bit and mom says, well before we do that I want you to strip the floors, let's redo the floors, and they were sand pine floors.  The floors had wax build-up, this was a house that was built, it was a hundred-year-old house probably when we got it, but very strong, had--withstood all the hurricanes in Mobile [Alabama], it was a very solid home.  Dad went to the store and got stripping material, came back and worked on it that morning and he had to go to work at eleven that night for his shift.  He was not making very good progress, he ended up going to the hardware store and they gave him some stronger material and said use this, this will be better.  So he used that and he made additional progress, but it was just not going very fast and mom wanted him to hurry and finish up so she could get her house back, this was disrupting everything, and of course he went to the store again, and said "do you have anything that's stronger, that will allow me to work faster that'll get all of this wax and stuff up?"  And they said, "yeah, we have this and it's the strongest thing that we have," so they sold him that and he got a couple of gallons and there was a guy there with his own construction company and some of the workers and they told him, "Mr. Lewis what we do when we need to get through things, you cut it with gasoline, you get about a quart of gasoline and put in there and then it will come up a lot faster and then you can get it up".  These are on construction sites without people around, I don't think anybody thought about that, but dad came back home, he was working feverously doing the living room, and he's getting the wax up, and it's getting very late at this point, and it's almost dark, and dusk, dark all the kids must come in the house.  Everything is disrupted so we ended up in mom and dad's bedroom because Joseph, who was the baby, needed to change, needed a change.  Ronald, eighteen months older wanted the baby's bottle.  We had tried to wean him from the bottle and he was--even when he was talking and he would tell his baby brother, "Let me have a little bit, just a little bit, I'll just have a little bit" and he would drink a little and give it back to him, but it was really hard to get him off the bottle.  Well, I picked up both, one on each, I take them into the bedroom and I'm changing the diaper, I'm finishing up with the diaper on Joseph and we hear this absolutely incredible noise, it blew out all of the windows in the house, the whole house shook and rattled and I grabbed both of them up, all the kids were in the room with me and I yelled at all of them "follow me," and with the two babies I ran out of the bedroom door, through the front door, the living room door onto the porch, the porch was safe, the small distance that we had to go from the bedroom door right out the front door of the living room was not far, we all got out of there, off the porch and I kept telling them to "run, run" all the way to the street.  We got to the street and turned around and we saw at that point mom and dad coming out with Evona [Gloriest Evona Lewis], and her flesh in places all over was burned. Mom and dad were burned on the legs and eyebrows singed and things like that.  My mom was burned on the arm fairly bad on one arm, but as it turned out, we got everybody out, the neighbors called the fire department, police, ambulances, everybody was there after a while, but Evona was burned the worst. She was eleven-years-old, very thin, long hair that had been burned and she had on little shorts and a little halter that little girls wear, summertime, and she was burned virtually all over.
Story_ID: 113657
Speaker 1: We found out later that the Coldspot Refrigerator, Sears' product, was plugged in the wall, but the plug was not all the way in firmly, and I don't know if you've ever seen something like that, but an iron or refrigerator or washing machine or whatever, when it comes on, if it's not plugged in securely, it will spark.  Well evidently according to the fire department, the fumes stayed low and they had gotten just high enough above this--.
Speaker 2: Outlet.
Speaker 1: Plug-in outlet that it actually, when the refrigerator came on, it sparked and it just blew and my sister, Evona [Gloriest Evona Lewis] was in the kitchen with mom [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] and dad [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.], helping mom as she always did, she was probably washing dishes or doing something in the kitchen with mom, and when it happened she had on very little in terms of clothes, a very small little frame and she got burned badly.  She was rushed to, all three were rushed to the Providence Hospital, and ten days later she expired from pneumonia.  Back in the--in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], and early '60s [1960s], if you were burned, if you were a burn patient, pneumonia is generally what got you.  I did get a chance to see her in the hospital before she died; my beautiful little sister, it was really tough, really tough. But I ended up back home going back into this charred house, my uncles and aunts came over, we cleared out the charred remains and what have you and my mom's brother Willie J., my next oldest brother, said, "You all are coming home with us" and he started to parceling out the children and I said "no, we're gonna stay here" and for the first time in my life, and I'm--I turned fifteen in August, so I--I mean I turned, yeah I turned fifteen in August and this was the middle of August, late August at least, I told them "no" and my uncle said, "what are you saying, you can't tell me no, this is no place for you all to stay."  I said, "this is our home and we have never been apart and we will never be apart."  I had an unbelievable, knockdown, drag out argument with my uncle, I loved him dearly, but I was not gonna let him take my sisters and brothers and parcel them out to other family members.  So my other uncles and my aunts intervened and said "You all put some paper around the windows, and let's see how this works out," we cleaned up that house, we stayed in the bedrooms and we cleaned everyday and other neighbors and my family came in, they helped us clean up, and men in the neighborhood put the windows in, dad stayed in the hospital two weeks, mom for months, but I ended up as the mom and dad of the house.  I ended up, I'd always been the person to help raise the family, that's what mom and dad taught me, I was a third parent, I knew that from my sister Evona on, I was supposed to look out for those under me.  So, I became the real parent almost, because dad could not get around, mom was in the hospital and we got to see her rarely.  Dad would take me to see her on Friday, he would let me drive the car to do that, but this was a very tough time for the family and we eventually got through that, but I don't think my mom--who endured seven skin graft operations--I don't think my mom, until she died, ever got over losing Evona, and it was tough.
Speaker 2: Did your family not believe in banks, is that they kept the money in the home?
Speaker 1: No, the money had to go for medical--.
Speaker 2: Oh, I see so it was spent--.
Speaker 1: The house, (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: Oh, I see.
Speaker 1: To try and get the house back in condition, all kinds of things, so that money that was in the savings account at Merchants National Bank in Mobile [Alabama] to help me become a doctor, ended up helping our family survive this terrible ordeal.
Story_ID: 113658
Speaker 1: All right, so, you didn't go far from home, but you decided to go to Tuskegee, so tell me about your first experience leaving home and coming to Tuskegee Institute [now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama]?  Was it Institute then?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was Tuskegee Institute at the time, Tuskegee--.
Speaker 1: This is 1960?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: In 1960, Tuskegee seemed an awfully, an awfully far place away.  He had to drive on Highway 31 at two-lane all the way up and through Montgomery [Alabama] and you got here and of course the initial period, the rest of the students were not on campus.  I was a scholarship kid, so you had to come early because you became an ambassador for the Institute, you had to learn the history of Dr. Booker T. Washington, Dr. George Washington Carver, the history of the Institute, the various things that went on, what was expected of you and they immediately picked me out and I was supposed to be a chapel usher so I had to practice that. We had classes during the day and we had, as a I recall, a gentlemen who came, one of our teachers was teaching us how we were supposed to do things and learning things and he said, he knocks on the door and it was a classmate, and two of the guys in the class were his nephews.  He gave them the keys to his Oldsmobile, and they were friends so they let me tag along, and he said, "bring my car back without a scratch."  We drove around Tuskegee and ended up at Moton Field, the airfield, the original Tuskegee Airmen airfield.  It was an open grassy place with this old, historic area sitting over here, two hangars and old brick buildings, but just grass and rutts out there, and we saw this little airplane come in and we were fascinated this little airplane came in and landed on the grass and taxied over to hangar one where this (unclear) sign was and we drove on over the rutts over there and we parked, we got out, we watched, we looked, this man totally ignored us, absolutely did not look at all.  It was C. Alfred Anderson, the Chief Flight Instructor of the Tuskegee Airmen.
Story_ID: 115598
Speaker 1: So you're on the field [Moton Field, Tuskegee, Alabama] and you see Chief Anderson?
Speaker 2: Yes, C. Alfred Anderson, "Chief" Anderson to those who were in the Tuskegee Aviation experiment, America's first black military pilots got their first seventy hours of flight training at Moton Field, a field owned by Tuskegee Institute [now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama].  This man had just landed in his airplane and totally ignored the three young men who had shown up, and he gassed the airplane up and we were standing there and we got closer and closer and closer and finally we're standing next to the airplane and we're looking never saying anything, but just looking. Chief Anderson turned around says, "Hi, I'm Chief Anderson," put his hand out, said "Would you like to go for a flight?"  The other two guys just kinda almost fell down getting back out of the way, Chief nudged my elbow, helped me in the left seat, told me to put the seat belt on, put your heels on the floor, toes on the rudder pedals, left hand on the wheel, right hand on throttle, crank the airplane up, when he got in the other side and off I went in this airplane all over the place, it was like an anaconda snake or something but Chief Anderson was an individual who was just an absolutely incredible instructor.  I know now as a pilot that he put his shoes on the outside of the rudder pedals and I could only do so much with the airplane, but he would have you think that you were actually flying the airplane and more and more he would turn over the airplane to you as you gain hand and eye coordination and skills and what have you, but I went for this first magical flight for thirty, forty minutes over Tuskegee, came back in and landed and it had truly broadened my horizons.  I was truly struck by the fact that I no longer saw Tuskegee as this big place that I had to walk from one end down here all the way up to the Tompkins Hall and over to the Chapel and what have you.  I found out that Tuskegee was a finite place, I saw the borders. I asked questions, I was totally fascinated with the idea of flying an airplane.  He taught me how to turn the airplane, how to make the airplane climb gradually, how to make the airplane descend gradually, how to maneuver the airplane and told me about controls and speeds and what have you.  You can only get so much in a short period, but in that flight I think the realization came over me that "I think I can do this," then "I know I can do this," and then "I have to do this," so from that point on flying became an absolute integral part of who I was.
Story_ID: 115599
Speaker 1: I developed a great love for flying, a passion for it, but at the time I did not know that this person [C. Alfred "Chief" Anderson] who took me for this flight was somebody who was an aviation pioneer in his own right, a man who from six to eight years old knew he had to fly an airplane, could never get anybody to take him flying because of the color of his skin, he was a Negro, but he buys his own airplane when he is nineteen years old and because of his reputation, because of the person knowing who he really was, a lady donated $2,000.00, Ms. Wright [ph.] to him to let him have enough money to buy an airplane.  I'll have to tell the story later, but as I say the rest of the story was his father worked at Mrs. Wright's Finishing School.  Mrs. Wright ended up from the time he was a little kid, he grew up there and she would send him to the store or whatever he did, she would give him money.  He ended up saving all of this money, and he tells her dramatically when she calls him in about raising money, borrowing money from everybody in the area, he tells her, "Well, Mrs. Wright, I only have $500.00, but it's everything you've ever given me, I've never spent any money that you've given me.  She was so moved until she called Sarah (unclear) her secretary, "Sarah, bring me my checkbook."  See he had told her that the airplane cost $2500.00.  It allowed this man to buy an airplane; he had to teach himself to fly.  He later became the first black person in history to have, the first minority person to have an airline transport rating, the highest rating you can get in the Art and Science of Flying.  He ran his own flight operation and sight-seeing operation in Washington, D.C.  He taught flying for Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and was later brought to Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama] to teach flying as the Chief Flight Instructor of the Tuskegee experiment, the aviation experiment.  In 1934 he left Tuskegee after flying in here, he left Tuskegee and explored the Caribbean, the first person in history, who along with his best friend, Dr. Albert E. Forsythe, they were the first people in history to fly a land plane into the Caribbean, all the island nations in the Caribbean. This man came back, became the Chief Flight Instructor of the Airmen, and ended up flying Ms. Eleanor Roosevelt during the civilian pilot training program that was here.  The President's wife, the picture that was taken by Mr. [P.H.] Polk who was a fantastic photographer, well known around the world now, but this black photographer headed up the, the unit here at Tuskegee Institute that taught photography and airline trades.  This man took a picture that was seen on the front pages of everywhere from The London Times to LA Times [Los Angeles Times], that made it possible for the Tuskegee Aviation experiment--for young eighteen to twenty-six-year-olds to learn to fly, and fly and fight for their community as military pilots.  This very easy-going, very humble man was C. Alfred Anderson.  He took everybody flying, it didn't matter who you were, he would drag you off the street, if you were going flying he would take you for a flight.
Story_ID: 115600
Speaker 1: Well this broadened my horizons and I made up my mind that unlike in high school where I was the bookworm, although I did play basketball and I did play tennis, here in college [at the Tuskegee Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama] I wanted to learn to fly, but I also wanted to be a well-rounded person.  So I went swimming in the afternoons after classes, I played pick-up basketball with the high school kids from Tuskegee Institute High School.  I played pick-up ball in the gym on Saturday mornings against some of the big guys, but my emphasis was not to be Roosevelt Lewis, valedictorian from Heart of Mary High School [Mobile, Alabama], because here I met valedictorians from all over the country, the competition was steep, but I ended up playing tennis. Dr. [Edward L.] Jackson who headed up phys ed [physical education], and was tennis team boss, saw me play, saw me hit, gave me new balls on a regular basis and a--Bancroft and Wilson Kramer rackets, try these out for me and then informed me that I was on the tennis team.  I assured him that I was a chemistry major, did not have the time and what have you, but I ended up on the tennis team for four years and Conference Tennis Champ my senior year, but the people in Tuskegee that Chief Anderson [C. Alfred "Chief" Anderson], Dr. Jackson and others introduced me to were people who really took an interest in young talent, whoever you were here at Tuskegee.  These students were pushed and pushed hard, the bar was high, and we excelled.  The competition from students around the country was very stimulating also, but I was hooked forever in aviation.  I had to fly, I had to learn, I did learn under Chief in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Cors] Program, I did get my license, I graduated as a number one cadet in ROTC at Tuskegee my year, and I got a chance to go to pilot training and yanking banking the jets and do aerobatics and oh, I loved jet aerobatics so much.  So opportunities came in waves here. In my chemistry classes, Dr. C.T. Mason, head of the George Washington Carver Research Foundation had to come in our as our instruction in organic chemistry the beginning of my sophomore year because our organic chemistry professor before classes started, he had a heart attack.  Dr. Mason was one of the foremost organic chemists and researchers, and I to this day think back that's my favorite course in my whole lifetime in school, it came to me quite easily it seemed when he taught us.  This was a man who had a passion for what he did and he passed it on.  I learned that from him, I've passed on things that I'd learn now, I'd trust with the same kind of passion.  The professors that I had here had a genuine desire to make sure you got the information and that you did well.  ROTC became an outlet for me, I excelled in it.
Speaker 2: Who was the President of Tuskegee at the time you were here?
Speaker 1: Yes, Tuskegee has had only five presidents in its history, and Dr. [Luther] Foster was the president at that time.  Dr. Foster was a quiet, easy-going person and the Institute did a lot of things under his leadership.
Speaker 2: Who are some of your classmates?
Speaker 1: Oh, my, my best friend in the school here was Raymond Dothard. Ray Dothard was in ROTC with me, not as an Air Force ROTC Cadet, but as an Army Cadet, so we ended up competing.  He was on the drill team in Pershing Rifles, I pledged (unclear).  In chemistry, we both did well in organic and Raymond became an Air Force ROTC graduate, went to the War, flew F-4s, made colonel after getting out and going with the [Air National] Guard.  He flew F-4s, F-16s, flew for Eastern then the airlines, Trump Airlines.
Speaker 2: You graduate, well chemistry was your major and what year do you graduate?
Speaker 1: I graduated 1965 and went into the [U.S.] Air Force, 12 October '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: And this was something that you automatically knew that you would do?
Speaker 1: Well, it allowed me a chance to fly.  I graduated with a degree in chemistry, but I also wanted to fly.  I had a fellowship, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, they would pay all of my expenses to get a master's degree in chemistry, I loved it but I think the idea of yanking and banking in an airplane and flying jets was just a bit much.
Story_ID: 115601
Speaker 1: So tell me what happens after graduation?
Speaker 2: Well, I graduated in--and went into the [U.S.] Air Force.  I ended up going into pilot training, Williams Air Force Base in Arizona, Mesa, Tempe Arizona, just outside of Phoenix.  I was the number two person to solo in the T-37 Jet, my first jet air craft, I absolutely loved it. Ended up with--my aviation career in the Air Force being fairly short--I ended up with ulcers.  I was grounded, had a problem, the flight surgeon wrote that he was going to medically retire me and I told him "no, I cannot sign this, I cannot accept a medical retirement." And he says, "well I'm the flight surgeon.  You'll have to meet a board of five colonels to get this changed," and during that period you did not want to meet colonels if you were a young lieutenant.  Well, I indeed asked for the board, they looked at my record, the number one graduate, distinguished military grad in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], number two as a graduate to solo in my class, I had my pilot's license, I was a chemistry graduate, a valedictorian from high school, they looked at my record and said, "how much time do you have for leave time?" And then I said "thirty days, sir".  The head of the board looked down, both ways and he says "Medics, give him thirty days leave. Lewis go home, to oh, you're from Alabama, do you know where Maxell is?"  "Yes, sir." "In sixty days go to Maxwell Air Force Base, have a physical.  If you pass the physical we'll have a job for you." Well, I ended up going to Maxwell, I passed the physical, I thought I was going back to pilot training to finish up, they put me in transportation and sent me to Plattsburgh Air Force Base, New York, sixteen miles south of the Canadian border, sixty miles south of Montreal [Canada] in the cold weather, I was a kid from Mobile, Alabama.  It was as if they were gonna really punish me, they wanted to see I suppose (laughter), so I ended up doing my job there as a vehicle maintenance officer.  I went off to school, I graduated with honors in the Vehicle Maintenance School, came back.  I did very well in the squadron there, in fact the base commander recognized me on a number of occasions, and even after I got my OER, the base commander there upgraded it.  My squadron commander, lieutenant colonel ended up having to go to the hospital and detox with an alcohol problem and I ended up running the squadron for a bit, so I was a squadron commander as a young kid, and I ended up holding things together, the base commander did not forget that.  He upgraded my OER and wrote a personal endorsement that was quite glowing.  He ended up going to Goose Bay [Air Force Base], Labrador in northeastern Canada as the base commander up there, and he asked for me from site headquarters to send me up to Goose Bay, Labrador where there was 256 inches of snowfall a year, and I was the maintenance officer up there and I ended up doing well and also acting as squadron commander in an interim period and I did quite well.  I ended up leaving there going to Southeast Asia, I went to Udon Thani up north, in Thailand '69 [1969] and '70 [1970] all squadron commanders in Thailand were fired during that period because the vehicle fleets were in just terrible shape from abuse to some extent by the troops, but also the harsh, harsh weather, the monsoons and rusting out and what have you.  I worked a deal downtown with workers in contract maintenance, they with blocks of wood and hammers and lacquer paint we had the best looking fleet (laughter) in Southeast Asia and that was something that was noticed by the hierarchy in my chain, and I came back to Scott Air Force Base, Illinois as a by-name replacement in the motor vehicle division, and a two-star General asked for me because I had survived all these things and done well.  I ended up as a staff officer with four and a half years in the Air Force and lots of good things happened after that.
Story_ID: 115602
Speaker 1: Because you were so passionate about flying--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and going into the [U.S.] Air Force, I wanted to ask you--while you were at Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama], and this is during the '60s [1960s]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --there's a lot going on with civil rights.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: There's a lot going on with the Vietnam War.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: And I know the students here--(unclear)--.
Speaker 2: We were very active.
Speaker 1: Very active?
Speaker 2: Extremely active.
Speaker 1: So tell me how did you fit in, what was your reflection of that?
Speaker 2: True.
Speaker 1: What is your reflection of that time?
Speaker 2: I need to go back a little bit further because I need to give you a background.  When I was a fifteen-year-old, I just turned fifteen, no, fourteen-year-old in Mobile [Alabama].  I had been in the park [Carver Park] playing tennis with a friend who lived right behind the Aarons [home of Hank Aaron] on another street.  This friend said, "it's getting dark, I've been at your house all afternoon, now I got to get home it's almost dusk, you know that those guys from the [Ku Klux] Klan have been hurting people all over the city." And truly we had an elderly lady who was a domestic worker standing at the bus stop, this car came by and white kids threw this bottle out, I don't know if you're old enough to remember what a Lotta Cola bottle looked like.  It was shaped like a--the regular old antique Coca Cola bottle, but it was huge, it was almost as big as the two-liter plastic bottles that we have today.  It was empty, but they threw this bottle out and hit her in the head at the bus stop, she was in a coma for some time and she may have expired, I don't remember all of the details, but there had been some other things that went on for about ten days, just a reign of terror going on.  This was on a weekend on a--.
Speaker 1: And what year was this?
Speaker 2: This was, it must have been 1958 during the summer, and this young man was my friend and tennis player.  I was teaching him tennis, he played basketball and he was a great runner, he loved track, but Joe ended up telling me, "I'm going home, that car just turned it could be those guys."  Now I had agreed to walk him down to the corner and he had to go down to the corner and the Aarons had a fence that you could go through to his house on the backside.  So when he got there, when we got to the end of the street, he took off running.  This car was coming down the street and as it got closer to me it was two blocks away initially, and as it got closer to me it sped up and turned to get on the side of the street that I was on.  I got up in the yards.  We didn't have a sidewalk, just the curb and the yards.  I started walking in the grass when they did that and I saw this white arm come out and everything on my right side went numb.  I went numb the entire, I don't remember anything but this arm and this car speeding by and it was a 1947 light green Ford, it hit me and knocked my leg from under me.  It knocked me down, it spun me all around.  I was on the ground.  In those days when you played tennis, you wore white shorts, white, white shorts, and white shirt, tennis shirt.  The only thing I could think of was the possibility that they would come back.  I dragged myself on the lawns and it was dark by this point, everybody's in their homes, I'm dragging myself another half block, I get into my yard, and my dog, I had a hound dog at that point, long, droopy ears.  He just started bellowing, I mean the most unreal sound you could imagine.  My mom [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] was eight months pregnant opens the door, comes out and tells him, "Cut that noise out boy, you wanna get out, I'll open the door."  She came to the door and I saw her come to the door, I'm in the yard at that point and she saw me and fainted away.  I had red blood everywhere on my whites, and Herman Smith, the young man that grew up next door was a grown up, working downtown at that point.  He was coming home from work, he saw my mom collapse in the doorway, he knew she was pregnant, the whole neighborhood did, he sprinted over there.  At this point my sisters and brothers are coming out on the porch and he gets me, picks me up and gets my mom laid out in a chair on the porch. People call ambulance, the police and what have you, but the bottom line was, I had been so very fortunate because when they rushed me to the hospital, our doctor, Dr. Henderson [ph.] was at the hospital, everybody--the police too--thought I'd been shot in the thigh here.  It turned that the police came to the hospital and there was a ball of concrete and there were spikes in it, and this spike had gone in and just barely missed the bone, but gone in quite deeply and it had hit with such force until it had knocked my leg from under me.
Story_ID: 115603
Speaker 1: There were other things that had happened.  When I was a senior, my friend and I were going home, I had an eighty dollar car and we stopped in Greenville, Alabama because the alter--the generator, not alternator, back there the generator went out and I had no lights.  I followed a Jack Cole [ph.] 18-wheeler into Greenville, knew the road and everything because we traveled it so much, we pull in and I want to get it fixed.  I asked this guy, and he says "can't you see I'm awfully busy and a lot more business come in, I'll get to it when I can."  So it's about eleven-thirty at night at this point, and all of these guys start coming in and they are spinning around, they are doing all kinds of things and we're looking at them and oh, my goodness this is weird.  So I'm hungry at this point, my friend and I go, and in those days "whites only" you go around the back and there's a one-foot square box kind of opening.  You stick your head in and you order, and you put your money in and you pay for it and then you wait.  Well there's no one else waiting in line or anything, usually there was a line.  No one else waiting in line, but it was right there next to a stall, I mean this was a latrine and it reeked, but I happened to have had to go, so I go into the latrine and I'm standing there and hear this absolutely, unbelievable noise.  This huge man who must have weighed 300 pounds grabbed the door and yanks the door open off the thing, and he's standing there with the door and I'm 164-pound, cat-quick tennis player at this point, there's no way he was gonna get his hands on me.  Before he could get rid of the door, I was outta there.  I ran around to tell the owner what happened and he says "Boy don't you know you can die tonight?" Says, "that's the [Ku Klux] Klan, they just came back, they come in and cut up all the time, but they're looking for something to get into, boy you better behave yourself and stay outta the way."  Aw, I call my dad [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] and mom [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] at home, there was a pay phone I called.  My dad called my--his cousin, Herbert Shine [ph.], told him the situation.  He lived in Greenville in Butler County.  They grew up with all of these folk, he made phone calls and in five minutes it seems that there was an equal number of black folks in pick-up trucks and cars and what have you and there were gun racks in all the pick-ups just like the other guys had, and they drove around and they made noise and blew the horn and stuff also.  My cousin, dad's cousin came up and said, "Junior, get in the car.  Where are the keys to your car?  Well, here they are.  Okay where's your friend, your dad says there's a friend.  I beckoned to him, he gets in the car," Herbert and about six of the trucks and guys go to his house.  They fed us; put us up for the night.  Next morning my car was fixed, everything worked out.  I cannot forget those kinda things, while working as a student in Montgomery County, I also end up getting shot at, five bullets went through and hit my car.  I was working on the Tuskegee Institute Summer Education Program in Montgomery [Alabama].  I was assistant supervisor waiting to go into the [U.S.] Air Force, but it was the kind of thing where I decided early on, I respect [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King, but I cannot let myself end up with a problem.  I cannot be non-violent and be guaranteed that, so I'm not gonna be part of the [Civil Rights] Movement. I stayed and did chemistry experiments while my classmates went to Selma [Alabama].
Story_ID: 113665
Speaker 1: So you were talking about--we were talking about Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama] and the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: Yes, my experiences in my life up to Tuskegee and while at Tuskegee had been things that happened where with just a millimeter more, one way or the other, it would seem that I wouldn't be here.  If I had gotten hit in the chest or in the head or in the groin, as a young kid in Mobile [Alabama], in my neighborhood, on my block, it would have killed me instantly or bled to death.  The shooting in Montgomery [Alabama] where there were five shots with me ducking down in my car as people sped by--.
Speaker 1: What type of work were you doing, you said it was a summer job?
Speaker 2: It was a summer education program, TISEP, The Tuskegee Institute Summer Education Program.  Young college kids like me volunteered led by Dr. P.B. Phillips, the Dean of Students here under a grant that he got from the Department of Education, were teaching young black kids the three "Rs" in Montgomery, Alabama and all of the black belt counties in Alabama.  Tuskegee students went out across the state and we taught the kids during the day and then we taught night school at night.  And one of the great things that I witnessed in my life was to see an eighty-nine-year-old lady write her name after going through the TISEP program that summer and standing up and showing that to her grandkids in a church on Woodley Road.  We taught in churches, we, young students, got young students and brought them in.  As an assistant supervisor in Montgomery County, I was responsible for all the supplies and the lunches, make sure everything was delivered and what have you, and we had white kids from all over the country come to Tuskegee, they stayed in the dormitories in Tuskegee and Dean Philips actually let us take them to the counties that were close by and they taught in Montgomery County, in Bullock County and Lowndes County and what have you, but we had to be back, immediately after school was out, we headed back to Tuskegee because things, bad things could happen.  My three students, white students, who rode with me had finished at this church, they had come to the door when I tooted the horn, waved and they went back to get their books and gear and what have you, kids were playing out in front and we ended up with this car speeding up and it had pipes on it and you know how guys understand what it's like with youngsters, you know different cars, and I ended up instinctively when I heard the first pop, I ducked below the--as low as I could get in the car, and there were five shots fired.  The kids inside slammed the door immediately, the kids outside went to the four winds.  Thank goodness no one was hit, but this is what we did as young kids, as Tuskegee students, we passed things along; we were very much involved in the Civil Rights Movement.
Story_ID: 113666
Speaker 1: I did not think that I needed to get involved firsthand and have somebody beat me or the dogs or anything, given what my psyche was.  I didn't know how far I could go or how much I could take and rather than endanger the Movement in my mind, my job was something else.  My calling was to be on the other side of the Movement or to do things behind the scenes but most of my classmates, many of my friends--most of my friends left Tuskegee Institute and went to the march in Selma [Alabama].  They marched from Selma to the steps of the Capitol [Montgomery, Alabama].  We kept up with things, we did remarkable things here as youngsters.  We were involved in a lot of things.  I just thought that was not my role, and I'm very fortunate to be here to be able to say that today, because five times in my life things could have changed one way or the other and I would not have been here, and each time that escape occurred, I said "thank you, and I know you have something more important for me to do," and that's the attitude I've always had.  I went to Selma just this past week with friends.  I went to the civil rights museum [National Voting Rights Museum and Institute], I went to the slave museum [Slavery & Civil War Museum], I crossed the Edmund Pettus Bridge, it was an extremely hard thing for me to do all of these years later, so I know it would have been extremely hard back then.  A key thing here though, although I experienced those things, those were things that never affected my belief that man is inherently good.  I truly believe that man can get along with man.  I love mankind, I love people, so that has never been an impediment in my befriending whites or any other nationality or anything that, in fact if anything I have worked very hard to make sure that I've never been a problem in a situation where I could diffuse a situation or move things along.
Story_ID: 113667
Speaker 1: Now I did come back to Scott Air Force Base, Illinois after being in Southeast Asia for a year, '69 [1969], '70 [1970] in Thailand.
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: Nineteen-seventy [1970].
Speaker 2: Nineteen-seventy [1970] okay.
Speaker 1: I returned Scott Air Force Base, Illinois about twenty-two miles or so east of St. Louis, Missouri near the Mississippi River.  Scott Air Force Base was the headquarters for Military Airlift Command [MAC].  Military Airlift Command is the Department of Defense agency responsible for all of the Department of Defense Airlift around the world.  It is responsible for moving of all cargo and all passengers for the military and [U.S.] State Department and other outfits.  I came there as the motor vehicle division staff officer, was befriended by Joe Bernovksy [ph] just a brilliant staffer who said to me, "Young man have you ever taken a course in speed reading?"  And I said "no." He says, "there's one starting up on Monday." This was a Friday, I just signed in and he says, "you wanna take a look at that?" Well, I learned from the Tuskegee Airmen that when somebody suggests something like that, it's probably a good idea.  This is a new job, so I took the speed reading course, came back to the staff, and that was one of the great things that happened because Joe thought because I was from the South, from Alabama that I would be this very slow talking, very slow individual.  I learned that my speed reading went from about 400 words a minute to over 1200 in that program.  I took additional courses, graduate courses while I was there, but I learned so much from Joe and the other staffers.  I learned what staff work was about; completed staff work is getting the job done.  They were very jealous of me being sent off to any schools or anything like many of my compatriots were, but at the end of my stay there, not only did they send me to Squadron Officers School [SOS], but also to Advanced Transportation School, and they sent me for a master's degree in transportation, of all places, the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama].
Story_ID: 113668
Speaker 1: As a kid growing up in Alabama, I could not have dreamed that seven years after I joined the [U.S.] Air Force, after graduating from Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama] that I would get a chance to go to the University of Alabama, the premiere learning institution in the state.  I remember George Wallace, our Governor standing in the school house door.  I remember the things that our Governor said.  I remember things that were attributed to him by others.  I'm a kid of those civil rights days, and to have an opportunity to go to school, I picked Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], number two, University of Texas at Austin [Austin, Texas], number one and because Alabama was in the top three and I had to pick it, I had Alabama number three.  A two-star general who headed up the Air Force Institute of Technology college programs called me, and he says "Captain Lewis, I see you're from Alabama", I said, "yes, sir".  "Well I want to congratulate you on being selected for school.  You know this is extremely competitive," and he went on and congratulated me again.  He says, "you know, if you go to Alabama, I'll be able to put another student in because of the in-state fees will allow me to put another student in an in-state program."  I was conditioned to say "yes sir", so I ended up in Alabama, I ended up doing very well there.  I graduated as a Presidential Scholar, the number one student in my program in the school of business and commerce [Culverhouse College of Commerce and Business Administration] at Alabama, and I also took additional courses and got my master's in business management at the same time.  It was, it was absolutely a fantastic experience.
Story_ID: 113669
Speaker 1: What year was this that you graduated?
Speaker 2: That was 1975, '76 [1976], I had gotten married in '73 [1973], had a new bride and she came to Alabama [University of Alabama in Tuscaloosa, Alabama] and worked on her Ph.D. there.  So we both were in graduate school, it was an incredible thing. I'd bought an airplane, I'd flew in the afternoons, I bought a little boat, I went out on Lake Lurleen and Lake Tuscaloosa and I really thrived there. Remember I'm a kid who is a conference tennis player, and competition is something that's I guess you learn at a fairly high level so I did indeed compete and things went well.
Speaker 1: What is your wife's name?
Speaker 2: My wife is Carolyn D. Lewis.  She's an Adams, not the Adams from Butler County [Alabama], but the Adams from Mobile [Alabama] the plateau section of Mobile, a very storied family in Mobile.  Carolyn is an educator at Maxwell Air Force Base.  She's the mass facilitator for the Department of Defense schools system there.
Speaker 1: Okay and you have a daughter?
Speaker 2: We have a daughter, Melissa Michelle.  Melissa was born in 1980 in one of my five Pentagon jobs, tours and Melissa is a doctoral student, University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] now.
Story_ID: 113670
Speaker 1: Now during all of this time from being a student at Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama] and going into the [U.S.] Air Force, were you studying the Tuskegee Airmen this whole time?
Speaker 2: I knew of the Tuskegee Airmen because of Chief Anderson [C. Alfred "Chief" Anderson].  I did not know of them as the Tuskegee Airmen.  I knew them individually as individuals that Chief Anderson had taught to fly.  He introduced to General Benjamin O. Davis, Jr. when he came to visit him.  He introduced me to General Daniel "Chappie" James when Chappie was a colonel.  B.O. was initially a colonel and then moved up in rank.  I met Lee Archer, I met Roscoe Draper, an instructor, I met Sherman Rose, I met A-Train [Charles Dryden]. All of these folk who came through going wherever they were going they would drop by to say "hello" to the Chief.  I knew he had a lot of friends who would drop by and they'd have to say hello and they were always very friendly, but Chief was everybody's friend.  He was my best friend in my adult lifetime.  He was everybody's best friend though that was the kind of individual he was.  He was a man of immense integrity, a man that other people looked up to because his word was his bond and he was so easygoing and he got along with everybody, extremely well-respected.
Story_ID: 113671
Speaker 1: Well when did it become apparent that you would take up, I guess take up the fight for the Tuskegee Airmen?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, after I finished Alabama [University of Alabama in Tuscaloosa, Alabama] as a congressional intern that followed from the Presidential Scholar designation at Alabama--they insisted that the [U.S.] Air Force let them send me to Washington [D.C.] because all of their Presidential Scholars from Alabama went to Washington, became interns in various activities.  I interned on the Public Works and Transportation Committee, U.S. House of Representatives.  The chairman was Norm Mineta [Norman Mineta]. The man I think knows more about transportation than anybody ever in the history of this country.  Norm Mineta chaired that committee, taught us a lot of things, we learned a lot of things.  I did research on the airline regulation hearings, the cold slurry pipeline areas and some things involving the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration].  I had a ball, I was in hog heaven.  I got a chance to fly my airplane in the D.C. area, I got a chance to do things, but there as an intern, Chief Anderson [C. Alfred "Chief" Anderson] had contacted the Tuskegee Airmen in the area in Washington and the D.C. chapter known as the East Coast Chapter knew that one of Chief's boys is going over to the Pentagon.  Believe it or not, I got a phone call and I was told to meet this particular gentleman downstairs at the front entrance of the Pentagon that afternoon after work.  It turned out to be Spann Watson.  Spann Watson took me to my first East Coast Chapter meeting.  They made me a member that night and made me the leg man for the outfit.  Those guys worked me harder than, than anybody could imagine, but we did lots of good things.  We set up the scholarship, the annual scholarship ball and banquet at the Bolling Air Force Base Officer's Club.  We raised money for scholarship for kids, we did all kinds of things for the community and the ticket for the Annual Tuskegee Airmen Scholarship Ball was "the ticket" in Washington, D.C.  We had the Chief of Staff for the Air Force there, we had all the Black flag officers eventually started coming there.  If they were anywhere near, if they could make that they made that event. And I started learning so much more about the Tuskegee Airmen.  I had learned that they were in fact the Tuskegee Airmen at this point and at that point, I saw how Chief Anderson had fed me information, introduced me to people all of these years, and that I knew so many of these people, I knew their stories, and I started researching, I started asking questions, I started making notes. I started talking about the Airmen when Spann Watson and the other Airmen would have me go into the schools to speak.  I used to buy the Air Force vehicle fleet, a $3.4 billion dollar program as a young major.  They grabbed me and they would have me come to the D.C. school system and stand up on stage during career day and what have you, and they would say, "now, tell them what you're doing and what you're responsible for."  And when you say million, people say "oh wow," when you say billion it goes over the heads of just about everybody, but I had to develop a program, sell it to the military and then sell it on the Hill [Capitol Hill, U.S. Congress].  We got our vehicle fleet upgraded.
Story_ID: 113672
Speaker 1: Good things happened and the [Tuskegee] Airmen really taught me by their example I think more than anything else.  These were so, these were people who were so accomplished, and I learned truly that the power of excellence overcomes an awful lot and that becamed [sic], that became one of my things that I started to concentrate on.  I learned from the Airmen that your measure of merit as a person, as a Tuskegee [Airman] is your performance.  Your performance is your measure of merit, you don't have to go out and wave a flag and say look at me, look at what I've done. If you've done it well people will notice.  In my [U.S.] Air Force career, I tied that to a very tough time in the military because the competition for promotions were very tight.  I looked at the situation and thought, I will do what I've always done on the tennis court, and in sports, I will compete against myself. This is one of the things I've always taught my young charges in the Military and the young people that I have that I teach to fly--get the best out of you, you can't argue with someone if you haven't done what you were supposed to do, and I talk about, now, after learning about the Airmen, after studying the Airmen for over thirty-five years, I developed what I call my, my "P's of Success." It used to be the "Four P's of Success", but one thing that I've always admitted in talking about it because I assumed it was your purpose, develop what that--what's the mission in the military?  Okay, what's your purpose, what's the mission that you need to achieve?  You look at that and then you say, well, I got to prepare myself, the second "P".  Be prepared, the Boy Scouts have it right, absolutely hit the books.  You don't have to be a valedictorian, you don't have to graduate number one, everybody can't be that, but be prepared, prepare as well as you can prepare yourself.  The third thing is develop a passion, a true passion for what you do.  What is it that you are really like to do?  What is it that you can contribute to society and enjoy?  What is it will allow you to roll out of bed in the morning when it's raining outside or when it's cold outside and allow you to get to work, and you can't wait to get there to do whatever it is that you wanna do?  Develop that passion for it.  After you have that purpose, after you have that foundation that you have put in by really preparing yourself, after you develop that passion, sometimes when you look like us, you have to persevere a little bit longer, the next "P", you persevere, you stick with it.  Other people will give up and they'll leave through the side door, the back door or even the window once in a while when the going gets tough, but if you're prepared, if that foundation is there and you really are doing the job, you'll find that, my goodness, I'm the guy standing here the next morning at the dawn and I've been asked to carry this load, I've been given this job.  So you end up with that, that perseverance to stick it out, and then the most important thing when the opportunity comes, as [Daniel] "Chappie" James [Jr.] used to tell us, "when the door of opportunity opens just a little bit, step in and take charge, perform like nobody else has ever performed the job before and you will be successful."  What's the secret of hard work?  I tell my students right up front, the secret of success is hard work, but those five P's of success has worked for me and I pass it on to them and they quote it back to me now.
Speaker 2: Well good, that was one of the questions I would ask you a little bit later, so what would you say to the future generations?
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: This would be your answer.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 113673
Speaker 1: Well let me go back to the Tuskegee Airmen.  One of the things that you said is that people would notice you know, if you did what you're supposed to do, but the Tuskegee Airmen--it took them so long to be recognized, it's just this year [2007] that they received a Congressional Medal.  Speak to that for me.
Speaker 2: I recognize that. I recognized from business school at Alabama [University of Alabama in Tuscaloosa, Alabama] that marketing was important.  The four P's of marketing is important too, the product, price, place and promotion, so I looked at the Tuskegee Airmen story and I thought, oh my, my, my this is such an absolutely incredible story, not for blacks but for the entire country.  This is a story of excellence like none I had heard.  This is a group of eighteen to twenty-six year olds coming from all over this country to this rural setting in Alabama where nobody wanted them and they put things out of their minds, and they committed to excellence, and they stepped up, and they did something that the world didn't think they were capable of doing.  They did it in a way that nobody thought possible.  These young people made a point to learn to fly and fight for their country when a 1925 study said this was impossible, that blacks were inherently inferior, their brains were too small.  If they got in an airplane and the airplane lifted off because they have small capillaries in their brains, they will pass out.  They can't fly airplanes, the manual dexterity is not there, they could never operate equipment that is, is complex.  It went on and on and there is a line in there that says, and as you know "the Negro is a rank coward in the dark."  Well these men I knew as Tuskegee Airmen were none of this.  What they had done here was such an incredible story; Hollywood could not come up with it. The more I studied it, the more I delved into it, the more I met these men who left the military and went out and did remarkable things in other fields that were equal to or more than they did in the service, and I thought what an incredible group of Americans not blacks or whites, but this is an American story of the first order. So I started lecturing on the Tuskegee Airmen.  I've done Tuskegee Airmen seminars from [military] bases at Misawa, Japan, across the world to Crete [Greece] and Italy. I have talked about the Airmen to anybody who would listen.  Why? Because that story is so important, it is a story that nobody, but nobody should misunderstand.  It is a story of excellence that we should celebrate in this nation and finally after many, many years they are indeed getting their due, it is coming to fruition that they are recognized now, but as I look back I'm just very pleased to have had a little bit to do with telling the Tuskegee Airmen story every chance I got. I've done well over a hundred interviews and a hundred-plus magazine and newspaper article interviews, and I have written on the Airmen, but more importantly I've told the story to others. At Maxwell Air Force Base, the future generations of leaders in our United States Air Force hear from [Lt.] Colonel [Herbert] Carter, who was an original Tuskegee Airmen in the 99th, who commissioned me in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] here at Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama], and they hear from me, and they hear from other Airmen, Tuskegee Airmen who come to visit, but it's the kind of thing that is a story that had to be told and it's the kind of story that we must keep telling.
Story_ID: 115604
Speaker 1: [So let's go back to when you graduate from the University of Alabama (Tuscaloosa, Alabama), what happens next in your career?]
Speaker 2: The next thing that had happened in my career after the University of Alabama and the Presidential Scholar designation was I got a chance to go to Washington, D.C.  I served on the Public Works and Transportation Committee, U.S. House of Representatives, the Chairman was Norm Mineta [Norman Mineta].  I was warmly received and given assignments in the airline deregulation hearings, coal slurry pipeline hearings and FAA [Federal Aviation Administration], various FAA interests.  It was a heady time for a transportation guy and I thoroughly enjoyed it.  From there I left and went to the Pentagon, my first Pentagon job.  I was on a ten-man team that was chartered by the Chief of Staff of the [U.S.] Air Force, we had a two-star general, General Thompson, Major General Thompson and our charge was to look at management behind the flight line.  We did that, fifty-two bases every other week for two years, we were somewhere else in the world.  Our charge was to roll up our sleeves as experts and fix things.  It was a tremendous education because I learned how the Air Force worked.  I traveled the world on this team and with the direct authority from the Chief of Staff of the Air Force, we made changes.  We did things that needed to be done and quickly.  We eliminated red tape.  I was the transportation boss on that team, from there I was moved in at the request of General Rufus Billups, Major General Rufus Billups, Class of '49 [1949] in Tuskegee Institute [now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama].  He brought me and had me buy the Air Force Vehicle Fleet, not because he knew me as a Tuskegee guy, what he did know was that I had seen the real Air Force at 52 bases in the last two years, and he needed someone that had credibility to go before the Office of the Secretary of Defense and budgetary hearings and go before the Congress, the staffers and make sure they understood the truth was being told.  We did that.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: This was 1978 to '80 [1980], I was on the Air Force Civil Engineering and Services Management Evaluation Team. Nineteen-eighty [1980] to '82 [1982], I was on the--I was the Chief of Vehicle Programs, United States Air Force.  I bought the Air Force Vehicle Fleet a $3.4 billion program.  I was pulled out that program very short notice because General [Wilbur L.] Creech, the Tactical Air Commander fired all of his commanders at Seymour Johnson Air Force Base, North Carolina.  He informed the Chief of Staff after he had flown back to his headquarters at Langley, Virginia and told the Chief he needed the top transportation officer in the Air Force to go down and clean up at Seymour Johnson, that they had not passed an operational readiness inspection or mobility inspection in three years.  He had fired that commander, and his commander and all the other commanders.  I went down, had to report the next morning by six o'clock.  I received zero orientation, the commander Peter Kempf, Colonel Kempf at the time directed me without even looking up.  "I read your resume, I know all about you, kid.  I don't ever want to see you in dress blues and all your ribbons here.  I want you in green fatigues working everyday," and that's what I did for two and a half years.  That particular operation did indeed have an "outstanding" on its operational readiness inspection the next time.  I was named Transportation Officer of the Year for Tactical Air Command, Transportation Officer of the Year for the United States Air Force that year with only two people different in the--in the operation.  Also, General Creech visited my operation on five occasions during my tour there.  He wrote my last OER [Officer Effectiveness Report] and said, "promote immediately to full colonel." That was all that was on the OER.  When a four-star general does that, things get done and I was really surprised but he also prior to my leaving on his last visit that I was there, he brought down a huge plaque and I was named the "Manager of the Year in Tactical Air Command," so that was a very surprising thing.
Story_ID: 115605
Speaker 1: I left Seymour Johnson [Air Force Base] and went to the Office of the Secretary of Defense [OSD].  Mr. [Caspar] Weinberger was Secretary of Defense at that time. I went through a professional development program in OSD, worked there for one year and then went to the Office of The United States Air Force Headquarters for logistics and engineering.  There I worked for a three-star general, Lieutenant General Leo Marquez.  I ran a $34.8 billion office as office manager and was the executive officer for logistics and engineering for the Air Force, all supply, transportation, engineering and services for the entire Air Force.  That was a five-thirty in the morning to about six thirty, seven o'clock at night, daily job and we traveled constantly, generally three trips during the week, so we put in twenty-five hours a day for that--that tour.  I learned an awful lot there, I did an awful lot of things and I recognized how supremely dedicated our Pentagon staff members are, and during budget time the heart attacks and the stress level is immense, but some of the most dedicated individuals I've ever met in my life work in the Pentagon for us, they work for all of us.  Later I went to the Philippines, I was sent over immediately from Headquarters Air Force to do a dual-headed operation in the Philippines when Mr. [Ferdinand] Marcos was removed from the Philippines.  I went in as Deputy Chief of Staff Air Transportation for the Pacific, responsible for all mobility in the Pacific, DOD [Department of Defense] air lift operations, and of course passenger operations.  My units out of there won a number of awards including "Best in the Command," "Best in the Air Force," and the "Best Transportation Unit in the Department of Defense."  My units across my time as a commander won best in the major command in four different commands, so I look back on that as a really heady time in my career. I prepared well, I was well groomed, I had the example of the Tuskegee Airmen and in the Pacific still remembered General B.O. Davis, Jr. [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.], and what a fantastic gentlemen he was.  So things went well for me.
Speaker 2: You were in the Philippines, was this in '87 [1987]?  I just need to get the timeline.
Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986] to '89 [1989] I was at Clark--.
Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986].
Speaker 1: [Clark] Air Base in the Philippines with responsibility for the entire Pacific theater.
Speaker 2: Between from '82 [1982] to '86 [1986]?
Speaker 1: Those were Pentagon years and the Seymour Johnson [Air Force Base] tour.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I had--.
Speaker 2: From '80 [1980] to '82 [1982] was Seymour Johnson?
Speaker 1: Yes, and '83 [1983], I'm sorry '83 [1983] to '86 [1986] was back at the Pentagon in three different jobs.
Story_ID: 115606
Speaker 1: So now you're very well prepared, you're a full colonel?
Speaker 2: Yes, and that's important.  One quick note here, my dad [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] had a heart attack in 1984 and we almost lost him.  He had a quad bypass, had the heart attack on the operating table, he made it back and my dad, my mom [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis], a number of my sisters and brothers, my mother-in-law, wife, daughter, nieces and sister-in-law from the Baltimore [Maryland] area, all came to the Pentagon to my office and they saw a three-star general, Leo Marquez pin eagles on my shoulders.  This was a little sixteen-year-old kid from Mobile, Alabama who showed up at Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama] afraid of his shadow.  I went through the ROTC [Reserve Officer's Training Corps] program and the other things that I've described, so I've heard the [Tuskegee] Airmen say, "It's not where you came from, but where you end up."  They were part of the example that helped make that happen and it was an awfully special day because mom and dad were there.  My wife [Carolyn Lewis] pinned one, and General Marquez pinned the other.  I tried to make remarks initially and couldn't because I looked over and saw my dad.  This proud [U.S.] Army medic who understood that in his day there could never have been a dream of his son having eagles on his shoulder in the Pentagon, and running a $34.8 billion office and 513 on my staff, on our staff.  All the paperwork came through me to get to the general, all the phone calls, all of the headaches, all of the classified, all of the administrative dealings, one guy has to be the guy where the bucks stop, and of course the general was in charge and the buck stopped with him, but he told me, "you do not work for me, you work with me" and he truly lived up to that, and I to this day, look back on that as one of the great relationships I've had in my lifetime because this man let me do unbelievable things.
Story_ID: 115607
Speaker 1: So as a colonel, where were your sights set for--?
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --the next promotion?
Speaker 2: --I always, I never had aspirations I was out trying to make general or anything like that.  That never was something that bothered me.  The [Tuskegee] Airmen's example was something I think again, was very special to me.  Let your performance be your measure of merit.  If in fact I ended up as a general one day, fine.  If not, fine, there was something else more important for me to do, something bigger and better and that something truly ended up being, coming back to Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama], coming back to Alabama.
Speaker 1: But is that something that you thought about and that you wanted to do originally?
Speaker 2: No, not really and truly in my [U.S.] Air Force career, I had never ever gone out to try and compete with anybody else for a job, or try and say "that's the job that I want, and I gotta do these things to get there."  My job in the Air Force was to get things done that needed to be done and do it to the best of your ability. I always had the ideal approach that I, again, the Airmen and my mentors and what I saw in General B.O. Davis, Jr. [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.], and Chappie [Daniel "Chappie" James, Jr.], do what's best for the country, do what's best for the Air Force, do what's best for your unit.  What's best for you will fall out of that.  You can call it patriotism in the case of General James if you want to, if you want to call it leadership in the case of B.O. Davis, Jr. fine.  Whatever you call it, those were my goals, I must do what's best for this country, duty on a country.  I must do what best's for the Air Force; I must do what's best for my unit, so that is what drove me.  A pursuit of excellence has always has been something that is right there that I have worked on, the Airmen taught me that.  Excellence is something that is an anecdote to mediocrity and to other bad things that can happen, but I never tried to plan out my career.  Somebody from the time I came back from Southeast Asia, always a two-star [general] or above, pulled me from the job I was doing and put me in another job and said "This is important, we need you to do this."
Story_ID: 115608
Speaker 1: So is that what happened with your next position?
Speaker 2: Yes, in the Pacific, I was sent out there--twofold reasons.  Number one, I had all of this Pentagon experience; they needed a senior colonel on the ground in the Philippines to make sure that the [Corazon] Aquino Government was supported.  I worked with the Embassy; they knew I knew logistics so the Pentagon needed somebody there very quickly to fix things in case that is what was needed.  My "day-time job," not working with the Embassy, my day-time job was overseeing the DOD [Department of Defense] Air Lift Operation and the mobility program in the Pacific [theater].  So for half the world I was responsible for mobility, and I had the Eighth Mobile Aerial Port Squadron there and the 74th Strategic Airlift Squadron there, so I was a group commander, and I had all of the detachments out there in the Pacific responsible for air lift operations.  I kept fresh fruits and vegetable parts all of that in front of the [U.S.] Navy task forces, I fed the [U.S.] Army any air lift things they needed to come in, the Navy, the [U.S.] Marines--I air lifted them for mobility, all of those kinds of things. And also in the Pacific, Operation Earnest Will, a one-baker-one [ph.] presidential directive, the first one I saw in my entire career, but I was responsible directly to the Pentagon for getting to Diego Garcia [Air Force Base] and running this operation. I don't know if you remember this but there was the mining of the Persian Gulf by Khomeyni in Iran.  This was an international incident, the world was on pins and needles because nobody knew what anybody else was gonna do.  Khomeini mined the Persian Gulf; the oil tankers could not come through there. President [Ronald] Reagan said, "this will not stand."  President Reagan wanted France to let us have overflight rights.  They wouldn't let us do it, so we had to airlift minesweeping helicopters that dragged boards we call them, in the water to get rid of the mines.  We had to airlift them three quarters of the way around the world from the States, East Coast all the way around the world on a C-5, multiple C-5s we did that.  I received them, they came through in the (unclear) received them, was there, we got the job done, but most of the world doesn't know that President Reagan had five cocked B-52s orbiting over the area during that operation, but the USS Guadalcanal, a carrier, a small carrier was on the way to the Persian Gulf, turned around and came back.  This was supposed to be super-secret, nobody knew anything. And on CNN, right after I pulled the helicopters off of the C-5s and the Navy guys got the, got them airworthy and they flew them and put them on the Guadalcanal, it was on CNN that the USS Guadalcanal has just come into the lagoon at, oh my--Diego Garcia, so I was involved in this absolutely incredible thing, it worked out thank goodness, but I came back from the Philippines to a job after a bit of an epiphany.
Story_ID: 115609
Speaker 1: I got a call from Chief Anderson [C. Alfred "Chief" Anderson] from Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama] here, my mentor who taught to me to fly.  "Colonel Lewis, this is Chief," niceties, and he says, "I understand you're coming back in the--in the next couple of months."  "Yes, Chief."  "You have a lot of experience with the government, would you help me get the license for Moton Field back, they are talking about closing down Moton Field, the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration] and the State have agreed to do it.  It's listed as abandoned. "Yes, Chief, I'll do that."  The same week, two days later I get a call from a new general officer who had been a colonel with me at Seymour Johnson [Air Force Base].  He tells me that in his new job in personnel that he has received briefings three times, and it says that there are only four black kids in 137 colleges and universities around the country with [U.S.] Air Force ROTC [Reserve Officer's Training Corps], only four black kids are gonna have the opportunity to go to pilot training, and without thinking I said "not in my Air Force."  This is a guy who has experience at every level in the Air Force and I know how things are done.  I've been on the inside when a phone call is made to "fix" something or "get something done."  He says, "We've been asleep at the switch, we gotta fix it.  You're the only guy I know, because you own your own airplane, you've flown forever, you have a connection with Tuskegee, and I briefed them on Chief Anderson and the [Tuskegee] Airmen.  He says, "I, the Air Force needs you to do this," and I said, "don't ask me to do that, don't ask me to do that."  I ended up Easter Sunday sitting in church, and I started smiling and this warm feeling came over me and I knew that I was coming back to Alabama, that I would indeed try and get more of our young people in the air, that I indeed would try and get our airport license back to save our dirt. One of the things I've learned over the years and I dabbled in real estate a little bit as a young officer, and that allowed me to do things later, that I've done here in Tuskegee.  I learned that in our history we lose our dirt, we do not as farmers keep dirt in the families, we do not keep our homes in the families.  I was absolutely intent upon not losing the dirt that the Tuskegee Airmen got their first seventy hours of flying on, the dirt that I learned to fly on.  This hallowed ground, I could not see it growing up being paved over or going into a cow pasture again.  We would not have Chief Anderson 100 years, or 50 years later to fly the First Lady to prove that blacks could fly again.  This man was eighty at that time. So I ended up--he was eighty-three at that time--I ended up coming back to Tuskegee, taking the job here as the professor of military, professor of air science, PAS.
Story_ID: 115610
Speaker 1: I lived on base at Maxwell Air Force Base [Montgomery, Alabama] and I commuted every day [to Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama], but one of the things I did was to jump in my Bonanza, two to three times a week and I would fire up--I kept it on the base--I would fire up and fly over, cycle my prop over Chief Anderson's home and he would pick me up at the airport and bring me to work here in the Chappie James [Daniel "Chappie" James] building, so the students, early on, saw much more than they would normally see.  They saw a full colonel; they saw a guy with experiences in a lot of areas, someone who visited twenty-six countries in the world because the [U.S.] Air Force sent him, someone who had Pentagon experience, congressional experience.  My students saw in me what they could be and I pushed them awfully hard, but one of the things I did early on, by example, that's what the [Tuskegee] Airmen did with me, I flew my airplane over, landed and I would take them flying.  Chief [C. Alfred "Chief" Anderson] would help me do that.  I set up a ground school, I put sixty-one students through ground school and when Chief found out, he went out and bought a Cessna 172, November-3-0-3-8-Echo [N3038E], an airplane.
Speaker 2: What is that?
Speaker 1: A Cessna 172 four-place [four-seat] airplane to be used by me to get out students in the air.  Today, I've taken over 3,000 young people up for their first flights in Chief's honor.  I have 353 with licenses, I have nine who are airline pilots, there are nine who are young ladies, and I have fifty-two in military seats, including Major K.T. Smith [ph.], who was Topgun of the Air Force in '95 [1995], a number one graduate in [U.S.] Navy pilot training, Dewaine Barnes, Topgun Navy instructors, Isaac and Dewaine, Isaac Shareef and Dewaine Barnes, the list goes on and on, but these young people have done remarkable things. I did not do it, but if someone says that you held the door open a little bit longer than it would have been open, and had us believe in ourselves and helped with the opportunity, yes.  I've been a facilitator in ways that I could to get the first two blacks in the history of the Alabama Air National Guard.  I got them their licenses here after taking them for their first flight.  I took them over there, introduced them to the commander and basically the commander understood as another full colonel--I say they can fly, the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration] says they can fly, I want them in a cockpit, both fly for the Guard still.  So some good things have happened, are there enough?  Absolutely not.
Story_ID: 115611
Speaker 1: I came here [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] for three reasons: I knew that we needed to save the dirt at Moton Field, save and upgrade that airport, that was one thing because the Tuskegee Airmen legacy, I thought was tied to that, the second thing was to get a Tuskegee Airmen museum on that airport.  In fact we do have a $29.1 million Tuskegee Airmen National Historic Site and museum on Moton Field today, and that was facilitated by my teaching Bob Riley when he was running for Congress about the Airmen. When J.C. Watts came to support him and campaign for him, a white man from Ashland, Alabama took J.C. Watts up and down my hallway and showed him my Tuskegee Airmen exhibit.  It absolutely touched J.C. Watts, it touched Bob Riley.  Bob Riley made a promise to me as Watts was leaving, "Colonel Lewis, if I'm elected I'm gonna see to it that there's a Tuskegee Airmen museum on this field."  J.C. Watts turns on his heels, grabs us both by the shoulders and says, "you have it all wrong when you're elected we will see to it."  J.C. Watts ended up as the number three guy in the Congress that year, he indeed reached across the aisle, got [HM] John Lewis the Democrat from Atlanta [Georgia].  Lewis, J.C. Watts, Bob Riley worked together and got chairmen of all the various committees to sign up and the chairman got their membership to sign up and they told me that this was the least controversial bill that went through the Congress in 1998.  It took seven and half months from the promise until President [Bill] Clinton signed the bill into law.  It was announced November 6, 1998 on Moton Field with about 4,000 people there and a lot of dignitaries.  The Tuskegee Airmen legacy with that museum is indeed gonna be institutionalized, and the third thing was to get a four-degree granting aviation program at Tuskegee University to carry on the flying legacy of the Airmen, those three things and the flying legacy is something that hasn't occurred yet and I have been the person to keep the flying portion going until the University does that.
Story_ID: 113682
Speaker 1: All right, so you just--you were talking about the University [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and their part that they needed to play.
Speaker 2: Yes, I have long wanted a flight training program at Tuskegee Institute, then Tuskegee University.  I think as I have traveled around the world one thing was constant.  If someone asked, where did I finish school?  Where did I graduate from college and I mention Tuskegee, almost before I get it out they say "Booker T. Washington, Dr. George Washington Carver, peanuts," this, this kind of thing.  They did not know about the Tuskegee Airmen.  Now, in my estimation, based on my research, I looked at Tuskegee University as having this absolutely incredible historic foundation with Booker T. Washington, the great educator, with Dr. George Washington Carver, the great scientist, but in the '40s [1940s] the other leg on that three-legged milk stool was the Tuskegee Airmen.  I thought that Tuskegee University was missing out on the fact that this is an incredible story, it's our story, it's your story, it needs to be told.  You owe it to the world to let them know just like the Carver and Washingtons of the world, there are 996 young men who got their wings here, but 14,634 total who qualified for the Tuskegee Experiment in aviation and were involved in almost like the Moon Project of its day because for black America it was akin to going to the moon, it truly was that technologically challenging as thought of by the rest of the world, so you did this, take credit for it.  Use that to motivate our young people and get our young people in the air and carry on the flying legacy here.  So I have worked very, very hard to try and do that.  The University has announced that it will do that.  There will be a "C. Alfred "Chief" Anderson Department of Aviation at Tuskegee University" from our President Dr. B.F. Payton.  I take him at his word and I look forward to that happening.
Story_ID: 113683
Speaker 1: Until that happens, it seems it's my job to try and keep as many young people in the air as possible to carry on that legacy because we have less than one percent of the airline pilots, we are in the tenths, you can say that in any area of aviation.  Tuskegee University has a school of--department of aerospace engineering.  One of my former students, Crystal Harris, is a flight test engineer of record at Boeing, that was the flight test engineer for the aircraft that flew the longest commercial air craft distance in the world, from Hong Kong to London, England last year, you probably remember that.  There's a young lady, one of my students who's down at NASA, she is an instructor for the astronauts on flight controls, Tasha Stevens [ph.], I have a number of students who are Lockheed [Martin], and at other--at Vought, Chance Vought, and other places, but they got their first ride in an airplane at Moton Field just as I did.  Why is that important?  Because when you get that kind of experience, even if they don't learn to fly, it may motivate them to do something else that is even more important.  The nine airline pilots, yeah they're airline pilots. Some people, the fighter pilots, would say, they're just bus drivers.  No, no everybody had a niche, for the fighter pilots they're at the top of the food chain, for the cargo pilots, I have a number of 'em flying, the young man who flew Jessica Lynch from the war zone into Germany and then stayed with her and flew her into Washington, D.C. and Andrews, one of my students, got his license at Moton Field.  They are doing remarkable things. One of my students is with British Overseas World Airways [BOAC].  They are doing things that I would never have had an opportunity to do, but as [Daniel] "Chappie" James said, "if you can keep the door open just a little bit to provide that opportunity to let some of those young people in, they will in fact come in and perform."  They will do the job and that's important to me.  To tell the Tuskegee Airmen story is to motivate for generations into the future, the idea that it doesn't matter the color of your skin or your creed or your nationality.  If you're willing to work hard, if you're willing to make a commitment to excellence, if you are willing to do the P's that I talked about, then good things will happen.  Don't try and complete against the person next to you, or in the cubicle down the way from you.  I learned in my own tennis competition, compete against yourself.  "What's the best I can get out of me?"  If I can get out of me what I expect, at a level that I expect, I can feel very good about me.  I have done this at this level.  I have a right to be proud that I was able to do this.  Now, the boss I work for probably has me at this level, but if I can continue at the level that I set for myself and not let other people dictate to me. I'm gonna be a happy person and so will the folk I work for and with because I'm helping them.  I'm doing my job.
Story_ID: 113684
Speaker 1: So you do have a major concern for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness yes, I go to oh, a couple hundred different venues during the year, virtually every year and I talk about the Tuskegee Airmen.  I talk to young people, I hold a fly-in here every year that's been going on long before me, but was started by the instructors of the Tuskegee Airmen, they formed NAI [Negro Airmen International, Inc.] Black Wings in Aviation, and the idea was to get black American aviators together and bring them together at a place, Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], where military aviation was born for us and to have Chief Anderson [C. Alfred "Chief Anderson] and the other flight instructors and the Airmen come in and really infect the new generation with their flying, their aviation DNA so that they can go out and spread the word and do, and fly and this has been going on for, it will be forty-one years next year.  For the last sixteen years I've been the Air Boss and I've been the guy who's run that program.
Speaker 1: What is your major concern though today?
Speaker 2: My concern today is that number one the opportunities are not being grabbed by our young people to get into the aviation world.  In many instances there's still the idea that blacks don't fly, they don't swim, they don't do various other things.  That's not true.  My students can compete with anybody.  A Topgun of the [U.S.] Air Force says that, a number one in [U.S.] Navy Pilot Training says that, ten of them have finished number five or above in Pilot Training.  So we know that's not true, but they don't have fathers or grandfathers, or aunts and uncles with airplanes in the black community that says "hey, I'm going to Chicago [Illinois], meet me at the airplane and I'll swing by and pick you up, have your bag ready," well I'm one of the few people who has had an airplane since I got back from Southeast Asia in 1970.  I bought a V-Tail Bonanza, and I dated my wife-to-be [Carolyn Adams] for two and a half years from Illinois, the St. Louis area, down to Mobile, Alabama and back and when we got we married we traveled all over, our daughter [Melissa Michelle Lewis] wasn't born for another seven years.  Our daughter grew up in our A36 Bonanza.  I had to take the rear two seats out of a six-passenger airplane, and put her doll house in or my little ponies, her dog Major, her cocker spaniel.  She grew up that way because we traveled a lot, we went all over the place and we kept in touch with "family" in Mobile.  Why, because family was so important.  All of those assignments at the Pentagon and at Seymour Johnson [Air Force Base] I made it to Mobile on average, twice a month.
Speaker 1: So your major concern is being fulfilled, you're trying to fulfill that, that void that's there.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, there is a tremendous void and it's not being taken up by the educational institutions.  Our young people are not being introduced to aviation.  This is something you can do, and you can do it because if I can do it, you know you can do it, you're a lot smarter than I am, come on, let's go for a ride.  When the kids come back, the smile end up pushing ears up on top of their heads, it's the same feeling that I had when Chief Anderson [C. Alfred "Chief" Anderson] took me for my first flight.  It's the feeling that you get when you know that a kid says "I can do a lot more than I'm doing now," it doesn't matter if he eventually becomes a pilot, but the thing is you've broadened his horizons.  How do I know that, firsthand experience, so we do have to reach in and get all of our young students and give them experiences that are not traditional experiences for them.  We may have folks who are potential doctors with a cure for cancer and fifty other diseases out there somewhere in the country. If they know nothing about medicine, have never been to a doctor before, if they don't that they have a tremendous capability to learn chemistry and biology and the sciences, and that they are great mathematicians, some of the neat things that I've learned is don't ever take things for granted.  I know guys who you would never think are mathematicians, but the mind is there, and what you gotta do is introduce them to things and let them take it.
Story_ID: 113685
Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, what stands out the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, my family. Well, I learned early on from my parents.  Mom [Clara Nell Mitchell Lewis] and dad [Roosevelt Lewis, Sr.] said always be true to your God, you're gonna have God, then comes your family, and you don't get to pick and choose who the family is.  So you're gonna love each other, you're gonna take care of each other and you're gonna make sure that everybody in this family understands that they are family, and the third thing you're gonna do and things you're gonna have is that you're gonna have the contributions you make in this world.  When your life comes to an end, what have you done that's worthwhile while you've been here on God's time?  What have you done to make a difference, whether it be for the young or the old?  Who have you touched, who touched you?  Have you passed things on in this world?  Those are things that my heroes taught me, mom and dad.  Now, Chief Anderson [C. Alfred "Chief" Anderson] was a major influence on my life because he took me flying and gave me this great passion, this love for flying, but Chief was never a hero with me.  He's my sixteen-year-old flying partner, my sixeetn-year-old flying buddy.  Chief Anderson though introduced me to the Airmen, and taught me things that I'm still learning because things he told me when, like "never get yourself in a situation you can't get yourself out of."  He was talking about staying within the [flight] envelope of an airplane.  What it is that the airplane is supposed to without you becoming a test pilot, but that's true in your life too. Never get yourself in a situation you can't get yourself out of.
Story_ID: 113686
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, I'm much too young and there's much too work--much work to do than to think about legacy, but I suppose I have made a few contributions and I suppose my military career I'm very pleased and proud of, my academic career, I'm pleased and proud of, my career back in Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] as a facilitator of saving the dirt at Moton Field, and I don't say that I am the guy who saved the dirt, other people say that.  The governor of this state [Alabama] has said that.  The governor of this state has said "this is the person, the single person who made a difference so that you have a Tuskegee Airmen National Historic Site and the Tuskegee Airmen legacy preserved."  He told the Tuskegee Airmen that, the fact that one day Tuskegee University will have an aviation program that will truly do, duly recognize the third milk-stool leg, its Tuskegee Airmen to carry on that flying legacy one day.  If people remember me that I made some contribution in their lives toward that, fine, but the legacy of the Airmen I think is one of the ages that truly needs to be carried on and I am just very pleased that I helped facilitate that in some way.
Story_ID: 113687
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not spoken about that you'd like to say?
Speaker 2: Yes, to our young people, the P's of success. I'll close with: always define your purpose, always look at the fact that you have a mission, what is the mission?  Once that purpose is there, next look at the fact that you need to prepare yourself well to carry out whatever it is you're gonna out.  Prepare well, hit the books, do those things.  The next thing, you truly must develop a passion for it, and if you don't see a passion then may--fine, it's a bad day for me.  The next thing is truly believe that sometimes you have to preserve a little bit longer than the next guy to get what it is you need to get done.  I found that to be true here in Tuskegee and I won't go into detail.  The next thing is after you preserve, you hang tough.  Now when the door of opportunity opens just a little bit, step in, take charge, get the job done.  Perform like nobody else has ever performed before and as the Tuskegee Airmen said, "performance is the measure of merit of a Tuskegee Airmen."  There's nothing wrong with being the best there is at what you do.  There's nothing wrong with being a person who understands that a commitment to excellence makes a difference.  You also got to remember too though that there are consequences for actions, make sure that the consequences are not the bad ones, that the actions are the ones that generate outstanding consequences.  If our young people understood those things a little better we'd be a lot better off in this nation.
Speaker 1: Well I'd like to thank you for taking the time to tell us your story.  Thank you from The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: Denise, thank you very much and I'm very pleased that you thought it important enough to sit down with me today.
Story_ID: 113688
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear).
Speaker 2: Bottom row center, I'm in the center and we have a number of pilots, my former students who are in the military who are here for the Annual Fly-In 1996.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Left, I'm saluting--.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on one second.
Speaker 2: Bottom left.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay go ahead.
Speaker 2: Bottom left is a Junior ROTC [Reserve Officer's Training Corps] unit from an integrated high school in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.  They heard of the Tuskegee Airmen Fly-In, they came down, they performed drill and ceremonies for the Airmen and I'm receiving their salute.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: Top center.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Top center are the three surviving Tuskegee Airmen, 1999 that were Topguns of the [U.S.] Air Force.  They won Topgun of the Air Force Honors by fourteen points in 1949, they were never recognized.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Do you wanna name them or?
Speaker 2: I know, no I don't recall their names right now, I'll have to send them to you a bit later.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: [Off-Camera Discussion]
Speaker 1: Yeah, wife [Carolyn Adams, Lewis], daughter [Melissa Lewis] and me.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  You have to take them out with the others cause there's cracks.
Speaker 1: Oh my, okay, we have--.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Hold it, hold it
Speaker 1: We have--.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, description for this.
Speaker 1: Yes, I'm on the left, that's my third female pilot, she got her license here and that's her flight instructor on the right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Do you know their names?
Speaker 1: I don't right now, it's 1992.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Got it.
Speaker 1: Aw ha!  I'm on the right, on the left is Sherman Rose, one of the original Tuskegee Airmen Flight Instructors with over 38,000 hours, sixteen-plus thousand in the helicopter at Fort Rucker, the rest in fixed wing as a Tuskegee Airmen instructor and instructor and instructor (unclear), that's his son David in the center.  He integrated Fort Rucker flight training.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Major Roosevelt J. Lewis, Jr., the Pentagon years. At that point I bought the Air Force Vehicle Fleet, a $3.4 billion account as Chief of Vehicle Programs.
Speaker 2: This Makeda Newby, my first female student to get a pilot's license here at Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], 1991.  She has flown turbo prop cargo aircraft for years supporting the automotive industry.  She's been based out of Detroit [Michigan] for many years.
Speaker 1: [Off-Camera Discussion]
Speaker 2: Okay, which way do you want me to turn it, this way, which way, this way?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  No that's--.
Speaker 2: Which way do you want me to turn it?
Speaker 1: Stand it straight up. Okay.
Speaker 2: This is the same girl?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I don't see another picture, but this has you in it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Are you finished with this one (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, Makeda Newby, Tuskegee grad, my first female student to get a pilot's license and she is out celebrating that she has her license now.
Speaker 2: This one is easy, the loves of my life, on the left my wife Caroline D. Adams Lewis, and on the right my daughter, a doctoral student, the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland], Melissa Michelle Lewis.
Speaker 1: (Off-Camera Discussion)
Speaker 2: (Unclear), You have your uniform on (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yes. This is my family when Melissa was five years old; no, this is six years old.  We're at the, we're in the Philippines and this is Melissa at six, my wife Carolyn and myself--DCS [Defense Courier System] Air Transportation, Pacific theater, a full Colonel.
