Story_ID: 193110
Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Elisabeth Oei [ph.] and Alisse Kingsley.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Carmen Latretta Lundy.  C-A-R-M-E-N, L-A-T-R-E-T-T-A, Lundy, L-U-N-D-Y.
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: There's a story behind my name.  My father [Freddie Lundy], I think he got Latretta from some of his travels.  He's a veteran of the Korean War, and I understand that it's just some name that he liked.  And I don't know where, it doesn't sound Korean at all, Latretta.  (Laughter)  Carmen, I believe my mother [Oveida Mathews Lundy-Francis] explained to me that she worked for a jeweler whose name was Carmen.  And I think the jeweler was important to her, maybe gave her her first job, or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Miami, Florida at Kendall Hospital [Kendall Regional Medical Center] on November 1, 1954.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I am a vocalist composer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You're also a visual artist, too, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, but nobody pays me to do that.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, that's good.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is November 12, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  And you don't have to give your address.
Speaker 2: I'm sitting in my living room in a community in Southern California known as Woodland Hills [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 193111
Speaker 1: All right. Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Fiji.
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "The good die young, but the great live forever."
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 193112
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side separately.  And we'll start with your mother.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Oveida, O-V-E-I-D-A, Elizabeth, with a 'z,' Lundy.  Do you want her maiden name?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, that would not be Lundy.  That would be Mathews, with one 't'. Mathews with one 't'.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 22, 1935.  She was born in Monticello County, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How far back can you trace your mother's side, and what are the, you know, stories about what people were doing on her side?  Are there any stories that come down?
Speaker 2: As far, I can go back as far as 1784.  A gentleman named Hobart, H-O-B-A-R-T, last name Presha, and that's P-R-E-S-H-A, he was a Haitian from some country in Africa, and found his way through the Caribbean.  And I'm going to guess that he came out of Africa into France, and France into the Caribbean.  He bought land in northern Florida.  He did not enter the United States as a slave, he came in as a free individual and purchased land.  And that is as far back as I can go on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Now, this is quite a story.  So, he achieved--he's from Africa, and went to France.  I guess he achieved, well--
Speaker 2: I'm guessing about the France part.
Speaker 1: You don't know what part of the... okay.
Speaker 2: I'm guessing about the France part.
Speaker 1: But he did come through Haiti?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Before he came to Miami [Florida]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Not Miami, to northern Florida in Monticello County [Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Northern Florida, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And I understand that this is based on information I got from a family reunion, kind of a backstory to the history of the family in my mother's line.  And when he, when his children were married he would portion part of the land so they could, you know, start their families.  So, everybody kind of lived like that.  And that farmland still exists in my mother's family, that property still exists.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Haiti, at the time--I was shocked at this when I read it in C. L. R. James, 'The Black Jacobins [: Toussaint L'Ouverture and the San Domingo Revolution]'--was the richest colony in the Americas.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Which is, you know, so he, it was at its height when your ancestors, you know--
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: --moved to Florida.
Speaker 2: And I learned from a book I've been reading by Tom Reiss called 'Black Count [: Glory, Revolution, Betrayal, and the Real Count of Monte Cristo],' that the "Black Code" was something created by Henry IV, and that whole institutionalization of racism is a result of one of the kings in France, which is still like astonishing to me.  And, but that's another story all in itself.
Story_ID: 193113
Speaker 1: So, yeah, so, then my grandmother [Gertrude Taylor-Mathews], one of [Hobart] Presha's, I think daughters--let's see, I have to skip now, because I'm talking about--I kind of like--fast-forward to what I recall as a child.  My grandmother was one of the second of seventeen kids, something like that, seventeen children.  My grandmother's parents were, her maiden name is Taylor.  And this is all Florida, all Northern Florida.  She married while in northern Florida.  Being the second of seventeen children, she married in Florida and then moved to Miami [Florida] as a result of her marriage to my grandfather [Henry Mathews], who's also a Floridian.  And he was the nineteenth of twenty children.  So, my grandmother bore, I think she had a total of thirteen children, but eleven survived.  So my mother [Oveida Mathews Lundy-Francis] was the first child to survive of eleven.  She was the first of eleven, but I think there were two born before my mother, or two that didn't make it; I think they were stillborn or something like that.  So, my grandmother's name is--my sister just told me this the other day, because she had another first name.  But I always knew her as Gertrude, but I just learned that she had a name, a first name that no one ever knew.  I just learned this like two weeks ago.  So, her name was Gertrude Taylor, and she married Henry Mathews.  And Henry, his first name was Douglas or something like that.  And so, he's not a junior.  Even though his father's name is Henry, he's not a junior, because he had another first name as well.  So, that's how I just know them, as Henry and Gertrude.
Story_ID: 193114
Speaker 1: So, what did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: My grandfather [Henry Mathews], when he moved from northern Florida to Miami [Florida], got a job working for the Department of Agriculture.  And he was one of the first to develop the land in south Florida as a result of that.  And I can recall as a child my grandfathers, they owned their property.  He and his brother owned, bought a lot of land in south Florida and built a community there called Perrine, Florida, P-E-R-R-I-N-E.  So, this was a community that was pre-existing of course, because it's now black people moving into what was, I guess, maybe just a predominantly white part of South Florida.  He moved his family there and built a family market.  So after he, I guess, earned enough--and I was going to say that as a child I can remember going out to the back lawn, and there was every fruit tree that could possibly grow in the tropics, the sub-tropical region that Miami, Florida is.  So, I could have a pineapple one day, I could have a sugar apple one day, I could have cherries the next day, I could have mangoes.  There were like three or five mango trees, and it was like, it was just papaya, guava, every kind of tropical fruit there is.  I grew up just having that accessible to me, just as a kid hanging out with my grandparents.  It was great.  Across the street from there was the family market.  So there was a major avenue called 104th Avenue, something like that; this was where the market was.  I have a painting inside that I showed you earlier of my childhood memories of going and visiting my grandmother in the store, and hoping for a cookie or, you know, a candy bar or something like that.
Speaker 1: Was there a name for the market?
Speaker 2: It was called Mathews Groceries.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And later they changed the name to M and L, for Mathews and Lundy.  So, there was this grocery store, and next door to that was the barbershop.  And above the barbershop and the grocery store was my uncle's home.  So, it was like a two-story building.  And the barbershop had some--it was just like a beauty shop, you know, that kind of thing--hair, whatever.  So, they lived across the street, and the formal visitors would enter through the front door, but everybody else came through the back door, because the back door was the path right over to the market across the street.  So, that was it.  And I can remember the cauldrons, where they would, you know, the chickens would run around, and they'd be like, you know, trying to make the chickens... or whatever.  (Laughter)  The chickens were running around, and I can remember that stuff very vividly.  I can recall somebody coming back from fishing.  This is Miami, so fishing is huge, and just the whole thing of everybody being covered with flakes and flakes of scales of fish, because, you know, they were preparing the fish, the whole thing.  That's the kind of stuff, you know.  There was a kerosene market, you know, where you could get the kerosene for the oil lamps.  They had that also, but it wasn't--I don't think they had like the gas, you know, the gasoline, the petro.  But there was also--they didn't serve beer.
Speaker 1: Was there electricity when you--
Speaker 2: Yes.  They didn't sell beer.  My, my grandparents were very religious--no cigarettes in his store, and no beer.  So, they did that for as long as they had that market.  They would not sell those products.  So, that's it.  And then my grandfather and his brother built what they call the Mathews Center, and this was like a place where you could go on the weekends, and the kids could do, you know, after-school programs and, you know, that kind of thing.  My mother's, my grandmother's father built a school in northern Florida, which I understand was burned down by the KKK [Ku Klux Klan].  So, education was a huge part of our rearing, leaning toward a Biblical education, huge.  But the value of education was also instilled in all of us.  And I'm the, you know, I'm the oldest of seven kids.  My mother is the oldest of eleven.  So, you know, the family life was huge and we were very--I guess like an entrepreneurial spirit was prevalent throughout the family, and we all were very--you know, developed kind of a resourceful manner in our lives in figuring out ways to make ends meet kind of creatively.  So, that's what I can tell you about my grandmother.  She was the first woman, black woman, to establish the voting polls for people of color in the sixties [1960s].  She was very instrumental and very, very dedicated to her service to the community in that way, and she pretty much ran that market.  She and my grandfather were, that's what I remember.  That's all I remember, they were--that they had the store, they just, that's what they did.
Story_ID: 193115
Speaker 1: Now, what did your mother [Oveida Mathews Lundy-Francis] say about growing up, and what were her aspirations?
Speaker 2: That's a great question.  I don't know what my mom's aspirations were, I really don't.  Everybody sang, you know.  I don't know if she ever wanted to do that professionally, but she sang until her last day, her last breath, with the same woman, the same women.  She sang with the same women her entire life, which was amazing to me.
Speaker 1: What was the name of--
Speaker 2: The Apostolic Singers.  It started out as a choir.  My grandfather [Henry Mathews] started it as part of his whole thing of building a church; you've got to have a choir.  And I understand that there were about seventy-five voices originally.  And in most black churches you have three choirs.  It's just a standard, that's what it is.  You get the, I'm going to say, they call them the Senior Choir, okay.  And then you get the Apostolic Singers, those are the divas, the diva choir, you know.  (Laughter).  And then you had the Junior Choir.  So, my mother's group was the diva choir.  And their music, their style, was very much like what--if you were to listen to any kind of the gospel Caravans records.  If you listen to anything like that, that's what they were throwing down, I mean like in a huge, awesome kind of a way.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And--yes--
Speaker 1: Your mother was the lead singer?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother was a lead singer, and there was another lead singer.  There were a couple, and they would share, depending on what that song was and whose register--
Speaker 1: How many were in the group?
Speaker 2: I have some photos I can show you.  Sometimes--I have photographs where there are at least seven or eight--three gentlemen, four women, and then the pianist, like that, that kind of size group.  And my mom and a vocalist named Alberta, Alberta Brown [ph.], you know, they were just ridiculous, ridiculous.   Many years--when I had moved to Los Angeles [California] many years later, I was inspired by this friendship, this bond that had lasted over decades and decades.  And they'd never recorded.  So, I talked to one of my mother's sisters, who had just retired from the military.  "You know, we really should document the history of this group."  So, we did that, so I just, I went to Miami on three different occasions and set up a camera and talked to them.  And we sat and talked about the experiences, and they made a program so we could kind of videotape the actual performance and things like that.  And it was a way to just really give them a chance to see for themselves their own lives, and what they had really accomplished, and I really feel proud of that.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite song that they performed?
Speaker 2: (Singing) "I don't know what you going to do.  I don't know what you going to do.  I got to praise his name, uh-huh."  Kills me every time. But I just, I could see this, you know, as a little girl sitting in my living room.  Every house I ever lived in, every house I ever was in, had a piano in it, you know.  So, as a little girl when they would rehearse at the house, "You take this note," my aunt would say.  "Take that note," you know, the harmony stuff.  And I'd sit there like five years old going, "I know the note, I know the note.  When I grow up I'm going to be in this group, because I know the notes."  (Laughter).  So, you know, that was like early, early music lessons without even realizing it, you know.  This is like infectious stuff that's going on.  This is like organic and, you know, this was like, I'm absorbing this just the way they are.  So, my dream became "When I grow up, I'm gonna' sing with them," that was it.  And I never did, you know, I never did.  I was in the Junior Choir, I got close.  (Laughter).  But that was, that was like a hierarchy.  That whole thing had to be, you had to be, you had to be like--you have to had lived, in order to be in that group.
Speaker 1: So, they would tour, I take it--
Speaker 2: Well, they would tour--
Speaker 1: --around other churches?
Speaker 2: --they would tour only the southern states, one or two, and all of Florida.  Because we're in Miami [Florida], so you could hit every little nook and crook town all through Florida.  And we went into Atlanta, Georgia, and there was something called the convocation, which a lot of people know is that when all the churches from all the denominations, from all the different branches all over the country come--well, it's kind of like a convention, but we call it a convocation.  And it would just be the rehearsals for the music.  And the rehearsals for those convocations were mind-boggling--the work that went into this show time at the convocation.  And you'd get there and everybody, every choir from all over the country would just kick it, you know.  That was exciting.  I remember that Terrance Darby's mother, Elder Darby's wife [Frances Darby], she was an incredible singer, incredible.  And she was the one that took the prize that year, the year that I was lucky enough to go.  I think I was around fifteen or sixteen years old, where we all got on the bus and drove from Florida to Atlanta to show off, show our thing, you know.  But those were great, great times.  And I think that what was great about it was that it was really for--it wasn't about money, it really wasn't about money.  My mother's group opened for James Cleveland, she opened for the Gospel Caravans.  There were other groups that you may have heard of, like the Swan Silvertones or The Highway Q.C.'s; those kinds of groups would come to town, and that was always Overtown [Florida].  Overtown is the, it's kind of like the Harlem [New York City, New York], if you will, of Miami, and it's called Overtown.  So, a lot of what I was hearing about as a child was taking place there, which is like a no-no.  "Oh, no, no, you don't go there."  The Sir John Knight Beat [Club], a lot of black acts would come into those kinds of venues, you know, but I wasn't allowed to partake in any of that.  So, everything was a curiosity.  And then...
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Was that a long answer to your question?  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, but that's a good one.
Story_ID: 193116
Speaker 1: Now, so, did your mother [Oveida Mathews Lundy-Francis] participate in the family business, the store and all of that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: As well as--and then she had--
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.
Speaker 1: --a career as a singer?
Speaker 2: My mother, I told you about all these buildings that my grandfather [Henry Mathews] and his brother built.  So, down that same--so I talked about the street that ran around the corner, and then three blocks down was the church and all the--so my grandfather built the house next door for his sister, Ada [ph.].  And the house across the street from there was Aunt Ethel [ph.] and Uncle Allen [ph.].  And then there was Uncle Matt [ph.] just across the street from there, and it cuts across to cousin Winifred Jordan's [ph.] house.  And he was also an incredible gardener, his house with all the fruit trees and stuff.  Everybody was a family member, all the way down the block, for two blocks.  Now, on this street would also be small little homes that were just like, I guess you would call it, was it--all these little apartments.  My mother was a milliner, so she had a little hat shop right there. So she would, you know, with seven kids I guess it's always about trying to figure out to make some money.  So, around the early seventies, I think I was already maybe thirteen or fourteen, I'm just guessing, maybe fifteen going into high school, she opened up a boutique next to the family market.  Because my grandfather, he kind of added on, if you will, and built another structure.  And that structure was where my mother, they made--the store became bigger.  It was a lot--you know, they could stock more.  And next door to that, my mother opened a boutique, and next door to that was a restaurant.  So, this is what she's doing.  Somehow between her day job, which was, my mother worked as a, there's an official name for this, but I'm going to say it's a supervisor of a halfway house for children who are in-between families, some who have lost parents or are maybe orphaned.  So, she worked for a long time for Dade County [Florida].  And many of my mother's siblings became gainfully employed working for the City of Miami.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother go to college?
Speaker 2: No, she did not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's only one, I think that my mother's youngest sister was the first one to graduate from college, Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 193117
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side, then we'll try to put them together.  So, can you give us your father's full name and spell it?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Freddie, I-E.  His middle name is Lee.  And he's Freddie Lee Lundy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 29th, 1931.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where?
Speaker 2: He was also a native Floridian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Alachua County, A-L-A-C-H-U-A, Alachua County, Florida.
Speaker 1: Is that in the northern part of the state?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's like Gainesville [Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what do you know about his side?  How far back can you trace them, and what are the stories from that side?
Speaker 2: I don't know nearly as much about my dad's side, but I do remember my grandmother visiting.  Her name is Saphronia with a P-H. Saphronia with a P-H.
Speaker 1: Like one of the four women in the Nina Simone--Safronia, you know that song.
Speaker 2: Yes, Peaches is the last one (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, right, "My name is Safronia," yeah. (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: "My name is Peaches."  That was my aunt's nickname by the way.  She just took it--she was so crazy about that name she just gave herself that nickname.  Okay, so my dad's mother, Saphronia Darling, her last name is Darling.  This is interesting, that my mother's sister married a Darling also, married my father's cousin.  So, I've got cousins on both sides, (laughter) so funny.  So, Saphronia--and Willie [ph.] Lundy is my father's [sic, grandfather] name.  I just found this out on his birthday.  His birthday was September 29th, and I had to ask him, "What was your dad's name?"  I finally learned that it's Willie.  Now, Willie died when my father was eight years old.  So my father doesn't know much about his dad.  He was also raised, as a result, by his grandmother, whose name is Alice Darling.  And Alice Darling lived to be 106; she was 104 or a 106 (unclear).  And I have a photograph of the newspaper on her 100th birthday.  There's a newspaper article with all that stuff in it.  Um, okay, so, my dad, the cool thing about it--well, my memory of this is that since both my parents grew up in the sharecropper family, toiling the land and all of that, they made sure that we knew their history and their background.  So, every summer they'd put us in the car and drive us up to northern Florida, either to Monticello County [Florida] or to Alachua County [Florida].  And they would throw us out there with the tobacco, and the figs, and the outhouses, and the slop with the pigs, you know, and the cows, and churning the butter, and no electricity.  And instead of having plastered walls and plastered ceilings, it was cardboard with little tacks on the cardboard.  And when the night--and then the, you know that moss on the trees, you know, and all that wonderful southern--all that moss would hang, and we would take that moss from the trees and throw it on the ground and throw it--you know, we would just make our own beds.  And it was crazy, I mean, it was like, you know, sometimes I would sit there and go, "I'm not gonna do this when I grow up."  (Laughter)  "I don't want to do this.  This is scary, and you got to go up there and you got to plant potatoes.  I don't want to plant potatoes," you know.  I can remember that, looking forward to, and then thinking, "This is supposed to be a vacation.  Why are we working?  You know, why are we out here in the land?  Why are we doing this?"  And now I wish I had paid attention, because I love being out in the garden, you know.  I wish I had I really learned about the soil and what you really got to do to make things grow.  (Laughter)  So, my father and mother [Oveida Mathews Lundy-Francis] would take us to their homeland.  And those are such, you know, that's like such cool stuff when I think about it now, and how beautiful it was to see how independent we were, and how we sustained our own lives.  And everybody was entrepreneurs, you know, everybody did that.  I can remember, you know, my aunt--I'm sorry, my grandmother, my father's grandmother, dipped snuff.  And that was back--you know, that whole thing of it sitting in your lip.  And she packed a pistol right here in her skirt.  I even have one of her quilts, actually.  She used to, you know, make quilts for everybody.  And I actually inherited one, luckily.  But that was cool stuff, that's what I know about my father.
Story_ID: 193118
Speaker 1: I can remember visiting other relatives.  There's a place called Melrose, Florida.  There's a famous town that was burned down to the ground.  Because it's also--what's the name, it starts with an 'M,' the town?  It might be Melrose, where the community was so thriving that the--
Speaker 2: Oh, are you talking about Rosewood, the one they made the movie of?
Speaker 1: Yes, that one, that's Florida.  So, I have family throughout that entire area.  It just, it just seems that, I don't know how it happened, that from both sides there's so much of the ancestral roots in southern Florida.  And I know we had to have come from somewhere else, but I don't--I understand that Lundy is also, had some roots in the Caribbean, which I think makes sense with my last name.  My father [Freddie Lundy] has an aunt who is from Barbados, and that's the English colonization.  So, you have the French colonization on my grandmother's--on my mother's side, and you have the English colonization on my father's side.  So, very interesting.  And as I travel the world, it's kind of curious to me that where the audiences seem to be, you know, where the audience--where the people are curious about the music I do.
Story_ID: 193119
Speaker 1: So, now did your father [Freddie Lundy], did he have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, both my parents, you know, graduated high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they both entered the Dade County [Florida], what do you call that?  supervising young children.  My mother [Oveida Mathews Lundy] and father actually adopted a little girl later, during that time when they were both working for the County, who became not only my adopted sister, but she became my aunt, because my mother's brother married her.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this was like foster--
Speaker 2: Yeah, foster--
Speaker 1: --children?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They worked with foster children?
Speaker 2: So, yeah.  It was called the Parkway Children's Center.  My mother worked--my aunt worked there, and my mother worked at the Alpha House, which was on the grounds of Kendall Hospital [Kendall Regional Medical Center, Miami, Florida] where I was born.  And my father worked there also.  So, both my parents worked in the same location for many years.
Story_ID: 193120
Speaker 1: Now what did your, did your father [Freddie Lundy] have any stories about growing up, about it was like when he grew up, you know, that he shared with you?
Speaker 2: Gosh, I wish I could tell you yes, I really do. My father is very much alive, he just turned eighty-three.  My parents divorced when I was a junior, maybe a senior in high school.  So, my memories of my childhood are, there's very much of a paradoxical, you know, experience there--a lot of beautiful things and a lot of things that are hard to talk about and hard to remember, to even talk about.  And I think that my mother [Oveida Mathews Lundy-Francis] had seven kids within a ten year period.  My youngest sister is ten years my junior.  So, that's a lot of kids.  We grew up in a, I mean, my mom, we felt we thought we were, we thought we were wealthy.  I mean, my grandparents owned the market.  They owned, they built all the stores and the churches and stuff.  You know, we felt that we had it pretty nicely.  And I could walk into a, I could walk into a Woolworth's or something, and someone there would say, "Are you a Mathews?"  It was just like that.  People always--we all looked the same, or there was something about us that had this similarity.  So, I just thought everything was totally cool, and we believed that for a long time.  My mother put us in the car once, all of us, she piled us in the car and drove us to Overtown [Florida], to Liberty City [Florida], so we could see how, you know, "This is what it could be like, so don't complain about anything.  You guys are doing great, because this is what it could be like," you know, that kind of thing.  "This is poverty, this is not having anything.  This could be you."  So, we kind of woke up that day, you know, with a whole sense of what life was like for us, even in our little three-bedroom, one bathroom home that we just thought was the "bee's knees," you know.  We pretty--had it made.
Story_ID: 193121
Speaker 1: Well (unclear) considering your parents' [Oveida Mathews Lundy-Francis and Freddie Lundy] personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, their talents, their looks--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I'm more--looks?
Speaker 1: Everything, yeah.
Speaker 2: The older I get, the more I look like my mother.  But I kind of got a mixture of both.  I don't think I really look like either of them, but we all kind of look like brothers and sisters when you line us all up, you know.  Um, I think my mom.  I'm so inspired by my mother that I think I'm just trying to be her again, you know, and maybe live the life that she would have had, had she not had all these kids to look after, or something like that.  Who knows?  But I know if it wasn't for her, I would not be a musician, I would not be a professional, I would not be a visual artist.  None of that would be happening without her.  My mother was a seamstress, so she made all the clothes for the kids, you know.  It's school time again, and what are we going to do?  The whole thing: buy the fabric, get the patterns, cut them out and sew them, and be out there all--you know, for days and days and days putting together a wardrobe for seven kids, an awesome woman.  She was a wonderful--she could cook; she managed to--she was a decorator, so if furniture needed to be re-done or this or that, she would do it herself.  She'd teach me how to make the drapes, teach me how to cover the furniture, you know, how to reupholster the sofa.  She just had all those skills, and she applied them.  And it's amazing what--I think when you don't have immediate resources, it's amazing to be around some person, or someone like my mother, who could figure out to get it done.  You know, that was so inspiring.
Story_ID: 193122
Speaker 1: Um, this is how I got my first piano lessons, this is how it happened.  My mother [Oveida Mathews Lundy-Francis] got a job, on top of everything else, cleaning house for a woman who was a formal classical pianist.  And her husband worked for The Miami Herald.  She got this job once a week cleaning house.  So, when she got there and found out this woman was a former classical pianist turned housewife--ooh, here comes Carmen, here comes Carmen.  (Laughter)  She had a son who was a drummer, so Curtis [Lundy] got percussion lessons and I got--
Speaker 2: This is your brother, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Curtis is my brother, the bassist.  Curtis was getting percussion lessons, and I was getting piano lessons.  And then Curtis would get piano lessons as well, but I didn't get the percussion lessons, but I was listening.  So, William and Leslie Bloss [ph.], and those two people were lovely, lovely, lovely people.  And as a matter of fact I remember years later my mother was doing a party for them, like, you know, kind of, what do you call that?  Ushering a party, whatever that's called.  And there was a black man that attended that party, and his name was [Ronald A.] Hammond, last name Hammond.  It turned out that this Mr. Hammond worked in the Financial Aid department at the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida].  So, that's how I got into the University of Miami, was through that connection, all those years later, that same family.  If it wasn't for that man at that party that my mother remembered, "Oh, yeah, he works at the University of Miami, let's give him a call."  So, we finagled that first year for me as a freshman at the University of Miami, that's how we got in.
Story_ID: 193123
Speaker 1: Now, my father [Freddie Lundy], interestingly, also had many second jobs.  He got a second job working at the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida] at what they call the Physical Plant, which is a physical plant, meaning you're pretty much doing maintenance on the grounds of the University of Miami.  So, I can recall when I was getting a little older and asking so many questions, and now those questions are being presented to you when you're in Civics and social studies, "What are you going to be when you grow up, and what do you want to be?  And here are your options."  You know, the options were for me was that I could be a model, because I was getting really tall.  And I thought, "Well, that could be cute."  And then I said, "I know what.  I'll be a flight attendant, because flight attendants get to travel, and they get to dress up.  So, I can kill two birds with one stone if I do that."  So then I took Spanish, you know, did all those things that you have to do; you've got to speak another language.  So, I can remember around that time asking my father about, "What college are you working at?  Or can you take me there, can you show me that?  I want to see what that's like."  So, my dad took me out to the University of Miami, and all I remember about this campus is that they had a beautiful, it was a beautiful pond in the middle of the campus.  And that's what I remember, my father taking me out on the edge of the pond, and I'm just, you know, maybe he had a fishing line, maybe he didn't, I don't remember.  But I can clearly remember asking him, "Well, how do you get to do this kind of thing, you know?"  And so, now I'm kind of, that's kind of my family life.  That's, those are the wonderful things about my family life--my mother [Oveida Mathews Lundy-Francis] giving me those piano lessons early on, putting me in a little tap dance class, learning how to tap dance, you know.  Those were things that were important to her, and she wanted us to have that.
Story_ID: 193124
Speaker 1: I guess you take after your mother [Oveida Mathews Lundy-Francis] more, I guess?
Speaker 2: I think I do.
Speaker 1: In that sense, yeah.
Speaker 2: I think I do.
Speaker 1: And, well, what's your earliest memory of the family?
Speaker 2: What's my earliest memory of the family?  Earliest memory of the family you want to know?  Well, I'll tell you one that's easier to tell, okay.  Um, that's really hard to answer, it's just really hard for me to answer that.  Um, well, let's see, oh, that's really hard.  But two things--I'm having a vision of something, so I'll just tell you the one thing.  I was about four years old, and I forget, it was some kind of day school or pre-school, and Mrs. Bunyon was her name, Florence Bunyon [ph.].  And I loved that little house, sleeping on the little [U.S.] Army cots.  I just loved all of that, and coming home from the day school and then going straight to my grandmother's [Gertrude Taylor-Mathews] piano and just bang, bang, bang, bang, bang, four years old.  And my aunt, one of my mother's sister's teenagers said "You know what, we're cleaning the house.  You're going to have to go home."  And I was like, "Really, I have to go home?  I know where that is, so, okay, I'll go home," which is about, if you were in a car it would take you about seven minutes to get to my house from my grandparents.  So she said, "Go on, just go.  Get out, I'm cleaning."  So, I walked out the front door of the house, and I'm looking back and nobody's saying anything, "Where are you going?"  So, I thought, "Well, let me just go next door to my aunt's house and let her know that I'm going home."  You know, this is my grandfather's sister.  "I'm going to go home, Auntie, I'm going to go to--they said I have to go home."  "Okay, isn't that cute.  Bye-bye."  So, I started heading down the street, and three blocks down, I make it down to the church, and I still know where I'm going.  And then I make a left, and I know that if I make that left, there was a major highway that I'd have to cross, which is now not the black part of town.  But I have to cross that street, and then I go down that street and then I get the thing, and I know where my house is.  So, I did that, I left.  And now everybody's looking up and going, where the heck am I?  So, when I got to the last house in the black community before this, like, field of grass and then the road, these three men had their heads down in the hood of a car fixing a car.  And they looked up and saw me, and said, "Where are you going?"  "I'm going home."  This is four years old.  "Where do you live?"  "In Richmond Heights [Florida]."  "Do you know where that is?  You're walking home? Oh, no, no, no."  So, they put me in the car and I gave them directions to my house.  And they dropped me off just on the other side of the main road that's off the next divider, you know, of the towns.   And I walked across the dirt, I mean the rocky path, to my house and walked in the front door, because then people left their doors unlocked.  And my father [Freddie Lundy] was sleeping in the bed, and I go into the bedroom.  They had one of those cedar chests, and my tea set was in that cedar chest.  And I just, I'm taking out my tea set and I'm "La, la, la, I'm home, I made it home."  My father woke up and just, "What are you doing here?  How did you get here?  What in the world--"  And the next thing I remember is being, you know, back at my grandmother's house, with everybody sitting in the living room like this, "And what happened next?  And what happened next, and what happened next?"  And I'm telling my little story, and nobody can believe this is happening.  (Laughter)  And I see my mother [Oveida Lundy-Francis]--because I know I'm in trouble, you know, I just know it.  But I'm telling the story just the way I'm telling you, and my mother's sitting there like--you can see that she thinks this is so funny.  But she needs to be angry with me, not like amused by it.  And she was (laughter) well, I just remember the tears rolling down her face, and the whole thing was just hysterical.  So I guess I got away with it because I was safe and sound, okay.
Story_ID: 193125
Speaker 1: So now, fast forward to first grade, and I'm now going to school, which is on the other end of town.
Speaker 2: What's the name of your school?
Speaker 1: Frank C. Martin, Frank C. Martin Elementary School [Miami, Florida].  So, I'm going to school, first grade or whatever. Now, my father [Freddie Lundy]'s family lives at the end of the block, and they've got like nine kids, too.  So, one of these days I had a horrible experience occur with one of the young sons of my aunt, and it was a horrible experience.  And you know, child molestation is no joke.  And--
Speaker 2: You were in the first grade?
Speaker 1: Yeah, first grade.  And I held on to that, I don't think I ever told my mother [Oveida Lundy-Francis] about it.  I never told anyone until I was, I think I had began menstruating, and I think it was important for my mother to help me understand what was going on with my body.  But I did not tell her for all those years.  So, when my--I guess my mother must have told my father, okay.  So, he came, he became ridiculously over-protective, it was just ridiculously over-protective, almost to the point where he was as abusive, you know, not in that way, but I mean physically just--I mean, that time--you asked me about my family life, what my family life was about.  My father was an incredible disciplinarian, you know.  Their whole teaching was to just spank the hell out of a kid, you know, for any reason that was their reason, not for whatever the kid might do or might not do, or did.  It was just, punishment was a way of life for us.
Speaker 2: Now, this isn't necessarily unusual for that--
Speaker 1: For that time, it isn't.
Speaker 2: --age.
Speaker 1: But that--when you asked me about my, you know, childhood and growing up--
Speaker 2: --but it's still wrong.
Speaker 1: --that's the stuff I remember.  I don't want to remember that stuff, and that's what I remember.
Speaker 2: And your family is also in an apostolic church, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Very strict rules--
Speaker 1: Very strict.  We couldn't dance, we couldn't go to the movies, we couldn't--you know, you could play music because it was for the higher being, but you couldn't think about ever making money at that.  That's like, against everything, you know; that's like blasphemous, you're going straight to hell.  Make money for this?  You know, so I got, I mean just really hammered, it was just drummed into us.  I mean, that was how we grew up.
Speaker 2: So, this is a lot of stress on you as a--
Speaker 1: This is like--
Speaker 2: --as a six-year old.
Speaker 1: --this is still happening, it's still happening.  Some things just die hard, you know.  So, my childhood, we had fun, don't get me wrong.  We're kids, we knew how to make fun.  I can remember, you know, 'Our Gang' was very popular then.  You know, 'Our Gang' and, you know, 'Spanky and Our Gang.'  And we used to, I used to love to like make my little, create my little theater scenes, and create the little, you know, build a little space and create the little games.  And I just loved that.  We were a huge family, so we were a very popular family on the street, you know, where we grew up.  We could make a game, we could just start a game with just sisters and brothers, you know, and everybody else in the neighborhood would join in.  So, it was really commonplace for my family to just be the life of the whole block, you know.  But we were also the laughing stock of the block, because we'd see my father coming home from work at the end of the block and we'd see the car, and we'd all dash in, like "Oh, my God, Dad's home.  Oh, what's he going to do, and what kind of mood is he in today?  Oh, shoot."  Fear, I mean, fear.  We lived in fear of my father.
Speaker 2: So, punishment was arbitrary--
Speaker 1: Huge.
Speaker 2: --based on how he felt about something at a certain time?  Was that the--
Speaker 1: It was not, it was not a good thing, okay.  Um, those are, those--it's a hard way to learn a lesson.  Do you know what I mean?  It's--you get it, you get it.  But do you have to really do that in order for me to learn the lesson?  You know, it was that kind of--
Speaker 2: In the early years, was this abuse still going on continually, or--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I don't want to paint this image of that's all there was.  But it's just that it was so, you just never knew what was going to occur.  And my father didn't drink, doesn't smoke, never did, never did.  So it wasn't like this other kind of dark alcoholic--none of that, you know.  My mother smoked on and off, but it wasn't like this chain smoking kind of thing.  We were like too religious for that kind of stuff, you know.  And there'd be occasions where you'd see my--because everybody else smoked, my mother would take a cigarette or something like that, but it wasn't commonplace.
Story_ID: 193126
Speaker 1: I can remember the lady across the street from us, Miss Mary [ph.], was a chain smoker.  But she reminded me a lot of Billie Holiday.  When I first, when I learned about who Billie Holiday was, I was like, I know that lady.  It was my neighbor across the street.  And you know, we had a cop that lived, Mr. Blake [ph.], he lived here (pointing).  Mr. Thompson [ph.] lived here (pointing), he worked for [U.S.] Customs [and Border Protection].  So we had the cop, we had the Customs agent, we had, you know, Mrs. Gibbs [ph.], the teacher, the school teacher.  Everybody was, you know, it was like a middle class community.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you were telling me it was a development that was created after the Korean War.
Speaker 1: In the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: The GI Bill and the Home and Development, yes.
Speaker 2: Was your father [Frankie Lundy] a GI?
Speaker 1: He's a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's a Korean War veteran.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Korean War veteran, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you mentioned that earlier, right--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that he served.
Speaker 1: So, maybe that whole military--and you've got to understand--I now understand something that may or may not make sense to you, or to anyone who might identify with what I'm saying in some remote way.  But I realize that men of color were really more oppressed then than they are now, let's face it, you know.  So, racism, even though nobody talked about it in my family, it was never a dinner conversation.  We didn't tune into the news that way, until [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  But prior to Martin Luther King, we didn't know.  We just thought we were living the life.  We were very fortunate people, that's what we thought.  Um, but then I realized that the men of color who become the preachers, you know, the fathers who make families, this is the one place where they get to be the authoritarian, where they get to say what it is, okay.  So, I started to realize, oh, this is that domain which they cannot do, or aren't allowed to be out in the world.  So, in the more insular side of things, you've got the male dominating figure in the home who is asserting that which has been kind of placed them upon them in an adverse way.
Speaker 2: So, they're basically mirroring the authority that's used against them when they come home, against their family?
Speaker 1: Isn't that sad?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And it may be true and it may--this is just my little story, you know, my observation as an African American.
Speaker 2: Oh, others have--there have been black psychiatrists--you go to a meeting of the Association of Black Psychologists, they would probably agree with you.  You know, you could be on a panel and just be one more person that's saying this.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So I guess maybe in a way, my childhood was normal.  Imagine that, that this could actually be a normal upbringing.  If my brother Curtis was sitting here, I'm sure his perspective would be different, he's a man, you know.  But even so, he may be able to fill in some of the things that, for me, have become more of a faded recollection, and not so vivid.
Story_ID: 193127
Speaker 1: Well, what I didn't ask you, I didn't ask you to name your brothers and sisters, from the oldest to the youngest, and tell us a little bit about what they're doing now, and what they were like.  So, this would be a good time I guess to do that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Curtis Lundy, Curtis Leon Lundy--
Speaker 1: Is he the oldest?
Speaker 2: He's the oldest son.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest daughter, I'm the oldest of the seven.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's start with you then.
Speaker 2: Okay, Carmen--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So, Carmen Latretta, Curtis Leon, Corliss Loretta--
Speaker 1: So Curtis became a jazz bassist?
Speaker 2: Bassist, jazz bassist.  Corliss Loretta has worked at the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida] in the human resources department for the last thirty-five years.  She is the mother of three.  Let's see, Cheryl Lorraine, Cheryl Lorraine worked for Xerox for many years, for like twenty-something years, and then she became the head chief security officer at the University of Miami for the past five years.  She is the mother of one.  By the way, Curtis married twice, and he has four children.  Let's see, and then after Cheryl Lorraine comes Carl Lamar.  Carl is a veteran, he was a [U.S.] Marine.  And he is now taking up the entrepreneurial aspect of being, he's a self-employed contractor.  So, that's become his main, I would say his line of work for maybe the last twenty years.  And then there's Freddie [Lundy, II], who's named after my dad.  And Freddie is a gardener, and always has been.  Um, and then Correll Lavita, my youngest sibling, she has a master's degree in what is it, technology?  It's a fancy name for computer.  IT [information technology], what does that mean?
Speaker 1: IT, yeah.
Speaker 2: I forget what the 'I' is for.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: But, so, she is a computer whiz.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So it seems like education was fairly important in the family.
Story_ID: 193128
Speaker 1: Did you like school?
Speaker 2: I loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Loved it.  (Laughter) I didn't like honor's English.  I didn't want to be in honor's English.  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: Why not, why not?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  You know, I didn't go to--we were, when I went into high school, it was the first integrated school, high school.  I think the integration happened right when I went from ninth grade to tenth grade.  But I went to ninth grade in middle school, all the way up to the ninth grade in middle school, and then went to tenth grade.  And I think there was one white kid and one black--a white girl and a white boy, you know, in my middle school.  So now, integration, here comes integration, you know.  So, I got into honor's English, and I thought "What am I doing here?"  (Laughter)  I didn't wanna' be there.  I don't know, it's just weird being the only black girl in the class.
Speaker 1: You were the only one?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There was one, myself, and a kid named Terrell Blakely [ph.].  Hi, Terrell.  Terrell Blakey, and we were the two in this honor's English class.  And I just felt so weird in there, I can't tell you why. So I transferred to Mrs. Dunn [ph.], and I loved it, I loved my English class with Mrs. Dunn.  I sang at her wedding, as a matter of fact.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Miami Killian [Senior High School, Miami, Florida], K-I-L-L-I-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So tenth, eleventh, and twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: What was the racial mix at--since this is the first integrated school, were blacks the clear minority there?
Speaker 2: I kind of think it was--we were 60/40 or 40/60, it was very close.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very close.  And it was a great school.  It was a great time to, I think it was just a great time for affirmative action.  I mean, it's a dirty word now, but, you know, if they had done the right thing, we wouldn't need affirmative action.  There, I said it.  So--
Speaker 1: In advanced placement, you would be a minority in that school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's what you're saying.
Speaker 2: But I remember there was an elective black history class.  Mr. Dobbs was my teacher, and that's where I first heard jazz, was in my science class with Mr. Dobbs who also taught black history.  And he would come in with those, like, portable, you know, record players and flip that thing off, and the speaker would be the other, you know, the lid.  And [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson, the first time I heard Nancy Wilson was in his class, very, very--I loved it, loved it.  I mean I just really loved school.  I just loved getting up at six o'clock and getting everybody dressed and ready, and doing the hair, and getting a ride to the bus stop.  I just loved it.  I mean by that time, I kind of understood my role as the oldest daughter, you know, to kind of just assist with family life.  I loved it, loved everything about it.
Story_ID: 193129
Speaker 1: So, you heard [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson in high school.
Speaker 2: Didn't know she was a jazz singer, just--
Speaker 1: Now did you see any of the black singers on television in those days?  Did you watch TV?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did; yes, I did. So, I entered the choral program in junior high school, as an elective.  It made sense to me, because I was in the junior choir, you know, in church.  So, that's where I was introduced to classical music, really, you know, the Bach Magnificat, and you know, Berlioz Requiem, and all those things, choral pieces.  And that's where I began to understand my role kind as an alto and all of that stuff, because singing the harmony made sense to me, but it was all kind of written music.  So, that's where I really started to really read, you know, really learn to read music, it was in the choral program.  And I just loved school.  And I think the choral program used to be like a two o'clock in the afternoon class.  Then it was, it became, the next year it became the first class.  So, I just, I just got of bed and couldn't wait to get in there and do that.  So, yes, so my musical thing was already happening in the chorus.  And then 'The Ed Sullivan Show,' okay.  So, before the Beatles, okay, so before the Beatles that show was very popular, and I think its iconic now because of the Beatles.  But I remember this night watching 'The Ed Sullivan Show,' and on comes the most beautiful woman I'd ever seen.  And her hair was just coiffed, and she had on like one of those Jackie O [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis] dresses, you know, with the, you know, sleeveless--just ever so elegant.  And she sang, the song she sang was not like an Aretha Franklin tune or a [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick tune.  It was like a Broadway tune, you know, so it had a little bit more something, like more of a swing beat.  But it was Barbara McNair.  And when I saw that lady I said, "That's what I want, that's what I'm going to do," and I just set out to do that very thing.  That lady changed my life.  And I got to tell her, I actually got to tell her.
Speaker 1: Did you tell anybody else at the time?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  This was all my--you know, Scorpios, we're like really private, secretive, you know.  It's like all that internal stuff.  Well, I knew that was it, and I just set out--I just knew that was what I was going to do.  So, there you have it.
Story_ID: 193130
Speaker 1: So, '[The] Ed Sullivan Show,' Barbara McNair--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Barbara McNair.
Speaker 1: And you had a chance to tell her?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, because I was--
Speaker 1: Well, let's get that.
Speaker 2: When I first moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], there was a place called the Baked Potato in Pasadena [California].  Freddie Hubbard was playing at the Baked Potato, so I'm at the Baked Potato, and in walks Barbara McNair.  So, I'm like, "I've got to tell Barbara McNair, I've got to tell her."  So, after the set, after the set was over, people started to leave, and I walked over to her.  And I just said, "I want to introduce myself to you.  I'm Carmen Lundy, and I want to thank you so much because you gave me a dream, and thank you so much."  And she was like, "Oh, well, that's so--" you know, it was a very lovely response.  But I actually got to thank her, which is kind of a cool thing.  Yeah, but the Ed Sullivan Show was, he was doing things that were happening in our society that was all about the music; it was all about entertainment; it was all about a show, you know.
Speaker 1: So, this is interesting, though.  You're in an apostolic house, and you're not supposed to listen to popular music, but if you turn on TV, it's hard to not hear it, isn't it?
Speaker 2: There's the contradiction.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 193131
Speaker 1: There's the contradiction.  It was the contradiction is all throughout my family life.  And that's what I (unclear), "Oh, excuse me, Pastor, I have a question."  "Oh, no, put your hand down," you know.  The contradiction became--because I'm now a thinking human being, and now I'm starting to sort out and think for myself, and things were not adding up.  And then the Saturday night jook joints, and everybody's partying over town, you know, the Sir John Knight Beat [Club, Miami Florida].  And then everybody gets dressed up on Sunday morning with the hats and the gloves and everything and all, you know, "Thank you," and "Amen."  Hmm, what's going on here?  So, a few things started going on.  The blues started to creep into my sphere, you know, the Lead Bellys [Huddie William "Lead Belly" Ledbetter] and the John Lee Hookers, and that would be the Saturday afternoon jam throw down.  Now, I'm starting to be a, you know, young adult, so I guess I was allowed to be a little bit more privy to other things.  Well, I'll never forget that Sunday when my mother [Oveida Mathews Lundy-Francis] ran in the front door with the groceries, slamming the door.  She threw down her purse, threw down the groceries, and said, "Turn on the TV quick," just like that.  "Oh, okay."  It's the 'Ed Sullivan Show.'  "And now, ladies and gentlemen, the Beatles."  (laughter)  I remember that day, and I thought, "Wow, Mom."  So, now it's like the door, the floodgates are open.  That just opened everything up.  Now, music was, everybody was just like--and Curtis [Lundy] was like, now he's fooling around on the bass, you know, he's like twelve, might have been eleven or twelve.  Now the bass really means something, you see.  Now, everything is everything.
Speaker 2: So, does that mark the period of time when television was like opening up in your house?
Speaker 1: Oh, heck yeah, oh, yes, indeed.  We mentioned other images, [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll, one of the most elegant, one of the most accomplished.  She represented everything that you would aspire to for success, to just... intelligence.  To everything there was to become, she represented it.  That little show that she had, 'Julia,' my sisters and brothers still make fun of me to this day.  (laughter)  I was just so in love with that little TV show and that little Corey [Baker, played by Marc Copage] kid, and just her whole manner of just being a dignified woman with the smarts that could just slay anybody, you know.  That, for me, Julia, Diahann Carroll, oh, my God, that was it.  And then I learned she could sing, she sang.  I mean she was an actress, you know.  Well, who knew?
Speaker 2: What about 'Star Trek'?  Do you remember 'Star Trek'?
Speaker 1: Um, 'Star Trek' was a little, I'm not a "techie trekkie."
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Star Trek,' for me, was--
Speaker 2: I know, I'm mentioning it because of [HistoryMaker] Nichelle Nichols.
Speaker 1: Nichelle Nichols, of course.  But [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt and Catwoman took the cake for me.
Speaker 2: And 'Batman,' right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was, that was kind of a medley.  I didn't really get, with all due respect, I guess I wasn't caught up--I was more into the 'Jetsons,' (scatting) You know, I dug that.  And learning--not even knowing that the Flintstones was based on rhythm changes.  Are you kidding me, rhythm changes?  And those are the things that were intriguing to me, all the music from the cartoons.  You know, having younger sisters and brothers, it's cartoons, you know, cartoon crazy on the weekends, you know.  So, I think my little interest was more in the theme music--those soundtracks.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 193132
Speaker 1: So, in high school [at Miami Killian Senior High School, Miami, Florida] were you able to, were you in a chorus in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was in the chorus, and I was in the alto section and the soprano section.  So, I am playing a little piano still for the little doo wop groups, all the little sound-alike groups, the Temptations and all those sound-alike groups.  You know, the kids would make their own groups and pantomime to the real deal.
Speaker 1: So, would you have to, like, conceal the fact that you were playing the piano for these groups?
Speaker 2: I was scared to do it, and then--but it was kind of--my mother [Oveida Mathews Lundy-Francis] again.  My mother found it very interesting that someone would want me to play piano for them.  So, there was no tension like, "Oh, can I do this?"  And my father [Freddie Lundy] didn't know, okay.  Dad didn't know.  Um, playing the piano--and the soprano on my left asked me to play piano for her for a talent show that year, tenth grade.  So, as a result of the song she did, I harmonized with her while playing the piano.  So, we became this little duo, and we started, you know, becoming a popular little duo around school.  And so much so that we got a little record, a chance to make a record in our junior year.  I think the song was called, 'The Price of Silence,' and the flip side was 'Boy, I'm the Girl for You.'  (laughter)  That makes me laugh every time.  And so, we made a little record, and now we've got little jobs.  I mean, my first paying job, my first professional gig was singing for the high school proms with my partner, Stephanie Patterson. [ph.]  And we were called Steph and Trett [ph.], and years later I realized that sounds so much like Stepin Fetchit.  It still makes me laugh.  (laughter)  So, Steph and Trett, you know, we were like the little duo.  We were cutesy, and we just knew we were going to be coming to school in limousines.  We just knew who we had to be.  So, that's kind of where I started to break out of the choral thing and do more solo work.  So, now I'm playing piano for Stephanie, and she wants to do this song by Diana Ross.  She wants to do that song, and wants to do that song.  But I'm realizing that I'm doing all the work.  I've got to learn these changes and figure out--I don't know this stuff, like C, E, G, and there's a G chord here.  So, I can remember getting ready for one of those prom gigs, and my mother was zipping me up and I'm--you know, she made all of my clothes.  So, it's like she's zipping me up in some fabulous garment that she had made.  And I'm saying "Oh, I don't really feel like doing this tonight.  I don't feel like playing piano and doing this anymore."  I lost interest, because I felt like I was doing all the work and somebody else was getting all the glory, you know.  And my mother said, "Well, sweetheart, you don't really need her.  You just, just do your--," you know, something like that she said to me, kind of sweet and whispery.  And boy, that was like a tidal wave of, like a release of tension just left my body.  And I was like, "Really, you mean I can do this?  You think I could, Mom, you really think I could?"  "Sure, you can."
Story_ID: 193133
Speaker 1: So, I started thinking about that very seriously.
Speaker 2: This is in the early seventies, right?  This is like seventy--
Speaker 1: This is 1971.
Speaker 2: Seventy-One [1971].
Speaker 1: Seventy-One [1971].
Speaker 2: Now, this is more like Roberta Flack--
Speaker 1: Robert Flack.  I've got my little afro wig, I started to go to school with my afro wig.  I was like Roberta Flack and [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis all in one, you know.  (laughter)
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, Roberta Flack plays piano and she sings, too.
Speaker 1: Plays, and she was--you know, and what was cool about Roberta was that, you know, we came out of the gospel--you know, Aretha Franklin was everything to everybody.  So, Aretha is bringing that--and she and Ray Charles are now introducing this whole soul music thing to the sector.  And it's like people are making millions of dollars, you know, over the--you know, everybody's making a ton of money with Aretha Franklin and Ray Charles.  So, I--
Speaker 2: What you're suggesting here, just to pin that down a little bit, is that they--it's always said that they take gospel music and re, you know, instead of saying "Jesus" they say is a "baby," and you've got popular culture music now.  I mean they're taking the same melodies and--
Speaker 1: The melodies--
Speaker 2: --the music and--
Speaker 1: --but don't forget about that rhythm.
Speaker 2: --selling it to the--and the rhythm, too, to the public--
Speaker 1: To the public.
Speaker 2: --with another face on it.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But it's the same, it's basically--
Speaker 1: And it's so interesting to me that all this occurring.  If you look at our American history, this is all occurring during, inside, and around the Civil Rights Movement.  So, there was a huge statement floating up in black culture that couldn't be ignored.  And now you've got television reporting it.  So, there were a lot of things going on.  So, I think that really helped the music.  You know, I really think that helped the music, the television--
Speaker 2: This is, this is the music that you're familiar with.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: And yet it's now out for the public, you know, it's a popular culture--
Speaker 1: It's televised--
Speaker 2: It's secular--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: It's secular music.
Speaker 1: Secular music is now--and the thing which we are now--it's like we gave the world a gift, and now everybody's like receiving it openly.  And so many people who were listening to it in the closet are now free to just turn on the radio in their house and just, you know, have a ball, and drive down the street with their music blasting now, you know.  While it just freed up a lot of things, I think that actually when you listen to the way the famous British artists talk about what the music represented for them, it's a similar thing.  So, yeah, that time was just amazing.  And I just sang Aretha Franklin--I was Aretha Franklin's little--you know, if I could be Tinker Bell, if I could be a fly wherever she was, I was.  I used to take a reel to reel tape player and put Aretha Franklin on track one, okay.  I'd put Aretha Franklin on track one, open up the second track and sing along with her, just to get her phrasing down.  And I was astonished at how I was always ahead of her.  No matter what I did, or how close I was, I was always--I could never just line up with her.   It taught me a huge lesson, a huge lesson about phrasing and a person's sense of rhythm--where they are in the tempo, the way you sing over a bar line, all that stuff.  But you know, later, you know, the jazz vocalists--I didn't even know about jazz singers still.  I still didn't know, not a clue.  So, Aretha Franklin was it; that was my model.  But I realized that I didn't have those chops.  And her vocal register was about an octave higher than mine.  Where her voice actually sat naturally was about an octave higher than mine.  So, I just couldn't hang, I couldn't hang.  So, maybe it's a good thing I couldn't, you know, because then I would just be cloning her for the rest of my life.  But that influence is just so, it's indelibly a part of my, how I sing and what I hear.
Speaker 2: Wasn't there an alto at that time that--
Speaker 1: Yes, I would say the alto, the mezzo, was Roberta Flack and [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick, okay.  So, I could sing Dionne Warwick, but you know I love the way Aretha would take a tune, you know.  Dionne would come out with, (singing) "I say a little prayer for you," you know.  "Forever and ever," you know.  And Aretha would come by (singing) "Say a little..." just the way she would re-interpret it.  (laughter)  But it was kind of great to get both people's, you know, both vocal ovations of the same tune.  And then Roberta came along, and was just so sweet, and so the way her--she reminded me a lot of Carmen McRae, if think about it.  If you listen to Carmen McRae and listen to Roberta Flack, there's a huge-- something very inter-connected about the way they phrase, and the way they handle the melodies.  So, but I didn't know Carmen, I didn't know who she was.
Speaker 2: It seems to me, now correct me if I'm wrong, but it seems to me like Roberta Flack, and later on Anita Baker, are people who didn't see themselves as singers.  And was it because they were altos, you think, that they didn't see themselves as singers in the beginning?  They had to be coached to come out and actually sing.
Speaker 1: Nina Simone, Roberta Flack, and Shirley Horn, they were all about being classical pianists.  That's what they really aspired to, was to play classical piano.  And I know that Nina Simone was threatened.  In other words, she had a gig in Harlem [New York City, New York] where she was just, you know, playing piano.  And the guy threatened that if she wanted to keep her gig, she was going to have to sing, so that's why she started singing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a similar story with Roberta Flack.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, I don't know exactly--I've read the biographies of everything that's Ella [Fitzgerald], everything that's Billie [Holiday], everything that's Sarah Vaughan; I've read everything that's Carmen McRae, but I don't know about Robert Flack and what was going on.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the case.  She didn't see herself as a singer, but she was, you know, pushed to go out, I mean to actually sing.
Speaker 1: So, you know, it's interesting how--
Speaker 2: She's an alto--
Speaker 1: Oh, the alto thing.
Speaker 2: Anita Baker didn't sing either.
Speaker 1: Well, when you play piano, you can find your key.  You can find where that thing is comfortable for you.  You know, that's not such a daunting thing, when you know the keyboard.  Boy, am I glad I know how to play piano, let me tell you.  Because I mean when I just think about all the thousands of dollars I've saved just coming up with an arrangement because I know piano.  People don't realize that, you know, how when you don't have those skills you rely so much on others, and that can be very expensive.  It could also be wonderful, because you get these people with these skills that make you sound great all the time, you know.
Story_ID: 193134
Speaker 1: --So, well, so in high school [at Miami Killian Senior High School, Miami, Florida], you know, how are your grades in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, I still have my transcripts somewhere, and I think I did pretty good.  As a matter of fact, I graduated in the top ten percentile.  And I--
Speaker 1: You were singing on gigs on the weekend, and you were playing the piano. (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, you know, in high school I didn't, I just had those summer gigs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I stopped playing piano, I stopped playing piano for myself.  In my junior year, a gentleman came into the choral program as an accompanist for the choir, David Roitstein.  David--now it's the end, it's kind of like the end of the school year, and now the talent show thing is coming up.  So, David had been accompanying some of us in our little classical pieces, but there was something different about the way he played when he wasn't reading the paper.  So, I asked David if he would play for me, because there was a song on Roberta Flack's first record, 'First Take.'  There was a song on that that I absolutely embodied as a teenage singer, and it was called, 'Trying Times,' written by Donny Hathaway.  And the tune was cool to me, because it was my little political statement in my high school, and what was happening in America with the whole Civil Rights Movement.  And with my little song was about what the world is talking about, you know, [paraphrasing] "We've got confusion, mother against daughter, father against son, the whole thing.  Folks wouldn't have to suffer if there was more love for your brother.  But these are trying times."  That was the tune.  Ron Carter on bass, [humming a tune] that's the way it went, and Roberta Flack accompanying herself, a great song.  So, that was my tune.  I asked David to play it for me.  So, he plays it, and he's like laying the changes.  I'm like "David, wait a minute, that's not--what are you playing?"  "Oh, that's an A minor."  "What do you mean, A minor?"  What do you mean A minor?"  Because I'm so used to playing just C, and I'd have an A in the bass, but I had no idea I was playing in A minor.  So, he said, "Oh, no, I'm playing, this is--I'm just voicing the chord differently.  Let me show you what I'm saying."  When David showed me those voicings, it opened up my entire world.  "What is this?"  So, he said, "Well, this is just a jazz voicing.  It's, you know what I'm talking about right Carmen, jazz."  "What do you mean, jazz?"  "Oh, really?"  So after school we get in his van, he pops in a cassette, and it's Cannonball Adderley.  He pops in another cassette, it's [HistoryMaker] Herbie Hancock, 'Fat Albert Rotunda,' which Bill Cosby is on that record.
Speaker 1: Fat Albert?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that Fat Albert, you know, Rotunda.  Bill Cosby is saying, "Hikky burr, hikky burr," or something like that is on that record [sic, HM Quincy Jones and Bill Cosby perform "Hikky Burr"].  So, actually, no, 'Fat Albert Rotunda' is, [humming tune], it's a cute little simple tune.  But it was the first time I had heard Herbie Hancock, the first time I'd ever heard Cannonball, first time I ever heard Miles Davis' "Waltz for Debby," Bill Evans.  And this was all through this kid--
Speaker 1: This was like in '71 [1971]?
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, '71 [1971].  So now, I'm just intrigued by what this guy has turned me on to. And wow, wow, wow, wow.
Speaker 1: So now I'm on the talent show and I'm doing--with my Afro wig--and I'm like (singing), "Trying times," and I'm a big-time Roberta Flack, you know. (laughter)  But it was, that response from that audience, was what was the key.  That was all the affirmation I needed, was that when David played for me and I sang, 'Trying Times' for my high school peers and that audience, and that was it.
Story_ID: 193135
Speaker 1: So, now my choral director, Ann Duncan [ph.], I want to thank you Ann Duncan for giving me life.  Ann Duncan came up to me at the end of the school year, "So, Carmen, where are you going to college?  Have you applied to any of those schools around?"  "No. Well, what do you mean?  I don't know, college--nobody's ever--nobody's said anything to me about college."  So, apparently she was appalled that I was clueless--no plans, no nothing; it wasn't discussed.  "So, we need to talk about, we need to sit down and have you look at some schools."  You know, that didn't go on in my family.  So, now I'm graduating from school with no plans for college.  And Ann Duncan, I don't know how or what she did, but the next thing I knew I was at the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida] as a freshman.  So, I had been accepted to the University of Miami.  I guess she made me apply, but it wasn't like an audition, and it wasn't like I had to go to the University of Miami and audition.  The next thing I know, I'm accepted at the University of Miami.  How am I going to pay for this?  I don't know, but check this out.  My father [Freddie Lundy] was working, as I told you, at the Physical Plant, so that allowed me to have a bit of a tuition remission, and the rest I had to come up with.  So, that's when my mother [Oveida Mathews Lundy-Francis], you know, started scrambling.  She went to Mr. Hammond [ph.], you know, the guy that I told you about, you know, and the next thing you know I am in school; I'm a freshman in college, wow!  And I am an opera major, yes, wow!  (laughter)
Story_ID: 193136
Speaker 1: So the curriculum was, I had three choices.  I could be music education, I could do composition, and I could do performance.  So, I chose performance major, and this is probably because it seems like of the three, it seemed like the--I knew I didn't want to be a teacher, I wanted to be Barbara McNair.  (laughter)  I wanted to be on the stage.  So, I entered the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida] my freshman year, '72 [1972], '73 [1973], as an Opera major, or whatever you want to call it, a classical voice major.  And I was handed a voice teacher, and this is something you must do once a week, whether you like it or not.  You're going into this studio, and you're going to sing scales for an hour, and we don't care if you like it or not, you know.  And then I joined The Chamber Singers.  The Chamber Singers you had to audition for, you had to be a really good side reader, and you had to--sort of like sixteen voices--four altos, four sopranos, four tenors, and four basses.  And that was quite a little feather in my cap.  It was quite a little ensemble, a little gig to have.  So, I did that.  And there was an elective, JV 101, Jazz Vocal 101.  I didn't even know what that was.  So, David [Roitstein], the same kid who turned me on to Cannonball Adderley, he's at the University of Miami in the jazz department.  So, wait a minute, how did you get here, and how did I get here?  How is that we're both at the University of Miami at the same time?  How is that?  So, we just continued the friendship, of course, we just continued.
Story_ID: 193137
Speaker 1: So, I think in that--actually, something I'm reminded of--right in that summer, the summer before we both started, David [Roitstein] put a little singing group together, like, well, he played piano and I played percussion.  And there were like six or seven voices, and we just sang, (singing) "Love the One You're With," and stuff like that, you know.  And we went around to all the hospitals, wherever they would allow us, to just sing for folks, you know, we did that.  And then David got me a little singing gig with the Youth Jazz Band, and it was a song called, 'Just Be Ourselves Without Fear,' which was, which became the Brecker Brothers.  But prior to that, they started a band called Dreams.  And Dreams was a wonderful group with horns, a little hipper than Blood, Sweat and Tears, a little more modern--stretching.  And you know, Blood, Sweat and Tears was all the rage then also.  So, I had to do the Blood, Sweat and Tears version of, 'God Bless the Child,' so that's one of the first tunes I ever learned that had to do with jazz standards.  But I didn't know it was a jazz standard, because I'm singing like David Michael Thomas [ph.].  Um, so there's that first year.  So, now, I'm in the classical department.  I'm learning my Italian art songs, and I'm doing my performances every Friday that was required.  You had to sing for the staff and for the whole faculty, and the whole school.  You know, once a week you did that on Fridays.  So, so, now I'm doing my little arias, Italian arias, da, da, da, there you go.  So, David is upstairs jamming, and I'm downstairs being like this and I'm like (laughter).  So, he got an idea to put a band together.  David got an idea to take some of his classmates and put a band together, and he asked me to sing with the band.  And that's how it started, that's how it really started for me.
Story_ID: 193138
Speaker 1: So, are you living on campus during this period?
Speaker 2: No, I'm still living at my mother [Oveida Mathews Lundy-Francis]'s house.
Speaker 1: I was wondering, you know.
Speaker 2: So, I'm getting up and making it to class every day, and I'm going all the way back home.  So I didn't get a dorm room until my second year of college.
Speaker 1: Well, did that, did your activities in school create any conflict at home, in terms of the religion and the strictness, and all that?
Speaker 2: It didn't matter.  I was so hell-bent on this thing that was happening to me that I just couldn't--I think my mother expected me--I never asked her, but I think my mom expected me to maybe follow her, you know, and kind of work in the boutique and get into the entrepreneurial thing and start a business, or maybe run the business for her.  But I, I just, I was too determined to make this thing happen.  And, you know, I think--the university [University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida] campus life--you know, and I'm a young woman discovering a lot about myself, and this was something that I wouldn't have dreamed would happen.  So, here I am doing this, and people are asking me to sing.  So, I'm singing all these songs, and people are writing--I'm singing all my classmates' tunes, you know, which was fun, so I get to do that.  I get to--there's this JV 101 thing where you harmonize, kind of like The Manhattan Transfer, and Lambert, Hendricks and Ross and all the vocal leads, so I'm doing that.  And I'm still over here doing my Italian arias, and I'm still in my vocal class once a week doing scales.  (laughter)  You know, so it was great, it was great.  And then David [Roitstein] got that gig, my first gig, my first performance gig in Miami with a band.  It was at the Eden Rock Hotel in 1974, and I sang in that Eden Rock Hotel for a year every night, six nights a week, come rain or shine, in the Mona Lisa Room.  And we auditioned for that gig on Miami Beach [Florida].  So now, I've got to go to Miami Beach every night from 9 to 1, okay, the gig was from 9 [PM] to 1 [AM].  I did three sets, and then I had that 8:30 theory class.  And that's what I did.  So, we just did the cover tunes that--it was electric bass, drums, Fender Rhodes piano.  I played percussion and sang.  Dell Baroni [ph.] was on electric bass, so--
Speaker 1: By percussion, you mean like tambourines?
Speaker 2: Like wood blocks.
Speaker 1: Wood blocks, okay.
Speaker 2: Shakers, all that stuff.  You know, it was, you know, adorable.  And then we added a percussionist, Steve Goldstein [ph.] was our percussionist.  And Paula Rosa [ph.] was guitar.  So we had a group, and we called it--the president of the hotel where they hired us, he had me come into his room, to his office, and he had a question for me.  "Would you consider changing your name to Mona?" he wanted to know.  (laughter)  Because you know, we're in the Mona Lisa Room.  "Would you consider changing your name to Mona?"  And I thought, "Mona Lundy." (laughter)  Something doesn't--Mona Lundy, no.  Then I thought, oh, no.  I was honest, right?  But I thought, oh, no, what if I've lost the gig for everybody?  You know, I was really worried that I had blown the gig.  So, anyway, we got this gig, and it's like, that's when I first discovered Tony Mitchell's music.  But that was a great time, to work like that on Miami Beach.
Speaker 1: Now, were you known as Carmen at that time?
Speaker 2: I was always Carmen Lundy, that's it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That was it.  But we started a group later called Shadow, which also is funny.  You know, Shadow, I'm the shadow in the band.  Everybody else is not white--not black, I should say.  So, yeah, so those were the early years.  So, I began my career in 1972 singing at the Eden Rock Hotel.
Speaker 1: Is it '72 [1972] or... you said '74 [1974].
Speaker 2: Well, it was the summer of--wait, okay.  Yeah, '74 [1974], because I graduated from high school in '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But it was the end of my sophomore year of college, going--wait, let me get it right.  It was the end of my freshman year going into my sophomore year of college, was when I started singing at--and I remember we wrote a blues called, 'The Gas Line Blues.'  And the reason we wrote that was because when the gas, the first real gas crisis hit the United States, that was a big deal.  It was the first time--and then the Toyota [Motor Corporation]--I think Toyota made a big splash then, and all those small little compact cars became all the rage for us after all the gas-guzzlers.  And I remember that clearly, because we wrote a blues about that, and we sang every night at the gig.  So, that was the Mona Lisa Room in the Eden Rock Hotel.  And in the big room, Julie Budd; I met the Smothers Brothers; all those acts that would come to Miami Beach.  So, that's the way I got, that's the way things happened for me, and I just never stopped, never stopped to this day.
Story_ID: 193139
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, is there anything significant about graduation from college, I mean from the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida]?
Speaker 2: No.  The reason why there was--okay, let me just say this before you ask.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I became a jazz major in the beginning of my sophomore year at the university.  They allowed me to change my major to jazz, despite there being a curriculum for the vocal in jazz.  So, I was the first vocalist to become a jazz major at the University of Miami.  And as a result, I was thrown into the courses alongside my musician counterparts.  So, that's where the composition started, because I had a composition class.  That's where the arranging started, because I had, it was a required course.  Improvisation, that was actually a course.
Story_ID: 193140
Speaker 1: So, that's what happened to me, and that's when I became--so, graduating from the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida], no, it was not eventful.  As a matter of fact, if I pull out my yearbook you'll see a picture of me on stage singing; that's the picture in my yearbook.  And the reason for that is all of my classmates were moving to New York [City, New York].  I didn't know a thing about New York.  I had, with all my studies, I never read anything about this guy--I think it was a book called 'Bird Lives' [sic, 'Bird Lives!: The High Life and Hard Times of Charlie (Yardbird) Parker']  It might have been the first thing I read, it was about Charlie Parker, 'Bird Lives.'  That's the first time I'd even heard of New York.  Yes, as a child, you know, there's an Empire State Building in this place called New York.  But other than that, clueless.  So, all of my classmates were now graduating.  "Where are you headed?"  "Well, Mama's in New York.  So and so is there.  So and so is there, too, and they live right down the street from each other," you know, that kind of thing.  So I said, well, I've got to do that, too.  So, now I'm in my fourth year, I'm a senior, and I'm movin' to New York, that's it.  So I put the word out that I'm looking for an apartment.  And I had this gig; I was singing at the Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida] every night for maybe the last several years now.  And so, I put the word out that I was moving to New York, too.  And it was kind of like a cool thing to say, that you're moving to New York.  I had not a clue.  So, I found an apartment prior to moving to New York City.  Actually, I went to New York to visit some friends for a weekend prior to moving to New York.  When I went, a friend of mine from Switzerland met me in New York, and we went to the Village Vanguard.  I brought my big band charts with me, and I sat in with Thad and Mel [Thad Jones and Mel Lewis] at the Vanguard that night.  That's the only time I ever did anything with Thad and Mel.  Because people think I had, you know, worked with him.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: And that's not the case.  I actually--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's in our outline.
Speaker 1: I sat in with them, it was unbelievable.  I had these charts, you know, the Village Vanguard, backstage is actually a kitchen.  And I can remember going in there and introducing myself to Mel, and telling him that I was just visiting, but I had my charts, and "Can I sit in with you?"  And they thought that was the most, I don't know, brazen little act, you know.  "This young lady just asked me if she could sit in, and she's got her charts."  So, do you know, they read those charts, 'I Remember April,' pieces of (singing) "Little Boy Lost" by Michele Legrand.  They read, they sight-read that stuff.  So, that was it.  So I went back to Miami [Florida], and this is happening.  And I spent the next year just planning to move.
Story_ID: 193141
Speaker 1: So, I left Miami [Florida] without graduating, check that out.  So now I'm in New York [City, New York]--
Speaker 2: What year is this?
Speaker 1: This is like 1978.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I so go in from, I guess I start in '72 [1972], '73 [1973].  Now--and I took a semester off, because I got a gig in Venezuela that fell through.  So, I lost a semester and had to make up.  And the whole band, we all took off a semester, horrible, and we lost--and the gig fell through.  But I got back in the following semester, so that pushed me back, you know, a year, like a half year.  So, at the end of that year, May 23rd, 1978, I'm on a flight to New York.
Speaker 2: Before you leave Miami, like, what was going on in the Miami music scene when you left?
Speaker 1: Okay, oh, great--
Speaker 2: Because I think it was like the seventies when Gloria Estefan and all these--
Speaker 1: No, that came later.
Speaker 2: Later, in--
Speaker 1: Estefan came later.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I was introduced to the whole Latin scene.  I used to, I used to share the bill with Jaco--because Jaco Pastorius played bass with Ira Sullivan.  Ira Sullivan, the flutist and flu hornist, okay, had great bands.  Jaco and Bobby Economou were kind of like drum--they were like partners, they always played together.  So, we used to play opposite them at the Lion's Share, which was a gig in Fort Lauderdale [Florida].  So, that Miami scene--Ira Sullivan was a part of the Unitarian Church, so there was always jazz and free concerts at the Unitarian Church.  So, I started with Ira as often as he would allow me.  There was another guy named Joey-Joe--Joe Delia.  Joe Delia [ph.] was an alto saxophonist.  There was another guy, Jet Nero.  So, I used to sing with--my brother [Curtis Lundy] played with Joe... what did I say?  Joe--
Speaker 2: Joe Delia, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, crazy guy, an alto saxophone player.  And he, he was, he had kind of a Caribbean style, but he could really blow, he was a great player.  Didn't have the discipline (laughter) of say, Jet Nero.  But I got a gig at the Gold Dust Lounge, singing with Jet Nero and Maji [ph.].  Maji used to play with Ray Charles.  I used to have that little giglet, you know, that kept me cool in Miami.  And then, oh, there was a famous club called the Checkmate Lounge, and that's where I first heard John Clayton playing with Monty Alexander, with Jeff Hamilton.  He and Jeff Hamilton were playing together back in the seventies together with Monty Alexander.  Now, Phyllis Hyman came to town.  When Phyllis Hyman started her career in Miami, her husband was from Jamaica, Larry Alexander, and he became her manager.  She started her career right there in Miami at the Coconut Grove and in the Checkmate Lounge in South Miami.  And her trio consisted of Frank Gravis on electric bass, Chuck Silverman on drums, and Hiram Bullock on guitar.  And that very same trio, she took to New York and opened and began her--and went from New York--this is before me, now.  But I would play--Phyllis would play a club, and I would follow Phyllis in that room.  Or I would start to play a club, and Phyllis would come behind me.  But the most popular of these clubs in Miami was called the Checkmate Lounge.  Now, there was another club in Fort Lauderdale called Bachelors II--Bachelors III or Bachelors III.  And that club had all the big band guys and all the--you know, it was kind of like one of those gigs where Frank Sinatra would come to town the union would hire all the best cats in New York to play the gig, that kind of a deal.  So, that was farther, that was more north, closer to Fort Lauderdale, that area--Hollywood, Dania, that whole area.  So, that was the Miami jazz scene that I participated in.  Um, there were certain gigs in the black community.  Bacchus II was a club--Bacchus, like, I guess the Greek god.  It was a club called Bacchus II that had a huge band.  I think that's when I introduced trumpet and saxophone to my ensemble.  But I liked that, you know, having a guitar, a trumpet, and saxophone.  I had a band with Steve Williams on drums.  Steve Williams was also one of my classmates who would ultimately, his claim to fame was with the great Shirley Horn.  But when we started, Steve was a huge rock and roll drummer then.  So, you got all that Miami jazz scene happening, and everybody played.  You see, we went to school during the day, and we played at night.
Story_ID: 193142
Speaker 1: All right.  So, you're in--oh, one last person from Miami [Florida] you wanted to talk about.
Speaker 2: Billy Marcus was a pianist, and Billy played at the Airport Lounge.  So, that's significant, because the Airport Lounge near the airport, right, a traveler's lounge.  I remember Dizzy Gillespie playing there, I remember Curtis Fuller coming through, you know.  So, it was a chance, I think it was the first time I heard Ella Fitzgerald was in Miami at the Miami Convention Center.  And I actually got to go backstage and meet her, and introduce myself to her, and all this.  This was so new to me, the jazz was so new to me.  The bass player in my group, we were hanging out in between classes, and he had a cassette player.  He said, "Carmen, check this out."  It was (scatting) I was like, "Oh, no, what is this?"  It was Ella Fitzgerald scatting, 'How High the Moon.'  And when I heard that scat by Ella Fitzgerald, that went from Barbara McNair to, "That's what I'm going to do."  So, forget the whole R and B; cool Roberta Flack; pop; [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick.  You know, you can forget all of that, you know.  It was, for me it was Ella Fitzgerald and Stevie Wonder, and that was it.  And I just stayed like that for as long as I could.  I just, like, hovered there.
Story_ID: 193143
Speaker 1: Now, what was the, well, I hate to--there's no way to say it without sounding stupid, but what was the attraction to Stevie Wonder?  (Laughter)  I mean, I guess I mean in terms of when you compare him, say, to Ella Fitzgerald.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, I think he spoke of, I think he spoke, he was like the voice of our generation.  He sang things that we were living.  He sang about things that we were living.  So, he was just the person who put everything in real time for us.  That's it.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite Stevie Wonder song?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, oh God, yeah.
Speaker 1: Or some of your favorites?
Speaker 2: Some of my favorites, 'Knocks Me Off My Feet,' 'They Won't Go When I Go,' 'Golden Lady,' 'All, I Do,' all the ones that are hidden in the records, you know, the other--not the ones that have become the iconic pop hits, but all that other stuff he wrote.  'Send One Your Love,' all those other things where you could see how we were just, you could see where he was being influenced by the jazz of Chick Corea.  You know, you could see where he was picking up on what was going on with [HistoryMaker] Herbie [Hancock], and 'Chameleon,' and 'Bed Time Story [sic, Tell Me a Bedtime Story,'] and 'Maiden Voyage.'  You could kind of hear him drawing from those things as well in his music.  And then he would have Dizzy on a track or something, like he would write a tune about Duke Ellington.  So, it was kind of like a parallel there for me with Stevie.  But it was all about the repertoire, otherwise.  It was all about everything Ella Fitzgerald sang, whoever the composers were, all the improvisation--I used to have, I was required to transcribe her solos, literally.  When I say transcribe, I mean not just learning to sing it, I mean to actually write it down on paper, note for note.  That's really transcribing, you know.  Um, but I just lived, and breathed, and absorbed everything that that one particular artist did for years.
Story_ID: 193144
Speaker 1: Now, one other thing before we leave Miami [Florida] that I think is important.  During this time of my, you know, four or five--four and a half years at the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida], I did graduate, by the way.  I did graduate from the University of Miami in 1980, technically.  Um, but the other thing was, there was a pianist, David Roitstein's piano teacher.  His name was Vince Lawrence, Vince Lawrence Maggio.  Now, Vince was interesting.  He had played piano for a while and accompanied Lena Horne for a while, had a little experience with that.  But he took an interest when I changed, when I was allowed to become this jazz major, vocal major.  This jazz piano teacher became aware of this, and got permission to create a class for a jazz singer.  And what this class involved was a tune of any standard.  He would take the tune and write every lyric on the chalkboard.  He would write out the entire tune, and then he would go and he would make us read each line.  And then he would say to us, "Underline the nouns in this line.  Underline the verbs in this.  Okay, now, I'm going to play this song for you, and the version's going to be an incredible rendition of, say, you know, 'I Love You Porgy,' or something by either Nina Simone or Ella [Fitzgerald] or whoever, right."  And he'd play it, and you'd see the lyric, and then you'd see, you'd understand how that artist was interpreting, and the true art of interpretation.  And then he'd play some great standard that was done by maybe [Frank] Sinatra.  And then he would sit and he would voice that thing, and he would show you.  Then you'd see that lyric come off that board, and then you would hear that lyric rendered, and then you would get a sense of understanding what your responsibility was.  If you were going to call yourself--or be anything like what these people are, you had better know this is what this is, and you'd better get inside this music.  And that's what Vince Lawrence did for me that no voice teacher ever did.  And this is a guy who's a pianist, okay.  No voice teacher ever gave me that.  This guy was a stomp-down accompanist, and he was the jazz piano teacher.  But he was the one that said, "Listen to this.  Now, you do it.  I just showed you them, and I showed you what you need to be thinking about.  Now, it's your turn."
Speaker 2: I've often wondered how, like, Frank Sinatra was so talented at phrasing, or Nat King Cole, or--
Speaker 1: Billie Holiday--
Speaker 2: Billie Holiday.  I mean--
Speaker 1: No, Frank Sinatra is thanking Billie Holiday, there you go.
Story_ID: 193145
Speaker 1: Billie Holiday is the--look, we wouldn't be having this conversation if it wasn't for Billie Holiday, okay.  It's all about that lady.  For as much as I fell in love with Ella Fitzgerald because her chops were ridiculous--you know, and I'm in the classroom going (singing), you know, so anybody that's going to throw that at me--whoa, okay.  But it was when Billie Holiday--when I learned who that lady was--that pretty much puts you to bed right there.  That's all there is to it, okay.  So, when you listen to Billie Holiday, and you listen to early Billie Holiday--you listen to not so early and you listen to that transition that happened here vocally--that's one thing, just the instrument.  But everything else, that lady is our jazz singer.  That lady is the one that gives all of us a career.
Speaker 2: So, she sets the tone for jazz singing?
Speaker 1: Oh, hands down, with all due respect to all the other greats, the greats, I mean.  When I say the greats, I'm talking about a handful, including the men, you know.  And I can mention three or four, but the minute I start naming names, I eliminate someone, and then I've contradicted myself.  But you'd better believe that Johnny Hartman, Sarah Vaughan, Ella Fitzgerald, Carmen McRae, I would even put Joe Williams in there, okay.  Billie Holiday, the lady that-'What A Difference a Day Makes'--Dinah Washington--Billie Holiday is the reason why we all do it the way we do it is because of her.
Speaker 2: Well, thank you.  This is good, this is real good.
Story_ID: 193146
Speaker 1: So, so, New York City [New York], I guess, right, you're in New York City, and you sat in with Thad Jones and Mel Lewis.  But you know, everybody writes about that, you know, when you sat in.
Speaker 2: Just sat in.
Speaker 1: So, what did you, now we have in here that you worked with Ray Barretto?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, that's because of my whole little Latin thing, you know.  I started, I hired, Oscar Salas was my first drummer of Cuban descent.  And Oscar could play.  He could sit down and play a really funky groove, but then he could get up and go over to the congas, and really play in an authentic way.  He introduced me to a young woman who was, that was an odd thing to me, to see a lady playing conga drums, even back in Miami [Florida].  And Mayra Casales is still my percussionist when I record.  I think every record I've ever done where there's a percussionist, she's on it.  But Mayra, being Cuban--and Oscar introduced me to the whole world, kind of like what happened with Chano Pozo and Dizzy [Gillespie].  You know, I got all of that, I'm from Miami [Florida] [Florida].  So, I was getting it, you know, left and right.  One other kid, Diego Iborra, he was my drummer also, but he didn't really hip me to the stuff that I learned from them.  So, you got this whole Latin vibe in my music, too, that started in Miami.  So, your question was?  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: I just asked you about Ray Barretto.
Speaker 2: Ray Barretto.  Oh, so now I'm in Miami [Florida], I'm back.  You know, I left New York.  I mean I'm in New York, I left Miami.  And Mayra, I think, joined me about eight or nine months into my being in Miami, because everybody--we were all coming to New York; everybody from Miami was just moving to New York.  I'm going to name some names.  Bruce Hornsby, Pat Metheny, Danny Gauntley [ph.], Mark Egan, Steve Williams, Curtis Lundy, um, oh, my God, Teri DeSario.  It's ridiculous--Bobby Watson--it's crazy, we were all classmates.
Speaker 1: Did you collaborate much with your brother?
Speaker 2: Yes.  So now we're all in New York, and our collaboration began there.  Even though we played together, we started writing and actually putting, we were putting a band together in Miami.  In 1975, Curtis and I started a band called Nimbus, N-I-M-B-U-S.  We did that for a while, and Bobby Watson was in the band; Peter Harris on guitar, Frank Joseph [ph.] on keyboard.  Mark Glassman [ph.] sometimes on drums; sometimes Diego; sometimes Oscar, like that.  So, anyway, Ray Barretto--another pianist of mine named Howie Schneider had moved to New York also.  Howie got a gig with Ray Barretto, and wrote a couple of tunes for his next record.  This was in the seventies, okay, late seventies.  So, Howie's like, "Well, I have a friend who can sing this tune," you know, that kind of thing.  He just kept talking me up.  Mayra's now, you know, we're both like, "Ray Barretto?  Well, that's, she's a percussionist, so you've got to introduce her," that kind of thing.  We get this little job with Ray Barretto.  Ray Barretto had a record come out in the seventies, I forget the name of the album.  But he toured that album, and he hired, he hired Mayra and he hired me to do background vocals and percussion.  And that's how I got to work with the great Ray Barretto.  So, the one and only time I have ever sung in the City of Chicago [Illinois] proper was as a background vocalist with Ray Barretto in 1979.  That's the only time I've ever sung in Chicago proper in my entire four-decade career.
Speaker 1: I know he's, he collaborated a lot with Celia Cruz.  Did you ever meet Celia Cruz?
Speaker 2: Oh, I never met her, but I, you know, went to many of her concerts.  But I never had the honor of meeting the great Celia Cruz.  So, there's Ray Baretto.  And Ray Baretto was one of those cats that was a jazz, you know, he was the go-to guy for a lot of the jazz cats.  So that was the other thing, he had a simpatico with all the jazz musicians, and he could play, and he could play.
Story_ID: 193147
Speaker 1: So, I met the great Patato Valdes, Carlos Patato Valdes. Now, here's what's funny.  Mayra [Casales] and I used to go to this club, this first year I'm in New York [City, New York].  I lived on, I lived on the same street as Woody Allen and Edgar Winter.  I lived on 87th Street right down the street from Gracie Mansion.  This is where I, you know, got this great apartment, whatever, with a piano in it, (laughter) with a piano in it.  My first apartment had a piano in it.  So, now I'm living down the street from Woody Allen, Pat Nixon, and Edgar Winter.  And at the end of the block is the Gracie Mansion, the mayor's mansion.  That's my first apartment in New York, can you believe it?
Speaker 2: How did you manage that?
Speaker 1: 87th Street between York and East End, 511, to be exact on the second floor. (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: So, were you doing, I take it you were doing well in terms of income?
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: Or was this luck, or what was it?
Speaker 1: I was lucky.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was lucky.  I had put out the word in the club I was working in, the Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida], for that whole year leaning into my moving to New York.  So, one night I'm sitting out in the car on a break, and a lady sticks her face in the window and says, "Are you Carmen?  I understand you're looking for an apartment."  And that's what happened, it just happened.  Now there's downside to that story.  It turned out the guy that I was subletting from was a heroin addict who almost killed me, he pulled a gun on me.
Speaker 2: What is the story?  What happened?
Speaker 1: Well, remind of the--I've got to tell you about Patato, though, so don't let me forget about that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well, what happened was I'm in my apartment now for a year, and everything is cool.  I'm paying the rent on time, and everything's cool.  So, this one time, I get a surprise visit from the guy that I was subletting from, John Fitzgerald [ph.], who lived in Miami [Florida], or was down in Miami, that's how we met, he and his girlfriend.  Well, he just wanted to come in.  He just felt that he had, it was his apartment, and I'm here, let me in, okay.  And I thought, "Well, no, it doesn't go like that.  This is my apartment, and I'm renting it from you.  And you can't just come in here when you feel like it."  This is my--what I'm thinking.  So ring, ring, buzz, buzz, buzz, for hours.  He just would not accept that I was not letting him to his apartment.  So, he's, now he's saying--this is like after four hours of ringing the bell, "There's people after me.  There's somebody after me.  There's a black car down there and there's somebody coming after me.  You've got to let me in."  Okay, now this is like after four hours have passed.  Now, there's somebody after him.  So, I let him in.  What a mistake that was.  He comes in, his eyes are all glassed over.  And he says, he takes a gun and says, "You wouldn't let me in my apartment.  Who do you think you are?"  And he's got a gun pointed at me.  Mayra is in Miami, by the way.  She's not, you know, she's visiting her family or something.  So, this guy's like this with me, and I'm standing there going, "Have you spoken to your mother lately?  She really loves you."  (Laughter)  I didn't know what to say.  I just said, "You know, your mom really, I think maybe you're--have you spoken to your mom lately?  She really cares a lot about you."  And he looked at me like (laughter)--I'm like, this guy is pointing a gun at me.  So, then he goes, "Those people outside--" you know, and he takes the gun from his, "Those people outside are coming after me, and you wouldn't let me in."  So I was like, okay, I said, "Well, but, you've got to understand something," and I'm trying to explain to him in a very calm way, now that I see he's--the gun is not pointed at me anymore.  And I said, "Well, something just tells me to tell you that you really should talk to your mother."  So, now, the gun kind of comes down like this.  And he goes back over, and he's like this, and get the door.  He says, "I'm sorry, I--you've got to understand, you know, you should let me in my apartment, it's my apartment."  So, he's still a little crazed, right?  So, he's put the gun away, but he's not leaving, he's not leaving.  He stayed there for two weeks, detoxing, sleeping with a gun under his pillow.  And I had to sit through this man's detox in this fabulous apartment with the piano on 87th Street between York and East End, down the street from the mayor.  (Laughter)  And this is what happened to me my first year in New York.  So, now, he's detoxed, right?  His girlfriend shows up, and they're both drug addicts, you know, like--but he's detoxed.  And she comes and they--whatever they do has run its course, and they leave.  When they leave, I was like, "I'm out of here.  I've got to find a place to stay."  Mayra comes back finally, she knows this horrid thing has happened.  She goes back, and we just started looking for another place to live.  And that's, you know, and I actually moved to the West Side to Amsterdam and 84th Street, which was my next apartment.  And I took the piano.  But check this out.  He was so remorseful for what he had put me through, that he gave me the piano.
Story_ID: 193148
Speaker 1: So now, this piano that I moved into in New York City [New York], follows me to every place I lived, until I left and moved to Los Angeles [California], that same piano, okay.  So, that's the upside of the story, that's the upside.  (Laughter)
Speaker 2: It's a roller coaster story, yeah.
Speaker 1: But anyway, we used to live--so now this is before all of this happens.  We're like--Mayra [Casales] and I knew that the deal was that you've got to go out and hang out. So, two beautiful things happened to me while in my first year in New York, beautiful things.  One, I got a gig singing every Friday and Saturday night with some of the greatest jazz musicians alive at that time in New York City.  There was a club called Jazzmania on, the address was 14 23rd Street, Park Avenue South.  And it was a loft, and you had to take five unforgivably long, steep, flights to get up to this loft.  Mayra would schlep her conga drums up there, and I'd schlep myself with my charts, you know.  So, the reason why I was able to be this lucky was because my friend, Bill Morgenstern, who I didn't mention to you, who mentored me all those years in Miami--the art dealer, jazz fanatic, historian, who was also a ballet dancer and loved the theater, and was originally from Brooklyn, New York--Bill Morgenstern had a brother, Mike [ph.], who had a jazz club called Jazzmania.  And my best friend, Bill, called his brother and said, "My girl, Carmen, is coming to New York, and you've got to make sure she gets something.  Do something, do something with her."  He would say, "Do something for her," like that.  So I got this little gig singing every Friday, fifty dollars, it was a fifty dollar gig.  There's still fifty dollar gigs to this day in New York.  I just can't believe it, but there are.  Fifty dollars, I go in there.  And there would be, one night there would be somebody like Jaki Byard.  The next week it would be Walter Bishop, Jr.  The next week, it would be Michael Carvin.  The next week it would be Ronnie Mathews. The next week it would be Don Pullen.  The next week it would be Kenny Barron, you know.  And it was just on and on and on, these great musicians--Charlie Persip on drums.  What, what!  Stafford James on bass.  Rashid--I mean it was so much--it would be-- John Hicks on piano.  So, every weekend he would book different artists.  I still have the newspaper articles.  I still have the newspaper articles of all these people that I sang with.  I did it for an entire year, for fifty-two weeks I sang every weekend with some great jazz pianist.  Joe, what his name, Joe Carroll.  Joe Carroll was a wonderful singer.  A lot of people don't know about Joe Carroll, but he was a great--Eddie Jefferson, another great singer would come through.  I sang with Al Harewood, who recorded with Betty Carter.  Al Harewood was a left-handed drummer, so his right--you know, but his right cymbal would--most times as a singer, you're kind of hearing this, you know.  But his right cymbal was over here.  Interesting stuff.  But that was my gig for an entire year, which is how I met Walter Bishop, Jr., which is how I ended up recording on one of his recordings.  I sang this tune called, 'Valley Land,' and that's funny to me, even now, because Valley Land is about L.A., and I didn't know what L.A. was.  L.A., you might as well have been telling me, you might as well be saying to me East Cabibia [ph.], I did not know.  So, that was my first year.
Story_ID: 193149
Speaker 1: What we used to do during the week--we lived down the street from the El Corso.  El Corso was a ballroom, a Latin dance club with live music.  And Mayra [Casales] and I used to--ladies got in free before ten o'clock, or something like that.  It was such an incredible, excuse me, I was just thinking about how Patato [Carlos "Patato" Valdes]--(scatting) And the guys would come over and ask you to dance.  I didn't know how to do that Salsa stuff, but the guys would always dance--like they always knew who couldn't dance, maybe because I sat there like this, "Don't ask me, don't ask me."  Mayra, "Can I sit in?"  They would not let Mayra sit in, because she was a woman.  They would not let her sit in.
Speaker 2: Now, this is the great Patato?
Speaker 1: Patato Valdes.
Speaker 2: He was a trumpet player.
Speaker 1: Oh, my God, the music.  Oh, Tito Puente; everybody played there, everybody played there; always instrumental-Pacheco--it was ridiculous.  So, we would go, and Mayra would just like always--and Patato was the first one to let her sit in.  Patato let Mayra sit in.  So, Patato is so kind and so sweet, we couldn't get rid of him.  (Laughter)  He came to our apartment down the street, and he stayed for two weeks, cooking every day.  He would cook, he would start in the afternoon or something, and everything (unclear) I'm sorry--he would start and go into the kitchen and never come out.  And everything was delicious, this man could cook.  And I guess they called him Patato because he was just tall enough to not be a pygmy.  (Laughter)  You know, but he was one hell of a conguero, and oh, my God, and he made the conga sing.  And that's what Mayra Casales learned from him--
Speaker 2: He was the best.
Speaker 1: --how to make those congas sing.  It's not just that sound of slap, slap, slap, slap.  No, those are tones, beautiful tones.  So, I got a really heavy-duty--as a matter of fact, my name is Carmen, right?  They all thought I spoke Spanish.  I started getting record dates.  People would call me to come and sing at these record dates, and I'd get there and everybody spoke Spanish.  (Laughter)  So, you know, those early days in New York were just, we just, we were just lucky, we were just lucky.
Story_ID: 193150
Speaker 1: And there was a lot happening.  Walter Bishop, Jr., one of the guys that was on the gig at Jazzmania, inspired to put a band together with me and Mayra.  So we get Marcus Miller, bass player, and Kenny Washington.  Marcus was sixteen, and Kenny Washington was the same age, Kenny was sixteen.  So, it was Marcus, and sometimes it was Michael Carvin on drums, and Ricky Ford on tenor sax.  I think I'm forgetting somebody, but that was pretty much that new band.  So he gets the great idea, he--
Speaker 2: So, what's the name of this band?
Speaker 1: This is Walter Bishop, Jr.
Speaker 2: Walter Bishop, Jr.
Speaker 1: You know, the pianist who--he's, you know, people know this song, 'Star Eyes,' but his-(scatting)--that's a famous arrangement by Walter Bishop, Jr.  He also played piano with Charlie Parker for a little while.  Anyway, so Walter puts a band together, and we play the Tin--I actually have these pictures of us standing outside, a photo op, at the Tin Palace, which is on the bowery.  The bowery is like, it sounds like, it sounds like the bowels of New York.  I mean its way, way, south and way east.  But he also called up a guy named Joe Wells [Joseph T. Wells].  Joe Wells is the owner of Wells Chicken and Waffles, just about two or three doors down from the famous club Minton's.  And Wells is famous for their chicken and waffles, right.  Well, they had an upstairs room that had been empty for God knows how long.  But Walter talked Mr. Wells into opening up that room for us to play.  So, we went there in, all of us, and these young kids, with Walter Bishop, Jr., you know, all of us in tow with him.  And we would play like that, we would do those gigs with Walter.  So, my first couple--now I'm starting to get calls from all these people that I was working with.  You know, but they didn't even have a choice.  That was, that was so funny.  That was the funny thing about the Jazzmania gigs.  It's that they would get to the gig, which was kind of like one of those things just to keep your chops going, and just jam with some other great people.  It wasn't like a highbrow kind of situation.  But they were like, "What is she doing here?  Nobody told me there was a singer on this gig.  I don't think I want a singer on this gig.  What tune you wanna do?  What, what key?"  (Laughter)  So, it's like, okay, 'Mean to Me,' in C, okay.  "All right."  You know, like 'Someone in Love.' "What key do you want to do that in?"  Because you know, with a lot of these kind of trios, a lot of guys played the tune in one key, you know, either E flat, or whatever that standard key was.  So, I would call a tune and say something they knew, but I'd say it in another key.  So it was like--oh, okay, so now, now there's a little bit of a challenge.  Now, this sister's coming in here, now, I don't want to feel like--well, she's got me wondering how to play this.  Okay, let's go."  So, it was a wonderful kind of on the fly, spontaneous improvisation.  And that's all, that's what jazz is anyway, you know.
Story_ID: 193151
Speaker 1: Yeah, now you recorded an album [sic, record] with a group called 'Jasmine,' right, in '79 [1979]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And you were telling me about it off-camera, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Jasmine, J-A-S-M-I-N-E.  The group was Roger Rosenberg on baritone saxophone, Steve Berrios on drums, Lee Smith, the father of Chris McBride, on bass, and Bill O'Connell on piano.  And I was just thinking, I think I might have gotten that gig as a result of either Roger Rosenberg being on one of those gigs, or that Walter Bishop [Jr.] was on at Jazzmania, it was something like that.  Or it could have been, it could have been Steve the drummer, or it could have been O'Connell.  But I'm sure it wasn't Lee Smith, because I had met Lee Smith as a result of the session.  But the session was, I think it was, I think they had done the track and I just came in and sang on top of their pre-recorded track.  And at the time there was a radio station called WRVR.  WRVR was what I guess people would now call a smooth jazz radio station, but it wasn't.  It was just super hip, and not this, what we now--don't even like to talk about.  But anyway, so that was my first record, and the tune is called, 'Angelica.'
Story_ID: 193152
Speaker 1: Now, in '80 [1980], you form your own group, right?  So--
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh.
Speaker 1: So this is with--it's an interesting group.  I was wondering, you've got John Hicks and Onaje Gumbs, and they both play piano.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Two piano players?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it's just sometimes one was available and the other wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, they never were there together?
Speaker 2: No, no, we didn't do that.  It was just--
Speaker 1: I was wondering how that worked.
Speaker 2: No.  And I don't remember, God, I wish I could say that I can recall how I met Onaje.  It might have been at the same Jazzmania, because that was the hang, you know, one of the hangs.  And John Hicks, you know, my brother--John Hicks was playing with Betty Carter at that time.  But everybody freelanced, and when you're making, when you're making a living as a musician, a jazz musician in New York, you'll take a gig; a gig is a gig.  You know, you'll do it.  And I think it helped that I was a musician who wrote my own charts, had my own ideas, and knew what keys I wanted to play in.  You know, it kind of helped, because it made it a little easier for the accompaniment, you know, just, she knows, she's got this; okay, you got it.  You want to do what?  "Take this what and go over the bridge, and I got it," you know.  So, I think it made it easier.  I got a gig working in Connecticut every weekend.  And after that, the next year I worked in Connecticut.  I'd just get on the train and they'd pick me up at the train station.  And I did that gig for a year.  John Hicks, Danny Nixon, also one of the pianists on that gig.  Um, and it just kept growing.  This was, that was something--you know, when you say put my own band together, it's like when did I do that?  But I think what started happening was I needed to, I had to figure out a way to stay with this, to stick with this.  Sometimes I'd open up the back page of Show Business or Backstage and look for little auditions, auditions for singers, and I would try that thing.  And I realized that this is not--and that was more leaning toward theater, you know, the Broadway stage audition kind of thing.  And I said, no, I don't really want to, I just want to, I want to hit with the--I just want a gig, you know.  So, I remember taking, going to Mikell's 97th Street, wherever there was a potential.  There was a place called Syncopation [ph.].  Now, Syncopation was owned by a musician, and was downtown, kind of in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York City].  At the time, The Bottom Line was a very popular venue.  The Village Gate was a very popular venue.  There was even The Bitter End, which was a little more of a, kind of a folk kind of, not so much jazz, but it was on that same strip, Bleecker Street.  Every club that was a jazz club, I went in there and submitted a resume or talked to the owner myself, and just told them I was looking to do a gig.  If there was any opportunity whatever, whatever presented itself, I was there.  So, I would get a little chance to do a gig for a hundred bucks a night.  You know, I'd be walking down the street and see there was music in that club.  If it sounded like jazz to me, I thought maybe I can do a gig in there.  And that's what I did.  I just went around with my little whatever, tape, or whatever my resume said at the time, and I just booked a gig.  And that's what I did.
Story_ID: 193153
Speaker 1: So, Onaje Allan Gumbs, I liked Onaje because he had the chops and the knowledge of some of the more seasoned jazz pianists, but he also was my age, and he also was interested in playing a little bit of R and B, and a little bit of the backbeat stuff which I enjoyed, too, because I did come from, again, Ella Fitzgerald and Stevie Wonder.  And it was a way to keep a gig, playing some cover tunes, you know, playing cover tunes from another era and from my era.  And they're all cover tunes.  If they're not yours, you're covering somebody, you know.  So, Onaje was great that way.  Then I met this guy, Harry Whitaker.  When I met Harry, when I met Harry Whitaker, I began to really understand and get a better sense of what it was I wanted to do.  Harry also represented, Harry played with Roberta Flack for a long time, and he also played with Roy Ayers for a long time.  And he also had his own group and his own gigs, and made his own records.  And he was just such a free spirit, and no, he didn't have--nothing, there was no restriction as to what he would or would not play, you know.  So, if I didn't feel like doing all standards on a gig, or even if I did, he'd say, "Well, let's try something different with this."  And we'd just look for ways to reinvent, or how should I say, reinterpret is a better word--to reinterpret a lot of those standards, because that's where the gigs were.  And I actually believed, and it was also what I was taught--I believed that if you were a jazz singer that meant that you sang a specific repertoire.  That meant that you sang the music of Cole Porter, [Oscar] Hammerstein, [Michel] Legrand, Duke Ellington, [George] Gershwin--that's your--Kurt Weill--that's what you're singing.  Those are the standards, and you can do whatever you want.  And then I would go to the gigs and hear Sarah [Vaughan] do it, hear Carmen [McRae] do it, you know, that's what everybody did.  So I figured that's what I would do.  Then it occurred to me one day, well, I can go down the block tonight and hear Betty, and next weekend Sarah's in town.  Carmen McRae's at the Blue Note, you know, so how am I going to fit?  Where do I fit?  Well, how am I going to do?  What do they want with me, when they've got all of these great singers?  You know, what am I going to, how do I do this?  And that's when it occurred to me that maybe I need to start thinking about singing my own stuff, whatever that is.  I wasn't even like, I mean I had maybe two or three original compositions at the time that Onaje wrote.  So, I sang Onaje's tunes. Harry Whitaker; I sang Harry's tunes, you know, and then we'd come up with some slamming arrangement of, 'Love for Sale,' or some great arrangement of a [Antonia Carlos] Jobim tune.  So, now I've got these really hip arrangements, and then I've got originals.  And then there's like, well, wait a minute.  So, if I stop and think about it, Billie Holiday actually did give us a couple of songs that didn't exist before her, 'Lover Man.' She gave us 'God Bless the Child.'  You know, even [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson gave us, 'Guess Who I Saw Today.'  So, maybe I need to start thinking about what I'm going to give to the jazz, you know, repertoire.
Story_ID: 193154
Speaker 1: And that's where that--so with Harry [Whitaker], with Harry and [Onaje Allan Gumbs], it became real clear to me that I had something to say that had all the elements of everything that I had learned, but it was a new tune.  And boy, oh, boy, did they go running.  They went, I mean everybody's like, "Carmen, Carmen, Carmen, do this gig.  Can you do this gig?"  Then I put my first record out in 1985, 'Good Morning Kiss,' and nobody called anymore.  It was like I betrayed them or something.  Because I'm like, now I'm singing, and now I'm not singing.  I didn't know; I'll never understand that.  I'll never understand how I could work, work, work, work, work like that for all those years, for seven years.  From 1978 to 1985, I worked somewhere as a vocalist with someone.  I put that record out--now, the record goes to number three on the charts.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It came in like number, like--
Speaker 2: So, when you try original music, then the record gets to number three, but you can't get a job.
Speaker 1: Can't get (unclear)--nobody, I cannot find work.
Story_ID: 193155
Speaker 1: So, the thing was, I was, I think the year prior to that--pardon me--
Speaker 2: It was '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Okay, so '84 [1984], there was a guy on 74th Street and Columbus [New York City, New York].  He lived between Columbus and Amsterdam [New York City, New York], I guess.  And he had an apartment on the fourth floor of a pre-war building, and he converted his living room into a recording studio.  So, I asked him how much it would cost to use his space to do a demo.  It could have been three hundred bucks, something like that for, I don't know, a day session, and then I had to pay the musicians.  So, I booked this little, his little living room studio with Alex Blake on bass, Victor Lewis on drums, Harry Whitaker on piano, and we go in and we do this little demo thing, okay.  And that felt really good, it felt really good to just play all the tunes we were doing on the gig, to just play them, record them and check it out.  I still have the tapes, I still have all that stuff.  So, about a year later, I met a man as a result of singing some background vocals for a young lady who was being, she was trying to start, you know, get a little career going.  She was a little younger than me, but she was more in the, what do you call that?  Like contemporary R and B.  But I got a gig singing background with her.  And the gentleman that was sewing, making my stage wardrobe at that time, was also working for her.  He said, "Hey, you know, she just got, she met this guy who is funding this whole thing for her."  I said, "Really?  So, do you think he'll talk to me?"  It was just like that. "You think--?" "Well, sure, why not.  His name is Jack, give him a call.  So, I go to Jack.  And that month was the month of March, 1985, okay, I think I got it right.  Essence Magazine, March 1985 [sic], I get a quarter page story called, 'Showstoppers.'  And it's so funny.  In the photograph, you'll see I'm wearing a white jacket and some black slacks, because I was making all my clothes then, too, until Maurice came along and started helping me do that.  Maurice White [ph.] started helping me make my clothes. So, anyway, 'Showstoppers,' quarter page ad.  I don't know how I got it, and who did it, but I was happy, Essence Magazine.  So I took my little Essence Magazine to Jack, who was a lawyer, and I said to him, "Jack, I would really, I was wondering if, I really would love to be able to make a demo tape.  I have some interest at Columbia Records, and I made a demo tape when I was in Miami [Florida], and they want to hear another one."  I had my senior recital tape.  That was the first thing I took to Columbia was my senior recital tape, with strings, I might add.  But that was my first demo tape for Columbia.  They wanted something else, so it was like a few years (unclear).  So, I tell him what my goal is.  And I say "There's an article on me in Essence Magazine this month."  And he looks and he says, "You mean to tell me you're in Essence Magazine, and you don't have a recording contract?"  I said, "That's right, and I'm really anxious to do something about that."  He reached over, grabbed his checkbook, opened up his checkbook and wrote me a check.  True story.  Thank you, Jack Taman.  Jack writes me the check, I deposit it, and I call up Rudy Van Gelder Studios, one of the most famous--you know, all the Blue Note Records--
Speaker 2: The Flying Dutchman, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right there, the Flying Dutchman, right there in Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.  And I call up and I book the studio.  So, I got Harry Whitaker, I got my brother on bass, Curtis Lundy; Victor Lewis on drums, Bobby Watson wrote the horn parts, with John Faddis and all those other great people on it; Mayra [Casales] on percussion.  And we go in there and we make this demo, okay, for Columbia.  I think I did some of the tracking there, and did the mixing at Sound Ideas and all the overdubs at this other studio called Sound Ideas.  I got my demo, I'm so proud.
Story_ID: 193156
Speaker 1: I call up, I won't say the name, but I call up Columbia [Records], "I have my demo, and we're wondering when we can have a meeting to show you my music."  So, "Sure, sure, come on down next week."  I get there, and by this time I had representation, someone who--Father Peter O'Brien was kind enough to represent me to Columbia so I wouldn't go in there exactly like, you know, without some help, assistance.  So, now we play the record, it sounds really great.  And he falls in love with the record, everything is wonderful.  So he says, "Do you know what?  I really like this, Carmen.  But, you know what I think?  I think we want to do our thing with you.  I think what we're going to do is, I would like to introduce you to a producer and arranger, Ettore Stratta and Jorge Calandrelli.  Do you know who they are?"  "No."  "Well, they did some work for Barbra Streisand," he was doing this whole thing with me, right.  "So, I would like for you to meet them.  Let's have a meeting, let's schedule a meeting."  So, the meeting is scheduled, and we are now like, "Whoa, yes, you know, this is happening."  I met the producer, met the arranger, and we were talking about music.  This is great, wow.  So, I then--now this, all this money I've spent, you see, on this recording is now just a demo tape still, right, for Columbia, right.  But it's worth it, because I'm getting a record deal, so I think.  So I get a phone call from a singer, whose name will never be mentioned, from a singer who says, "Oh, Carmen, how are you doing? (Unclear)--
Story_ID: 193157
Speaker 1: "--Came to my gig last night at the Blue Note, and he asked me to give you a call and to tell you that your deal is off at Columbia [Records]."  "Excuse me?  What?  Excuse me."  "Yeah, I'm so sorry, but he wanted me to, asked me to let you know.  He's sorry, but you know, your deal is off."  I'm just stunned, I'm stunned.  So, I get on the phone and call my manager, Peter [Father Peter O'Brien].  "I just got this call from--telling me that my deal is off with Columbia.  Tell me what's going on?"  "No, this can't be.  Let's get--I'll call 'em tomorrow," okay.  Do you know never returned the phone call, never gave me an explanation, never heard from the man again to this very day, never heard from him again.  And this is after having met in Miami [Florida], when I was singing with the University of Miami Big Band and we went to the Montreal Jazz Festival and the whole big da, da, da.  And then he comes back, and I see him again at the university.  And in all these different stages, this is my one link to this goal that I have.  And then I get all the way in the door twice with a beautiful project, and bang, the whole thing is shut down. Still don't know why.
Story_ID: 193158
Speaker 1: So what year is this?
Speaker 2: This is 1985.
Speaker 1: Eighty-Five [1985].
Speaker 2: Okay, so now Father [Peter] O'Brien who was until 1981--was it '81 [1981] or '83 [1983]--Mary Lou Williams passed, and he was her manager for seventeen years.  So, we met as a result of her passing and him doing a concert, so and so and so, and that led to him assisting me.  So, Peter picks up the phone and calls Columbia [Records], "What's up, what's up, what's up?"  Nothing.  So, he does the next thing.  He knows about this new label, heard about this new label in northern California, and he knows the guy from his relationship with Mary Lou.  And he calls Herb Wong.  Herb Wong, we meet at the Waldorf Astoria in New York.  I got my tapes, and me and Peter and Herb Wong meet in the hotel room, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  The next thing I know, I'm licensing a deal with Black Hawk [Records].  And that's the record, 'Good Morning Kiss.'  And the title, 'Good Morning Kiss,' I think that's one of my best selling records to this day.  It went all the way to number three and stayed there for twenty-three weeks under, 'Round Midnight" and the other side of, 'Round Midnight,' and then Carmen Lundy's, 'Good Morning Kiss.'  And that's the way it hung there for a long time.  So, the whole thing is bizarre to me.  But the thing I was going to say is, 'Good Morning Kiss,' the title is the opposite of 'Good Morning Heartache,' which is what Billie Holiday's tune was all about, 'Good Morning Heartache.'  So, I wanted to say, 'Good Morning Kiss.'  I just wanted to put the plus, the upside, of the morning.  So that's where I got that title from.  So, now it's 1985, I release, 'Good Morning Kiss' on an independent label called Black Hawk.
Speaker 1: And some of the cover featured some of your artwork as well?
Speaker 2: That's the re-edition that I did.
Speaker 1: Oh, the re-edition, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I started my own label--
Speaker 1: So, it didn't--
Speaker 2: --in 1990-something.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: In 1991 or '92 [1992], I started my own label.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I used--because I always owned the masters, they were always mine.
Speaker 1: So, you know--
Speaker 2: So, you made a good deal.
Speaker 1: It was a great deal.  But the funny thing was, I had to sue them to get my advance.  They only gave me half of it, and I had to sue to get the other half.  This is all like, you're dealing with the disappointment of the whole Columbia thing, and now I've got the record out and now it's happening.  It was one of the first records that came out on cassette, LP, and CD.  My record, 'Good Morning Kiss' came out on all three formats.
Speaker 2: In 1985?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 193159
Speaker 1: So, so, that was a really tough thing, you know. It was really tough to go to all of that, you know, to accomplish that, really, and then to look up and I just couldn't find work, I could not find work.  I don't know what, I don't understand what ensued.  I think a lot of things that was--I don't know if you recall this.  But the eighties, '85 [1985], '86 [1986], the crack cocaine, the cocaine, the drugs were just prevalent throughout every aspect of the music life.
Speaker 2: On the East Coast especially, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, okay, huge, big time.  So now you've got a whole lot of shifts and things, and people are crazy.  And people are like, "But, why am I not getting a gig? Cause I got a record out--" So, maybe I'm a bona fide band leader now, you know, with the record out.  So, maybe it's getting harder to afford--I don't know what exactly happened.  I think that at that time I was no longer being managed by Peter [Father Peter O'Brien]; that happened shortly thereafter.  So now I'm without management, I'm trying to hook stuff up myself.  And at that same time I was taking acting lessons, because I realized that something--I felt maybe it was me, something about the way--my stage persona needed work.  You know, I was just like what is this?  So, I started taking acting lessons to just kind of get comfortable in front of people without the music, you know.  It was like kind of maybe, I thought it was a way to kind of do whatever that was that I didn't think that I had together, you know.  Maybe acting, maybe I could just like get that whole visual thing, you know, under my belt.  But I remember doing that.  And this same gentleman that wrote the check was now a benefactor, became a benefactor.  So, if I needed money to keep things--you know, he would actually--so we, I mean this is not without my repaying him, certainly.  But at least there was somebody who understood that I had an objective that I was trying to achieve, and he assisted me, okay.  And that's the truth.
Story_ID: 193160
Speaker 1: So, that's why I was able to afford those acting classes, okay, but I wasn't singing.
Speaker 2: Where did you take the classes at?
Speaker 1: I studied at HB Studios down in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York City] on Hudson, I think it is, Hudson Street.  And then I switched from Ed Morehouse [Edward Morehouse] who was my instructor, Ed Morehouse.  I switched from Ed Morehouse, and I went over to Thirty Bond to Gene Frankel, and I studied with Gene Frankel, which was like I had to audition to get in that guy's class.  So, I did that for about a year and a half.  And then around that time, I met someone who became my representative, because it was very hard to do what I was trying to do alone, particularly with a record out.  So, this person came, his background was in the theater.  So, he did what he knew, and he sent me on auditions.  Because after all, I was taking these acting classes, right.  So, he sent me on an audition, and the audition was for a Broadway show.  That was a European company--bus and truck-- means you hardly fly anywhere in this--you know, be on a bus with fifty other people, going from city to city.  And I got the part, and I figured it can't be too bad, I'm doing Duke Ellington's music.  You know, how bad can this be?  I get to sing Duke's music every night? You know.  So, it was the role that, I played the role that Phyllis Hyman originated (unclear) and her character was based on Ethel Waters.
Speaker 2: So, this is [HistoryMaker] Donald McKayle's, 'Sophisticated Ladies,' right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I did that.  I had a six-month contract, and I was all over Europe in every theater, every (rig?) stage.  You name it, I saw it, along with the company; we did that.  And I burned out, I actually burned out.  The first, I think we had twenty-nine shows when we first kicked off in Holland [The Netherlands].  We had twenty-nine shows before we had a day off.  And it was just a gruel.  And I hung in--
Speaker 2: It can be intense.  Now, this is your first experience with--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, first experience--
Speaker 2: --Broadway.
Speaker 1: --like this.  I had done some off-Broadway, a role as Billie Holiday, in an off-Broadway play.  But this was the real deal.
Speaker 2: And you were like, you had to sing, dance too, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh yeah.  There was two--and I didn't want to dance, but there was the finale of the first act, and the finale of the second act.  And I had to know that stuff and I had to do that stuff, you know.  I went through quite a few pairs of Capezios in that show.  So, anyway, I would go out at intermission, and the company that took the show on the road had purchased my 'Good Morning Kiss' LP from Blackhawk [Records], and they were selling my LP in the lobby during the intermission after the show.  At Duke Ellington's 'Sophisticated Ladies,' they were selling 'Good Morning Kiss.'  And I realized this after four months, oh, no, no, something is very wrong here.  I want out of this.  I've got to get back to my, what I really do.  And I--you're selling my record in Europe, all over Europe, and I want out, I want out of here.  This is the first and only time I've ever asked out of a contract.  Six months, I was done after four months; I was done.  So, and besides, which I had an album, and I did not know that my record was on the charts like that.  I was in Europe, nobody told me.  So I've got a hit record, and I'm clueless.
Story_ID: 193161
Speaker 1: So I came home, picked up the pieces.
Speaker 2: So, you come back in, what, 1986?
Speaker 1: So that was, that started in '88 [1988].  So, the end of '89 [1989], I was finished with that.  So, now I'm back in New York [City, New York] in my apartment on 98th Street and Broadway, 98th Street and Broadway.  And I'm there and I'm just trying to put two pieces together, piece my life back together.  And--
Speaker 2: This is, is this '86 [1986], really?  Not '89 [1989], right?  This is '86 [1986]?
Speaker 1: Oh, you mean which part, the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the time we're at right now because--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Okay, so in '85 [1985], the record comes out--
Speaker 2: Didn't you put out--yeah in 1989?
Speaker 1: So, in the eighties, I couldn't get work.  Forget '86 [1986], oh, one great thing did happen in '86 [1986].  CBS/Sony, in Japan, you know, they were huge.  The Japanese economy was exploding, and they loved jazz.  And all of my contemporaries were going back and forth, in and out of Japan constantly.  So, the Japanese wanted to make a record with singers, but they only wanted standards.  So, they hired ten singers and they had a hundred songs.  And they asked ten singers to pick ten songs, and I was one of the last singers to get in on that.  And as a result, I made my one and only album of standards.
Speaker 2: So that's, 'Night and Day?'
Speaker 1: That's, 'Night and Day.'
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's, 'Night and Day,' so that's '86 [1986].
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: So now, '87 [1987], you know, I did have a gig at Mikell's, I could keep a gig at Mikell's.  Mike Mikell and Pat Mikell, I could work there.  So, I would try everything.  And my brother [Curtis Lundy] was playing with me then, too.  And my brother and I would try anything and everything.  We just, we were just, you know, we had, I tried--it was the first time I did things with a string quartet at Seventh Avenue South, the club down--owned by the Brecker Brothers at the time.  So, I did Mikell's, Seventh Avenue South, and a club called, on Bleecker Street called--oh, gosh, on Bleecker Street--Lush Life, Lush Life.
Story_ID: 193162
Speaker 1: Go back to 1983.  We missed the Village Voice story.
Speaker 2: The Village Voice story.  Well, that's how I met Father [Peter] O'Brien.  Mary Lou Williams had passed in '83 [1983].  Now, that makes sense.  And he was doing like a concert to honor her works, and needed a vocalist.  And that's how I got that gig.  And I think Dizzy Gillespie was on that--no, John Faddis was on that gig.  I remember that now, at Symphony Space.  But Father O'Brien had learned of me, because he saw an article written by Gary Giddins, the cover story in the Village Voice.  And it was called, 'She's Got it All,' that was the caption, 'She's Got it All.'  And there was a photograph of me right there on the cover of the Village Voice.
Speaker 1: Oh, 'She's Got It All' (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was a great story, I mean it was great--
Speaker 1: The Village Voice--
Speaker 2: --and I didn't see it coming, you know.  I think I was, it was just when Seventh Avenue South the club had opened, and I was just trying everything. I really was trying every combination of sounds that I could get away with.  And that's what we all did.
Story_ID: 193163
Speaker 1: And it was a wonderful time to be, you know, honing your craft in New York [City, New York], during the '70s [1970s] and eighties [1980s].  Jazz had turned the corner, so to speak.  You know, you had, the Fender Rhodes had become a part of the music, with Chick Corea and [HistoryMaker] Herbie [Hancock], so there was a little more electronics in the music, trying to borrow from different things.  You know,[Carlos] Santana was a huge influence on Miles Davis.  You know, he'll tell you that, in terms of just even the fashion.  But just widening the scope and incorporating all these sounds, all that stuff was great.  So anyway, I was doing that, too.  My brother [Curtis lundy] and I put together groups with--you know, I would take Al Jarreau tunes and swing them, stuff like that, you know.  But I used to bring in trumpet, and I used to bring in--I can remember being at Mikell's.  Mikell's was, I want to say the uptown club, because it was at 97th and Columbus.  So, it wasn't exactly beyond 110th Street, which is considered Harlem [New York City, New York].
Speaker 2: It's not Harlem, but it's, Columbia [University, New York City, New York] is so close.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And you--
Speaker 1: Exactly.  So you've got that, Columbus Avenue and 97th Street, and then you've got downtown.  So it was like the middle, just like that wonderful crossroads kind of a club.  Art Blakey played there every weekend.  It was Art Blakey, was kind of his other gig whenever he wanted it.  I can remember being in that club and hearing Whitney Houston for the first time singing backup with her mother, and being given a solo spot when she sang that song, "The Sun will Come Out Tomorrow," beautifully.  That was her feature number.  I remember seeing Wynton Marsalis walk into Mikell's for the first time and sit in with Art Blakey.  I remember being there at the club there.  So that was a great club, and that was my, it kind of became my go-to room whenever they had availability.  So, that kept me cool, that gig kept me going.  But as far as opportunities that were prior to my releasing the record, it was very hard to keep that going.  And now of course, I'm more of a bandleader now than I was before with the record out.  So, it was getting expensive to just afford.  And then I started getting some gigs in Europe.
Speaker 2: Okay. So this is, let's jump back forward again to 1990, I guess?
Speaker 1: Well, no, so I left New York in 1991.  I left, yeah, I left New York in '91 [1991].  So, I would say the mid-eighties, I started to get more opportunities, let's say into the nineties.  And in the early nineties I started to do a lot more work in Europe.  Opportunities started opening up.  There were a lot of opportunities with the North Sea Jazz Festival [Netherlands], for example.  I did play Switzerland a couple of times with Walter Bishop, Jr.  We played (unclear), we'd go--I'd have a gig, you know, or something like that with another artist where I was the featured vocalist.  But the opportunities for performance with my group, you know, having a couple of records now, became a little--and with the support of great people like Betty Carter, who was I think a real, you know, became a friend.  I think she really supported me in ways I don't really, I can't really know for sure.  But my brother [Curtis Lundy] was her bassist for a long time, and I think she really found out maybe through me showing up at all her gigs, that I was really serious about this, too.  So, Betty became a huge support, and I found myself having a lot more opportunities to work in Europe.  My management changed, and that helped also.  I made a record in 1990 for an independent label called Arabesque, out of New York City.  So, I made one record with them.  And so, that was the last year I lived in New York, actually.  The last year in New York, I made a record for Arabesque Records.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 193164
Speaker 1: So, you got an opportunity to star on a pilot special for CBS, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's right.  So, I came to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] to visit some friends.  So, remember, I was telling you about how everybody was moving to New York [City, New York] from Miami [Florida], right?  So, as a result of my acting experience and some of the friends I'd met along the way who would do the Broadway shows, I became friends with a lot of those actors and vocalists.  And they were successful in their own right, so they were moving to New York to begin film careers.  And they said "I'm moving," I'm sorry, they're moving to Los Angeles to establish their film careers.  They'd hopefully break into the, you know, the big screen, the silver screen.  So, I was invited to visit L.A. by a friend of mine who was now doing television and film.  So, I came out to just hang out and just see what L.A. was all about.  New York was, I was burning out, and was looking for any way to get out.  So I did move to Long Beach, Long Island [New York City, New York].  The last year I lived in New York, I actually was not in Manhattan.  I was out on the island, and had a beautiful apartment that overlooked the Atlantic Ocean.  And I thought, "This I can do.  I can do this and go into the city when I have to, and this can work for me." You know.  (laughter)  So, as a result of visiting my friend, my agent sent me on an audition for a television pilot.  I was kicking and screaming.  "I'm on vacation, and you're doing what?  You're sending me to this, what, audition?  And what do I have to do?"  So I was so upset about being forced into this, that I decided the only way to kind of satisfy my own, you know, obligation to doing this audition was to sing one of my own songs.  Because I figured I'll sing one of my own songs.  It won't matter, they won't know it.  And then I will have gone to this audition and I can get back to my vacation.  So, I sang a tune called, 'Perfect Stranger.'  And I remember the audition was at Mary Tyler Moore studios, and it was like those old studios where they still have the air-conditioners sticking out the windows, you know.  (laughter)  And this day was really hot, so it was kind of cold, but hot.  So it was really hot in there, and the air-conditioner wasn't on.  And I'm singing, 'Perfect Stranger,' with some accompanist, a guy I never met, that kind of audition.  Well, don't you know, I got the callback, which shocked me.
Story_ID: 193165
Speaker 1: --Which shocked me. Now, the funny thing about this is that I'm here on vacation, and they're sending me to this audition.  But I had called my agent and said, "You know, maybe there's a chance for me to do a gig out here.  I know some jazz musicians, so maybe can you hook up a gig for me?"  So, while I'm out here, he says, "Oh, Carmen, by the way, I did hook up a gig for you.  And it's at this place on the ocean in Santa Monica [California] called The Red Sea [ph.], and I got you there on Saturday night.  Do you want to do it?  It only pays three hundred bucks. Do you want to do it?"  I said, "Okay, three hundred bucks.  Okay, I can pay John, I can pay David, and I'll make a hundred myself."  So, I do this audition.  I'm upset about it, but I do it.  The next night is my little giglet at The Red Sea.  So, I've got John Clayton on bass, David Roitstein on piano, just a duet.  I get there and I ask, "Can you, we need the PA.  We're going to rehearse, can you--we're just having a little sound check.  Would you mind bringing out the PA?"  "PA?  You what?  You need a microphone?  You what?" (laughter)  So, we're waiting and waiting and waiting, and we start to rehearse without the PA.  And it's a, you know, small kind of sized restaurant type thing.  And I'm rehearsing, and then he walks in with a really old, like old microphone that has like, kind of like, they call them Elvis mics.  But it wasn't even, it wasn't even that good.  It was green and yellow, and it had like lines through it, and it was really heavy, and it had two stereo speakers from the '70s [1970s].  And that was my sound system.  And I went, "That ain't gonna happen tonight."  So, I decided right then and there I would just do the gig without a microphone.  So, now it's show time, people are starting to flow into this little ditty club.  And I'm just trying to get a little giglet while I'm here, get a feel, and in walks Leonard Feather and his wife Lorraine [sic, Jane Feather].  I cannot believe this is Leonard Feather here to review this gig that I'm doing.  He must have heard about me from something, maybe, 'Good Morning Kiss.'  So, here I am singing at The Red Sea in Santa Monica with Leonard Feather in the audience.  And I had just done an audition the next day, I mean the day prior, for a television show.  So, at the end of the gig, everything went great.  There wasn't a whole bunch of people, but just enough--friends of mine, and we made it a nice little happening for the evening.  Well, don't you know, those people wouldn't pay me.  They wouldn't pay me.  It's time to hand over the cash, and they're like, "Well, the owner's not here right now, and we don't have any cash, and he didn't leave any cash for us."  So, everything is starting to get a little wacky. So, my agent says, "Call the cops."  So, the cops show up, and the owner is nowhere to be found, and they don't know where the money is.  So, the cop comes in, there's a lady cop and a male cop.  And I'm standing there in a beautiful red dress, and the cop walks in, the lady cop, and grabs me by the arm.  And I was like--this was my first time in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2: She grabs you?
Speaker 1: Grabs me, just snatched me by the arm.  Grabs me, and I'm just, "Take your hands off me."  I mean, I'm from New York, I don't know (unclear)--what is this?  So, my agent's fiance said, "Oh, no, no, no, no, no, she sings at the club.  She's singing here, and she's trying to get paid, and there's nobody here to pay her."  So, now they're trying to explain what's really going on.  So before we can finish this whole, "Don't--No, it's not her problem.  I mean, she's not the problem."  He's trying to explain, and somehow the money floats up, and now they're handing him the money from across the side of the cash register.  I'm kind of cutting to the chase.  It was totally drama, total drama.
Speaker 2: Now this is the age of Rodney King, too.  This is in 19--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right then.  So, they hand over the cash, and in the meanwhile the musicians had left.  Just, you know, my agent, we were the only ones left in the club.  So, but, they, so I get my money, and still no owner, okay.
Story_ID: 193166
Speaker 1: Still no owner. So, what happens?  I'm visiting, right?  So, my passport, my luggage, is all in a dressing room in an apartment down the street from the club, and there's no owner, so I have no access to my personal belongings.  So I wait until two o'clock in the morning.  I call my agent in New York [City, New York], and I say, "This is what's happening.  I can't believe you put me in this place."  And I'm screaming at the top of my lungs, of course, that this is happening to me.  "And I can't get my things."  So, it turns out that his ex-wife was dating the owner of this club, and that's how he was able to finagle the gig so quickly.  So, the ex-wife comes to the venue and starts getting, gets on the phone and calls every place that she thinks that her boyfriend come be.  And it was two o'clock, 2 a.m., before he was, before he appeared and let me into that apartment to get my things.  So that was my first--that was my first time in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. And maybe it should have been my last, I don't know. (laughter)   But the next day I get a review in the paper from Leonard Feather, a love letter review.  And he says my song, 'Time is Love,' should be a standard.  I'll never forget that; he said that about my tune, 'Time is Love.'  And I got the part in this television show.  So now, I go back to New York and I pack to come out here to tape the show.  So, that's how I began to relax and think, okay, maybe this is it.  Maybe I can do this.  Oh, you know, okay, I can drive, you know, actually I'm at the wheel of the car.  And they gave me this car for the shoot, and this is kind of nice, and the apartments are kind of cute.  Maybe this is, this is kind of like Miami [Florida] to me, oh, the weather.  Maybe I can do this.  And it's like twenty years later, I'm still here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 193167
Speaker 1: So this is, so, all right, so the jobs came--I know you produced an album in '92 [1992] called, 'Moment to Moment,' right?
Speaker 2: That's the one that I released (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's the Arabesque--
Speaker 2: --that I did in 1990 before moving.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --in 1991.
Speaker 1: All right, that's the Arabesque album.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the Arabesque album.
Speaker 1: Okay, in 1990.
Speaker 2: So, I don't know what happened after that.  Oh, my God.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: Well, I fell in love, so I was in a relationship for about, I don't know, ten years, and it didn't work out.  It was horrendously horrible.  I was trying to cut my, you know, do this thing that I'd done so well in New York [City, New York].  And I was trying to do that in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and that's next to impossible out here.  It's nearly impossible to make a career in jazz from here.  So, fortunately for me I had--
Speaker 1: So, are you saying that you had to travel a whole lot--
Speaker 2: Yeah, to just do the gigs.
Speaker 1: And you had a place here, and you had to travel all over the place.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So, but the good, the continuum of all of this--from the time I laid, you know, stepped foot in New York, all the way through, all the way through to my first say ten years of being in L.A., I was writing.  I would make one bedroom of wherever I lived, and I would turn it into a studio and I would just write.  And I would be in there all day with, you know, I would just write all day every day.  And that's what I did, and that's when I started painting.  I started painting in that wonderful apartment that I had in Long Beach, Long Island [New York], when my backyard was the ocean.  That's where I began to paint.
Speaker 1: So, this is about what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen, to be exact, 1990 was when I began--
Speaker 1: Nineteen-ninety [1990], okay.
Speaker 2: --painting.  And so now I've got my little easel and the same little--and I had a deck, I had a deck on this wonderful house that overlooked Pasadena [California].  So, I would paint outside, and just on the other side of that was my studio, and I would just write all the time.  I just wrote music constantly, working at either writing music or arranging a tune for a gig.
Speaker 1: So, in terms of the artwork, did you, did you ever have any formal training in art or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you draw when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So, this just hit you all at once?
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: What inspired you to (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Bill Morgenstern, he was an art dealer.  You know, when I visited my family, when I'd come from New York back to Miami [Florida], I had chose to be with Bill because, well, my family was huge and there was so many people in the house, and the house had shifted.  So now the space that would have been mine wasn't there anymore, and I, you know, was cramped.  And I was kind of at a point where I was a young woman, and I had my own ideas about how I wanted to spend my time.  And he had a second car, so I didn't have to rent a car to go visit my family and be free to visit.  And he just made it easy for me.  And he also had an incredible record collection.  He also had a swimming pool, and he was a gourmet chef.  So, who wouldn't, you know?  (laughter)  So, I saw my family.  I'd, you know hang out--sleep at Bill's house, go visit my family, and sleep at Bill's house--like that.  So, Bill had an incredible art collection.  And his kitchen wall, there was a Dutch Master's painting on the kitchen wall, okay.
Speaker 1: By a real Dutch Master?
Speaker 2: By a real Dutch Master.
Speaker 1: A real--okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And the bedroom I slept in had a Cassatt [Mary Stevenson Cassatt], you know, and he was a collector of pre-colonial art.  So there was all this, you know, the biblical images everywhere.  But his house--and then I'd come the next time, and I'd go, "What happened to that Dutch Master?"  "Oh, I sold it."  But if he replaced it with something, it would be even more amazing, you know.  But he would explain to me that art was, for the painter--for the painter, art was a struggle.  And that was nothing new to me.  A struggle was absolutely nothing new to me.  So, why take any lessons?  I already knew what a struggle was.  So, I'm going to struggle through this, you know.  So, that's really what it was.  And I wanted to show Bill, I wanted to thank him for all he'd given me.  And what better way to thank Bill than to show him my effort that I had taken from all those years of his gifting, his mentoring.  He had a sheet music collection.  Oh, one more thing about Bill.  He would come in from his studio, you know, art dealership every day, and he'd do three things.  He would change into his swim gear, make a martini, go for a swim, take the martini to the piano, and play [Frederic] Chopin for an hour.  (laughter).  And that was it.  That was my Bill, and that's what he did.  He would just play Chopin, it was the martini, and it was the swim.  The swim, the Chopin, the martini; that was Bill.  But I just learned so much from him, he was such a knowledgeable man.  I think he was a history teacher during his earlier in life in Brooklyn [New York City, New York]].  And I asked him, "Well, how did you get into this art dealing?"  He said, "Well, when I would take the train to work every day--I taught in Brooklyn and I lived in the city--when I took the train every day I would read all about, I would read, I was a connoisseur of magazines.  I would just learn, I would teach myself."  And that's he became an art dealer.  So, even his whole manner of becoming who he was, was fantastic. He was also--ballet dancer.  And I would visit him all the time.  He said, "If you want to keep visiting me, you're going to have to take dance classes."  So in order to be his friend, I had to get into dance class.  (laughter)  So, it was worth it.
Story_ID: 193168
Speaker 1: But, one person like this, so this is the guy.
Speaker 2: Do you still dance?
Speaker 1: Oh, gosh, no.
Speaker 2: Do you still take lessons?
Speaker 1: No.  I should, but I don't.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think my whole physicality is on the bandstand. I think I'm more physical in my life when I'm on stage than any other. I like to garden, I like to--I'm crazy like that.  I like to work with mosaics and, you know, it takes a little bit of hefting to do the kind of landscaping and gardening that I enjoy.  But that's it for me.  But my real physical--I just kind of left all that behind, all the working out.  And I really haven't made much of an effort since I've been in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] to really do that stuff.
Speaker 2: Well, you're blessed, because you look like you're in good condition.
Speaker 1: That's my dog, Scully.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She walks me every day or every other day, and that's good.
Speaker 2: So many singers, you know, they start off small like Ella Fitzgerald who was little at one time, and the older she got, the bigger she got.  And I mean, it's not only her, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Sarah [Vaughan], yeah, there were several.
Speaker 2: You see them young, and you see them slim, and--
Speaker 1: And svelte.
Speaker 2: And, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, I don't know.  I guess I'm doing something right, but I think it's my puppy, I think it's Scully.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Scully, I really do.
Story_ID: 193169
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, let's see.  So you're painting and there's a, and you're working with, I have notes here that you're working with Chico Freeman--
Speaker 2: Kip Hanrahan--
Speaker 1: Kevin Eubanks--
Speaker 2: Kevin Eubanks, those are all people on my records.  You know, Chico is on that record, the, 'Moment to Moment,' record, and Kevin Eubanks is on guitar on that record.  But let me talk about my writing.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: My writing is pretty much the deal.  That's pretty much what I think has set me apart.  I always did it, and I think sometimes--we're looking for so many different ways.  I was looking, "Okay, this arrangement of, "Oh, man, she's done that, too.  Man, gosh, you know, Betty [Carter] has done that tune.  What am I going to do with this tune?"  "I love that tune, 'My Ship,' I love 'My Ship,' I love the way Miles Davis does, 'My Ship,' I want to do 'My Ship.'  I need an arrangement of 'My Ship.'"  You know, and then I just kind of whatever, start with the melody and wherever my fingers would land on the keys.  And I say, "Okay, maybe this."  And it's kind of like sometimes when you're learning a new tune, a standard that you don't know, you find yourself repeating it a lot, just to kind of get, you know, familiar with it, particularly from this perspective, from the piano.  And sometimes you stumble onto things and there you are, there you are with some idea.  And then those ideas will just keep flowing, and then I say, "Why am I--wait, why spend this energy trying to arrange the already perfect tune?  Why don't I start trying to find a way to take these ideas and create something with them, create some new melodies?"  And that was the discipline I established long ago.  And I would record everything I did, you know.  You know, and then, you know, when the eighties brought in the whole drum machines and all that stuff.  So now you've got keyboards, you've got program this and program that.  So, I started incorporating those programmed things because it would, you know, if I had a beat going, then maybe I could focus on, you know, the other thing.  You know, so let me program this beat, then I can work with that, and then I'll come up with some other stuff.  But that got to be really boring really fast.  Those programmed things were very, they--once my idea started to develop, that wasn't developing with it.  So, now this programmed beat became this loop that just made everything feel flat to me.  So, stop the beat, just stop the beat.  Imagine the beat, imagine that's Victor [ph.] on drums.  Imagine that's Smitty [ph.] playing that tune.  Imagine that's my brother [Curtis Lundy] on bass.  So, imagine these are the great, these are the people playing your tune and go from that.  So you know that if you give this tune to Curtis, he's going to do this, because he can, you know.  And I was limited even there, because I can't play a walking bass line to save my butt.  So, because I can't play walking bass lines, I do the next best thing; I just outline the chord changes with the bass notes.  And this is how things started to develop for me.  And the ideas, and they--and then I would take it to them, my idea, and then they'd turn it around and give me back what I conceived in a way that was beyond my conception.  So, the writing became my voice, not even the singing of the song, but the actual composition became my voice.  Because that thing, that new thing, not only brought something out in me, but it brought something out in all the other players, too, because they're playing a new song.  So, they have to play themselves, there's no example. There's no great bass player line that they can borrow and copy that to play; everybody has to be themselves now.  Wow, how wonderful is that.  And besides which I had great examples of it.  I had [HistoryMaker] Wayne Shorter, I had [HistoryMaker] Herbie [Hancock].  You know, there were so many examples of people who were doing this very thing.  They weren't singing, you know, but you know, that was the hardest thing of all, was to sing this stuff, and with some lyrics that what? That stood up next to Ira Gershwin's lyrics?  Are you kidding me?
Story_ID: 193170
Speaker 1: That's what I had to contend with. Richard Rodgers is a lyricist.  Carmen Lundy is no lyricist, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, how do you, how do you--do you start with a--you start I guess with an idea for a song, I mean a theme, or do you start with a melody?  Or how do you start?  I mean is it, is it what the song is about that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Wow--
Speaker 2: --you know, gets you started?  Or is it a melody that you attach a meaning to?  What is it?
Speaker 1: Wow.  It's rarely the lyric that gets me going.  So, more often it's a feeling more than anything, more so than even a melody.  It's the feeling.  So, can I use an example?  There's a song of mine that comes to mind, 'Quiet Times,' and I can remember that I had a feeling that was so overwhelmingly sad that I just went to the piano, and I just played the chord, and the first note came out.  And the whole song was written right then in that moment, because the feeling I had was so powerful and so overwhelming.  I had gone to a gig at the place called the Grand Finale, and I played the whole--that's when I met Billy Eckstine, on that gig.  And I'm singing all night, singing my heart out.  And that guy told me that, "I'm not paying you, you're never going to amount to anything anyway.  And you can just go home, because I am not paying you.  You can get out of here, get out of my office.  Get out."  This is after all night of singing.  And that hurt me so.  And I remember I didn't have--back then you got paid cash, you know.  It was a seventy-five dollar gig.  And I remember that I didn't have, I had used my last token to get to the gig from my house.  I didn't have subway fare, so the guy--I didn't have any money.  So I had to walk home from the gig, and it was snowing that night.  It was December of, I'm going to say 1981.  It was either 1980 or 1981.  And I had no money.  The guy had just reduced me to whatever, and I'm walking home from the gig.  And I could see my footprints kind of like in the snow, soft, you know, feeling like really soft snow.  I just remember walking into my apartment and going straight to the piano, and bang, that was a feeling, okay.  Didn't hear a melody, but the thing that I did hear was how quiet it was.  'Cause it was snowing.  And I was just walking, just quiet.  It was quiet times, these are quiet times.  So, that's a feeling.  People can say something to you, and you go wow, what an interesting--I have a friend, Richard Maytene [ph.] and I wrote a lot of tunes together.  And Richard would write down things that people say.  So, when we'd get together to write, he'd say, "I have a list of things.  Okay, "Something to believe in," you know, he'd just run, he'd just say--you know, he'd say, "What do you want to write tonight?"  "Let's see, open your book, what you got?  What kind of titles?"  So, I used to write from titles.  I used to take a title and make up a story.  I wrote a lot of tunes like that, 'Perfect Stranger,' is written that way.  'Something to Believe In,' is written that way, just from the title.  We actually did a one word tune, 'Hallelujah.'  We took a, "craft of lyric writing course" together, and the assignment was to write a one word title.  'Hallelujah,' how about that?  (laughter)  So, we did that.  So that was another way of arriving at tunes, just a title.
Story_ID: 193171
Speaker 1: And then there's the melody, there's that melody. Sometimes a melody that's familiar to you triggers something that's not familiar.  So, I can think of a tune I wrote called, 'Seventh Heaven' after Kenny Kirkland died.  And Kenny had this one little bit he'd do whenever--his mother was Puerto Rican, so he had a huge Latin influence.  And people don't know this about Kenny, great pianist who we lost too soon.  But Kenny had one little ditty he would do whenever he was in (unclear), (scatting) no matter what, (scatting) all right.  And it would, whenever he'd do it, everything would just lift, and everybody would be off.  And it was just, he'd pick the right time.  So, anyway, I can remember thinking about him, because he had just passed away.  And I can recall going to a gig and seeing Dianne Reeves on a gig here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]  On the way, I'm driving home, and I'm hearing "On the first day of Christmas, my true love gave to me,"  I'm hearing this song.  (laughter)  "On the second day of Christmas, da, da, da, da, da,"  And I'm singing this song all the way home.  And I'm like why am I, why am I singing this song? (laughter)  So, that concept of the first day and the second day became, 'Seventh Heaven,' which was a tune I was already working on from the Kenny idea, from the Kenny Kirkland idea, you know.  So, I put it in six, I put the rhythm in six, and out comes, 'Seventh Heaven,' which is a song about the first day and the second day in heaven, and the third day in heaven.  So, it's all these different sources of inspiration.
Story_ID: 193172
Speaker 1: All right.  So, you were talking about--well, we're around 1995, and you released, 'Self Portrait.' for JVC Records.
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-four [1994], yeah.
Speaker 1: Ninety-Four [1994], okay.  Now, this album features songs that you, you know, a lot of songs that you did.
Speaker 2: A lot of compositions, yeah, a lot of my own.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of your own.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And I had always wanted to make a record with strings.  The year prior, one of Nina Simone's last recordings, 'A Single Woman,' was released.  Jeremy Lubbock did the strings, and it's one of the most beautiful records.  If you don't know it, definitely add it to your collection.  'A Single Woman,' is a beautiful recording, and I wanted to do that.  I wanted to sing with an orchestration accompaniment.  So, JVC, I wrote them for over a year hoping to get a contract, an agreement with them.  And so, in all that writing I had plenty of material to choose from, but I also loved being able to sing, 'Round Midnight,' with an orchestra.  You know, that was great.  I was with JVC long enough to make two records, 'Self Portrait,' and 'Old Devil Moon.'
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now, 'Love Me Forever,' is that--
Speaker 2: That's the same.  The Japanese wanted a different title for the record.  So it's the same music, but it's a different title.
Speaker 1: Okay.   So, it's the same as 'Old Devil Moon,' but they didn't think that would, that it's a good idea to have an album called, 'Old Devil Moon' in Japan?
Speaker 2: There you go.
Speaker 1: The cultural--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Interesting, interesting, okay.  So, what did you, I guess--what was your favorite, you know, out of, 'Old Devil Moon?'
Speaker 2: Wow, my favorite?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: 'You're Not in Love,' that's a great tune. 'You're Not in Love,' that's my favorite.  That song has, I think it's got like tens of thousands of hits on YouTube now.  And the British happen to think it's a great song, and I agree.  I just love that record.  I just love the way it played.  The song itself is based on the Minor 9 chord voicing.  And the whole tune is--I'm sorry, Minor 11, excuse me--a Minor 11 voicing which I learned, I guess that's what I took from Walter Bishop, Jr., was to--how to make a chord with that many different extensions in it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 193173
Speaker 1: Now, in '98 [1998], you participated in Betty Carter's Jazz Ahead Program at the Kennedy Center [John F. Kennedy Center for Performing Arts] for the first time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And there was a Betty--now, I don't know if the Betty Carter--the conflict story about Betty Carter comes before '98 [1998] or after, but--
Speaker 2: Betty Carter started the program at Brooklyn Academy of Music [BAM, Brooklyn, New York City, New York].  And it was really, I think I see myself kind of taking the same interest in really looking at who our future talented greats are, you know, where are they coming from.  And a lot of young people don't get the opportunities that were so readily a part of the scene the way they were, even when I was talking about my time in New York [City, New York].  That was toward the end of all of that.  Some people want to romanticize and still think you can, so go for it.  But I think Betty Carter saw a lot of young gifted artists in her travels, and wanted to find a way to bring those kids together to help them really understand, to really hone their craft in this music.  And Dr. Billy Taylor was the artistic advisor for jazz at the Kennedy Center at that time, and he invited Betty Carter to bring her program into the John F. Kennedy Center for Performing Arts.  And they brought the program in, and everything kicked off beautifully, and then she passed away the following year.   So, this left this whole, you know, what to do now without her.  Because she had a very hands-on way of choosing those artists.  And the three little girls, The Reed Sisters, I mean those kids, those girls grew up with her.  So, now what do you do?  There's no Betty, how do you make this, how do you keep this program moving forward?  Jazz Ahead, she came up with the title, Jazz Ahead.  I think my brother [Curtis Lundy] gave her that title.  She was looking for something to call it, and he said, "Why not Jazz Ahead," which makes sense, moving this music forward and everything.  So, there was a concert that same year that Betty passed, kind of honoring her legacy, and there were a bunch of people involved in that, as you can imagine, and I was one of them.
Story_ID: 193174
Speaker 1: So, when that following year--you know, what to do now with Jazz Ahead--my brother, Curtis [Lundy], was involved in the mentoring role that she initiated, and my brother asked me to come along.  Betty [Carter] and I knew each other--funny story.  I mean we had just done the North Sea Jazz Festival [Netherlands] the year, the summer before.  And we were on the same stage, and we were sharing a back to back.  She was on first, and I was on after her.  We shared the dressing room, and I remember going over to Betty and saying, "Thank you, Miss Carter.  I just want to say thank you for everything you have taught me, and for supporting me."  And she just looked at me rather surprised, like--she wasn't the easiest person to approach, I'll say that.  But she looked rather surprised by my just taking that moment to acknowledge her that way.  So, she said, "Did you check your sound?" You know she's like, "Did you check your sound?"  Because she knew I was coming out next.  I said, "No, why should I?  You've been out there.  Why should I check my sound?  You were just out on the stage?"  So, she followed me out from my opening number.  I had no idea she had every intention of watching my set.  So she followed me out, and they announced me and I'm waiting in the wings for the guys to tune up.  And she just shoved me on my right shoulder, she shoved me, "Get on out there," like that.  I said, "I'm going, I'm going, I'm going."  So, that was the last time I saw her.  She passed away within like a month or two of that.
Story_ID: 193175
Speaker 1: So the next thing, my brother [Curtis Lundy]'s asking me to represent the vocal aspect of Betty Carter.  She was a great band leader, incredible band leader, I mean, she was, indeed.  If you came through her, it was like the University of Betty Carter.  That's how amazing, that's what she did with those young people who played with her.  She turned them into top-notch professional artists just through her mentorship.  I see that happening with so many great players who have her to thank.  You've heard this all the time with Art Blakey, and all the people that came through the Messengers.  She was kind of like that, too.  She gave so many people a chance.  And you know, guess what?  After fifteen years of being at the Jazz Ahead Program, I picked up a few kids myself, you know, and given them that same opportunity that she gave someone.  And that's the whole beauty of that kind of experience for me as a performing artist.  I mean, I'm looking for the next best cat, too, or gal or guy.  I'm looking for the next awesome musician myself.  And the Jazz Ahead Program has allowed me to meet--and learn so many things.  I've learned about different cultures through that program--the music that these young people bring, you know, the stories they tell from where they're from and how they discovered the music.  And you know, they're from all over the world, literally.  So, from one year to the next--and we've got such a range.  We've had harpists, we've had violinists, we've had, you know, not just the typical--what you'd associate normally with a jazz ensemble, you know, the trumpet, the sax.  But we have had a wide range of different instrumentalists come into the program as well.  And my drummer, my current drummer, Jamison Ross, I met at Betty Carter's Jazz Ahead Program.  The guitarist that I'll be working with in New York [City, New York], as is to finish this last tour with me, Andrew Renfroe, I met him at Jazz Ahead, and so many others.  So, Betty has, she means a lot to a lot of people even now.  And I'm happy to be a part of that legacy of hers, and hopefully as we speak, and as this moment becomes the past, I will begin to really think about my own legacy and how--whatever that contribution is that I will ultimately make to the music.
Story_ID: 193176
Speaker 1: What's the landscape look like today for young jazz musicians?  The instrumental music has been minimized, and a lot of public schools have wiped it out altogether, I mean with the techno music and rap being predominant.  I mean, are there many young people that have access to the--
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: --instruments these days?
Speaker 2: Well, you know I have a lot of instruments around my house, and I can--when my neighbors found out that I had all these instruments, the little kids would knock on my door, "Can I see, can I see?"  I don't know, I think I've, for me it's important for young people to be in touch with how music is made without plugging anything in, without just, you know, without the assistance of computers and all the technology, just because I think it makes you a better listener really.  I think you just appreciate--I think jazz is the kind of music that you're more impacted initially by seeing what a person can do with an instrument in their hands, same with classical music, when you actually sit in a room and you observe and you feel the sound that somebody makes on an instrument, and the virtuosity and the skill and that freedom of expression that's all there in that moment.   I mean, I think that's a huge part of why most of us follow the music.  Also, you can't really count on the radio.  I mean, I can turn on the radio right now and go from one end of the dial to the next, and not hear any jazz, right now. But this is America 2014, and you can't even do this on the dial and find jazz.  And if you do, you know, the band they're with or whatever is like crackly and doesn't--you know.  And it's never in the center of the dial, it's always on the end somewhere, kind of like politics.  You know, you've got the center, then you've got the left of the center and the right of the center.  It's like you're trying to find something that's "you" somewhere in there, you know.  So, I don't mean to sound by any means pessimistic, because I've seen so much of this young talent.  I have a young niece who has fallen in love with the music, and I have given so many guitars to people.  My nephew, or my sister's grandson I should call him--you know I gave, this is like the third guitar that I've handed him, because I've insisted--because you know, when they're kids, they think they're toys.  But now that he's old enough, I think we see that this could be a means to something, because it's problem solving.  Music is problem solving; it's physics; it's mathematics; it's a thinking person's--I mean it allows you to really think about how to organize something to make a statement.  There's so many things that music offers, I can't imagine why anybody ever thought that it was not something you could afford to put into any kind of a public school curriculum.  It makes no sense, really, when you really think about it.  It's science.  Just this one thing alone, this one aspect of the human experience in and of itself, impacts so many other things that turn you into a gainfully employed adult.  I mean I don't understand how anybody ever thought this was something worth striking.  So, wherever I can, I commit myself to working with young people, even in-between tours. I can be on the road in the middle of some place I've never been, but I'll take the time to go to the university to talk to the kids, to help them understand better, through our experience, how they can get better at this music.  And I do believe there's a future in the music.  I think it's just a matter of time, and a matter of maybe different leadership.
Story_ID: 193177
Speaker 1: Tell us about Justin Time Records.  You signed with them in 2001.
Speaker 2: I don't have much to say about Justin Time, just that they allowed me to do my thing, they didn't get in my way.  They didn't tell me, "Well, we want you to record these songs and do it like this."  So, they just let me do my thing, and for that I thank them.  But they don't pay the royalties, and I'm, you know, I'm too far along in this game of the industry of performance and being a recording artist to say that to you--that a record company can still be that irresponsible and sell your product and move it every which they can, and not even, you know, at the end of the day, cut you a check the way they cut themselves a check, you know.  So, that--I have nothing more to say about Justin Time, but that they allowed me to do my thing.  They didn't get in my way, and they released it, but I don't see any royalties for it.
Story_ID: 193178
Speaker 1: Now, you launched your own label in 2004.
Speaker 2: Afrasia Productions with Elisabeth Oei.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, that was on--I started a label back in the early '90s [1990s] only to re-issue, 'Good Morning Kiss.'  That's not the same thing as Afrasia Productions.  Elisabeth was inspired by a concert that she produced of my music.  I had just entered another decade of life, and far along enough to look back.  Because that's what you do, you start looking back.  (Laughter)  And I wanted to do a concert that reflected all the different stages of my development.  So, we thought it was a good idea.  We found the concert hall, and then we picked up the phone and started calling people.  So, I called the musicians that I began my career with, from Miami [Florida].  And then I called musicians that helped me hone my craft in New York [City, New York].  Then I called the musicians I worked with in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and we all came to the stage and played nothing but Carmen Lundy original compositions.  For two hours, we played nothing but Carmen.  And Elizabeth was smart enough and devoted enough to the project that she videotaped the entire thing.  And we recorded the entire concert, which led her to the next obvious step which was, "Wait a minute.  We've got this great stuff, and it turned out great, so let's release it."  So, she released my first live recording, 'Carmen Lundy Live at the Madrid Theater' here in Los Angeles, and 'Jazz and the New Songbook,' which was my idea. "Jazz and the New Songbook." The new song book. The new song book. (laughter) So, that started--which is now, let's see.  So, we do a live DVD, and two CD set, which still sounds great, which is--you know, always the test of time is how things--you know, that's a real test, or the measure of your success, is how it holds up.  It still sounds great.  And every record subsequent to that release is on Afrasia Productions.  Everything I've done has been a result of her commitment to the body of work, and she's doing a great job, she's doing an incredible job, when you consider how different the music industry has shifted--how even the format of listening to music has changed dramatically.  So, for us to be successful at this point is quite a compliment and quite an acknowledgement of what she's been able to do, single-handedly, by the way.
Story_ID: 193179
Speaker 1: And you all have produced--Mayra Casales, who's a long-time collaborator with you, the conga player, and Geri Allen as well, right?
Speaker 2: Well, to be more specific, Mayra Casales, not Geri Allen.  Geri's on my latest CD, 'Soul to Soul.'  And I have recorded with Geri on many of her projects, I've toured with her.  But Mayra is the other artist on Afrasia Productions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Mayra's album included you, [HistoryMaker] Regina Carter, and Jon Lucien, who has passed away, a great from the Virgin Islands, and David Budway.  You know, this is, yeah, so that was back in, I think--
Speaker 2: Mayra produced that herself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And that's also something that--you know, Ray Barretto did that too, as a percussionist.  They were bandleaders, you know, and she's done quite well, she's doing quite well.
Speaker 1: So, you said, 'Timeless Portraits and Dreams,' was released in 2006?
Speaker 2: That's Geri's record, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay,
Story_ID: 193180
Speaker 1: All right. And in the meanwhile, you're touring, right, you're still touring?
Speaker 2: Gotta get out there and take the music to the people.  I mean that's the real, that's the biggie for me.  We just came off the road.  We played the northwestern United States.  We started there, and then we went into Europe and played several different countries in Europe.  And we've been back maybe a week or so now.  But the big deal for me is, you know, life isn't too bad.  I'm going around the world singing my own songs, you know what I mean, with great people.  So, I'll take whatever, you know, comes with that and celebrate that, and know that whatever I've chosen--whatever this departure from the ideal personification of that which somebody says is a jazz singer--I'm a little bit, you know, ahead of that right now, as far as I'm concerned.  Because I think somehow I've managed to remain authentic and yet introduce new music.  But the cool thing is I can go from a German-speaking country to a French-speaking country, to English-speaking to Russian-speaking, to Greek, and sing my own songs and have people receive that.  That's pretty great, you know, singing in English, besides.  So, for me at this point in my development there's a sense of accomplishment, certainly.  However, it would be nice--and I want to thank The HistoryMakers for inviting me to talk about my journey.  It would be nice to see a collective effort on the part of the music industry in this country and in the world to recognize--and I'm going to say specifically the jazz artists--to recognize those of us who are still motivated to bring forth new ideas in the music, and not necessarily content with the re-visitation and the tribute to, and the--you know all these things sell records, and I get the whole marketing concept behind them--the American Songbook and the, you know, a tribute to this great artist and that great artist.  But in a way, for as much as you think that's stabilizing and keeping everything oiled, you know, and all the working parts--in a way you're kind of freezing things up, when you don't include those artists that really have a new voice or have another way of saying the same thing with new material.  And that's been a huge obstacle for me, with the (unclear), with those individuals who insist on preventing that from getting through, which makes no sense when you consider the evolution of people like Miles Davis.  And you just look at his discography, and you can see how the music evolved.  Why do we insist on the 1950's record, 'Kind of Blue,' when there's, 'Bitches Brew?'  You know, why do we do that?  I mean, I don't understand how that happened. The same goes--and I thought--there's someone in New York who's a prominent disc jockey who refuses to play my new record.  And I was reading, I just finished reading George Benson's autobiography.  If that same disc jockey refused to play George Benson's record, we'll never know what the deal would be with him, do you understand.  So, when I read that, and George said he took his tapes and he ran over to [W]RVR  back in 1970--so and so and said, "Hey, I just finished this, check this out."  And the disc jockey put it on.  This is the, 'Breezin' record I'm talking about.  He said the lights--the whole radio station--all the lights lit up--this is, 'Breezin', right.  Now, this is like--some people were like, "Oh, that's fusion, oh that's--he shouldn't be doing that," all that stuff, right.  But look at what would have happened if that person had stopped that, or just shut that down because it was expressing something beyond a certain traditional concept that people have for jazz.  And he's a perfect example of what I'm--I'm not comparing myself to George Benson, but it's a perfect example of why it's not a good idea to shut people down like me, or to insist that if I'm not going to come to the stage and render some great tune from, you know, Tin Pan Alley with some glorious new sparkles on it, you know, with high definition sonic values instead of something new--what is it that you don't want to receive?  What is that--my thing is that so much has happened in the world in the last thirty years that hadn't happened before.  And I want to sing about the last thirty years, personally.  I don't want to sing about the last, you know, thirty years prior to that, I don't.  So, is there a market for people like me?  I think so. But that's--so I guess what I'm saying is, to me the beauty is to somehow have managed to bring forth--and be true to myself at the same time--and bring forth a body of work that did not exist thirty years ago, you know.  And maybe there's two or three good ones, maybe there's ten or twelve good ones, but at least I did it, and I don't have to sit back now and talk to you and wonder about, "Oh, well, yes, you know, well, I did love the way Sarah [Vaughan]--."  "Do you want to hear my version of that Sarah tune?  It goes like this."  You know, there's more to it than that.  And I love the song 'Misty,' love it.  I can sing that song on every gig, 'cause it just feels good coming out of you.  That song, it's like--anybody who has ever played that tune, 'Misty,' it just pours from you, it does.  But, you know, it's not enough anymore for me to do that.
Story_ID: 193181
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've heard like, I've been at concerts where even George Clinton and Parliament, he tried to play something new in Detroit [Michigan] about five years ago, and the fans actually started pounding on the stage, 'Play Flashlight.'  And, you know, so I mean sometimes fans don't want to hear--and especially in the age of recordings where they hear the record over and over again--they don't want to hear the artist play something new.
Speaker 1: I saw that at an Aretha Franklin concert.  The lady had just given us a master class in how to sing the blues.  And they were upset that they didn't hear, 'Respect.'  (Laughter)  I mean, and they were walking out hemming and hawing and everything.  Do you understand that you just saw like one of the most amazing artists alive today just do what they do, and you're--like you didn't get your song.  What is the problem?  (Laughter)  And I think that is just going to be like that, you know.  What can you do?
Speaker 2: Yeah. That's one of the--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: You know, you just got to keep on going, and hopefully they'll fall in love with the next one.  That's unfortunate, but that the way it goes.
Story_ID: 193182
Speaker 1: What is the--I know I saw an album and a song of yours on YouTube this morning.  I can't think of the name of it, but it has to do with the transatlantic slave trade.
Speaker 2: Woo 'Grace.'
Speaker 1: Right, that's exactly it, right.
Speaker 2: 'Grace.'
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about that?   I was intrigued by it.
Speaker 2: That's Lisa's [ph.] favorite tune on the record. 'Grace' was in my--in the course of working on music--and the guitar has become my new little tool to ply my trade.  I came up with this wonderful little chord progession on the guitar, which had no form.  It had nothing; it was just that, and I was so intrigued by this little thing.  What--something about this combination of chords intrigued me to the point where I realized that maybe I should--if I was going to continue to spend time on it, I should give it a form.  So, the form that I gave it was to a hymn.  The hymn that I chose was, 'Amazing Grace.'  Now, I've got a form, right?  So now I'm back it, and I'm working it, and now I've got a ii-V, that's a chord progression.  I've got a ii-V and I can land it, but I'm not going to land on the root.  I'm not going to play the root; I'm not going to play the root, and I never did.  If you listen to the song, you'll never hear E flat.  The song is in the key of E flat, but you'll never hear that chord.  So, now I'm, this song had haunted me for months.  I couldn't sleep.  I'd wake up--I would try to actually tell my brain to do something else, so that I would not hear this piece, and it stayed that way for months.  So, I thought let me just move on, there's other songs.  Let me just work on some other stuff.  During this timeframe, I had gone to do a couple of gigs in South Africa.  And one of these South African visits led to being introduced to a young man who subsequently called us one day to say he was in Los Angeles [California] emceeing the Inaugural South African Film and Music Festival, and would we be his guests?  Of course, we'll be your guests, of course.  So, we go downtown, wonderful setting.  The South Africans gave us a little slice of their culture that night, beautifully.  Hugh Masekela was on the bill, along with many other artists in addition to Simphiwe Dana.  Simphiwe Dana is the woman that you hear opening that song, 'Grace' on the recording.  Now I didn't know her, I hadn't met her before.  And we were introduced by the emcee that evening and one thing led to another, and we invited them to be guests in our home for several nights.  While we were here exchanging cultures, talking about--I mean some of the things I prepared, some of the meals I prepared in exchange for what they had done for me in South Africa, I thought well, I've got to do the same thing.  So I'm cooking soul food this week, it's got to be soul food.  Well, I did the collard greens.  (Unclear) would say, "Oh, this is called something."  But it was exactly the same dish, they had a different name for it.  This was fascinating to me.  Certain things I was preparing, they were so familiar with, the guava juice, even.  They just drank guava juice the whole time, you know.  She told me a little story about when she was a little girl and she would cook, she would take all the guavas and then sell them for candy, you know, sell them for ice cream.  You know, so it was like nice to--all these cute little stories.  And we found out we had so many things in common when we talked about the music.
Story_ID: 193183
Speaker 1: So, something came up.  "Well, you must do something together.  You guys need to do something together."  So I said, "Well, come into my studio.  I'll show you my studio and show you what I'm working on."  So, I started pulling all these tunes.  And stupid me, I picked the most rhythmic things, because I'm thinking that would be the thing that she's [Simphiwe Dana]--I mean that was just so ignorant of me to do.  So, I'm thinking--and then I thought, "And there's this tune that has been driving me nuts, I've got to play it for you.  But before I play it for you, I just want to tell you what my inspiration is.  My inspiration is that I did some research on the history of the hymn, and learned a great deal more about how this hymn came to be.  And in doing so, I realized that John Newton was a slave trader," and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, right?  I'm telling them the whole thing.  And she, after I tell her this story--because who doesn't know that hymn, right?  So, she went, "I didn't know that."  And then she says, "Do you have a pen and paper I can borrow from you?"  So then she starts writing.  "Where do you press record?  Where do you press record?"  She starts singing, and the levels--I mean, she's a little lady, lovely, tiny, little lady.  And she started singing, and my levels went through the roof.  "Wait, hold on, hold on.  Wait, let me set these levels."  So, she begins to sing, and then suddenly there's something, "We have walked for so long with our heads to the ground.  We have died for so long with our heads under the boot (speaking Xhosa)."  I don't know what she was saying, but I know it was Zulu or something, right.
Speaker 2: The Xhosa language.
Speaker 1: Xhosa language.
Speaker 2: Xhosa?
Speaker 1: Yes.  So, she sings her little ditty, and I sing right into that, right?  So, whatever she did, I just followed it up--something that had never even occurred to me melodically and lyrically; it just came out.  And we got it on tape, we got the whole thing on tape.  So, now we're so excited, you know, Elisabeth [Oie] comes in and Lupie [ph.] comes in, "Listen to what we've got."  Elisabeth says, "Oh, my."  So, I'm so excited, and she's so excited that this is--because now I realize she's singing from the South African perspective, and I'm singing from the African American perspective about this point in time in our history as a people.  Wow, wow.
Story_ID: 193184
Speaker 1: So, that's what you have in 'Grace.'  But I want to just add that what happened was she [Simphiwe Dana] became haunted by the story the same way I had been.  So, for the next three and a half days, we couldn't get her to come out of the studio.  She was in there all of the time singing, rewriting, re-singing, rewriting.  And I just left her, I just left her, just allowed her to have that space, because I knew whatever she was going to produce would be as astonishing as what we had first done.  But I just want to add that she would remain--I understood exactly why she was in there.  So I didn't even bother to, you know, try to pull her away, because I really understood that that song was so captivating.  And we pulled it off.  And the other thing is it took the sister coming from South Africa to be in my home to have this song live.  And that will always be the most intriguing part, that that's what was missing.  Whatever I was trying to do and say, I couldn't have done on my own.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 193185
Speaker 1: Now, your latest project is, 'Soul to Soul,' right?
Speaker 2: 'Soul to Soul.'
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: 'Soul to Soul,' is, we have thirteen songs, twelve in America, and thirteen as a bonus track elsewhere.  I began this project, as I have with many, where I begin my day at work from whatever resources are with me on that day, or wherever I left off with this craft of trying to perfect my experience in music somehow, and that's a lifelong effort.  Maybe I never will, but that's not the point.  It's just that I work at it, so, 'Soul to Soul,' was just that.  And because the guitar was this new--had become a new, interesting tool for me--
Speaker 1: How did this come about anyway?  I know you mentioned it before, but--
Speaker 2: The guitar?
Speaker 1: One of my questions was like, how did you pick up the guitar?
Speaker 2: Let's see, well, I started collecting musical instruments when I first moved to Los Angeles [California].  And something about--you need to naturalize these synthesizer tracks.  So, I was just kind of like trying to--you know, have a--and also the guitar sound and keyboards and synthesizers sound terrible, sounds terrible, they all do.  They haven't been able to figure out to make a real guitar sound like a "real" guitar.  So, I had one, so I would just kind of pull notes just to see if there was a way to--so that's how it started.  And then I had another guitar, and another guitar.  So, I have five or six guitars in my house, and it makes no sense.  What am I doing with all these guitars and I don't play them?  So I thought, I have to justify this, so I better learn how to play this thing.  So one year, the Betty Carter Jazz Ahead Program, one of those years, maybe six years ago, I decided to bring a guitar with me since I'm in the same place for two weeks.  And when you hear music all day from twenty-five different people, sometimes you don't want to hear a note, and sometimes stuff sticks with you, and sometimes you're inspired.  So, the guitar was perfect for me.  I could pick it up, I didn't have to plug it in, and I could just do things in my hotel room.  So, one day walking back from the hotel, I saw Chip Jackson, the bassist with [HistoryMaker] Billy Taylor, who was also on the faculty.  He's coming back to the hotel, but he's a bass player.  But I see him with this guitar.  So, "Chip, what are you doing with the guitar?"  "Oh, this is my travel guitar, I travel with it."  "I have one, too.  Could you do me a favor?  Could you just show me anything at all on this instrument?  I'm just, I don't know--just show me something."  "Sure, Carmen, what time do you want me to meet you?"  So, he comes to my room and he takes my guitar, picks it up and he plays a chord, and he said, "This is the Minor 7 chord," which he knew that I understood because I'm a pianist, right.  "Here's your Minor 7 chord, here's your five-seven [dominant seventh] chord, and this is where you resolve.  And you do that same thing on this chord.  You can take that same position and move it here and move it here." "What?  You're kidding me.  You're kidding me, come on.  So, take a picture of my finger so I wouldn't forget."  So, I've got this photograph with my fingers on the fret like this, so I wouldn't forget where he placed me, right, because it's all by ear after that.  So, from that little lesson with Chip, I was off to the races.  I just could not believe that I could get around the guitar from just that little thing he showed me.  So, now, one thing leads to another.  So, there you have it.  The guitar was now, you know, that was a functioning tool for me.  And what was great about it was that I always loved the music of Antonio Carlos Jobim, so I already had a reference.  I already had this musical sonic reference of how this could feel, how this could sound--simplistic, yet complex.  So, because I had that reference, I was able to place myself in an imaginary state where I could repeat something over and over again and just allow--and just let something float up, and things started to float up.  But what was cool about it was that it was different from the piano.  The piano, you know, I could actually voice something with eight different notes, where here it was just two or three, you know, maybe four, and they could just have such a richness.  So, from that, I began to use that more in the studio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was an instant thing.  I didn't have to come over and mic the piano.  This is when you've kind of got ideas going, you know.  I didn't have to mic the piano, plug it in.  When you have an idea, you don't want to lose it.  So, I found the guitar was a way to just, you know, press the chord and I could at least get it, and then go and lay it down on the piano, you see.  So, that was, that was it.
Story_ID: 193186
Speaker 1: So, this record was kind of a, was a continuation of, 'Changes,' where all of this began--'Solamente,' 'Changes,' and 'Soul to Soul.'  So, this whole little body of three records are what you're getting in, 'Soul to Soul.'  The difference is on, 'Solamente,' I had an eight-track player.  So I could only record eight-tracks, and I couldn't punch in, and I couldn't do anything.  It was just live in the music, you know, live in the moment.  So then here comes, 'Changes.'  I've got a little guitar thing going on now, a little bit more understanding of it, and I'm now recording on the computer, which allows for a lot more tracks.  And then you've got all these plug-ins you call them, with different sounds.  So now, I've got all these other things where I can utilize my compositional skills, you know.  And then I'm writing it all down and, you know, I like to do that.  When I have an idea, I like to write it down with my pencil on manuscript paper, and write the song out as a composition, see it as a composition, you know, the idea; I'm looking at it.  So, when I work on it, I already have my form and structure, you see, it's not just a blind kind of a way of getting things done and relying too much on the technology.  It's still a very basic thing--the pen in hand with the paper, and the notes on the page.  And then I attempt to do that, you see.  So, what you get from, 'Soul to Soul' is a continuum of that which started with the previous recording.  But now, Elizabeth comes to me and says, "Well, who do you want to record with?"  What a great question, because I had kind of like, I had vibes.  I kind of heard Warren Wolf, you know, and I had guitar, and I really did hear Earl Klugh.  "Who do you want to record with?  Why don't we just call those people?"  I had the tunes.  I was almost done with whatever this thing was becoming.  So, it turned out I had recorded the entire project before I ever called anybody to play on it.  So now I can give them the CD, "Here, here's the stuff.  I need you to play this line.  Do you hear that?"  (Unclear) harp, Carol Robbins.  "So, I want Carol Robbins on this.  I definitely want a harp on the record, okay?  Okay, great.  I want to have horns on the record.  I want trumpet, I want trumpet and tenor."  I knew I didn't want trumpet and alto, I wanted trumpet and tenor; I wanted to explore that sound more.  It reminded me of things like Freddie Hubbard and Wayne Shorter, you know.  That's who, that's what I was hearing, kind of like that Blue Note horn sound.  That's what I had, that was it.  So, okay, I have a trumpet, tenor, so I just went down the line.  And I wanted to record with Patrice Rushen.  Patrice and I had begun, we had met on this bandstand.  We had met before, but we met on a bandstand as a result of Terri Lyne Carrington's '[The] Mosaic Project.'  Her 'Mosaic Project' won a Grammy for Best Jazz Vocal in 20ll, so, there were tours that ensued as a result.  And Patrice Rushen was one of those artists that I was on the stage with.  And I just loved, just really loved what she brought to the music.  So, she lives in Los Angeles [California].  So that was kind of a--and she was into, she was open to the idea of our working together.  So there she was, and she made herself available.  And it just, down the line--and Daryl Hall who is from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] but lives in France.  Daryl and I toured at least three or four times in New York [City, New York] together, yet we hadn't recorded together.  So, I knew Daryl was my bassist for this.  And we just planned it that way.  We really went with who I really heard, who I had in mind.  And the only person that didn't come through for me was that guitar chair person that I wanted.  That didn't work out for me, so I just left all my guitar tracks on the record.  So, all that you're hearing is me, and it had just enough simplicity.  And Don [ph.], with his brilliant ears mixed it just so.  (laughter)
Story_ID: 193187
Speaker 1: Just kept me just right under that radar, you know, so it wouldn't be detected that it was actually Carmen, you know.  (laughter)
Speaker 2: Do you think you'll ever play the guitar onstage?
Speaker 1: You know, I did play the guitar on stage at the Blue Note [New York, New York].  The first time I played the Blue Note in the last few years, I played the guitar on that gig.  And they asked me back once since then, but since then I haven't played the Blue Note.  And just to, just to see if I could develop the confidence for doing it, Patrice [Rushen] and I did a duet here for a Billy Higgins tribute, and I played the guitar.  And I played it with Carol Robbins also, so I've done it a couple of times just ever so apologetically.
Story_ID: 193188
Speaker 1: Now, what project are you working on now?  What's the next big thing for you?
Speaker 2: Well, the next big thing is our engagement in New York [City, New York] next month, we're gearing up for that.  We will be at the Jazz Standard, and I'll be representing the music from the, 'Soul to Soul,' project which has been kind of an interesting for me, to focus on the body of material from a specific album.  That's been a little different for me.  And I'm glad we did it, because a lot of the music from, 'Soul to Soul,' was not performed live at all before we recorded it.  So, it's interesting to do a record that way, and then play the music after the fact.  And that's been an interesting reveal--a lot of the tunes.  Everybody has found other ways of approaching the tunes, and that's been kind of a cool thing, too.  And then also to sing a song like, 'Grace,' without Simphiwe [Dana] has been daunting, very hard for me to pull that off.  So, the next best thing is, the next great--or the next big thing, as you asked, would be my New York engagement.  We have a few gigs coming up next year where I'm going to--Warren Wolf, the vibraphonist from the recording, will be on stage with me.  So, it will be great to just have everybody--Randy Brecker, Carol Robbins, Bennie Maupin, you know, Warren Wolf, Mayra [Casalses]--you know, it will be great to have everybody on this.  Geri [Allen], you know, Patrice, all on the stage.  But we have yet to book that particular concert date.  And that's what I, I think that's the next big thing for me, is to be able to present, 'Soul to Soul,' on a concert stage.  I'll take it wherever it is on the planet, where everybody on the record is represented in the music in person.  That would, to me that's the next big thing.  But that's kind of a dream that, or a goal, that I want to realize before too long.
Story_ID: 193189
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would do differently, I mean if you could?
Speaker 2: No, I can't think of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And in same vein, when you look back at everything that you've done to this point, what today would you see to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Um, when I began, all I wanted to be was the next best greatest singer there was, that America had produced.  That was all I really dreamed of doing, to be a really, really great singer.  I never once dreamed that I would be as much of a writer as I have become.  And I think my legacy is that I may be--we'll find out in time--but I hope that I've made a contribution to the repertoire.  I hope that I have inspired young people to follow their dreams, that I can be an example that dreams can really be realized, you can actually do what you set out to do.  This is particularly important to me.  My family and the young girls and boys that get to call me Auntie, you know, they mean a lot to me.  I hope that I'm an example for them through this music.  I have seen the world, and learned a lot about myself through other people's perspectives, not my own.  My legacy, hopefully, is that with the help of people like Elisabeth Oei, Jack Taman [ph.], [Father] Peter O'Brien, Bill Morgenstern, that they can impact your life and assist you in realizing, you know, your goals.  And my legacy I think was that I've given the world new music, I've given the world new songs to sing.  I've given that, you know, horn player, another tune to get around, you know.  That's, that's important to me, that my writing has been as much of my voice as my singing has.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 193190
Speaker 1: There's another question we always ask, and it's--actually there's three more.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today?
Speaker 2: I want to see the face of a black man on American currency.  That would do it for me.  And you can just--while you're at it, you can put the forty acres and the mule on the backside, okay.  And it could be [HistoryMaker] [President] Barack Obama, our current president.  It could be Frederick Douglass, for all I'm concerned, you know.  You give me any of those images, and I'm cool; I can walk a tall walk.  So when I hand you, when I pay for what I rightfully am purchasing, and when I pay you for your services and it comes in the form of cash and it's got a black man on it next to that other guy, that will do it for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 193191
Speaker 1: Okay.  We always ask about family, too.  Now, you are married, and it's an unusual marriage.  Well, it's not, there's only two kinds in the United States now.  So--
Speaker 2: What kind are those?  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: So, you're married to Elisabeth Oei?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so, this is, well, just speak to what that means today, to be able to do that.
Speaker 2: Well, it's something we should always been able to do, so it's nice to be living in a time where we can.  And I've been in relationships prior to having met Elisabeth, but she's the only person I've ever wanted to marry.  So, that's kind of cool, that I actually got to marry the person I actually chose to marry.  We, I think we are very proud to represent as a couple to people that there's nothing unusual about two people in a common space sharing a commonality of feeling and an expression of love, that want to build a life together.  And I think that it's beyond--you know, when people say same sex, I think the minute you mention the word sex, all these pheromones pop out of people, and they all get funky and stuff.  But if you take the sex away from it, and it's just pure relationship--pure love energy between two people who decide individually to make a commitment to one another, you know--that may or may not have anything to do with religion; it may or not may have anything to do with politics.  But it's the reality, it's part of the human experience, that everyone should grow in life to a point where they can actually find themselves in love with the person that they choose to spend their life with.  So, for my realization to come true, I mean, for my life to be lifted up--which is really what it has been--my life with Elisabeth has lifted me up into a place of understanding and being a part of the world that I cannot imagine where I could be right now talking to you this day without this marriage, without this wonderful relationship.  And I think we've, I've also lived the truth; I have not lived a lie.  I never have--as a performing artist, as a woman--I have never--in my family life, my mother [Oveida Mathews Lundy-Francis], my father [Frankie Lundy], my grandparents, whoever--I have never once in a day of my life, lived a lie, you see.
Story_ID: 193192
Speaker 1: Do you think the black community is making progress on this issue?
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: I know it's often said that the black community is more conservative than it seems it should be on this issue.
Speaker 2: You know, that's a whole other three hours of you and I.  From my perspective, I think the black community is the reason why jazz has turned into some other non-entity as an American experience.  I think that jazz is losing a lot of it's ultimate, you know, growth and foundation due to the fact that we don't have black folks in the room with us the way, you know--Sunday morning, gotcha.  Come on, what about, you know, Saturday night, you know?  If you're so motivated to support rap, and this and that and the other, what's so different about this music?  You know, I have a problem with that in the black community.  I just feel like they just totally dismissed--there's no relevance, there's no ownership, none of that's happening, and that really bugs me.  For the few of us who have continued this art form with integrity and with some kind of sense of tradition and respect for those people who paved this wonderful freeway that we're on right now--because it was a dirty, scratchy, dirt road to begin with.  Now, we're like cruising on the freeway, and you can't show up and support us?  That really bothers me.  I have yet to be interviewed by a black magazine.  Ebony, Jet, Essence, I have yet to be asked one question, one question.  It makes no sense to me, it makes no sense.
Story_ID: 193193
Speaker 1: So, the African American community, as much as we evolved, we have not been allowed to realize our potential in this country fully, equally.  All you have to do is compare the education systems in a black neighborhood and compare it to the average white neighborhood, and you know that's the truth.  And the tricky part to discussing anything having to do with my racial identity--the tricky part to that is that the minute a person like myself, a woman of color, a person of color, discusses anything having to do with my racial identity, it is perceived to be from the negative, okay.  It's perceived to be from a negative--emotionally negative, anger, you know.  Anything that has to do with pride or assertive--self-awareness--anything that has to do with the positive is never going to make the news the same way as the negative, okay.  So, it's a very difficult subject to discuss or talk openly about without the listener perceiving it as the negative.  And what I said to you earlier, I was telling you that my parents--well, you know, around the time of affirmative action--and this whole term, affirmative action, is such an ugly word.  But I still say there would not, there would be no need for affirmative action had the right thing been done in the first place.  You know, there wouldn't need to be this action that affirms somebody's right to something.  So, here we are in a very difficult place in American history.  Because there's still a refusal, there's still a kind of threat of--it's easier to feel threatened than it is to feel enlightened by this "coming-together" as a people who are ultimately American, for every reason that has assisted us in becoming identified as such, you know.  So, just--American is the ultimate.  To be black American shouldn't be any less than to be Asian American or any less than to be, you know, Hispanic-American.  But for some reason--my sister said something to me that still bugs me to this day.  She said this to me on my birthday.  She said, "Well, you know that whoever of a different culture that comes into this country, even now when they come into America, it's still a color thing.  So, you're still welcome in this country if you're a, you know, if you're Anglo," she used the word Anglo.  "If you're pure Anglo, then you're still--but if you're not, if you're a person of color, it's still harder to just enter this country and pursue the American dream."  And when she said that--she's ten years younger than me--it really bothered me, because I wanted in my lifetime--because there was so much hope and so much promise and so much accomplishment--so much dismantling of so much institutionalization of the race thing--I wanted to really be a person at my age and think, "Oh, we did it; we finally did it, you know."  And that now, it is a question of the content of one's character.  But we're still struggling with this whole thing of feeling threatened by the person who is walking down the street with his hands in his pocket with a hood on who happens to be black.  And it's okay to carry guns, and then it's not okay to carry guns.  Well, you can carry a gun if you're like a cowboy in Texas or somewhere.  It's okay to have the gun right here when you're waiting the tables.  But if you're a black person with a gun sitting here, it's like, you know, the next thing you know, you're dead.  And it just really leaves me with what I would say, my hands are going like this--it's like it makes me reach down a little deeper.  It just makes me go a little deeper into myself to try to go into that place that I really don't like having to go into, you know, and reach down and bring something up that's a flower, you know.  That's a beautiful way of living with that kind of reality that refuses to go away.  And it's just like the cancer that we absolutely, hands down, have the cure for.  But too many people are making trillions of dollars trying to find a cure.  So, why then the cure?  We're making too much money just trying to find this cure.  We have a cure.  We have a cure for racism; we have a cure for cancer.
Story_ID: 193194
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.  How did your parents [Oveida Mathews Lundy-Francis and Freddie Lundy] feel about your career, you know?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My mom was a staunch supporter to the end.  I was on a, I was on a gig in Denmark.  My mother developed breast cancer in 1996 right after, I'm sorry, in 1992 she developed breast cancer, right after the terrible Andrew hurricane came through Miami [Florida] [1992].  And she lived with it for four years, and she passed away on September 11th of 1996.  And that day, she called me.  I was in Denmark, and she called me and she said, "You just, you just keep on singing; you just keep on focusing on your career.  And you just do that; that's what you're going to do."  I said, "Okay, Mom," but I didn't know that was the last time I would speak to her.  My father has never heard me sing professionally.  He just turned eighty-three.  Starting in 19--I knew that he was in all the religious, you know, the Bible toting, you know, whatever that is--you know, a staunchly sanctified and holy ghost kind of man, and I knew all that.  But I had already put out several records now.  I had gotten my courage to like approach him again to come to one of my concerts.  It was a very important concert.  I remember it was in the mid-eighties [1980s].  I was invited back to do a huge concert in Miami, which was a big deal at the time.  It was a festival with a great setting, thousands of people.  And I thought, "Well, this is the one.  This is the one I can get my father's approval on, for sure.  You know, this means a lot."  I go to my dad, call him up, "Dad, I got tickets for you and everybody.  Just, you know, what time do you want to be here?  I've made arrangements for you to get the tickets."  And he's like, "Oh, no, I can't.  I can't do that.  I'll never make it to heaven; I'll never make it to the Kingdom of Heaven if I hear you sing."  And I'm on the other end of the phone all excited about this concert, and my father shoots it to shit, and just takes me down to that horrible place.  And I'm like, you know, I'm in makeup and I'm ready to do my thing, and I'm just crying my eyes out.  So, I call my mother after this conversation and, you know, she can hear my, she can hear how painful, what a painful state I was in.  And she, in her wonderful way, she found some words to kind of lift me up.  So, the irony of that whole thing was that Mayra [Casales] was in the band; she's from Miami and we were both on the gig.  And we're, you know, we're getting ready for the gig, and her father comes and he has a gift for me.  He actually brings me a gift, and I couldn't even get my dad to show up and put some clothes on and come down and listen to me sing.
Story_ID: 193195
Speaker 1: So, now I get over that.  That was the '80s [1980s], I finally, you know, I get over that, I'm over it. So, now, I'm invited, you know, ten years later I'm invited to sing with the Miami Symphony [Orchestra], whoa.  The Miami Symphony, that's pretty darn good.  So, I remember talking to my father [Freddie Lundy] that day.  I said, "Well, Dad, I went to school.  I mean, you're the reason why, you helped me to be able to afford to get my college education."  "Yes, but I thought you were going to be a teacher."  "Yes, I am a teacher, I teach all over the world.  I've done master classes in Australia and Africa, Japan, Switzerland."  Still not enough.  So, now, the Miami Symphony.  This time I do one better.  I get in the car and I go to my father's house, and I sit with him.  But I'm not sure how that's going to go, so I asked my aunt to come with me.  "Can you come with me to Daddy's house?  I want to invite him to this concert."  He sat right there.  "Nope, it's not gonna happen."  So, now I'm, you know, I'm in my late forties, early fifties, wherever I am.  And I just--you know, a lifetime of this.  And sometimes I wonder if maybe that's one of those other things that makes you you--that you dig down and you bring that song up, and you sing that song a certain way, because you've got all that stuff in your reality, and it's still part of who you are; there's still no acknowledgement, and you can't seem to--so, now, the name Lundy--he's getting it left and right.  "Lundy, oh, is that your daughter Carmen?  I saw her in the newspaper.  There's a big article about your daughter in the newspaper."  Do you think that makes a difference to my father?  Uh-uh.  So, then I give him--the last time I saw my dad, I gave him a stack of my CD's, "Here, happy birthday."  And he said, "Oh, this will be good for business."  I don't know what he meant, but my father has never heard me sing.  I've been on, I think I was on BET [Black Entertainment Television].  His wife--he re-married--and I think I was on BET, and she was flipping the channel and there I was on BET. And, "Look, (unclear) on TV," you know.  "Nope, I can't watch."  What?  So, I lived with that.  I lived with one of my parents [her mother, Oveida Mathews Lundy-Francis] who was the most supportive having passed away.  And I was hoping that I could now build a relationship, because it's my only parent that's still here, and that I could now build--but that's a two-way street.  So, it's a very painful thing, Larry, to talk about, to--you can't--it's like you've got to accept--it's like the matter of accepting something, because nothing I have done has made a difference in that one little aspect of his concept of what eternal life is all about, you know.  So, when he told me, when he actually insulted me by saying all those things, I just said, "Well, if there's a heaven I'll see you there someday," click, good-bye.
Speaker 2: Does he react the same way to your brother's career?
Speaker 1: That would, that would require you talking directly with Curtis [Lundy] to get what that is.  But he has not participated in our professional life.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: To my knowledge he is yet to see my brother pull those strings so beautifully.  And the thing is, it's his loss.  That's what, that's why it's--the complexity of the, you know, the sadness is that it's his loss.  And he's been given so many opportunities, just one after the other.  So, that's my, that's my--I don't want to say my legacy--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Unclear--
Speaker 1: --But it's something, it's definitely--it's kind of a burden that I would rather not have to carry.
Story_ID: 193196
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is like legacy, but a little bit different, a little bit more personal.  Ma'am how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, one second. What'd you say?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Oh, my artwork.  We talked about, did we talk about my painting?  A little bit?
Speaker 1: A little.  We could talk about it some more.
Speaker 2: Ask me that question again.  The last question was?
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?  But, yeah, we didn't talk about the painting in any kind of detail.  But I know you mentioned that you taught yourself.  You painted with oils, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I painted, and I taught myself.  And I have exhibited.
Speaker 1: Where have you exhibited?
Speaker 2: Once at the Jazz Bakery in Los Angeles [California].  And one of my paintings was on, it was in a competition in New York City [New York] at the Jazz Gallery.  I've sold some of my work, and I try to incorporate that into my daily life.  So I try to--especially when you're coming off tour and you've been--so much music--sometimes I don't like to go right back in to the studio.  And I find that the painting gives me a chance to kind of form some ideas, or think about some things, or listen to other people's music for a while, and then kind of return into the music making part.  But it's been a great, wonderful, wonderful extension of my expression.
Story_ID: 193197
Speaker 1: Okay, to answer your question, how would I like to be remembered?  A consummate professional.  That matters to me, that musicians know that I have made every effort to be as generous a bandleader as an artist.  It's very important to me that musicians regard me as their very own.  It's not the same as being one of the cats, you know, that's not what I'm talking about.  I mean that we are--that they can always--when you hear the name--they speak my name--that you know that was a woman of integrity, and of the highest efforts made to be a professional and considerate artist alongside them in the making of the music, that's huge for me.  Personally, I've tried to be a good sister, you know, relative of the family.  I've tried to bring forth that which gives them a sense of pride to represent the name that I was born with, in a way that will always be held in high esteem and integrity, and make them feel better about themselves, and that I've made a contribution to their life that's for the good.  Friends, I'd like to be remembered as a genuine, honest-to-goodness home girl, down to earth, you know, that I think we've--anyone who enters our home feels comfortable here, feels welcome here.  And as a neighbor, that I am a good representative for what it's like you want to be when you grow up, you know.  That I see a lot of kids growing up on my street here, and I'm one of the first people they know when they're two and three and five, you know; I'm one of the first people they know.  So, that I represent myself, my life, and my family life, and where I come from with a lot of integrity, so they don't have to fear people that look like me when they grow up; they don't have to--they know that everybody isn't like that, because I'm one of them that makes the exception.  And these are things that matter to me, that I'm a woman of character and a woman of generosity, and sensitive and considerate of other people's feelings.  And this means a lot, because I think these are the things that, as I evolve as a person, matter to me.
Story_ID: 193198
Speaker 1: This is a family portrait taken, it looks like it's the '70s [1970s].  Looks like it might be the early seventies, actually mid-seventies, now that I look closer.  And this was the wedding of my sister.  She's the person here, and this is Corlis [Lundy].  Now in terms of age, this is my mother [Oveida Mathews Lundy-Francis].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  First on the left is my mother.  Next is my middle sister, Cheryl [Matos], and that's Corlis there with the bouquet.  That's Curtis [Lundy], my brother, the bassist.  There I am in the yellow dress.  That's my youngest sister, Lavita [Correll Lavita Lundy], we call her.  That's my youngest brother, Freddie, Jr. [Freddie Lundy, II], and that's my brother, Carl [Lundy].  And this is my father [Freddie Lundy] in the blue suit.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is, wow, that's my mother as a young lady.
Speaker 2: What's her full name?
Speaker 1: Oveida.  That's my mother, Oveida.  It's so funny that I see that she signs it, "With love," down here.  And when I autograph most of my recordings for people, I always say "With love," and I didn't realize that we had that in common.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of Elizabeth Oei and myself.  It looks like we might be backstage at Ronnie Scott's in London [England].  Oh, I look so different there, oh, my.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is, on the left here, that's a photograph of me that's taken during the release of my first record for JVC, 'Self Portrait,' in 1994.  This photograph was taken of me at the age of twenty-one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What you have here are early--
Speaker 1: Now, we're not going to try to shoot all of these, so--
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you can just do the whole page.  These are early promo shots of all the different bands that I was in.  You can see Bobby Watson there with the big Afro, a famous saxophonist.  And that's my brother in the hat, to his left in the photograph.  This is one of my first gigs at the Eden Rock Hotel in Miami, Miami Beach [Florida].  Playing percussion is hysterical, these are hysterical photographs.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: And what's this one down here?
Speaker 2: Okay, this is when I opened for Patti LaBelle at the University of Miami concert.  And that's actually the photograph you see in the yearbook.  There's no picture of me like most classmates.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: More shots of Miami.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's your brother in the hat, on the right?
Speaker 2: That's my brother in the hat here on the far right.  That's Bobby Watson with the big Afro behind.  And Diego Iborra, Ceaser Ely, trumpet player.  Oliver Wells--
Speaker 1: Okay, can you start from left to right, so people can keep track?
Speaker 2: Okay.  From left to right, Oliver Wells [ph.], Cesar Ely, Diego Iborra, myself, Bobby Watson, Peter Harris, Curtis Lundy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this is the picture that says "Jazz Sounds (unclear)."
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a photograph of me on the very night of my senior recital in this wonderful, wonderful, I don't know what you call that--dashiki gown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: More reviews and things.  This is still Miami--
Speaker 1: This is an interesting piece here.
Speaker 2: This is like a little promo piece by a woman named Linda Robbins [ph.] who just was a, she's an artist studying.  This is funny.  This is Bruce Hornsby's contract for employment when he was working with me in Miami.  That's hysterical, with his signature for two hundred and ten dollars.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is more promo shots.  Lemme go to this let's see, this is all the different hairstyles, oh my God.  This is my, the cover story from the Village Voice by Gary Giddins.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Singing on the steps of City Hall for the [HistoryMaker] Jesse Jackson campaign back in '84 [1984].  That's me with Ray Barretto.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Several newspaper articles, the Billboard jazz charts, when the 'Good Morning Kiss,' record was number three.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: This is me with Paul McCartney hanging out.  Underneath the fold on the paper, you see the Billboard chart where I was number three, just under, look at that.  I was under, the other side of, 'Round Midnight,' and then soundtrack from, 'Round Midnight,' and then Carmen Lundy number three.  That's pretty darn great.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is more newspapers articles throughout.  This is all New York.  This is all during my time in New York City.  Look, there's Dakota Staton and Carmen Lundy next to each other, I love with, with Leon Thomas on top.   What is--hysterical.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This was, this is, yeah, that is from Vanity Fair.  You can see the Vanity Fair--I put the Vanity Fair thing there to remind myself that's where that was from.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Williamsburg Orchestra [ph.], that's when I was doing, my first time doing almost anything with a string quartet in New York [City, New York].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: This is, 'Sophisticated Ladies.'  This whole page is dedicated to my role in, 'Sophisticated Ladies.'  I actually did a painting of it.
Speaker 1: A self-portrait?
Speaker 2: A self-portrait.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Backstage in my robe.  Then you have some posters of a lot of my appearances here in the [United] States. This is a trip lookin' at this this way, I never even looked at--more headshots.  This is hysterical, all the different hairdos, oh, my god. Oh, my god.  I don't mind this, she's a pretty lady.  (laughter)  That's pretty, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: And I like this one because I'm singing in that one.  That's good, yeah, that's good. Those two work for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Let's see, Variety.  This is when I began to, you can see a lot more publications of my work outside the United States and some other kinds of papers that were reporting on jazz, Variety, The Hollywood Reporter, you know, that was unusual, to be covered, for jazz music to be covered in those periodicals.  These are more covers.  That's me in Paris [France], my first time in Paris, my very first time in Paris. You see lots, more newspaper articles here.  This is with the, this is when I was singing my own compositions in Sweden, with the Norbotten Big Band.  So this is when I was becoming, you know, I was being recognized for being a composer as such.  And I'm very proud of that record, 'Self-Portrait,' very proud of the work that we did on that. Let's see.  This is work with, that's an unusual cover that you're photographing, because this is the actual cover of the record.  We never used that cover picture for anything.  That's kind of cool to see that.  Oh, I see, these are all the possibilities for covers--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --that they presented with me.  And they went with the black and white.  That's what that is.  Okay, so all of these are more head shots, I mean what do you call them?  Proofs, we used to call them proofs back then.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Of me in the studio with different guys.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is, as you can see, travels in Brazil, trips to--
Speaker 2: Is this Brazil here?
Speaker 1: Okay, this photograph, that's a Brazil photograph.  That's Billy Childs' [William Edward Childs] piece for orchestra and Africa percussion.  And you can see some of my artwork when I was doing, when I was, had my first art exhibit here in Southern California.  It was here at the Jazz Bakery.  And now here's Brazil.  That was so great.  Look, Buster Williams, Steve Turre.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA CONVERSATION)
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's 'Afrasia.'
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Archie Shepp.
Speaker 2: Archie Shepp.
Speaker 1: Wow, nice.  Look, there's my brother.  That's from the same picture, that's nice.  I don't know what language it is.  So then I move on to my Justin Time Records period.  This was in the early 2000s--2000, 2001, where I, I think it was the first time I recorded an album with all original music, it was with Justin Time.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: That's just more posters from Japan, which is kind of great to see all the different characters in other languages. The New Yorker, that's nice to have a New Yorker blurb.
Speaker 2: All right, next.
Speaker 1: This is Greece.  That's Russia.  This is photographs of performances in Greece.
Speaker 2: I'll get that one.
Speaker 1: And that's interesting.  It's got three of my album covers on one... okay.  Let's see, what is that?  I don't know what that is. Something fell out Okay, this is Russia, that's Russia.  And this is only book one, oh, my God.
Speaker 2: These are pretty good.  When we get done with this, I think we--
Speaker 1: Okay.  There's--I feel you.
Speaker 2: I think we have enough.  We're just trying to get a, you know, a pretty good sample.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I got you.  It's ridiculous. Okay, we're good, we're good.  No, one picture, one more picture I want you to get.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it's this one, this one of Elisabeth [Oie] and I.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it's right after the success of the live concert.
