Story_ID: 186152
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My name is James Oscar Lee, James, J-A-M-E-S, Oscar, O-S-C-A-R, Lee, L-E-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is April 1, 1912, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a teacher.
Speaker 1: All right, and you're currently retired, right?
Speaker 2: I'm retired.
Speaker 1: All right, from the Chicago Board of Education, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I worked for the Chicago Board of Education.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?  November the 6th I think--5th, November the 5th.  I can't see it from there.
Speaker 1: Oh (laughter), okay, you gave it away, huh?  December 5th.
Speaker 2: Yeah, December 5th, 2003.
Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present time, and you, you don't have to give your address, just but, you know.
Speaker 2: I'm at my home, in the living room.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: In Chicago, Illinois, right?
Speaker 1: In Chicago.
Story_ID: 186153
Speaker 1: Now, okay, before we go into depth and there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions we are compelled to ask, and they only require a short answer.  The first question is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is Virginia ham.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like the springtime.  I like the changing of the trees, the colors.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  We usually travel to some of the islands in the Pacific [Ocean].
Speaker 1: Okay, for instance, what--
Speaker 2: Well, Hawaii for one, the different islands we go.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now do you have a favorite phrase or, or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite phrase that I use--I can't think of one that I use that regular.  I don't think I have any.
Story_ID: 186154
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  And I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side and your father's side.  I'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, first?
Speaker 2: Carrie, C-A-R-R-I-E, Carrie Gertrude, G-E-R-T-U-R-D-E [sic.], and her last name was Ward, W-A-R-D.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: That I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know that.
Speaker 1: Was she born in Gloucester [County], Virginia?
Speaker 2: She was born, yes, she was born--both my father [Walter Lee] and mother were born in Gloucester County, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's where they were from.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you don't know what year she was born?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And what happened was that they moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and that's where I was born.  But my father went off on his own.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I don't know too much about him at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I'll ask you later on about him, and we'll see what we can find out.  But your mother was, about what, was she born in the 1890s you think, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about 18-something.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: About how old was she when she had you?  What would you say?
Speaker 2: When she passed she was eighty-two.
Speaker 1: And that was in what year?
Speaker 2: That was in--let's see.  I don't know exactly what year it was.  It's been at least, at least twenty years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in the '70s [1970s].  So, yeah, I guess she was born around 1890 I guess or so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhere in there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 186155
Speaker 1: Now what do you know about her [Lee's mother, Carrie Ward Lee] side of the family?  How far back can you trace her side of the family?
Speaker 2: I can trace it back only to her mother because her mother lived with us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she lived with us until she was 104, then she passed.
Speaker 1: Okay, when did she pass, do you, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I was young then (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Were you--
Speaker 2: I was a teenager then.
Speaker 1: Teenager?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she was 104 then, so she was--yeah, she was born prior to the Civil War then, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --right?  Did she ever tell, tell you things about the war or about any, any of that time?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't.
Speaker 1: She didn't talk about that at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she talk about any, any other relatives or where they might be?
Speaker 2: No, she never talked about any of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you never heard any stories about that side of the family or--
Speaker 2: No, I don't even remember my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember even seeing him, but I do remember her because she came to live with us.  I think he had passed.  She stayed on the farm until he passed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then she came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Did, did your mother ever talk about what her, her mother may have told her about anything?
Speaker 2: No, they never--I never heard anything.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what did they do for a living?  I mean what, what did your--
Speaker 2: My mother did day's work.  She went out and worked in the homes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did your grandmother do the same thing?
Speaker 2: She didn't work at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, but when she did work, did she--
Speaker 2: When she did, I guess she just kept house--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because they were--they lived on a farm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so your grandfather had been a farmer you said.
Speaker 2: A farmer, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he own his own land or was he--
Speaker 2: Yes, he owned--
Speaker 1: --renting?
Speaker 2: --he owned his own land.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, tell us about--so there's nothing else that you remember that, that comes down from about that side at all?
Speaker 2: No, I had, I had an uncle that I remember.  His name was--but they called him Nash [ph.], and I remembered him because he used to drive an oxen, you know, those big, big bulls that they use to pull timber out of the forest.  When they'd cut trees down, they had these big bulls.  They worked in pairs.  They had wooden yokes over their--over their necks.  And he would talk to 'em, and hee and haw [ph.] whatever means right or left.  He would just say that, and they would just do whatever he said do, but no reins on 'em.  He just talked to 'em like they were humans (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Really, so there were no, no--
Speaker 2: No reins.
Speaker 1: --no reins at all.  They would just--he would just tell 'em what to do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember that.
Speaker 1: Did he have names for 'em?
Speaker 2: I don't think he had any names for 'em, but he just hooked them up, and they'd go to the forest with him, you know.  And he got paid for them hauling this wood down to the river so they could float the logs down to the, to the sawmill.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, now the, the oxen were in Virginia, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --he owned a farm in Virginia--
Speaker 2: Did--
Speaker 1: --Gloucester County, Virginia.
Speaker 2: So you'd go down and visit sometimes in the, in the summer?
Speaker 1: Yeah, when I was a kid I'd go down there to visit.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so this is your uncle.  Was, was this your mother's brother?
Speaker 1: My mother's brother.
Speaker 2: Okay, and his name was, again, was--
Speaker 1: They called him Nash--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Nash Ward.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now can--is there any, anything else about that side of the family you remember?
Speaker 1: No, I don't remember anything else but--
Speaker 2: But the Wards had their own farm there?
Speaker 1: They had their own farm.  They had--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --a pretty big farm down there 'cause you had to walk from farm to farm, you know.  They didn't have any (cough) automobiles or nothing like that.  You had to walk.
Speaker 2: Okay, they wouldn't ride horses or anything like that?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, if you had a horse or--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --a saddle, yeah, you did that, but a lot of people just walked.  They didn't have a horse.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, now where is Gloucester, Virginia?  Is that--what is it near?  Is it, is it like near the [Atlantic] Coast or is it, is it--
Speaker 1: Beg your pardon?
Speaker 2: What part of it--
Speaker 1: It's near the coast.
Speaker 2: --Virginia is it?  Is it, it's near the coast?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Chesapeake Bay.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Used to do a lot of fishing there.  Chesapeake Bay has oysters.
Story_ID: 186156
Speaker 1: Now what about your father's side of the family?  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: No, the only thing I remember his name was Walter, W-A-L-T-E-R, Walter Lee.  That's all I remember about him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: L-E-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you know when he was born or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He was born around Gloucester [County, Virginia] too, right?
Speaker 2: He was around the same age as my mother [Carrie Ward Lee], right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was from, he was from down in that part of the country, Gloucester.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think they lived on the next farm or something.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is that how they met, you think?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your mother tell you a story about how they met or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I know you say you don't know much about him--
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: --but did, did you know him at all when you were a young--was he around?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know him when I'd see him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wouldn't see him that often.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you know much about his side of the family at all?  Did they--
Speaker 2: Well, he came from a well--his family was more well-to-do than my mother's family because I think his father raised racehorses.  He had a big farm.  They had racehorses.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, anything else?  Any stories about him?
Speaker 2: No, I don't--
Speaker 1: Did he ever win any races?
Speaker 2: I don't know what he did with them--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --or whether he sold 'em or what happened.  I don't know about that.  I know he had quite a few horses--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on a big farm there, raising horses.
Story_ID: 186157
Speaker 1: When did your family move to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I don't know because I have a brother [Walter Lee] and a sister [Darthy Lee Cullens], and we were all born in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't know when your mother [Carrie Ward Lee] moved there?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So evidently it must have been soon as--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --they got married they must have moved, came here to Philadelphia.
Story_ID: 186158
Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother [Carrie Ward Lee].  What was your mother like, and what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: I told you she did day's work.  She went out and cleaned people's houses, did their laundry, things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And sometimes when she wasn't doing that, she was a cook.  She would go to various places that served food, and they'd hire her as a cook.  She was a very good cook.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know what know what kind of opportunities she had for education and that sort of thing when she was growing up or--
Speaker 2: No, she didn't, she didn't have much of an education at all.
Speaker 1: Did they have a black school in Gloucester [County, Virginia] at all or--
Speaker 2: I don't think she even finished grammar school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But she was a pretty smart woman.  She could hold her own.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she basically, she--your household when you were growing up consisted of your mother and your grandmother, basically, and--
Speaker 2: That's, all, my mother and grandmother.
Speaker 1: And your siblings?
Speaker 2: And my sister [Darthy Lee Cullens]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and my brother [Walter Lee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brother, he was the oldest.  My sister was next, and then I--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --was the baby of the family.
Story_ID: 186159
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you know about your father [Walter Lee] you can tell us?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know anything else about him.
Speaker 1: Then you would see him from time to time, you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would see him from time to time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did he ever do anything to help you or anything or to--
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.
Speaker 1: --interact?  Okay.
Speaker 2: He never, he never came to my graduation when I finished high school [Central High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  He didn't, he didn't come to my--he didn't come to the ceremony when I finished college [Cheyney State Teachers College, later, Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania].  He really wasn't interested.
Speaker 1: Okay, did he live in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he lived in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But he was involved with the racehorses?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: He was involved with the racehorses in Philadelphia too?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't, he didn't bother with racehorses.
Speaker 1: Okay, his family did that in [Gloucester County] Virginia, okay.
Speaker 2: His family did that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: He didn't do that.
Story_ID: 186160
Speaker 1: What was your neighborhood like, and what were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I grew up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  I attended grammar school, Reynolds [General John F. Reynolds School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]; the name was Reynolds.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And of course we had a lot of fun at school.  And when I finished--before I finished grammar school I had a job.  I used to work at a print shop after school, and I continued to do that even when I went to high school [Central High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  There was a fellow that had a, had his own print shop.  He had a press, and I would go in there and he would show me how to set type and how, how to run the press.  In fact, I could do pretty good on my own running the press.  It was a foot press; you know, you use your feet and your hands, and you had to coordinate it.  If you made a mistake it'd mash your hand, putting the paper, you know.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: See, it was a big flywheel, and you had two pedals that you'd move your feet up and down, and this wheel, big wheel turned.  And you had a, you had a plate, a metal plate in the machine, and then you have the plate with the type that you printed that you had set.  You put that in and you put that in the machine, and the two would meet like this.
Speaker 1: 'Cause they would roll together.
Speaker 2: No, they would meet--
Speaker 1: Oh, like this--
Speaker 2: But it, it--
Speaker 1: --just like--
Speaker 2: --would open--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and close like this.  And as you would use the foot pedals, there was a big cylinder and you had big rubber rollers that would roll up on the cylinder.  That's where you got the ink from.  It would come down inside the press, go across the type, and back up again.  It would do like this, to put the ink on the type so that when the machine opened, you'd stick the paper in, pull your hand out, and it would press.  It would go together, and then you'd snatch it out and then put another one in.  And you would do, keep doing that.  And you had to synchronize it and--
Speaker 1: So your feet were moving and your hands at the same time.
Speaker 2: And your hands.  And you don't make a mistake 'cause you'd mash your fingers--
Speaker 1: Did you ever make a--
Speaker 2: --'cause it would close up.  No (laughter) 'cause I, I just watched the press, and the same thing when I was teaching cabinet making.  I never lost any fingers 'cause I didn't--as I would tell the kids, I said, "Now, when you go to these machines, they cut, they're cutting machines.  It'll cut anything you put up there.  It would cut wood; it'll cut meat; it'll cut the bones in your fingers; it'll cut anything you put up there 'cause that's what it is.  And when you use this machine, you don't talk to anybody.  You look at this machine.  And if I catch you looking someplace else, I won't let you use the machine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because most people that worked in shops like that they got fingers missing.
Speaker 1: Which represents a lapse in attention I guess.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 186161
Speaker 1: Now what did your neighborhood look like?  What part of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] did you live in?
Speaker 2: I lived in North Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, North Philadelphia.  And what, what--did you live in an apartment building or a, or a house, or what?
Speaker 2: Sometimes we would live in a house; sometimes we just had a room.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It would vary depending on the money that was coming in whether you could afford to keep a house, you know.  When money was good, then you had a house and you had your own stove, your heater downstairs, you know, like you'd feed the furnace.  We had a house to live in.  When money was slow then you maybe rent two rooms or something like that.  Keep the family together.
Speaker 1: Now you, you were a child I guess before the [Great] Depression, I guess.
Speaker 2: Well what?
Speaker 1: Before the Great Depression, before--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's before the--
Speaker 1: Before that hit.
Speaker 2: --Great Depression.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so could you--
Speaker 2: I, I remember the Depression.  I remember going through that.
Speaker 1: Now you were, I guess you were about sixteen when the Depression hit, right, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I imagine I was, I was a teenager when the Depression--
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Well, what did the neighborhood look like and what, what, what were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of the neighborhood when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Well, we, we just had row, row of houses, just a row of houses.  And it was just about maybe a two-story house.
Speaker 1: Okay, so these were row houses, the kind that are--
Speaker 2: Row of houses.
Speaker 1: --that are not--
Speaker 2: All alike.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --little houses, and they're all attached.
Speaker 1: And there are no gangways between 'em or anything.
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: It was straight up.
Speaker 2: --no gangways between 'em, but you did have a backyard.  You could go out in the backyard.
Speaker 1: But you could only get to the back by going to the front, right?
Speaker 2: Go in the front.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then come out the back, and there's an alley.  But the houses were all attached, and they were about two stories.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they used to have what they call a busybody.  Your parents or your mother and your father always had the, the room upstairs that faced the front of the house that you could look out the window and look down the street.  And in that room they had a little box like, but it was made of mirrors.  They had mirrors that you looked into outside the window, and you could see everything.  You could see down the street both ways and everything.  And used to call 'em busybodies because people would sit, sit up and watch that and see who was going in whose house and who was coming out, you know.  It was, it, it was the mirrors, the way they were shaped and put in, it would hang outside the window.  And you would look into this, this mirror.  And you could look this way down the street, or you could look this way down the street, or across the street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We called them busybodies.
Speaker 1: I've never heard of that before, but that's, that, that's interesting.  So, people would sit and look out the window.  They, they had a, a tool actually to allow them to look, you know--
Speaker 2: Both ways.
Speaker 1: --beyond what the eyes could see.
Speaker 2: You didn't have, you didn't have to raise the window and look out.  You could look in the busybody and look down this way or look down this way, and you could see who was at your front door from up in the front bedroom where you had, you know--
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  So, 'cause I thought you were gonna talk about a person who was a busybody, but that's a--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --this is a device, okay.
Speaker 2: It's a device called a busybody.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 186162
Speaker 1: Now these are the days before radio--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --and television--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --you know, not, not, not to mention television, but this is the day before radio.
Speaker 2: Day before radio.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Because when radios came out we made our own radios.  We got the little crystals and put our wires together, and we had a little crystal that the stations were on.  And then you had like a little cat's whisker that you would put it on the station.  You had to find the station, and we--and we used to listen to Earl "Fatha" Hines coming from the Grand Terrace Ballroom [New Grand Terrace Cafe] here in Chicago [Illinois] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  He'd come on at twelve o'clock at night.  And we would have our radi- our radios set up with this little crystal on that spot that he'd come on--no numbers; you had to find him.  And once you found him, you wouldn't let nobody move it because you don't know when you'd ever find it again.
Speaker 1: So, the set consisted of a--
Speaker 2: Crystal.
Speaker 1: --ground rock or I mean a crystal?
Speaker 2: Like, like a round--it was a crystal--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that the stations would come on.  And they were on there.  Now, you, you--the--well, say, we have stations now that you, you turn to, seventy-five and ninety-five; you could turn to those stations.  But we had no way of doing that.  But all those, all of those stations would come in on that crystal, but you had to find it on the crystal.  It was like a needle, like a little point that you'd stick on there.
Speaker 1: Did the crystal have holes in it or something--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or, or you just--
Speaker 2: It was kind of rough like.  It was kind of rough like, but the stations were on there.  And then when you would find that station, if you liked the station, you wouldn't let nobody change it.  Like we found the one of Earl Hines, "Fatha" Hines course, don't change it afterwards because we know where, where we can get "Fatha" Hines.  If you take it off, you would catch the devil trying to find that station again, to find that particular spot.
Speaker 1: So, so you'd have--how would you, I mean hear?  Did you have an earpiece or something, or how, how would you hear this band?
Speaker 2: You have earphones.
Speaker 1: Earphones, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  What did people do for entertainment, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was about a teenager I lived, I lived near a theater.  It was like 47th Street.  This was a street running in Philadelphia called Ridge Avenue.  It's a large street, and it had a lot of stores, and of course they had a movie house, and a showplace that all of the shows would come in from Washington [D.C.] or New York [New York].  The bands would come in and play there, comedians, just like they had here [Chicago, Illinois] on 47th Street, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay, like the Regal [Theater, Chicago, Illinois], sort of like the Regal.
Speaker 2: --shows would come from here or over there, comedians (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What was the name of the theater?
Speaker 2: Pearl Theater.
Speaker 1: Pearl Theater, okay.
Speaker 2: It was called Pearl.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: It was on North Ridge Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was about, I lived about three blocks from it, and we used to go over there and see all of the comedians, and dancers, singers--
Speaker 1: Who were some of your favorites?
Speaker 2: Well, in comedians, we had Butterbeans and Susie [Jodie Edwards and Susie Edwards].  They lived here.  They're, they're Chicago natives I think.  They were there; they would come in.  And we'd have Cab Calloway, Count Basie, Jimmie Lunceford, Lionel Hampton, all of them would come, Moms Mabley.  We had everybody that would come in there, the dancers, Billy Eckstine, Arthur Prysock, all of those--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now this is like in the '30s [1930s], right, in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --thirties [1930s]?
Speaker 2: They'd all come to this Pearl Theater, and that it would have amateur night, just like they did up at Apollo [Theater] in New York.
Story_ID: 186163
Speaker 1: Did you have to attend church, and did you go to church a lot?  Was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --that a big part of life?
Speaker 2: I started out at an Episcopalian church when I was young.  And then I got older, I joined the Baptist church, Reverend Johnson's [ph.] church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was, was your mother [Carrie Ward Lee] a member of the Episcopalian church or--
Speaker 2: No, she wasn't Epis- Episcopalian.  We were there by ourselves.  The three of us kids would go.
Speaker 1: Now, now--
Speaker 2: She went to the Baptist church.
Speaker 1: Okay, but why did you all go to the Episcopalian church at first and--
Speaker 2: 'Cause a lot of our buddies were there.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: So we went along with them.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that church?
Speaker 2: I only (unclear)--the father, Father Jacobs [ph.] I think was the name, 'cause his name was the father there--that was on Cottage Grove--no, it wasn't Cottage Grove.  I can't think of what street that was on.  Oxford Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] I think it was.  But we all attended that church.  There were a lot of kids there from the grammar school.  We all would go there.
Story_ID: 186164
Speaker 1: Yes, sir, now you were telling us about a wire recorder.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What's that?
Speaker 2: I thought everybody knew about it because Sears and Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] sold 'em.  I bought a big cabinet, and it had the, had the, the record player in there and the speakers, and you know and the radio.  And they, instead of a tape recorder, a cassette, they had a wire recorder.  You recorded on a wire spool.  And if the spool or wire would break, you just tie it in a knot and keep going.  It was, it was a, I guess the wire was--the tape was about, maybe about five inches, and it had a big spool of wire, and you taped on the wire.
Speaker 1: So you can tape your favorite radio show on the wire?
Speaker 2: Yes, you, you just taped that and send--we had a little, we had a little mic [microphone] with it that we'd pass around the room and let people--if you're gonna play, if you're gonna make a play or something, you speak your part, you speak your part, and you pass the mic around, and then we can play it back on the wire.
Speaker 1: Now when did that come out do you think?
Speaker 2: I was thinking, because I bought that here in Chicago [Illinois]--I mean I bought that here.  I bought it from Sears, and I had it when I moved into this house.
Speaker 1: In '50--
Speaker 2: This was in '53 [1953], but I wasn't using it 'cause I think it--I stopped using it maybe about four years before.
Speaker 1: Did you buy it in, in the, in the '40s [1940s] or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it must have been in the '40s [1940s] that I bought it.  But in those days, all of the cabinets were very beautiful.  They made beautiful cabinets.  And everybody kept the cabinets when the works inside nev- didn't work anymore, and they made something else out of the cabinet.  They'll make a, put books in it or put something in it because they paid so much for these cabinets, and TVs and stuff that you had.  You get a five or six hundred dollar TV.  The cabinet was beautiful.  Then when the works on the inside wasn't any good anymore, you couldn't throw away the cabinet 'cause it was so pretty, then you'd make something else, make a bar out of it or something.  Everybody kept their cabinets.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's before they started making molded plastic televisions--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and appliances--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --like this.
Speaker 2: Yeah, before they started that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, everybody had, had a cabinet, and make something out of it.
Speaker 1: Yes, but I guess the, yeah, the, I guess part of the value of an appliance would be the furniture I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --that it was in--
Speaker 2: --beautiful pieces--
Speaker 1: --that, that enclosed it.
Speaker 2: --of furniture that they made.  I kept that cabinet upstairs for a long time.  I finally got rid of it.
Story_ID: 186165
Speaker 1: Tell me about school.  Now, you went to grade school--
Speaker 2: At Reynolds [General John F. Reynolds School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 1: At Reynolds, yeah.
Speaker 2: --grammar school.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Did you go there the whole time when you were--
Speaker 2: Yes, the whole time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, what was Reynolds like (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Till the eighth grade.  Huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what was Reynolds like?  What, what was it like?
Speaker 2: Reynolds was a very nice school.  We had beautiful teachers there that I remember.  The principal was nice.  It was, it was a very nice school.  Of course, you know, we had our fights.  The boys always had to fight about something.
Speaker 1: Were, were there gangs in those days?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have any gangs.  We didn't use any guns.  We used a fist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If you get in a fistfight, and that was it.  And we didn't go home and get any guns or that kind of stuff.  And we were buddy buddy.  We ate lunch together the next day.  So, that's the way we did it.
Speaker 1: Okay, can, can you remember any fights that you got into?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, I got in some fights.
Speaker 1: What would you be likely to fight about?
Speaker 2: I don't know, if somebody say something about your mother or something like that, you know.  That was the main thing that could get the fight going or they talk about your sister or something like that, you know.
Speaker 1: Was the discipline pretty, pretty good at the school, in terms of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the discipline was very good, very good.  We had no problems.
Speaker 1: The students were basically respectful and that sort of--
Speaker 2: Yep, very respectful, because you had to be in those days 'cause the teacher was allowed to touch you up a little bit if you didn't behave yourself.  And then when you got home and told your mother, she did the same thing.  So, (laughter) you didn't go home and tell her (laughter).
Speaker 1: So everybody had the same standard (laughter) or a similar standard of--
Speaker 2: That's right, you don't go home and say you had a problem at school.  Well, most of the times when you'd come home from school, my mother [Carrie Ward Lee] would look at me and say what happened today?  I'd say, "Nothing."  She'd say, 'Yeah, something happened 'cause I can look at you and see something happened."  She could tell.
Story_ID: 186166
Speaker 1: But when I started teaching school up here at, at Dunbar [Trade School, later, Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], it was a different ball game altogether.  I remember a gym teacher up there telling a young lady that she couldn't climb the ropes in the class, in the gym class because she looked like she was pregnant.  And the girl went home and told her mother that and of course her mother came back with a gun.
Speaker 2: A gun?
Speaker 1: But she had the baby before she graduated though.  Now how her mother didn't know that her daughter was pregnant?  I don't know how, how they do that.
Speaker 2: So she was insulted enough over a remark or you know, to--
Speaker 1: Well, that's the way they do--
Speaker 2: --bring a gun back.
Speaker 1: --that's what they do.  And then some of the, some of 'em are different, you know, which--I've had, even had to--most of my parents would come up and say, "Well, Mr. Lee [HM James Lee], you can do anything you want to 'em."  I said, "I'm, I'm not gon' beat 'em," said, "I'm not Joe Louis.  I don't do no fighting."  But I never, in the whole time I was teaching at Dunbar, I never had a bad kid.  Had a whole lot of bad parents, but I never had a bad kid, all my kids.  They come to see me now.
Speaker 2: So, so, so you had a way of deal, of dealing with--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --discipline that didn't--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --involve--
Speaker 1: Well, you get respect if you give respect, and that's, that's what I taught them.  I just tell 'em you don't have to love me.  I don't have to love you, but we're gonna respect each other.
Story_ID: 186167
Speaker 1: Are there any teachers that you remember that really made a good impression on you?
Speaker 2: Yes, one that they used to call Ms. Junior [ph.].  She was something else.  She was, she was like one of the boys.  She'd go out and beat you too (laughter).  And she could play the game, same games that we played, and she was good at it.  So I always remembered her.
Speaker 1: This is a young woman, right, doing this?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --she was a young woman.
Speaker 1: Okay, anybody else?
Speaker 2: No, I, I was fond of the principal, Mr. Brooks [ph.].  He was a very nice guy.  I didn't (unclear)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA NOISE)
Speaker 2: Okay, so what, what, what were your favorite subjects in grade school?
Speaker 1: My favorite subject--we had a, a teacher there, she taught us all types of things that I'd like to (unclear).  She taught us how to, how to weave, how to do--they had machines there that you could weave.  She taught us how to weave.  She taught us a lot of things.  She taught us about electricity, different things.  And she was a very interesting teacher.
Speaker 2: You seem to have a proclivity for learning how things work and how to make things work and that sort of thing--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --from an early age.  Did, did you make things at home?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What kind of things would you make and--
Speaker 1: Just about anything I wanted.  You know, in those days, like they have these scooters now that you see the kids, we made our own scooters.  We got a two-by-four and a skate, put the back end of the skate, the front end of the skate on a two-by-four, put another two-by-four up, put a piece of wood across, and we had our skateboard.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sometimes we'd get fancy, put a box on it, put a couple of tin cans on the front for lights, and nail a sticker on the side that you could make a brake, and put it on a nail so you stop this thing from moving.  But we did all types of things like that.  We made things.  The kids don't make anything anymore.  It's all made for 'em.
Speaker 2: So you made most of your toys and things--
Speaker 1: Yeah, we made--
Speaker 2: --that you played with.
Speaker 1: --most of my toys.
Speaker 2: Would you make balls too to play with?
Speaker 1: No, I, I don't remember making a ball.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But most of the stuff we made.
Story_ID: 186168
Speaker 1: Now what about high school?  Where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to Central High School--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on Broad and Green Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you started high school in what year when you went--
Speaker 2: Let's see, I finished the high school that was '33 [1933], so that's, so that's in '29 [1929] I think.
Speaker 1: Twenty-nine [1929], okay, all right.  Okay, well, what was high--Central like?  Was that a big high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was a, a very large high school.  I imagine that in the graduating class, I imaging there were about, about three or four hundred students.  It's one of the oldest high schools in America.  And of course, you got a B.S. degree in science when you're finished.  You had science every day and lab work.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: And most of the, most of the students from, from Central High School, they went into politics.  Most of them were mayors or aldermen or something like that.
Speaker 1: Can you name some of 'em that did that?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, can't think of any now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they, they were often--none of them were black.  They were all white.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is an integrated high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause, because it--
Speaker 1: --and this is--
Speaker 2: --it was an integrated high school, but I don't think it was twenty blacks in the whole school 'cause I think it was about maybe five in my graduating class.
Speaker 1: Was it in downtown Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or?
Speaker 2: No--yes, it's, I would say yeah, downtown 'cause we walked to school in those days.  We walked about maybe three miles both ways.
Speaker 1: Okay, three--well, both ways would be about three, three miles, you know, put--
Speaker 2: Three miles there and back.
Speaker 1: Okay, oh, that's, that's six miles a day, yeah--
Speaker 2: Yep, six miles.
Speaker 1: --all, all, altogether.
Speaker 2: Altogether, yeah, about six miles.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And you saw lines of kids going to school every morning.  Everybody was walking to school.  We didn't have any buses.
Speaker 1: How long did it take you go to school?  I mean to get to school.
Speaker 2: We had fun with it, laughing and playing on the way, but we left in time to be on time.
Speaker 1: When, when, when did school start?
Speaker 2: In September, just like they do here [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: No, I mean what time of day.  What, what time of day did, did school start--
Speaker 2: Oh, eight o'clock.
Speaker 1: --in, in the morning.  Eight o'clock?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So would you have to start walking around six or something or would--
Speaker 2: Well, it usually didn't take us--I imagine about an hour, about an hour, hour and a half, fifteen minutes or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: It didn't seem like much 'cause it was the laughing and playing.  And the group was all, all, you know, all the way as far as you could see there was nothing but kids going to school, walking to school.
Story_ID: 186169
Speaker 1: Now what were your favorite subjects in high school [Central High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: In high school, I didn't particularly have any favorite subject in high school.
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, were there any teachers you kind of admired or looked up to or any of 'em that tried to help you at all in high school?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't very friendly to--
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --it wasn't a very friendly atmosphere.
Speaker 1: Did you feel like you didn't belong there, or did, did you feel like that they didn't want black students there, or--
Speaker 2: No, that didn't bother me.
Speaker 1: --did--
Speaker 2: That didn't bother me.
Speaker 1: Or do you think, I'm, I'm just asking if you think that their attitude was that they didn't want black students there, you know, if there weren't that many that--
Speaker 2: Oh, well, well, they had no choice.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's the way that was, so.
Speaker 1: Did, now did you get--
Speaker 2: Now, now, we--about--now everybody wasn't like that.  Now we did have, you know, friends, both sides, you know.  Because there was one boy, a black boy, his name was Robert Handy [ph.], and he was about six feet tall, nice looking fellow.  And all of the white boys loved him.  I don't know why, but they were crazy about Robert Handy, so much so that they voted him president of the student council.  And some of the kids that had chauffeurs, when their chauffeur would come to pick them up, they had to pick up Handy and take him home to 'cause they, they took him home, then they'd go home.
Speaker 1: What do you think it was?  What did he have?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know.  They were just crazy about Robert Handy.  And you'd see a whole bunch of 'em, and he'd be in the middle.  It was odd.
Speaker 1: Well, he was extremely popular I guess--
Speaker 2: He was, he was really popular.
Speaker 1: What did he do later on in life, do you know?
Speaker 2: He passed; he died.
Speaker 1: He, he died while still a teenager?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't know, he had something.  Something happened to him.  Yeah, but there was Handy right in the middle 'cause they was crazy about him.
Story_ID: 186170
Speaker 1: Did you participate in high school activities [at Central High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: No, because I had to work after school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you worked in the print shop after school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked.  But I had a, I had a job at the school because I would wipe the professors' cars off.  Monday, Wednesday, and Friday I'd wipe their cars off, keep the dust and everything off their cars, and they'd give me a quarter a week.  So I was hustling, trying to make some money.
Speaker 1: That was pretty good in those days I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: That, that wasn't bad in those days.
Speaker 2: No it wasn't bad, it wasn't bad.  I'd keep their cars clean.  I'd do it three days a week, you know, and everybody'd give me a quarter.  That was fine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you think about what kind of career you wanted to have when you were in high school?  Did you have an idea about what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to teach school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you wanted to be a teacher?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 186171
Speaker 1: Did you know you were gonna go to college when you were in high school [Central High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Well, I worked at the seashore.  I worked in a place called Beach Haven, New Jersey.  That's right off the coast of New Jersey.  You see, we'd go across the Delaware River Bridge, then we're in New Jersey.  Now this is an island off of New Jersey.  It's about, it's about like a mile at sea that you go across a causeway.  And Beach Haven, New Jersey is here, and Atlantic City [New Jersey] is here, and in between here is what they call a Barnegat Bay; there's a big bay there.  And to get to Atlantic City you have to travel like a--come out of here, go this way like a horseshoe.  But you can see the lights from Atlantic City in Beach Haven.  Well I worked in there--no, first, first I had a job when--no, that was, that was my job.  I got this job--my mother [Carrie Ward Lee] got it for me.  It was working at a hotel, Spray Beach Hotel.  And when you go across this causeway, there was a big sign before you'd get there, and on this sign it said, "No, no niggers, dogs, and Jews."
Speaker 1: This is New Jersey?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: This is in New Jersey, you said?
Speaker 2: In New Jersey, yeah, before--when you come off the cross--when you come, going into this island, Beach Haven, New Jersey.  That was the first thing you saw, was this big sign.  It was a huge sign, no niggers, dogs, and Jews allowed in this town.  Well, the, the only blacks in there was the ones that were working 'cause I was working at a hotel in there.  And you worked seven days a week.  You didn't have any days off because it was closed during the winter.  When schools opened, it closed.
Speaker 1: Okay, when, when you worked there was, it was--you were a teenager, so we're talking about--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a teenager.
Speaker 1: --nineteen twenty--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, when I was about eighteen--
Speaker 1: --eight [1928], '29 [1929]--
Speaker 2: --nineteen, twenty.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: I got a job there.  And you get, you, you, didn't have any days off; you worked seven days a week.  First, I worked in the kitchen, you know, cleaning pots and pans.  And then I, later on, I moved up and I got a chance to, to be a waiter.  And I'll never forget, I used to wait table, and there was a woman that used to come to the hotel.  She'd spend a month there.  She'd spend a month, and she didn't want anybody to wait on her but me.  She always requested that I wait on her.  Her name was Claus [ph.].  She had flower shop in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and she spent a month there.  And she would tip me every week, so that meant I got four tips out of her.  And you'll never guess what she tipped me a week.
Speaker 1: What was it?
Speaker 2: Ten cents a week.  And she made a big ceremony by giving me this dime.  I could have killed her.  You know, I had some people who were very nice.  They'd give you fifteen or twenty dollars a week for serving them, and that was good money.  I'd put that aside to go to college, pay some of my tuition.
Speaker 1: Now hers was ten cent a week?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Her tip was ten cent a week?
Speaker 2: Ten cents a week.  And of course you can't say anything 'cause that's your job, you know?
Story_ID: 186172
Speaker 1: The first semester that I went up to Cheyney [State Teachers College, later, Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] to, to register--
Speaker 2: Now how did you choose Cheyney in the first place, or did--
Speaker 1: That was--
Speaker 2: Was that the best place to go in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] if you, if you're a--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --black student.
Speaker 1: --that was--I wanted to be a teacher, and that was a, that was a teacher training--that was a state teachers college.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I thought I'd go to a state teachers college.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: It was Cheyney State Teachers College.  And the tuition was cheaper there than anywhere else I could find.  I would like to have gone to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], but I couldn't afford Howard.  I couldn't afford Cheyney.  And I worked all summer and had saved up seventy-five dollars, and I went to register.  And Mrs. Conway [ph.]--she was the bursar there.  She was taking the money.  She said, "Mr. Lee, you got any money?"  I said, "I got seventy-five dollars."  She said, "Well, that's not enough," and she said, "we have some state jobs that pays thirty dollars a month," that was a janitor's job.  I said, "Well, give me a janitor's job.  That'll help me out."  And there was a, a rich white man had died and left a hundred dollars for poor Negroes that would come into the school, that they, they would donate--his name was Richard Humphrey[s].  He would donate a hundred dollars.  So with that and me working, that's how I made it.
Story_ID: 186173
Speaker 1: Now what was Cheyney State [Teachers College, later, Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] like?  I mean who were some of the teachers there and personalities of Cheyney State that you met?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was there the, the director there, president was Leslie Pinckney Hill.  He was a Ph.D.  He was one of the forerunners.  He was really an educator.  And of course, we gave plays, you know, like 'Jethro.'  We had the singing groups that they'd--we would go and sing at different places, different churches and different things, and we put on a play, 'Jethro.'
Speaker 1: What was that about?
Speaker 2: It's out of the Bible, Jethro.  It's a play.  But then we put on and they traveled with that.  Then they had a football team and a basketball team.  But being in a state teachers college, it wasn't that many men there.  It was mostly women, girls, you know, that I said this and there was maybe about, maybe about four hundred girls.  I don't think it was, I don't think it was more than about fifty men there that were at the school 'cause they had the men's dorm on one side, and the, the girls' dorm on the other.  They don't sleep together like they do now.
Speaker 1: No co-ed dorms, huh?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't have none of that.
Speaker 1: And did you have curfews and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Curfew?
Speaker 1: Yeah, did you have curfews in terms of time when--how late you could stay out and--
Speaker 2: Well this, Cheyney was, I guess it was about thirty miles from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And nothing was around it but big estates, so there was no place to go but around there.  You--there, there was nothing to do around there for thirty miles, so you were just there at the school.  So you had nothing to do but to study, or go to sleep, or do whatever you wanted to do.
Speaker 1: So they didn't have a curfew on you?  You, you had to be inside at a certain time or--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --any of that sort of thing?  Not even for the girls?
Speaker 2: Well, that was different.  Yeah, they had, they had curfews.  They had all of that type of stuff, you know.  They were very strict on the girls.  If you broke the rules, they sent you home, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so going to college then was a little bit different than it is now--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --in terms of that.
Speaker 2: --big difference, yeah.
Speaker 1: I think some people go now and they experience more freedom when they go to college, but--
Speaker 2: --than they do at home.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But that wasn't the way it was then (laughter).  Doesn't sound like it was that way there, you know, that you--
Speaker 2: No, not that way--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --not that way in college.  You couldn't do it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --to suit yourself.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: You either had a roommate or you had a room by yourself.  You could do you know--
Story_ID: 186174
Speaker 1: --So were there, are any personalities there [Cheyney State Teachers College, later, Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] that you remember, teachers and so forth, or any special teachers, or--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --or students that--
Speaker 2: There was one student there.  His name--you may have heard his name.  You ever heard, heard of a fellow by the name of Bayard T. Rustin?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, right, he was a great--
Speaker 2: Bayard T. Rustin was at, at Cheyney with me when I was there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's a civil rights organizer and--
Speaker 2: He was a civil rights organizer.
Speaker 1: --and quite a character too, that's--
Speaker 2: Quite a character.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: He was at Cheyney when I was there.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Bayard, Bayard Rustin.  Did you come across him much at Cheyney State when you were there?
Speaker 2: Bayard Rustin had been kicked out of many a school.  At Cheyney, he was coming along the line, and I don't know how many colleges he had been kicked out of before he got to Cheyney.  But then he rested at Cheyney.  He, he could sing like a mockingbird.  He could talk about anything.  Sometimes after chow we'd go back to the dorm and we'd be sitting there maybe playing pool or something, and they would say, "Rustin, what about that lamp there?"  And he would talk about lamps until you stopped him.  You say, "What, what about the doorknobs?"  He'd talk about anything you wanted to talk about.  He'd talk about something as long as you wanted he wanted to talk and could sing.  He'd direct plays.  He was a brilliant fellow, brilliant.  But he's sort of limperous [ph.], and that's what got him into trouble.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he would--
Speaker 2: They kicked him out.
Speaker 1: Okay, for, for being gay?  I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: But he, he was a brain.  Everybody knew Rustin.  And they had about three guys like that on the campus, and they kicked them all out.  And one of 'em went to, went out and became a star in Hollywood.  His name was Laughlin [ph.].
Speaker 1: Laughlin?
Speaker 2: Laughlin.  His name was Lofton [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I went to grammar school with him, I knew him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he got kicked out, he got kicked out with Rustin.  I, I think it was about six of 'em.  They put 'em all out.
Story_ID: 186175
Speaker 1: They wanted me to be principal of the school [Dunbar Trade School, later, Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  I said no, I don't want it.
Speaker 2: Why not?
Speaker 1: Because it's a job that has a lot of responsibility, and you have no power; it's a powerless job.  Now, when I was teaching school, my classes started at eight.  I was always at school at 7:30 so I'd be ready to teach at 8.  And I have my kids to know that, that eight o'clock my class starts, and if you're not here, you're late, you insult me from the beginning, you know.  And I, I never had any, any problem with them, but I would tell 'em, I, I would make a joke out of it, and I would say now--in my shop I was teaching cabinet making, and I said now, if you can come to school and tell me a story that I haven't heard before, I'll let you go free.  But if you tell me a story that I've heard before, I'm gonna double your punishment.  You're gonna clean up the shop and put up the tools.  Now you can take your choice.  And we, we had a joke out of it; it was fun (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, let's--
Speaker 1: Only one kid got by me.  He said Mr. Lee, I got up early this morning.  I was on the bus, almost here.  The driver stopped to pick up another student, and before he could pull off, somebody stole all the tires.  I said okay, you win, (laughter) I've never heard that one before.  But we had a good time.
Speaker 2: That's rough.
Speaker 1: I enjoyed the kids.  That's the only thing I missed about working, I don't have the kids.
Story_ID: 186176
Speaker 1: So what was your major at Cheyney State [Teachers College, later, Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Industrial arts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you get involved in campus life at Cheyney State, I mean the type of, you know, fraternities or, or any of the clubs or--
Speaker 2: No, we, we didn't, we didn't have fratern- fraternities on the, the, the--Dr. [Leslie Pinckney] Hill didn't allow fraternities and sororities on the campus.
Speaker 1: Did he have--
Speaker 2: Some of the, some of the students would leave Cheyney and go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and get made in a fraternity or sorority and come back, but they didn't allow it on the campus.
Speaker 1: Did he give a reason as to why, did he--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I didn't bother.  I didn't have any money to pay, to spend, spend on it anyway.  I (laughter) just had money to get through what I was doing.
Speaker 1: So, so Cheyney State was extremely strict I--I mean was it--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--
Speaker 1: --it was very strict.
Speaker 2: --it was strict, it was strict.  They had plenty of rules.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you--what would happen if a student was caught drinking on campus?  What would happen?  Was that a big deal?
Speaker 2: We never had any, anybody that come up drunk.  We did have--now Cheyney--now, we did have day-to-day students.  We had students come in from Chester, Pennsylvania that would come into classes, and they didn't stay on campus at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were commuters, basically?
Speaker 2: They're commuters.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you stayed on campus though, right?
Speaker 2: I stayed on campus.
Speaker 1: For all four years, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 186177
Speaker 1: Did you run for any offices or anything like that or any of that sort of thing [at Cheyney State Teachers College, later, Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't run for anything.  I--we were allowed to work in the shops as, as long as we wanted to, and most of the times I was working in the shop.  Like, I built a, I built a block front desk, hand carved block front desk.  You know what a block front desk is?
Speaker 1: No, I mean I may have seen one, but I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you explain it to us?
Speaker 2: About that tall, it's about that tall, and it slopes this way, and the, the top comes down like this, and then you had the little cabinets on the inside there curled and some carvings on the inside.
Speaker 1: Like a roll top desk sort of, is that what you--
Speaker 2: It's not like a roll top.
Speaker 1: Not a roll, okay.
Speaker 2: It's, it doesn't roll.  The top comes down.  The top, it comes up straight and then it goes like this and then this way--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so that you have a, a part that you can write on like this but that's leaning this way, and then you bring it down and you have two little slides that you pull out beside the top drawer.  Here's the top drawer here.  It doesn't go all the way to the side because there's a three-quarter inch board in each side that you pull out that the top is gonna rest on when you pull it and bring it down.  You, you understand what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, the drawers in the front, they're made like blocks.  There's a block, like, like a block here, a block here, and a block here, and there's a curve like that.  It comes this way, and it's a curve; goes this way, there's another curve, and those curves are the drawers.  That's the whole drawer that goes all the way across.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the, and the, the big feet, hand-carved feet and all that sort of stuff.  I used to do that.  I spent most of my time building that desk.  And I built it in the four years that I was there, and I still have it.  It's in Florida.  It's a block front desk.  John Wannamaker is the big department store [Wanamaker's].  It was on--I had it on exhibit for--when I finished school.  And they wanted to buy it, but I wouldn't sell it so I still have it.
Speaker 1: So it sounds like--well, something like--
Speaker 2: I have a picture of it here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, I made all of my furniture that's in Florida that's in my apartment.
Story_ID: 186178
Speaker 1: So you were taught to make furniture and--
Speaker 2: At Cheyney [State Teachers College, later, Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: What else did you learn?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: What, what else did you learn?  What, what other skills?
Speaker 2: Well, I played football and I played basketball--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so that took up all my time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, football and basketball, that's, you know.  So you were involved in some labor-intensive activities in making furniture and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --playing sports.  What did you play in football?  What position did, did you play?
Speaker 2: I played left end.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And in basketball, did they have positions in basketball then or basically--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I played forward, but it's a different game altogether.  You wouldn't know it.
Speaker 1: How so?  What's, what was different about that?
Speaker 2: You were taught to use both hands on the ball.  You were not gon' do no skyhook or the coach would pull you out and take you to have your head examined.  You know, with the skyhook that they do and all that sort of stuff and jumping up and dunking the ball down, you couldn't do all that sort of stuff.
Speaker 1: No jump shots?
Speaker 2: No, you didn't do all of that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --no one hands and all that sort of stuff; no, you had two hands on the ball at all times.  And once--
Speaker 1: So when you shot the ball you--
Speaker 2: --once you stopped dribbling, you can't dribble again.
Speaker 1: So Michael Jordan would get kicked out of the game, right--
Speaker 2: I'm saying--
Speaker 1: --if he's tryin to--
Speaker 2: --it's, it's, it's a different game altogether, it's a different game altogether.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Reverse dunking and all that, now you know you're in trouble (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now I've heard, now when you played, I believe they had to--every time another, the other team scored, they had to jump ball again.  Was that going on?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they used to go back and tap it off again.  It's a whole different, new ball game, yeah.  They have a good time now.  They do anything they wanna do, dunk it, one hand, you know (laughter), and all that sort of stuff.  And the coach say, "What you doing there?  What's, what's wrong with your other hand (laughter), two hands on the ball at all times.  Come out of there," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now what about football?  Was football more disciplined then, too, as--than, than it is now?
Speaker 2: Football was, was rough.  As I was telling you, we had mostly girls rather than men.  So, those that played sports, we played football and basketball, we were the same people, you know, 'cause we didn't have that many, you know.  So, it, it was, it was rough and not like some of the other schools like North Carolina or the, two schools out of Maryland, big schools.
Speaker 1: Who did you play?  Did you play Bowie State [University, Bowie, Maryland], and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bowie--
Speaker 1: Coppin [State University, Baltimore, Maryland]--
Speaker 2: --Storer College [Harpers Ferry, West Virginia]--
Speaker 1: --Storer in--
Speaker 2: --Storer--
Speaker 1: --Harpers Ferry, right?
Speaker 2: Harper's Ferry we played--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That, that's a, that was our group.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But they had more, more fellows than we had.  And (clearing throat) when you go down south, you have all them corn-fed boys down there, and they were pretty rough, you know.  And we played the team [Morgan State University] out of [Baltimore, Maryland]--guy, had a guy called Tank, used to call him the Tank, [Thomas] Tank Conrad.  Oh, man, he was something.  He looked like he weighed about 350 [pounds] (laughter) and could move (laughter).  Yes indeed, we had a small team, you know.  We didn't have any depth 'cause we had--
Speaker 1: Did you play both ways?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Did you play both ways, offense and defense too on foot in, in football?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  You were there for the season, for the, for, for the day or the evening.
Speaker 1: So you didn't--
Speaker 2: We didn't have that many.
Speaker 1: --when, when, when the, when the team lost the ball to the other team, you wouldn't come out of the game?  You'd stay in and keep playing, you're saying?
Speaker 2: Would they do what?
Speaker 1: No, there was not an offensive unit and a defensive unit, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, we didn't have that.
Speaker 1: You played both, both ways (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Both ways.
Speaker 1: --offense and defense.
Speaker 2: Played both.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We didn't have that many.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they, they just wanted a team, so that's the way it is.
Speaker 1: So how did you all--
Speaker 2: There, up the road from us, there was Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania].  That was an all-male school.  It was a black school.  And a lot of them went up there for law.  It was a law--went up there for law school.  And we used to play them, 'cause we couldn't beat them because it was so many.  It was nothing but men up there, Lincoln University.
Story_ID: 186179
Speaker 1: Tell me about graduation from Cheyney State [Teachers College, later, Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania].  When you graduated, what did you, what--you were thinking about going right into the classroom, right, someplace?  Were you going back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to teach or what?
Speaker 2: Oh, you mean when I finished?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah graduation from Cheyney State, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, Cheyney was a state school, but you could not teach in Philadelphia unless you had experience from some place.  And I don't know where you could get it from.  What the students would do: they would leave Cheyney and go south to some little southern town and practice teaching.  We had a practice teaching school on, on, on the grounds at Cheyney.  But when they'd leave there, then they would go to some of these little towns and where they needed a teacher, and mostly in the South.  When you go there, then you not only had to teach school, but you had to preach Sunday school, preach, and take care of the church and all of that type of stuff you had to do, plus with all of the prejudices going on down there, I said I'm not going south because I'm gonna get killed, or somebody is gonna kill me, or I'm gonna kill somebody, so I'm not going south.
Speaker 1: So, let's--
Speaker 2: So, you couldn't teach in Philadelphia unless you had experience to come back to teach.  And I wasn't gonna go south.  That was out of my, out of my jurisdiction.  I could have circumvented by going to Columbia [University, New York, New York] up there and taking some courses at Columbia and then come back and try to get into the system in Philadelphia, but I didn't do that.  There was a little town outside of Philadelphia called Coatesville, Pennsylvania.  This was a steel mill town, Bethlehem Steel [Corporation].  And they had a school up there, a black school, which was James Adams Junior High School [James Adams School].  And they had a grade school there too.  And they needed a teacher to teach what they called ungraded students.  Now, the ungraded students were students that had come from the South, being a steel mill town, you had the labor coming from the South this way, coming up north, coming up, getting jobs, and trying to make a place to bring their family out of the South.  That's what it, what this was all about.  And they, they needed a teacher up there at that school, and I went up and I applied for the job.  I was working as a Jewish caterer.  I had a truck, and I was working out of a company.  And I hired all the waiters, and we did mostly bar mitzvahs and Jewish holiday stuff.
Speaker 1: Did they think you were Jewish?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  I just wondered.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, but they knew I wasn't Jewish.  But it--that's, this is, this--there's no money around now.  You know what I mean?  Everybody is working.  Say for instance, in my block, there were two black doctors, medical doctors.  And they would--they were my best waiters because I would go into their office and tell 'em, I said, "Well, look, I got a gig coming up Monday or Tuesday, whenever you wanna work."  They'd say, "Well, we'll be there."  Because I went in one doctor's office, and he was loaded, a lot of patients in there, so I walked back out.  I said, Well, I'll get somebody else.  And I saw him about a month later.  He said, "Hey, man, when you gon' get me another gig?"  I said, "Well, I was in your office last week, and you had all them people in there.  I didn't bother you."  He said man, "Don't pay them people no mind," said, "ain't a quarter in the whole room," said, (laughter) "if you'd a told me, I'd of went out the back door," (laughter).  So, they would work with me, and of course they'd get all the leftover food, all the beef and rolls and stuff.  They'd have enough to feed their family maybe three or four days.  And I was a Jewish caterer.  And then I heard about that job up there and I applied for it.
Speaker 1: Now this is 19--this is at, in the late '30s [1930], right, late--
Speaker 2: This is early '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Early '40s [1940s] by now, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in the early '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 186180
Speaker 1: I went up there [James Adams School, Coatesville, Pennsylvania] and I stayed up there until I signed up to come to Chicago [Illinois] and teach for, for the [U.S.] Navy.
Speaker 2: Now, let's get some base.  Now you graduated from Cheyney State [Teachers College, later, Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] in '37 [1937], right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, and when did you start this [Jewish] catering business?
Speaker 1: Say '38 [1938].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Thirty-nine [1939].  I, I didn't start the business.  I was working--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --for a group.
Speaker 2: All right, so you were in catering in '38 [1938], '39 [1939], '40 [1940].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then--
Speaker 1: Now, I went to, I went up in, in--what do you call it--Coatesville [Pennsylvania] around '40 [1940].  That's when I got that job [teaching at James Adams School], around '40 [1940].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I was up there about two years, and I came out here, so which, which brought me to 1942.  Forty-two [1942] is when I came out to Chicago.
Speaker 2: Now why'd you come to Chicago?  Why'd you move to Chicago?
Speaker 1: The United States government was looking for men with industrial arts background to teach aircraft engine maintenance.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And you could sign up either to work for the United States government, or you could work--no, I mean for the United States Navy or for the [U.S.] Army; you could take your pick.  So I picked the Army; I wanted to work with the Army.  When we, when they sent my application back, they said I qualified for the job, but the quotas for the Army was full so would I take the, take the Navy, and I said yes.  That's when I took the Navy.  And they sent me a letter telling me to report.  That was in November the 2nd, 1942 that they sent me the letter to report to Chicago at the Naval Training Station [Naval Air Technical Training Center] at 87th and--87th and Anthony Avenue over there.  That was a naval training station, and they gave me--
Speaker 2: Now it's now, that same building is now Chicago--
Speaker 1: CVS.
Speaker 2: --Vocational High School--
Speaker 1: That's right--
Speaker 2: --CVS.
Speaker 1: --CVS [later, Chicago Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: It's one of the largest schools in the country.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean physical size it's huge.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because they had the whole planes they could bring right into it, into that place that we--when we were up there studying.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they taught me how to work on carburetion, the carburetors.  That was my forte was carburetion, how you take carburetors apart, put 'em back together, do all this type of stuff.  And you had to be able to do it in the dark because if you're on some of those islands, Iwo Jima [Japan] or someplace, you don't have no lights at night.  You've got to feel 'em and know what you're doing.  If you put a light on, you might get your head shot off.  So they really had to know how to, how to work on these planes.  And, and it may not be at, in the daytime, and you may not have any light.  So it was pretty teachers.  Some of the guys were very good.  We didn't teach any blacks.  We only taught whites, didn't have any black students--
Story_ID: 186181
Speaker 1: Blacks weren't allowed to do this job [aircraft engine maintenance instructor] in the [U.S.] Navy or they just, they would miss--they were directing blacks away from those kinds of jobs?
Speaker 2: In the Navy, there was a difference between the Navy and the [U.S.] Army.  If you had a, had a, a degree from a college, you would get a commission going into the, you know, to the, to the Army.  And you could get a commission going into the Navy if you were white.  So all of the blacks that, that was up at, at, at Smalls, Robert Smalls Camp [Camp Robert Smalls at Great Lakes Naval Training Center, Waukegan, Illinois], you had some guys up there with Ph.D.s, but they, they couldn't get a commission because they were black.  So that, that, that was the difference, so I wanted to work with, with, with that group when I came out here.  I mean, well, that, that's, that's when I went up to the, to the, to Great Lakes.  But this, where I was teaching up in CVS [Chicago Vocational High School, later, Chicago Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois], the building then [Naval Air Technical Training Center, Chicago, Illinois], they were just all-white recruits coming in that we taught.  Some of 'em were good; some of 'em were washed out.  But then when the war [World War II, WWII] was over in the Pacific [Theater], and they didn't need as many men, then they wanted to close the school.  And they didn't take any more recruits, and they sent the instructors to Burris Airfield [Waukegan, Illinois] from all over the country.  And they sent some of, some of the blacks they sent to Pensacola, Florida, and they sent 'em back 'cause blacks couldn't teach whites in the South at that time.  So, that ended that.  So then they closed the school, and it was just ten black instructors left in the whole building.  And we'd go there every day and sit down and play cards and have a good time.  Our pay went up the service, you know, increments, and we really had a nice time.  And then when they really closed them down, then they sent us out to Great Lakes, which they didn't have a school, and we were civilians.  We just went there every day and sat in the cafeteria, and kibitzed, and got in our cars and come back home in the evenings.
Story_ID: 186182
Speaker 1: --Now how long did this last?  I mean how long did those kind of jobs [aircraft engine maintenance instructor] last?  Where you, you--they either didn't have a job for you, and they--
Speaker 2: That lasted, let's see, I guess maybe about five or six months like that, and then they [U.S. government] opened a service school up there.  Then we went into the service school that they opened up there at the Lakes [Great Lakes Naval Training Center, Waukegan, Illinois], but it was nothing about aircraft engines.  They had a machine shop and some other stuff they had going on up there.  And then they closed that school.  And when they closed that school, then they talked to us about joining the service.  And we knew what was happening, that if you were white you got a, and a college degree, you got a commission.  And the, the commandant of this naval district, he said he couldn't do anything about that, but he said but he would make us chief, chief anything we wanted.  So we said okay, we will get the manual and find out what are the duties of the chief before we say yes.  So we did; we got the manuals on all of the things that you do in the [U.S.] Navy, and we found out that it was a stateside rating.  They couldn't send you out of the country; they could do anything when you just a chief specialist (unclear).  We said we'll take it.  So they gave us the money for our uniforms, and we bought uniforms up in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], and that was it.  And then we started teaching up there.  And then when they closed the school up there, they shipped us out to various airfields or naval stations, wherever they were.  And I ended up, really ended up in Frisco (unclear)--not Frisco.  What is it?  Can't think of the name--Fresno, Fresno--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Fresno, California; I ended up there.  And when I got there, I didn't have anything to do, so I got me a, a job at Swiss Meat Packing Company, and I had my checks sent there.  And I worked for their, and I got tired of smelling the stink and the, and the raw of them hides that they were throwing salt on, so I decided I'd go to Libby's Canning Company [Libby, McNeill & Libby, Libby's] and worked there.  So I worked there, sent my check home.  I didn't have anything to do.  They had no jobs for me.
Speaker 1: So they paid you a salary, but they didn't have anything--
Speaker 2: I was in the service.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I, I--that's where I lived with the service.  I ate, and slept, and get up every morning and go to work.
Speaker 1: So they were subsidizing your food and board (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, I had a nice time, till I got--
Speaker 1: So did you--
Speaker 2: --tired of that.  Then I changed my rating so I could go out to sea and get enough credits so I could get out of the service, so that's what I did.
Story_ID: 186183
Speaker 1: When you changed your [U.S. military] rating, you went out as a carpenter, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chief carpenter's mate.
Speaker 1: Chief, chief carpenter's mate?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And so, where did you go?  Where did they send you?
Speaker 2: What (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Where did they send you?
Speaker 2: They sent me aboard the USS President Jackson, which is a troop transport.  I didn't even know where my office was on there, and I never went to it.  I just went to, really I went to get enough credits so I could get out of the [U.S.] Navy.  You know, you have to have so many credits--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to get out.
Speaker 1: Now where are we about now?  About 1944?  What do you think, '43 [1943], '44 [1944]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's around '40 [1940]--'44 [1944] I think, yeah, around '44 [1944].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Beginning of '44 [1944], somewhere in there.  So, I just wanted to get out.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So at this stage the war [World War II, WWII] is kind of drawing to a close, though it hasn't--
Speaker 2: It's drawing to a close, yeah--
Speaker 1: --nobody, yeah--
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: So I wanted out so I could find me a job somewhere.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when did you finally get out?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  It's on that thing over there, discharged something.  Was it '45 [1945]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it think it probably is, but--
Speaker 2: It's on there.
Speaker 1: I think that's right.  Is this it?  No, this is (unclear).  It's--well, we got it.  It's, it's, you know, yeah, discharged 1946, yeah.
Speaker 2: Forty-six [1946]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, January 12th, 1946--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, '46 [1946].
Speaker 1: --right.  Okay, so what did you do when you got out?
Speaker 2: I looked around to try to find something to do.  And I had some good friends in Chicago [Illinois].  One fellow was Dr. [Metz] Lochard.  He was, I think he was a city editor for the Chicago Defender at that time.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: How do you spell Lochard?
Speaker 2: I don't know how you spell it, L-O, capital L-O-C-H-A-R-D, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, okay.  So, so he helped you out?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a Ph.D.  He was from the [Caribbean] Islands.  He was from Martinique.  And he asked me--tell me why don't I try the [Chicago] Board of Education.  I said well, I'll try it.  So, he called up the superintendent of the school.  I think his name was Vanderslice [ph.].  He called him up, and I got the job.  Then I had to take the examination for it.  And that was it, and that's---I've been there [Dunbar Trade School, later, Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] ever since.
Story_ID: 186184
Speaker 1: (Background noise) So you started teaching at Dunbar [Trade School, later, Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] in '48 [1948], 1948 or thereabouts?
Speaker 2: It would have been around '48 [1948], something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So Dunbar Vocational High School, can you tell us something about it I mean?
Speaker 2: Well, it started out as Dunbar Trade School and then it went to vocational school.
Speaker 1: So when you started it was a trade, trade school?
Speaker 2: It was trade school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we thought it was gonna stay a trade school.
Speaker 1: Now what does that mean a trade school?  What does that really mean?
Speaker 2: It means that your teachers that you have are union people.  They have a card.  They know what a card is.  And they know that you're in the field.  You know what's going on.  You can train the person to come, to go right into the field.  He can pass the examinations and things that you do for that particular trade, whether it's house wiring, cabinet making, you know, carpentry, whatever it happens to be.
Speaker 1: So that's, that sounds like a very attractive, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, they had to take--
Speaker 1: --proposition or prospect for a high school student to be able to graduate with a, with, with a certification in that trade and to be able to get in the union too, right?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that would you'd be able to--
Speaker 2: Well, you see, you have a school like that here.  Now you had--what was it--Washburne [Trade School, Chicago, Illinois]?  Now Washburne was owned by the [Chicago] Board of Education, but it was run by the unions.  And you couldn't get in there unless your grandfather was so and so or somebody to get you in there, and they was white.  You got to be white to get in.  They didn't teach any blacks.  That's why, that's why Dunbar was started because they have no place to train the blacks, and they needed trained people during the war [World War II, WWII].  So they didn't wanna let 'em in Dunbar--I mean let 'em in Washburne, so they decided to start a black school on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] to train some Negroes.  That's how they got started, and after the war they cut it out.
Speaker 1: So Dunbar started during World War II?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: All right, as a--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --and you say as a trade school.
Speaker 2: As a trade school.
Speaker 1: All right.  So--
Speaker 2: And the teachers had cards.  And--
Speaker 1: Well, there weren't many--I, I would imagine there weren't that many black teachers at Dunbar when they got started 'cause there weren't as many black folks--
Speaker 2: They were--
Speaker 1: --that had union cards, right?
Speaker 2: There, there were some.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were some, but they had, they had to fight like hell to get cards.  I know, I know the guy that taught plumbing.  His name was Williams [ph.].  I lived on Marquette Road at that, that time, and he lived a couple of blocks down from me.  And he had a union card.  And he was one of the teachers that were hired to teach at Dunbar.  And he was telling me how he got his card and the fights that he had.  He was working in the suburbs, putting up pipes in new homes when they'd put it up.  And when he would leave for that day and go back the next day, all of the work that he had put up would be taken down that night.  Somebody would take his work a loose.  So in order to finish, he stayed out there.  He put his gun in his pocket, and slept on the job until he finished it.
Story_ID: 186185
Speaker 1: Everybody had a union card, but we had a hard time trying to get 'em into the unions.  We had classes sometimes at Urban League at night that we'd coach the guys on, on the exams, plumbing and different things.  We'd get the, the old exams and bring 'em there so that they're, we would tell 'em, you know, give 'em some idea of what's gonna happen when they go to take these examinations.  Now, the bricklayers that they had that finished, they couldn't get a card in Chicago [Illinois].  Some of 'em had to go to DuPage County [Illinois] and get a card and do bricklaying.
Speaker 2: Now, now, did you have a union card when you started--
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: --in Chicago, okay.  And what was your union affiliation?  Were you in the print--I mean the--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --what, what--
Speaker 1: It was cabinet making.
Speaker 2: Cabinet making, okay.
Speaker 1: I had a cabinet shop in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] too at one time--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and I made cabinets.
Speaker 2: Okay, did you, did you have to associate with your fellow union members here in Chicago.  I mean did, did you have, did you go to union meetings here and that sort of thing, or--
Speaker 1: In here?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I didn't.
Speaker 2: What would happen if you'd--
Speaker 1: They also made caskets over on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Did you?
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.  Not on the South Side, North Side [Chicago, Illinois].  I can't think of the name of the company now.  I used to work there in the summers making caskets.  That was a nice job.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you didn't have much interaction with the white union people here in--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --the city at all?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: No.
Story_ID: 186186
Speaker 1: Okay, so the city changed Dunbar [Trade School, later, Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] from a trade school to a vocational school.
Speaker 2: A vocational school.
Speaker 1: And, and what is, what would that mean, once again?  As a vocational school, you weren't automatically placed on a, in a trade where you had job (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: --when you got out.  So you might have a skill, but you didn't--they were--
Speaker 2: But, but you--there's no where you can use it to make money, to get into a union.  The main thing was to keep you out of the union.  And that's what, that's what they accomplished by changing the name.  'Cause they say now you--it--you know, before we had the trade school, the only way a black could learn a trade was to steal it.
Speaker 1: What do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: They used to steal their trade.
Speaker 1: How do you steal a trade?
Speaker 2: Say for instance if you're a bricklayer, you're working around bricklayers, and you're job is to mix up the mortar and stuff because the guy's up there laying the brick.  You've got to mix the mortar and take it to him, and dump it, and then go grab you some more, and this guy needs some mortar.  Well, you take your time mixing it.  You take your time delivering it to him and dumping it back in his pile so he can use it.  So you're watching him; you watch every move he makes.  And sometimes the, the, the guy knows what you're doing, he'll holler at you, "Get the hell out of here," you know?  "What you looking for?  Go bring me some more mud."  You know, you had to steal a trade.  And then when you get off in the evening, you get--mix you up some mortar and you practice.  You finally learn how to lay brick.  So most of the trades that they, that they had they had to steal 'em by watching what they're doing, and then remembering it, and then practicing.  That's the only way they could get the trade.  Now in the South they didn't have to do it because they knew how to lay brick in the South.  They knew how to do--they did all this fancy work, all this work.  They, they were taught to do it but didn't have any cards.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Like the White House (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The South wasn't unionized.
Speaker 2: That was built by black slave labor.
Speaker 1: Skilled labor.
Speaker 2: Skilled labor.  That's one thing I got against Tuskegee [Institute, later, Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  Tuskegee had all those buildings that, that were laid out by the blacks themselves, and they built 'em.  And all those buildings are torn down now; they're tearing them down.  I imagine they are.  The last time I was there they were closed up.  You couldn't go in 'em because they're falling down.  It's a shame that they let those buildings fall down because they were built by the sweat of those people.  They did all of that work.  They were nice buildings.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they have--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I would imagine, I imagine the same, they got the same buildings, the old buildings that Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] had when it first started.  I imagine they didn't tear any of those buildings down, the old buildings.  I imagine they're still there.  That's heritage, that's, you know.
Speaker 1: Right, I--
Speaker 2: That's something.  And down there--and then they changed the name of it.  What is it now?  It's a, it's a university now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's not an institute anymore.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a university, whatever that's going to do for 'em, I don't know, but it certainly ain't getting 'em no jobs.  If they can go out there and make some money, a--
Speaker 1: Do you have--
Speaker 2: --good honest living.
Speaker 1: Do you think that black people in this country have kind of gotten away from learning the trades and--I mean to the extent where it's--
Speaker 2: Well, not necessarily gotten away from it, but you know, I, I have a friend of mine that tells me about--now his father was a principal of a school, and he had two other brothers that were doctors.  And he said what happened was that coming up, when they were coming up, if you were dark-skinned, you had to use your hands.  If you were light, you could go be a doctor.  But see, they were sent to a medical school, while his father was sent to Tuskegee [Institute, later, Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] because he was darker in color, his family; it was a family thing.  That somethin'?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--
Speaker 2: All of those things have happened, so nothing you can do about it.  That's just the way it goes.
Story_ID: 186187
Speaker 1: But nowadays, what do you--do you think that without the, without the ability to matriculate through a program that takes you right to a trade, I mean to a trade and be accepted into that trade, what is the, what is the value of a vocational education if you can't use it, you know, or, or what do you think ought, ought, ought to be done about that?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know.  Now, let me tell you this.  Now, [Clifford] Campbell, that was the first director of Dunbar Trade School [later, Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  When he left, he went to city planning with Chicago [Illinois], real smart guy, (unclear).  He had to go with his age and everything.  They be glad to get rid of him.  They, they sent principals to Dunbar, Dunbar Vocational High School.  They sent elementary school teachers, made them principals over at Dunbar as a vocational school.  They don't know anything about vocation; they don't know nothing about it.  And each one was sent there as a hatchet man to kill the program.  And one guy, a big old fat guy there--I can't think of his name now--he cut out shoe rebuilding.  I can't think of his name.  I'll think of it.  And his reason for cutting out shoe rebuilding was because he had never had a pair of shoes half-soled in his life.  So they didn't--won't need none; they don't need that.  What happened was that the guy that taught shoe rebuilding, I think he was--he wasn't, he wasn't black.  He was a white guy that taught shoe rebuilding, but he was a great, he was a great teacher, great teacher, and he did a good job of teaching those kids.  Now, maybe he hadn't had a pair of shoes half-soled in life, but there's a guy up on 79th Street--I did have his card--he finished Dunbar in shoe rebuilding.  He has a shop up there that makes prosthesis.  That's what came from him being a shoemaker, all possibilities, you know.  You, you had some guys come there, principals, know nothing about the trades, never, never seen a union card, and they cut out shop, cut out linotype printing; they cut out house wiring, machine shop; they killed the aviation program that they had; they killed all of those programs.  So what, what are, what, what, what are the people gonna do?  All they can do now when they finish is flip a hamburger, you know, 'cause if you're up there, you learn a trade, you can always make some money.  Somebody's gonna always need something.  If you're a bricklayer, they're gon' need you.  If you're a plumber, they're gonna need you.  And you go up here now where they're rebuilding around 39th Street, 38th, Indiana [Avenue], all up and through there, what do you see?  You see cars come in there with a lot of Polish people coming in every day from different parts of the city doing all the bricklaying and the plumbing, no blacks at all.
Story_ID: 186188
Speaker 1: What's the condition of the--I mean the situation with the unions nowadays?  Are black folks joining these unions?  Are they able to--
Speaker 2: How they gon' join the union?  How they gon' join the unions?  They ain't got no way--gonna learn the trade.  They ain't gon' learn the trade.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the way you, so the way you learn it--I mean the way other folks are learning it is through--is Washburne [Trade School, Chicago, Illinois] still a, a trade school?
Speaker 2: Washburne moved out of the city I think.  I think they got a Washburne somewhere out.  I don't know where it is now.  But you could go to, you go to school and learn the trade.  And then they can always make a living, whether they're working for somebody else or whether they're working for themselves, and they make good money.  You, you go get, get somebody to lay some brick for you, you'll find out.  It's good money in it.  Plumbing, house wiring, and that's all they're doing up there, 31st Street, 38th Street, all around through in there.  They're tearing down houses, putting up new ones, and no blacks working.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and your right.  You see mostly Eastern Europeans come, coming--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --into work.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's what's coming in to work.
Speaker 1: Some Hispanics, you know, but--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's what you got.  And the blacks are flipping hamburgers or begging, so I don't know.  We tried to fight it, but we couldn't 'cause we couldn't do anything as teachers because we could lose our jobs, getting into politics.  So we couldn't do anything about it.  But I gave it--I gave all the information to the [Chicago] Negro Chamber of Commerce years ago.  And the guy that was head of it is still I think, Daryl [Grisham]--what's his name, Daryl what?  I can't think of his last name.  He's the president of the Parker House Sausage.  Daryl, what's Daryl's last name?  Do you know Daryl?
Speaker 1: No, I'm trying--no, I can't--I don't catch it, Daryl--
Speaker 2: I can't think of his last name.
Speaker 1: He's the president of Parker House Sausage here in Chicago [Illinois], or--
Speaker 2: Yes.  He was the president of the company.  And I gave him all of the information.  We, as a group, gave it to him years ago about what's going on, about these people losing jobs, you know.  You can--and it affects the whole community, the doctors, the lawyers, the preachers; it affects everybody because if you're a doctor and guy that's a bricklayer comes in he say five hundred dollars, and you're making big money, here's your money.  You can say five hundred dollars, and he's flipping hamburgers, you out of luck.  And that, and that's what's happening.  It's a lot of money in bricklaying.  There's a lot of money in construction.
Speaker 1: Do, do you have, do you have any thoughts about how this can be fixed or, or what--
Speaker 2: No, I don't know how it can be fixed.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: It's just, it's a lot of politics involved in this stuff.
Speaker 1: But you would say, I guess you would say that, that a trade school is needed in the black community.
Speaker 2: Yes, a trade school is needed.  Now they, now they've had vocational schools, and they do get a little sub- a little bit of it in the trade school--in a vocational school, but now they've cut the vocational schools out.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what--
Speaker 2: Now there's no more Dunbar Vocational Schools.  It's a Dunbar University--I mean the Dunbar [Vocational Career] Academy [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  Now what does an academy do for you?  What do they teach in an academy?  Now you have Simeon Vocational School [later, Simeon Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois].  That is now an academy.  They're putting a new one up, and they changed their name to academy.  I'm wondering when they're gonna change the name of, of what they call over here CVS.
Speaker 1: Chicago Vocational [High School, later, Chicago Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois], yeah.
Speaker 2: I wonder when they're gonna make that an academy.  Academy don't teach nobody how to make a living.
Speaker 1: These are all, these vocational schools are all in the black commun- well, the ones we named are all in the black community, and, they're no longer--so there're no trade schools.  That's, you know, it sounds like a tough situation, yeah.
Speaker 2: It's, it's a tough situation.  The only way when they grow up and learn a trade now is got to steal it 'cause there's nowhere for you to go to learn it.  When you had bricklaying over there, you had all of these things, carpentry.  You come there and learn how to do it, machine shop, foundry, mechanics, all that sort of stuff.  There's nowhere for 'em to go to learn it now.
Story_ID: 186189
Speaker 1: What was your philosophy?  How would you approach teaching your classes?
Speaker 2: Well, one thing I tried to instill in the students is respect.  That I respect you, you respect me.  We don't have to love each other, but we respect each other.  And I respect what you're doing, what you think, and we can get together on a common ground.  But I'm gonna respect you; you respect me.  And that, that, that was my philosophy.  That's the way I work it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you said, you said at one point you had all good students, I mean you never had a bad one.
Speaker 2: Never had a bad student.  I never had a bad student, had a lot of bad parents.
Speaker 1: Okay, meaning that the parents would support bad behavior or was just--
Speaker 2: Yes.  They don't know what the kids are doing.  They go out in the street, you don't know what he's doing, back home.  Say for instance, I was--I went up to a tailoring shop to talk to a fellow up there.  And one of the boys said to me, he said, "Mr. Lee, is that your, is that your new Lincoln out there?"  I said, "Yeah, that's mine."  He said, "I like it.  It's nice."  He said, "I'm gon' get me one."  I said, "Yeah, great," and he got one.  He got the same car I had.  Now you know something's wrong there.  Now he can take that car home.  Now his mama is on relief, and he got that car.  So you know he's, he's in the business, something wrong there.  And when we were kids, you couldn't bring nothing home in the house that your parents didn't buy for you.  You couldn't bring a pair of skates in, if, if you hadn't bought you any skates.  The first thing: where you get them skates from?  This is so and so.  Well, you take it on back, and don't bring it in here no more.  You came home on a bicycle, where did you get a bicycle from?  Now the kids just knock a kid off the bicycle and take it on home.
Speaker 1: And on the other end there's nobody to question.
Speaker 2: Nobody questioning him.  He got a, oh, he got a bicycle, and they're happy because he got a bicycle.  They don't care how he got it or whose, no, they don't care.  That's something.  You know, we couldn't bring nothing in the house like that.
Speaker 1: Sir--
Speaker 2: And when you, when you listen to all of this music that you hear that they're talking about women, about your mother, and your sister, and all this other stuff, and you're driving along and a car pulls up beside you.  And, and all of this stuff is coming out of the car, and it's a lady driving, and it's a baby boy sitting next to her listening to all this loud, crazy talk, you know, that's ridiculous.  What do you do?  Nothing you can do about it.  They're allowed to do whatever they wanna do.  But somebody's got to pay for it.
Speaker 1: Who pays for it?
Speaker 2: He'll pay for it, pay for it in jail or prisons.  And prisons are on the stock market.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that, that's, that's something that's new.
Speaker 2: That's something.  That is something.
Story_ID: 186190
Speaker 1: --Sir, what was the most rewarding aspect of teaching?
Speaker 2: I en- I've enjoyed the students that I have, just to watch them grow, you know, just to watch 'em grow.  Now, most of the students that come around to see me, they've bought their own homes, you know; they send their kids to, to college.  It's rewarding.  Now I had, I had two boys to come to my class.  One boy's father owns a tavern.  They're, they're teenagers in high school, and they're buddy buddy.  So they come into my shop eight o'clock in the morning, and they stay until lunchtime.  They have free period then.  When they come in, I can smell whiskey on 'em.  I call them over.  I say, "Hey, fellows, tell me what's going on."  I say you, "I know you've been drinking.  I can smell it."  I said, "Now you know you can't, you can't be in here drinking liquor and working on these machines 'cause you'll get hurt.  So what I want you to do"--I have a big tool room--"go back there in the tool room and go to sleep.  Don't come out.  Stay in there, and I'll come and get you when it's time for you to go get your lunch."  Okay?  Now his father owns a tavern, and it's his job to clean it up before he comes to school, and of course his buddy is with him.  You know, teenagers, they gon' sample some whiskey.  That's, that's natural, you know, get a taste, so okay.  So I said, "Now time to go to lunch, and when school's over come back here.  I wanna talk to you."  When they come back, I said, "Now you know you spent three hours with me.  I don't want you to come back drunk anymore."  I said, "Don't do that."  I said, "But you don't owe me three hours.  You owe me twelve hours, and you've got to make it up before you graduate."  And they made it up.
Speaker 1: What did they do to make it up?
Speaker 2: They come back after school--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and make them hours up.  Now, just that one boy, his father died.  He's got the taverns.  He's still running the taverns, and he's doing fine.  And he comes around.  He just had a big party at his place up at Union Pier [Michigan] for all of his classmates.  He's doing very well.  I had one boy, he used to play tonk in the lunchroom, and he had his deck of cards.  Said to him, "What you doing with them cards (unclear)?"  "Oh, Mr. Lee, I'm, I'm making money.  These dummies around here, they don't know nothing."  I said, "You don't know nothing either."  I said, "Now you shouldn't do that."  I said, "Because really you don't know the game."  "Oh yeah, I know (unclear)."  "Oh yeah, okay.  Tell you what, one day when it's nice out, and I don't feel like going out to lunch, can we have a little tonk game, you and me?"  "Oh yeah, yeah, yeah," him and his buddy.  I said, "Okay."  So one day I say, "Hey, got your cards?"  "Yeah."  I said, "Well, I'm not going out to dinner--to get my lunch--can we play a little tonk at lunchtime?"  He said, "Yeah," so we played tonk.  So in about a half an hour I had his ten dollars, put it in my pocket.  So his buddy say, "Mr. Lee [HM James Lee], you gonna give him his money back?"  I said, "Did he give you yours back?"  He said, "No."  I said, "Well, I ain't giving him his back.  I told him he didn't know how to play."
Story_ID: 186191
Speaker 1: Tell me about the process of purchasing this home because you were a pioneer, right, in moving out to this part of town [Park Manor, Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We [Lee and his wife, Verlena Lee] were looking around for a piece of property to buy, and we were looking in the papers.
Speaker 1: Now we're at 75th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue] basically. Seventy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm, I was living, I'm living--
Speaker 1: --seventy, yeah 75th.
Speaker 2: --at, at, at 6611 Eberhart [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's where I was living.  I had an apartment there.  And we decided we'll buy a house.  So we were looking in the papers and then going around and looking at different houses.  And we had looked at this house.  They let us in, and we looked at it.  And we had to get a loan, and the guy that was gonna get the loan, he was trying to, to beat us, he was trying to beat us out of some money.  He wanted the house.  And I don't know happened.  We changed him--we, we, we left him alone.  And I guess we waited about a year, and we started back I guess, and we came back over here.  There was a woman, a white woman, had two little white girls that were her children that were living here.  And she let us in, and we talked to her.  Her husband was, I think he was an electrician, but he had gotten a job in California, and he had gone.  All the furniture is gone.  They just had pallets they were sleeping on.  She was left here to sell the house, and he had gone to California.  So we got along pretty good, and we talked.  And we got things together and the loan and all that sort of stuff.  And everything went along fine.  Yeah, we had, we had no problems.  And I had a friend of mine that worked, worked for the, for the city here, and he said, "Well, you know you gon' have problems out there."  He said, "We better get you some protection so that you won't get hurt out there."  I said, "Okay."  So he decided he was gonna have protection out here for me.  And we moved in--no, I didn't move in.  What happened was she said to me, she said, "[HM] Mr. [James] Lee, if you wanna come over and do anything to the house while we're in it, before we go, feel free to come on over," since we, we got the papers and everything were going.  So I went, I came over, and I was doing some work around here.  And the neighbors asked her who I was, and she told them that she was gonna sell the house to me.  And she called me back and said, "I wish you wouldn't come over anymore, said I'm, I'm gonna have problems with my neighbors 'cause they're, they're angry with me for selling."  So I said, "Okay."  I didn't pay it any mind.  So when she moved out, she told me, she said, "Here's my address.  If anything happens, sent--anything is sent here, you can find me."  She said, "But don't give it to any of my neighbors," said, "I don't want them to know where I'm, where I'm living," when I moved in here, this house.  And then we had police protection.  But some of the people came down and said they would stay.  They welcomed me into the neighborhood.  One was a guy next door.  He had a hardware store and that Norman [ph.], the laundry down here.  They're on a couple--they had the places on State Street.  That's before they put the Dan Ryan [Expressway] in.  And (clearing throat) they, they moved out--I don't know when they moved.  I think they must have moved out the cover of darkness or something 'cause I--the next thing I know, I saw some blacks going into the house.  I said well, they're gone.  I didn't know they were gone, you know.  So it was real funny.
Story_ID: 186192
Speaker 1: So, two doors down [in Park Manor, Chicago, Illinois], I was going down the alley.  I was driving down.  I was gonna go to work one morning, and this woman, white woman, was out, and she had some awnings and stuff that she had put outside and puttin' a sale sign on 'em, you know, awnings off the house and all.  And I was driving down and I saw it, and I didn't have any awnings on this house, so I stopped.  I said to her, I said, "Your awnings for sale?"  She said, "Yeah."  I said, "How much are they?"  She said, "Fifteen dollars."  Well, I had priced awnings at Sears [Roebuck, and Co.], and they're gonna cost me about $250 dollars to put awnings back there.  So I went on and drove on, and I turned around and went around that block.  I said--I went back around the block and talked to her.  I said, "How much you say those awnings were?"  'Cause I said, "Now, 250 some dollars."  She said, "Fifteen dollars."  I said, "Will those awnings fit my house?"  She said, "Yeah, they came off of your house."  She had taken the awnings down and given them to that lady down the street.  So I, I gave her fifteen dollars.  I was glad to get (laughter) the awnings.  I put 'em back up from where they came from.  So I had no problems.  I didn't have any problems with any of 'em.
Speaker 2: Okay, so things were, were--were you the first black person on the block here?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So you been here since 1953.  That's a--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I had police protection here the whole time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a long time.
Speaker 1: And one of my students, Melvin [ph.], the one I was saying was intoxicated came to class that time.  He was the one that painted my fence out there.  I had a little picket fence about that high, white, all the way around before I put this fence up.  And he painted that fence in '53 [1953] 'cause we were laughing about it.  He stopped, passed here not too long ago, and we were laughing.  He said, "Mr. Lee [HM James Lee], you know, I painted that fence."  I said, "Yeah, you did."
Story_ID: 186193
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: You know, we have--we started, my wife [Verlena Lee] and I, we started block clubs down here [Park Manor, Chicago, Illinois].  And we got along pretty good, and then it sort of petered out.  And they started again.  They've been going at it again now about four years.  And we got 'em to the point that the front of the houses look nice.  You know, you come to the--and cut the grass and everything.  But I can't get 'em to clean up the alley.  You can always tell when you drive through the alleys it's a black neighborhood.  They forget the--you know, like I say years ago, when they combed their hair they forgot to comb in the back, what they call the kitchen, you know.  And it's the same thing with their homes.  Now I, when I clean up back here, I have the fellow come up.  I have him, on both sides of the alley, I have him take all the weeds down, no weeds back there, but with the whiskey bottles and all that sort of stuff out there.  And one of the last meeting I was to and I paid my dues, I said now let's clean up the alleys.  But they will not clean up the alleys.  I don't know why they won't clean the alley, weeds, and people drive through, you know.  Now this Walgreen's down here is about the only Walgreens I know around here that sells whiskey.  You can't buy whiskey at Walgreens anymore.  They stopped selling whiskey, but this one sells whiskey.  And we got all them bottles out there in the alley, and they use the alley as a toilet, because you got the Arabs on this corner and the Arabs on this corner, and they don't allow them to use the washrooms, so they use our alleys.  Because I, I don't know why they would buy gas at a place even--that wouldn't let 'em use the washroom, but they do.  They come right in there.  We've had 'em come here and ask can they--ask me can they use the bathroom.  I said, "No.  You bought your gas there, use that.  You can't come in my house."  I don't know why they would do that, but they do it.  And you can't go to the washroom in that one or that one, and that's right off the highway [Dan Ryan Expressway]--
Story_ID: 186194
Speaker 1: What would you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: As my legacy?  Well, I haven't, I haven't been too successful in all cases.  But one of the main things I have stressed when I was teaching was the clock.  And I insist on 'em going by the clock.  I said, "Now, my class starts at 8:00 [o'clock], not 8:01, not 8:02, not 8:10.  My class starts at 8:00.  I said why do you think these people made all these clocks?  They got 'em hanging on buildings; they got 'em hanging everywhere.  Use it."  And I insisted.  That's one thing I've always insist, that you say you're gonna see me at 10:00, okay, be here at 10:00, not 10:01, 10:02, no, un-un, 10:00.  Ain't but one way, the way the little hand and the big hand is, and that's it.
Story_ID: 186195
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Carrie Ward Lee] have a chance to see you become successful, you know, as a teacher and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did she live in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] the rest of her life or did she--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she lived in Philadelphia--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for the rest of her life.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, is there anything that you would do differently when you look back on everything?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I would--I don't know.  I don't know, but sometimes I think I should have done some things differently.  I don't know whether it been for the better or not, but you know, you can always make room for improvement.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I don't know.
Story_ID: 186196
Speaker 1: This is similar to legacy, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  Well, I think I'd like people to remember me as, as a person that didn't mind helping a brother if he needed help because I don't mind helping a brother that's in need 'cause sometimes it get you into trouble.  You lose some things sometimes by helping 'em, but I try to make it work.
