Story_ID: 37629
Speaker 1: My name--
Speaker 2: --start here.
Speaker 1: --is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers--
Speaker 2: You don't talk like that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Our videographer is Scott Stearns.
Speaker 2: Okay, Scott.
Speaker 1: Now, Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: I'm Myron Lewis Lowery, Jr.  I rarely use the junior, but M-Y-R-O-N L-O-W-E-R-Y L-E-W-I-S L--I did that wrong.  I said Myron Lowery.  L-E-W-I-S is my middle name, Myron Lewis Lowery.
Speaker 1: Okay, junior.  And what is your date of birth--(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Let me start this over.  If you--if you can keep this, you--let me start this over.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: My name is Myron Lewis Lowery, Jr.  I rarely use the junior, but that's my official full name.  That's M-Y-R-O-N L-E-W-I-S L-O-W-E-R-Y.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, Sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born the day after Christmas, December 26, 1946, in Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, Sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a member of the Memphis [Tennessee] City Council right now.  This is a part-time position.  I've been on the Memphis City Council for some nineteen years, elected in 1991, and that's my current position.  I've retired from FedEx.  I worked for Federal Express [FedEx] for seventeen years.  And I used to be a broadcast journalist at WMC-TV here in Memphis, from 1971 to 1983, for twelve years.  So, my three main careers are: broadcast journalist, news reporter, a communication specialist; and manager at FedEx here in Memphis; and as a councilman part time.  Now, in between there I've taught school in New York City and in Memphis, taught broadcast journalism, and I've also been a press secretary for Congressman Harold Ford, Sr.  I was his press secretary in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], from 1984 to 1986.  So I've had a--a wonderful career.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37630
Speaker 1: All right, what station were you the--
Speaker 2: WMC-TV in Memphis, Tennessee.  Let me tell you how this came about:  After the riots in 1968, President Johnson appointed the Kerner Commission on Civil Disorders.  This commission was designed to look into the reasons for racial unrest around the country.  The Kerner Commission made several recommendations, one was that we had to have an increased amount of diversity in the media, not only broadcast, but radio as well as print.  So the Ford Foundation put up $300,000, along with CBS and NBC, and they trained people during the summer to get into the field of journalism.  Geraldo Rivera went through this program a year before I did.  And this program trained people for some ten years.  I went through the program during the summer of 1971.  My former college president, Hollis F. Price, from LeMoyne College [Memphis, Tennessee], was working at WMC-TV [Memphis] as the urban affairs director, and he would come to New York to visit me.  I was teaching in New York at the time, by the way, teaching in Spanish Harlem at John S. Roberts Junior High School, 120th and 1st [location].  That was a unique experience.  So, Dr. Price said, "Myron, I know you've got a fine career ahead of you in education, but would you like to change, how about journalism?"  And he made me an offer I couldn't refuse.  There's ego involved in being on the air, and I said, fine.  But it was also a great opportunity to come back to Memphis.  I've always loved this city, so I took Dr. Price up on the offer.  I was trained at Columbia University in New York City doing an eleven-week extensive training on how to do an interview, on how to shoot film.  We shot silent film at that time.  So I came to Channel 5, WMC-TV, as the first full time African American reporter for the station, the station that hired Art Gilliam here in Memphis, who was a part-time announcer on the weekends.  So I was the first full-time reporter at the station.  So I stayed at the station as a reporter, weekend anchor, and producer for twelve years before I left.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm gonna get into the depths about that later on--
Speaker 2: We can go back, sure.
Speaker 1: --down the line.  I just wanted to establish that.
Story_ID: 37631
Speaker 1: And, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is Tuesday, the 27th of July, 2010.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in the city hall building [Memphis, Tennessee] right now.  We're on the 5th Floor in the City Council Chairman's Office.  I've served as chairman of the council for two terms, and I may try to serve again next year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37632
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight 'People' magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone, and they only require a short answer.  The first such question is--it's kinda like a warm-up.  The first question is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  I'm overweight, I like all food (laughter).  I guess meat is my favorite.  I love fried chicken.  I live in Memphis [Tennessee], so I love ribs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And barbecue.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Time of the year would really be the summer and the fall.  I don't like it too hot or too cold.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: There is no city in the world like Las Vegas, Nevada, bright lights, big city.  I love Las Vegas.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question in this set is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I usually leave people with this, "Take care."  I also say, "Life is good" because I believe if you have a positive outlook, it reflects through everything you do.  So I tell people every day life is good and when I leave I say, "Take care."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37633
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we're gonna start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Mary Hill Lowery, M-A-R-Y H-I-L-L L-O-W-E-R-Y.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in Columbus, Ohio, in 1929, December the 8th.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your mother's family?  How far back, first of all, can you trace her side of the family?
Speaker 2: To the 1700s.  My grandmother, Pauline Hill, used to tell me stories when I was a child.  Quite frankly, I did not believe them.  She told me how her father, Knight Foster, was growing up in Jonesville, South Carolina, and how he used to clean outhouses for a living, and he saved up his money, and he donated money to the county government for a school and a church.  And she told me some stories, quite frankly, I didn't believe, how her father, Lonnie Goode, was run away from Jonesville, South Carolina, because he was a black man dating white women.  I said, "Oh, grandma, please," but when I became older, I began to research that.  And one year, I took my son on a drive, and we went to Jonesville, South Carolina.  And when we drove through the town, the first thing we saw was Knight's Chapel Church on the highway.  I said wait a minute, Knight, his name was Knight Foster.  We got out, we looked at the cornerstone, and I saw W. Goode, Wade Goode, Lonnie Goode's father, on the cornerstone, Knight Foster's name.  And I went to the cemetery, and I found their headstones.  And there was a school named Foster Chapel School.  And I knocked--believe it or not, I went to a gas station in the town, and I said to anybody, "You know any of the Fosters?"  They said, "Yeah, they live over here."  My son and I knocked on the door.  I said, "I'm Myron Lowery.  I'm the great-grandson of Lonnie Goode."  "Lonnie Goode," they couldn't believe it.  Opened me with open arms.  Four years later, I organized a family reunion on my mother's side of the family to go back to Jonesville, South Carolina, and to meet family members.  It was like a Kunta Kinte [protagonist of Alex Hailey's book, 'Roots'] experience, so to speak.  And I did this because, as a reporter, I met the head of the National Archives.  This was in 1977; this was during the time of Alex Haley's 'Roots'.  And the head of the National Archives said, "If you give me a county and a last name, I'll find your relatives."  So when I went to Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], sure enough, he looked in the census records and he found Lonnie Goode, my great-grandfather, and he found Zula (ph.) Goode, my great-grandmother, and their kids.  And, it was just an Eureka for finding your history.  So, I traced my family roots back to the 1700s to a doctor, by the name of John B. Goode, who had a white family and a black slave.  And with this black slave they had thirteen kids, and I traced it back.  And I've got other relatives.  These are the Goodes in Los Angeles, California, in Las Vegas [Nevada], and in Detroit [Michigan].  And they've done even more than I've done to trace the family lineage back, so it goes way back.
Speaker 1: Now, where did John B. Goode live?  Is that in South Carolina?
Speaker 2: In South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Jonesville, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Jonesville.
Speaker 2: Yes, in Union County.  And since that time, Union County decided to print up a heritage book for the county, and I wrote up a history of the Goode Family, and it's printed in their book.  That was done about 1983 or '84 [1984].  And Knight Foster's children did a history of Knight Foster, as well, so it's in the Union County Heritage History Book right now.
Speaker 1: Is Knight Foster spelled with a "K."
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: Okay, and John B. Goode, you know--here--we're in Memphis [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Johnny B. Goode.  You don't have to tell me.
Speaker 1: We're in Memphis, Tennessee now?
Speaker 2: Again, that's why I didn't believe any of this.  When my grandmother told me the stories, I--"Oh, grandma."  But there's a rich heritage in my family, and I've always appreciated that when I found more, and I learned more about my family.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's, that's rewarding.
Story_ID: 37634
Speaker 1: So, he goes all the way back to the 1700s [in Jonesville, South Carolina].  John B. Goode--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  You know, and since that time, I've met new family members out in Los Angeles [California], and I put them on tape.  In fact, tomorrow I'm going to Los Angeles, and I'm going to put on tape Geneva James, who's a distant relative, she's eighty years old.  And I'm gonna ask her to try to remember some of the family history.  Just like you're doing with me, I've done with other members of my family, put them on tape so they could tell their stories, as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Unclear) interesting, there are about other stories I've heard about people that, you know, collected junk and that sort of thing and building a school, you know.  So this is an interesting, you know, story.  I believed it when you were saying it because I've heard such--
Speaker 2: It gives you a sense of pride.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It gives you a sense of pride.  You know, I was raised by my great-grandfather, Lonnie Goode.  My mother [Mary Hill Lowery] was divorced when I was young.  And he always gave me a sense of values.  He was a plasterer; he did walls.  In his business, he hired relatives within the family.  And he always motivated me and encouraged me to do more, to get a good education.  So I've--I've always remembered that and respected what he's tried to give to me, and I've tried to give to others, by passing it on.  He gave me a sense of responsibility toward community and what you have to do in life.  To much who is given, much is required, and I've tried to give it back as well, based on his memory.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I hope that you can share some of the research on your family with us for the archives in Chicago [Illinois; The HistoryMakers' archives] and--but I wanna ask you while we're doing this interview (unclear).  There has to be some good stories in all that history.  Are there any good stories that you heard coming up about your mother's side of the family from that--from that side that you can tell us?
Speaker 2: Right off hand, I cannot think of any, but obviously there were, you know, with Knight Foster in Jonesville [South Carolina].  I can't think of any good ones right now.  I guess the stories that I remember are the stories growing up with my brothers in, in Poindexter Village, a public housing project in Columbus [Ohio], but I can't think of any specific good stories right now, at this moment.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, we'll--
Speaker 2: If they come--
Speaker 1: --let, let's--
Speaker 2: --to me, I'll--I'll bring 'em out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37635
Speaker 1: So was--was your mother [Mary Hill Lowery] raised in Jonesville [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: No, my mother was raised in Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, let me ask this question then, when did the family make the transition from Jonesville to Columbus, or was it straight from Jonesville to Columbus or a stop along the way and another?
Speaker 2: It was straight from Jonesville to Columbus.  Now, some of the family members went to Detroit [Michigan], others went to Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother was born in Columbus, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Now, I wanna say that in Columbus, right now, one of my great-grandfather's [Lonnie Goode] brothers, Herbert Goode, has a large family.  And many of them have remained in Columbus, so they do an annual family reunion around the Fourth of July, the Herbert Goode Family.  My family on my mother's side, since I've been away, we really haven't done a reunion.  But on my father's [Myron Lowery] side, we do a reunion every two or three years, three or four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so, how had the--did your--okay, so, I guess it was your grandparents [Pauline Hill and Harold Hill] that moved to Columbus, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, from Jonesville?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right--
Speaker 2: And my great-grandparents [Lonnie and Zula (ph.) Goode], they lived in Columbus.
Speaker 1: Oh, your great-grandparents lived there?
Speaker 2: Great-grandparents were in Columbus, as well.
Speaker 1: So they've--
Speaker 2: Okay, and I stayed--
Speaker 1: --been in Columbus a couple of generations?
Speaker 2: Right, with Lonnie and Zula Goode.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 37636
Speaker 1: So, what did they [Lowery's great-grandparents, Lonnie and Zula (ph.) Goode] do for a living?
Speaker 2: Again, my great-grandfather was a plasterer.  He had his own company.  My great-grandmother was just a housewife and took care of the house, and she did the bills, the paperwork for the company, made sure that everyone was paid on time and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, your grandparents?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was Pauline Hill.  She was a day worker.  She was a maid.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think she graduated from high school and did not go on to college.  Her husband was Harold Hill.  I don't remember much about Harold Hill, they were separated and divorced.  I remember that Harold was an alcoholic.  He came around every now and then, but I can't tell you much about Harold Hill.  But my grandmother was Queen Mother Mary, so to speak.  She took care of us, made sure that we were neatly dressed.  She helped my mother [Mary Hill Lowery] out a lot.  My mother had us when we were young, so Pauline Hill is a saint somewhere in heaven right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37637
Speaker 1: Now, so your mother [Mary Hill Lowery] went to school in Columbus [Ohio], I guess.  Did she have any stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't remember a lot of my mother's stories.  I'm sure she had some, but I just don't remember.  That seems strange.  She's been dead more than ten years now.
Speaker 1: Now did she depend on her grandparents [Lonnie and Zula (ph.) Goode], you know, a lot, considering the fact that you're--her father [Harold Lowery] was not around.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, she did.  Again, it all for me--it all goes back to Lonnie Goode.  You're exactly right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your mother, like, she was born the year of the stock market crash and the year of the Great Depression, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But she never talked about the stock market crisis and Great Depression.  That was over and above her.  I mean, we were a poor, meager family and, as I said, she was divorced from my father, who was Myron Lewis Lowery, Sr., and she had four boys, and we grew up in Poindexter Village [Columbus].  I mean, we were poor.  We were dirt poor.
Speaker 1: I wouldn't get into that far yet, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, all right.
Speaker 1: --just trying to talk about how she grew up. All right.
Speaker 2: Did she have a chance to go to school or anything--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Other than high school, I don't, I don't remember.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, and what did your mother do for a living.
Speaker 1: Again, she was a day worker.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She, she was an elevator operator at a couple of the big buildings in Columbus, Ohio.  That's before all the elevators were automatic.  You used to have somebody to operate those elevators, and she was a day worker.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 37638
Speaker 1: Now, let me go to your father's side of the family.  Can you give your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Again, his name is just like mine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Myron Lewis Lowery.  He lives in Warrensville, Ohio.  He is eighty-three years old.  He will be eighty-four on August 16th.  He has since remarried.  His current wife is Gloria Lowery, and I see them at least once or twice a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side, on the Lowery side?
Speaker 2: Not much.  Now with my father's family, we've had reunions.  And I've tried to interview him.  He doesn't remember a lot.  And I do have him on tape telling me what he remembers, but I can't relate it to you now, it's vague.  I think they grew up somewhere around West Virginia.  His--he had a brother by the name of Lonnie and a sister, and her name escapes me right now.  Her cousins would kill me if I couldn't remember their mother's name, but--but she's passed away, as well.  So he's the, the last one living, Myron, my father, of his brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1: So did he move to Ohio as a kid or was he born in Ohio?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure if he was born in Columbus [Ohio] or not.  I knew his family was from West Virginia.  I remember he was in the [U.S.] Navy. And I remember growing up--I didn't see much of him, but the pictures that I saw are my father in his Navy uniform, and he was smoking Lucky Strikes.  At the time, smoking was en vogue, and he was a Lucky Strikes smoker.  He's since given up smoking, of course.
Speaker 1: Now did he serve in World War II, or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, that's important.  So, what did you father do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father worked for General Motors.  He retired from General Motors several years ago.  So, he helped to build cars.
Speaker 1: Okay, in a plant in Columbus?
Speaker 2: In a plant in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Cleveland, okay.
Speaker 2: Cleveland, Ohio.
Story_ID: 37639
Speaker 1: Now, is there any stories passed down about your father's [Myron Lewis Lowery, Sr.] family, and--
Speaker 2: Oh, I wish I'd prepared better for stories 'cause I would have called him and asked him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, no, I don't have any per se.
Speaker 1: All right, well, let me just ask you this, is there a story that either parents [Mary Hill Lowery and Myron Lewis Lowery Sr.] tell, or both of them tell, about how they got together?
Speaker 2: I didn't go that far, and I think they probably did tell me, but I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were they--I take it they met in Columbus [Ohio]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I assume.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause he was--was your father living in Columbus--well I guess it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: At the time.
Speaker 1: --at some point, yeah.
Speaker 2: At the time, at the time, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're talking about the 1940s.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So they met in--well, and they got together, and how--do you have any brothers or sisters?
Speaker 2: Three brothers.  Michael is two years younger than I am, he was born February 4th, 1948.  Steven was born September 15th, I believe 1950; and my youngest brother, Dwight, was born December 28th, 1952, I believe, but he passed away several years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So there are three of us left--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Mike and Steven.
Speaker 1: You're the oldest?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 37640
Speaker 1: All right, well, when you--when you consider your parents' [Mary Hill Lowery and Myron Lewis Lowery Sr.] personalities and talents and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, I grew up with my mother, so I didn't grow up with my father.  He was in Cleveland [Ohio], I was in Columbus [Ohio].  You know, I rarely saw him.  I saw him--I remember him coming to my high school graduation.  We were sort of estranged, you know, and my mother was on welfare, and she didn't talk kindly about him because she scuffled.  She robbed Peter to pay Paul.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you know how people say, you know, you walk just like--you look just like him, when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --I don't know if that was true or not, but--
Speaker 2: Because people that I grew up with didn't know my father, and I only saw him occasionally, I couldn't say that he'd played a major influence on my life in terms of shaping my values or anything.  I would say that those values had to be shaped from my mother.  And let me tell you how in just the opposite way my mother could not manage money.  Her favorite friend was the pawn shop.  And she did this to survive.  She robbed Peter to pay Paul.  She got a little bit of money here, she paid this bill.  When she didn't have enough to pay utilities, she would pawn the television set, pay the utilities, get it out, or lose the television set.  So growing up like this made me disappointed in her lack of financial expertise.  I resented what she did.  She did what she had to do, but I didn't like it.  My brother tells me that one day we made a pact, and that pact was that we would never be poor.  I said I don't remember talk--telling him this, but he said we did because we were angry at her.  So, in terms of saying we would never be poor, there was only one thing we had to do and that was to get a good education so that we could get a good job, so we wouldn't have to visit the pawn shop every week to borrow a few dollars here, to pay this or to do that.  So that was a dramatic influence that she had on my life because she had it in such rough way, doing day work and doing what she did.  We were determined that we were gonna get an education, and we wouldn't have to live that way.
Story_ID: 37641
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memories come from Poindexter Village, which is one of the first public housing projects in Columbus, Ohio.  And just before that, my mother [Mary Hill Lowery] had a nervous breakdown, and we were placed in foster care.  So, my brothers [Michael, Steven and Dwight Lowery] and I stayed with a couple by the name of--we called them Alvin and May, and I can't think of their last names right now.  We stayed with Alvin and May and other foster children.  So those were some of my earliest memories growing up in Poindexter Village, small public housing project.  There were radiators in the, in the front room, the bedrooms.  And I remember that every day of the week we could almost tell you what day it was by what we had for dinner.  Sunday we had fried chicken.  Fridays we had baked beans and wieners, you know.  So, those were some of my earliest memories, playing with my brothers in Poindexter Village.  And I can recall some pictures that we took together around Christmas time.  My mother was always careful to dress us neatly for church.  She was a Pentelcostalist, the Church of God and Christ.  And we've got some warm family pictures that just remind me of growing up and dressing as cowboys with Roy Rogers and Gene Evans and that kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 37642
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: East Side, Columbus, Ohio, public housing.  Smells I can't tell you, but if anyone knows Columbus, Ohio, on the East Side, you know what I'm talking about.  East High School, St. Cyprian's [school], St. Dominic's [school], is where I went to school, 1383 Atchison Street.  The house is gone.  That's what I remember about Columbus, Ohio.  East Long Street, Mt. Vernon Avenue.
Speaker 1: What kind of streets are these, and what kind of houses are on these streets?
Speaker 2: Oh, the city has changed over the years.  I think, you know, it's still considered an African American community.
Speaker 1: In those days, what was it like when you were growing?
Speaker 2: I guess the closest that I can relate it to is when you see shots of the Renaissance in Detroit [Michigan] or something like that of what the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] look like.  That's what Columbus, Ohio, look like to me, not then, now.  As I look back on it and reflect on it, that's what it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, housing, mostly what, big frame houses, or?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Two stories, big frame houses.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's what I remember when (unclear) Columbus (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: You know, that's, that's--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Story_ID: 37643
Speaker 1: Yeah, and did most people have a job in your neighborhood [East Side of Columbus, Ohio] growing up, or (unclear).
Speaker 2: As a young boy, I assumed they did.  You know, I wasn't paying attention to whether most people had a job.  You know, I didn't know how poor we were growing up.  I knew that we didn't have certain things like we should have had.  I knew that I had to scuffle to get what I wanted.  I got me a paper route and bought the things that I needed, the clothes, a bicycle.
Speaker 1: What did you sell, the 'Columbus Dispatch', or?
Speaker 2: The '[Columbus] Citizen-Journal'.
Speaker 1: The 'Citizen-Journal'.
Speaker 2: And 'Columbus Dispatch'.  And those were great first-time jobs.  My brother won a contest.  He won a trip to the World's Fair in Seattle [Washington] from selling papers.  And I saved my money, and that helped me to be able to go back to the pawn shop to get those things out that my mother [Mary Hill Lowery] pawned.  I never will forget, I was a defiant young man.  I told her one time, "This is my television set now, I got it from the pawn shop."  She said, "What?"  I said, "You put it in, I got it out, it's mine 'cause if you hadn't paid the money to get it out, somebody else would have it."  So I was defiant.  But I just resented the way she had to do it, you know.  As I look back now, she did the best she could do, but back then growing up--I remember one time I received a Bulova Accutron watch, one of the self-winding watches, state of the art, for my eighth grade graduation.  My father [Myron Lewis Lowery, Sr.] bought it for me; he was in Cleveland [Ohio] now.  And I woke up one Saturday morning, and my watch was gone.  I said, "Where is my watch?"  My mother pawned my watch.  So can you imagine the feelings I had toward my mother for pawning my watch and didn't ask or tell me "I need to borrow your watch to get some money."  So, that just gives you an idea of how I came up.  So that's why I was determined.  We--we had paper routes, and we decided to make 'em bigger and better.  We actually rented a cab on Sundays to deliver our papers from the station house down to an apartment complex, and took half the papers out at the top of the complex and half at the bottom, 'cause we--our wagons weren't big enough to carry the papers in, so--
Speaker 1: So you paid a cabdriver--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I paid a cabdriver to get those papers down there.  I think I had about a 200 paper route, 200 at a time.  And that was a lot of papers for a kid with a wagon. And that's how I traveled, with a wagon, carried them in a wagon, couldn't, couldn't lift them.  So, we scuffled and saved our money that way, opened our own bank accounts.
Story_ID: 37644
Speaker 1: Now, now let me get this straight, now, in your immediate household were your mother [Mary Hill Lowery] and your brothers [Michael, Steven and Dwight Lowery]--
Speaker 2: Yes, that was it, my mother and my brothers.
Speaker 1: All right, so you never lived with your grandparents (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, my [maternal] grandmother, Pauline [Hill], lived with Lonnie and Zula [Goode; Lowery's maternal great-grandparents], and I've told you a moment ago about me being defiant, well, one day my mother said, "You're not gonna talk to me like this, get out."  So I went to live with Lonnie and Zula in my senior year and junior in high school, so I stayed with them.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I thought you mentioned it (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did live with them.
Speaker 1: --I just wondered what--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the situation was.
Story_ID: 37645
Speaker 1: Where did you--what was the name of your first school [in Columbus, Ohio]?  Where did you start school at?
Speaker 2: My first school was Douglas Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Was that named for Frederick Douglass or Steven Douglas or some other Douglas?  You look--
Speaker 2: Some other Douglas, as far as I know.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't think--
Speaker 1: --Frederick Douglass.
Speaker 2: --in Columbus, Ohio, during the 1950s, they named it for Frederick Douglass, I doubt that very seriously, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Is it spelled with one "s" or two?
Speaker 2: One "s."
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so that's not Frederick.
Speaker 2: And after going to Douglas, Doug--Douglas High School--
Speaker 1: Now this is Douglas Elementary?
Speaker 2: It's elementary.  I did say high school.  I went to East High School I remember that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I remember my mother [Mary Hill Lowery] saying that I couldn't real--really read and I wasn't doing well, so she put us in Catholic school.  And we went to St. Cyprians Catholic School and later to St. Dominics until the eighth grade, and then in the ninth grade I went to Mohawk Junior High School, and from Mohawk I went to East High School, and I graduated from East High School in June of 1964.  I was the speaker at commencement for the class in 1964.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna get to that in a minute, but, now Douglas Elementary School, were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: You're taking me way back.  All I remember is the name of the school.  I don't remember if I was a good student, a bad student.  Let me tell you what I remember, I remember one time I had to ask a teacher to go to the bathroom, and she said, "No, class just went to the bathroom."  I said, "I gotta go."  She said, "No," and I stood there and wet on myself.  That was my memory of elementary school.  Other than that, mmm, I can't tell you.  Good student, bad student, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Did you--were you defiant in school?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was--I was just an average student.  I didn't excel.  I've always been gifted with being able to speak, so I was articulate.  And in junior high school, I remember that I emceed a program, a Spring Fling, so to speak, and that was very successful in junior high school, and that sort of followed me.  Everybody said, "Well, Myron can do it, of a good job being an emcee."  So when I went to high school, again, I was the emcee for the band.  When the football team went to play in the band, I was emcee.  I announced the routines for the band, and I was in speech and debate.  So, that's what I remember about school.  I was articulate, I could talk, I could put a good sentence together, I had confidence with what I did, and that followed me throughout high school.  I wasn't the best student.  I was an average student.  All my friends were on the honorable roll, the Honor Society, while I didn't make all As and Bs, I made Bs and Cs, and I got along.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in, in grade school, did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Again, you're going back too far.  I--I just told you what I remembered from grade school. (laughter) Favorite subject?  Aahh! Have no idea.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Didn't you take everything, reading, writing?  I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay, you didn't like reading better than math or your math better than reading?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to take you to high school, okay?
Speaker 1: All right, I know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't remember the stuff from--
Speaker 1: Did you--
Speaker 2: --grade school.
Speaker 1: Did you have any teachers that took an interest in you in grade school that you remember?
Speaker 2: All right, I need to say this one more time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I'm getting older.  That was such a long time in my life. You know, even now it's hard sometimes t remember two or three years ago.
Story_ID: 37646
Speaker 1: When you were a kid, were there any, especially adult male, that took an interest in you as--with your newspapers or any other--
Speaker 2: I had a good friend by the name of Raymond Span (ph.), and Raymond was a good friend who did take an interest.  And he had a car, a station wagon.  He was maybe ten years older, and he helped us [Lowery and his brother(s)] with the paper route sometime.  But, again, this is beyond elementary [school].  This is junior high and not in high school, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, young, young--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --older kids or young adult--
Speaker 2: Sure, right, right.
Speaker 1: All right, so he took an interest in what--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you guys were doing.  Yeah, 'cause four young--four brothers [Lowery and his younger brothers, Michael, Steven and Dwight Lowery] here together.
Speaker 2: Umm.
Story_ID: 37647
Speaker 1: Did you participate in stuff like Boy Scouts or Cub Scouts or any of that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: No Boy Scouts, no Cub Scouts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We participated in church.  My mother [Mary Hill Lowery] sent us to church every Sunday.
Speaker 1: Did you spend--and a lot of time--I imagine in the Church of God and Christ (unclear) we spent--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We spent a lot of time in church.  And there was a conflict because she also sent us to Catholic school.  So, in Catholic school you had to go to take catechism classes, so I was smart.  I knew the Bible.  You couldn't ask me anything about the Bible that I didn't know at one point in my life.  And I saw the conflicts between the Catholic religion and what they were teaching in Sunday School.  So, I'd ask the nuns what about this, and she'd say, "Oh, don't worry about that, you have to have faith."  (Laughter)  At the Pentecostal church, I'd say what about three divine people in, in, in one, one spirit, you know, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost?  She says, "Where'd you learn that?"  Catholic--"Oh, don't worry about that, you gotta go on faith."  So neither one of them had good answers for me.  So that led me to believe that people believe what they wanna believe, and they move on.
Speaker 1: Are you very religious now?
Speaker 2: Because of that experience, no, I'm not, because I've seen too much hypocrisy in the church, in all churches--in the Catholic Church--especially what that Church has done to harbor pedophiles throughout the years.  I've seen ministers who are rich and drive the big cars, and the people that they get their 10 percent from are losing utilities, and they're not doing anything.  Churches need to do more in this community.  Some do a lot; many can do more to help bring the community up.  So, I've seen the ministers make themselves rich off those less fortunate.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did the Church of God and Christ offer you any leadership training or anything like that, or encourage you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --as a youth to--
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37648
Speaker 1: Again, I'm gonna skip to junior high [Mohawk Junior High School, Columbus, Ohio] and high school [East High School, Columbus].  I participated in a couple of oratorical contests with the Elks, and I won a couple of speaking events with the Elks.
Speaker 2: I've heard a little (unclear) before, but I just wondered, like, how did you cultivate the confidence to be a, you know, an effective speaker?  That seems to be the one wall a lot of children cannot, or youth cannot overcome their shyness of speaking in public.  That's a common problem with youth, but you're someone who--
Speaker 1: If I could put my finger on it, I'd bottle it and I'd sell it.  I can't do that other than to say that my personality lended itself to have the confidence to believe in myself. If you believe, you can achieve it. And the story that I tell young people today, "If it is to be, it's up to me."  And it's a matter of doing it on your own.  People can't take care of you.  You've got to care of yourself, and then you give it back to society.  So how did I develop that confidence?  I don't know.  I know I have it.  I know that there's something intuitive that says you gotta do more, and I have pushed myself throughout the years to do more.
Speaker 2: Now did you have any heroes in terms of the orators from those days, like, you know, did you ever listen to the speeches of Dr. [Martin Luther] King or, I don't know, people that might come in town--
Speaker 1: Well everybody listened to King.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 37649
Speaker 1: Everybody listened to [Dr. Martin Luther] King.  I regretted--
Speaker 2: Were you particularly inspired by that kind of rhetoric--
Speaker 1: No, not particularly, and let me tell you something--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I had the opportunity to go to the March on Washington in 1963, and I passed.  All my friends got on the bus said, "We're going, you wanna go?" and I said nah.  I regretted that every day.  Even today I think about I could have been there in that crowd.
Speaker 2: Did you see the speech on television?
Speaker 1: Of course, everybody seen the speech.  I was a broadcast journalist.  I worked with that speech many, many times--
Speaker 2: I mean in real time and when it was being given that day, in August of 1963.
Speaker 1: I don't remember if I saw it that day or not, but I know I've seen it a hundred times since then--a wonderful, powerful speech.
Speaker 2: Okay, I just wondered.
Story_ID: 37650
Speaker 1: So, did you have any heroes--I mean, who were your heroes, if you had any in those days?
Speaker 2: Again, Columbus, Ohio--I can't tell you about heroes at that time, I don't remember.  I can tell you some modern-day heroes from Memphis, Tennessee, since I've been here, but not from Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll get to them later, but I just wondered is there any sports figures that you idolized or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Everybody loved Jim Brown, running back for the Cleveland Browns [football team; Cleveland, Ohio].  He was a good figure in sports.
Speaker 1: Did you follow sports as a kid?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was a Buckeye [college football]; I followed Ohio State [University].  I got sick of Ohio State football.  That's what we followed and, you know.
Speaker 1: So you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Football team was it.
Speaker 1: Bob Ferguson and Paul Warfield and--
Speaker 2: You remember them.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's right, Paul Warfield is right.
Speaker 1: He was a--he was a star then--
Speaker 2: It was a nationally ranked team.  Everybody--
Speaker 1: --and right there in Ohio, we all--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --watch.  The basketball team, you know, Jerry Lucas and all them.  Cincinnati--
Speaker 2: You're right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Jerry Lucas was the man in Ohio.
Speaker 1: Yeah, like, Cincinnati and Ohio State played every year--
Speaker 2: See you're going back so far, people that watch this'll say, "Jerry who--what--what are they talking about?"
Speaker 1: Well that's what it's for, it's history (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's when it's history.  But you know what, there's an idea that history is really today, what's happening today with this interview.  This interview will be a part of history.  So while I don't remember a lot growing up, I remember--take me back five, ten, fifteen years in my career, and I could be a little more articulate about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 37651
Speaker 1: So you at a Elks speech contest.  You remember the content of your speeches with the Elks?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I just remember I won.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so this is in junior high school [Mohawk Junior High School, Columbus, Ohio], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And then in high school--now you're in Columbus East [High School]--
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: It's a fairly large high school--(unclear) schools and a state athletic powerhouse, you know, from what I remember.  East Side of Columbus is the black side of town, stratified like a lot of towns are, one side is black and--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --named like that.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: How many black schools were in Columbus then?
Speaker 2: Now, wait a minute.  I never said that East High was black.  Now, it was on the black side of town, but it was an integrated high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Was the majority black, or?
Speaker 2: You know, the more I think about, it might have been equal.  It might have been equal.  I had just as many white friends as I had black friends.  You know, we had a reunion a year or two ago, and it was almost equally divided.  Maybe there were more African Americans than, than whites at the reunion, but it was an integrated school.
Speaker 1: Okay, well that's important.  I didn't know that.  Was your grade school integrated, too?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, yes.
Speaker 1: Both of them, St. Cyprian [Catholic School]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and Douglas [Elementary School]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, it's a little different from Dayton [Ohio] (unclear).  They're all black, if you're on the black side of town.
Story_ID: 37652
Speaker 1: Now, so, you're at Columbus East [High School, Columbus, Ohio] and you said that--were you involved in school activities there like clubs and things or any of those kind of--
Speaker 2: When you go through the 1962, 1963, and '64 [1964] yearbook, you will see me as a member of the choir, the Glee Club, the English Club, the French Club, the announcer for the band, and speech and debate.  My love was speech and debate.  Betty Coupli was my teacher then.  She had a dramatic influence on me and many, many others.
Speaker 1: How do you spell her last name?
Speaker 2: C-O-U-P-L-I, Betty Coupli.  She was at that last reunion I spoke about a year or so ago.  In speech and debate you had to take an issue and debate both sides, so you had to know your subject matter, pro or con, be ready to talk about each one.  I had a speech and debate partner, a good friend.  Her name was Myran Lewis.  Now you remember my full name?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Her name was My, M-Y-R-A-N L-E-W-I-S.  So we'd go to the schools and we'd sign Myron Lewis Lowery and Myran Lewis, and folks would say, "Is that a mistake?" "Nope."  Anyway, we were lousy together.  Every week we would go to a different high school-Dayton [Ohio], Cincinnati [Ohio], Cleveland[Ohio], and we'd have three debates that Saturday.  And for the first ten weeks, we lost every date.  We were 0 and 30, and on the eleventh week, we won one; we were one and two.  So we ended up 1 and 32, and we decided speech and debate was not our cup of tea.  So My [Myran] went into extemporaneous-correction, she went into dramatic interpretation, and I went into extemporaneous speaking-- taking the subject matter, given thirty minutes to review it--to read, and to get up and give a five-minute extemporaneous speech.  Well, we both found our forte'.  In dramatic interpretation, she placed first in the state and went on to the nationals.  In extemporaneous speaking, I placed third in the state.  So, that was all good training for my days as a reporter and my days as a city councilman.
Speaker 1: Did you know what happened to her, if she went on to--
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm glad you asked that question, because somebody will be able to help me find her.  My worked at Ohio State [University].  She was a researcher for Alex Haley [author of the book, 'Roots'].  She eventually married Alex Haley.  And I didn't find this out until a year or two before he died.  Because as a reporter here in the city, I would interview Alex Haley, and I'll ask him how's My and he'd say, well, she's fine, but he didn't elaborate, and I thought that was strange.  "Tell her I said hello."  He'd say, "Okay, I'll do it."  And then when Alex Haley died, I saw My here at the funeral and she had her attorney with her, Gloria Allred.  I wondered why My would have an attorney to come with her to a funeral.  Well, little did I know at the time, that Alex Haley died and he hadn't cleaned up all of his personal affairs.  He hadn't gone through a legal divorce with his first or second wife.  So My was number three.  But, I've sort of lost and misplaced her.  I can't find her.  I know she did work with Alex Haley on 'Roots'.  She did a lot of the research.  She did a lot of the research on 'Queen' and she wanted to write screenplays.  But one of these days before I leave this earth, I will find My Lewis to say, "Hey, girl, how you doing?"  But we were good close friends during high school and speech and debate.
Speaker 1: Okay, well this is quite a story.
Story_ID: 37653
Speaker 1: Now you're in high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] through a lot of the Civil Rights Movement. You're a paperboy, you're allowed [unclear] newspapers, and were you keeping up with what was going in the civil rights and--
Speaker 2: I always read the paper.  Yes, I kept up with what was going on with the freedom marches and the buses coming to the South and Bull Connor.  Sure I kept up with the March in Selma [Alabama].  I kept up with what was going on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I said, "Isn't it crazy the way they're treating black folks in the South?"  So I had a bad impression of the South just like everybody else did.
Speaker 1: Yes, and here you're now in Memphis [Tennessee], so I guess that things had changed over time.
Speaker 2: Well, when somebody first suggested that I come to LeMoyne College in Memphis, Tennessee, I looked at him and said, "Are you crazy, that's near Mississippi.  I'm not going down there."  But I ended up coming down here and loving it and staying.
Story_ID: 37654
Speaker 1: All right, so in high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] what was your, I guess your aspirations when you were a senior, or what did you project yourself doing when you graduated from high school?
Speaker 2: I don't think I had any specific goals at that time.  I knew that all my friends were gonna go to Ohio State University and Wilberforce [University], Central State [University], and I didn't wanna go with my friends, I wanted a new experience.  Someone from the United Negro College Fund said go to LeMoyne College in Memphis [Tennessee], it's a good school, you'll like it, so I wrote LeMoyne; they wrote me back.  They said, "You are accepted."  I worked during the summer at a Phillips 66 gas station, third shift, 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.  I saved my money, and I came down and paid my first semester's tuition, might have been $395, and got a work-study job my second semester.  So that's how I got to Memphis.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1964?
Speaker 2: 1964.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1964, all right.  So, how did you like LeMoyne College?
Speaker 2: Loved it; participated in the choir.  It's a small school, the people were friendly, and I assimilated well.  I spoke a little different than everyone in the South.  And, again, I was articulate, I had confidence, I made decent grades, Bs and Cs again, not As, but I got along.  I worked with the basketball team at LeMoyne College.  I was the manager, couldn't play a lick of basketball, but loved the game.  And I didn't mind getting towels for the players, making sure that they had all their equipment.  And the basketball team traveled in station wagons, so Coach Jerry Johnson, one of the winningest coaches in the history of the game, allowed me to drive the players to the games.  We drove to Tuskegee [University], Florida A [Agricultural] and M [Mechanical University], Lane College, Rust College.  So I worked with the basketball team, and I had a work-study job.  I tutored young people at LeMoyne Gardens, a public housing project right across the street from LeMoyne College.  So I saved my money there while working and going to school as a student, and I loved it. Loved every minute of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37655
Speaker 1: You graduated from LeMoyne [College, Memphis, Tennessee] in what, '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: 1968, I graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At that time, Vietnam War.  Kids my age were being drafted.  They were going to Vietnam, they weren't coming back.  I said I'm not going to Vietnam.  This was during the time of Dr. Martin Luther King coming to Memphis, the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 1: Right, right--
Speaker 2: In Memphis, it was the Invaders.
Speaker 1: Were there any students involved in the civil rights activity at LeMoyne.
Speaker 2: All of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Everybody was involved.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was--
Speaker 2: My good friends--
Speaker 1: --the Invaders about?
Speaker 2: The Invaders were the radicals of the day.  They were the Black Panthers of that time, in Memphis.  These were folks that said, "Hell no, Dr. King, we're not doing nonviolence, we're gonna be violent."  These were the folks that threw the bricks and the bats in the store windows on Main Street during the march.
Speaker 1: Let's kinda set the stage for this because people watching this in the future will not know the difference between Memphis and some other place in the South necessarily. But Memphis does have its peculiar--it was different in a sense that--black folks, they could already vote, right, in Memphis?
Speaker 2: Well sure, but there was still segregation.  Black folks did ride on the back of the bus.  There were two fountains, white and colored, so Memphis was still a segregated city.  It was not integrated.  Garbage workers at this city were treated less than human, you know.  Look, you're interviewing me at the City Council Chairman's Office right now.  That was unheard of during the '60s [1960s].  When I was a student at LeMoyne [College], when Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. was killed, I learned about it through CBS News at LeMoyne-Owen [College].  It was not broadcast on the local stations in Memphis, trust me.  I tell--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Dr. King's--
Speaker 2: --two or three a--
Speaker 1: --assassination was--
Speaker 2: Tru--was not broadcasted on the local stations up 'til about two hours after it happened.  It was on national news first.  And the reason it was is because this city was worried about a panic.  The police cars were going through the streets with their sirens on.  The mayor imposed a curfew.  There was more violence in Detroit [Michigan] than there was actually violence in Memphis when Dr. King was killed.  So, the point I wanna make is, our city has come a long way.  Our country has come a long way, but at that time Memphis was a segregated city, and students at LeMoyne did participate in the Civil Rights Movement and the marches.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was there as well.
Story_ID: 37656
Speaker 1: So, we were talking about 1968 and some of the events of '68 [1968].  Now were you--was there a black student organization on the campus of LeMoyne-Owen [College, Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: LeMoyne is and was a predominantly African American school.
Speaker 1: This is true, but there is often a need for a black organization especially on those kind of campus--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't remember any specific one at that time.  Most of the students were involved in the Civil Rights Movement in terms of participating in the marches and so forth, so.
Speaker 1: And did you have a--you said the students were involved with the Invaders.  Were you involved with the Invaders yourself--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --in terms of--okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I had a different philosophy than they did.  I mean, they were more radical than I--you know.  These guys were--I was a mild, meek guy.  These guys were the rough and tough, we ain't gonna take no mess kind of guys, you know what I'm talking about, so--
Speaker 1: Did you have--what did you think philosophically about nonviolent, direct action and the Civil Rights Movement.  I know a lot people debated this in the barber shop.
Speaker 2: Listen, you can turn your cheek for only so long.  I don't think I could have been there and let them put the hoses on me that way.  I mean, you know, give me a break.  Nonviolence was great for its moment, but you have to have a strong personality and will to be able to deal with that.  I--I don't know that I could have done it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, but, we were saying that after Dr. [Martin Luther] King was assassinated, the city withheld information from the--
Speaker 2: Well, that night, again, the local news media didn't--didn't have anything on the air.  Let's face it, it was embarrassing to the city and the city didn't know how to deal with it, at that time.  So, the city struggled like many other cities did to get through this tragic moment in our history.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you--I know you've probably thought about this a lot living in Memphis and being a student at that time, now what--do you have any specific reflections about that or ideas about what--what happened to Dr. King is still mysterious as to who shot him and what--you know.
Speaker 2: Well, after going through the number of investigations and the number of theories, there doesn't seem to be much credible evidence about anyone else other than James Earl Ray.  James was a master cheap thief who did things that he shouldn't have done.  Maybe he did have help, but there's nothing definitive that you can say about anyone else who might have pulled that trigger and who would have been here, so you have to accept it for what it is.  More than forty years now; I don't think there's anything new that's gonna come up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's certainly an incident that's--that's kinda marked Memphis, you know, forever, sort of, you know, the place where Dr. King was killed and this whole civil rights legacy.
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37657
Speaker 1: As a senior at LeMoyne-Owen [College, Memphis, Tennessee], you stated earlier that you gave the speech at commencement, right?
Speaker 2: What I said was, I gave the speech at my high school.
Speaker 1: High school.
Speaker 2: East High School [Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: All right, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: That's all right, that's all right.  I did not give the speech at my college graduation, but I did at high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you play any role in your college graduation ceremonies?
Speaker 2: Got my degree like everyone else (laughter), so.
Speaker 1: What was your degree in?  What did you major in?
Speaker 2: I have a degree in sociology, a bachelor's [degree].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what were your prospects after graduation?
Speaker 2: I was gonna go into social work.  I was gonna work for the welfare department, but at the time Uncle Sam was drafting everyone, so I was determined I wasn't gonna go to Vietnam [war].  So I have a couple of choices: I could have gone to Canada and evaded the draft, or I could have gone to the Peace Corps or to the Teacher Corps., and I selected the Teacher Corps.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: So that allowed me to go to graduate school at New York University.
Speaker 1: Now tell us what the Teacher Corps is.  I know we've heard of the Peace Corps, a lot of people are familiar with that.
Speaker 2: The Peace Corps is when you go to another country and you work in that country, and you help the less advantaged.  Teacher Corps, you do it same thing right here in the United States.  So I went to New York City.  I taught in Spanish Harlem.  So that's what the Teacher Corps did.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: The Teacher Corps trained people who had not planned on being teachers, but have put them in the classroom, and that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay and that was a product of the [President Lyndon B.] Johnson Admin--the Great Society--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --programs.
Story_ID: 37658
Speaker 1: Okay, so, New York City, now you had to be excited about going to New York City, I suppose.
Speaker 2: New York City was working on my master's [degree].  I mean, I was in Washington Square.  I lived in Bleecker Street.  New York City is THE city.  So it was a wonderful experience going to NYU [New York University], talking with others from around the country.  I've taught half classes at John S. Roberts Junior High School.  And after school, I worked in the community center.  So it was a wonderful experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  John Roberts was in--
Speaker 2: Spanish Harlem, 120th and 1st.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now, meanwhile--I think you were telling us--well, as the interview started, you were discussing how the major media had started looking for and trying to train black commentators and reporters--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: As a result of the 1968 civil unrests, President [Lyndon B.] Johnson appointed the Kerner Commission on Civil Disorders, and people from all over the country were trained at Columbia University.  I went through an eleven-week training course at Columbia to train me to be a journalist, and I came to Channel, WMC-TV [Memphis, Tennessee], as the station's first full-time African American reporter.
Speaker 1: Did you have a choice of either coming back to Memphis or going to another city?
Speaker 2: Well, once again, Hollis Price worked for the station, and he asked me if I'd like to come here.  So I was interviewed by the station first before I went through the program.  If I had been accepted by the program, they would have helped me to find a job someplace.  This was an opportunity for me to come back to Memphis, so that's why I took it.
Speaker 1: Okay, I got you now, all right.
Story_ID: 37659
Speaker 1: All right, so you came back [to Memphis, Tennessee, to WMC-TV] as a first full-time--
Speaker 2: Reporter.
Speaker 1: --reporter.
Speaker 2: Right.  The first day I was on the job, I did a story, a package, and it ran on the air.  And folks didn't think I could--would be able to do that, but that's what I was trained for.  So I hit the ground running, and I worked as a reporter for 1971 to '73 [1973], and then in '73 [1973], I was the weekend anchor, started weekend anchoring.  And in '76 [1976], I produced my own public affairs show, a thirty-minute program called 'Minority Report'. And, in this show, we featured African Americans who were doing great things here in our city.  And I featured three African Americans every month, everyone from a local barber, Warren Lewis (ph.), who used to cut hair with fire.  That's right, he was on the 'Jay Leno Show' and all over the world cutting hair with fire.
Speaker 1: How did he do this?  You mean literally with fire?
Speaker 2: Listen, before you leave Memphis, I'll take you to this place and I'll show you.  He can still do it.  I'll have to show you what he does and how he does it.  He singes the hair--singes the ends, and yes, it smells, but he wipes it off with his hands.  It's a story to see.  But we also covered positive role models in our community, non-profit organizations, people who are doing things to make Memphis a better place to live.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the people who were on the show that we might--
Speaker 2: Well, believe it or not, I did a segment once with Benjamin Hooks, black political leaders, Maxine Smith. I interviewed all the entertainers who came through Memphis at the Mid-South Coliseum during the '70s [1970s]:  Michael Jackson, Jackson Five; Prince; Luther Vandross; Teddy Pendergrass; the O'Jays; the Bar-Kays.  So, I tried to keep the show balanced in terms of having a little bit of entertainment, a little bit of serious nature, a little bit of a non--focusing on a non-profit organization and people who typically wouldn't make the news but who are doing useful things.  I featured a young guy, can't think of his name right now, but he built wheelchair ramps for people who needed the ramps to get in and out of the houses because they were confined to wheelchairs, and that's all he did, featured people like that.
Story_ID: 37660
Speaker 1: Okay, now were you part of the formation of the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] at all?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.  You've done your homework.  I started the Memphis [Tennessee] Association of Black Journalists with Carol Hall.  Carol was at Channel 13 at the time.  She's now out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  She's retired from the broadcast industry like many of us.  But in starting the Memphis Association of Black Journalists, we provided seminars for high school students, telling them what they had to do to get into this career, and not only camera, but off camera, doing what that man right there is doing [pointing to camera man] with the tape--at the time it was film.  But we talked about the importance of lighting--the lights that you have up here [pointing towards the ceiling], the importance of sound, audio engineering, the importance of sales.  Somebody has to sell the air-time.  So we made sure the young people knew that in this industry there were jobs other than being the star on camera, and we made sure that people would prepare themselves for this.  There was one young lady, by the way, her name is Regina (ph.) Burns, and Regina came to this seminar when she was a sophomore.  She wasn't supposed to be there until she was a junior in high school, but she came back every year.  And I've talked to Regina throughout the years.  And Regina's worked now in print, broadcast, radio, television, and she's now doing web work and multimedia.  So many of our students worked in the industry for years, and Regina's still doing that.  She's quite a product of what we started in our careers in--in journalism through the Memphis Association of Black Journalists.  And from that organization, yes, I participated with NABJ, the National Association of Black Journalists.  And I was the first vice president of broadcast for NABJ, so I was very active in this area, and I'm proud of that.  In fact, during the 25th anniversary of NABJ, they selected my lawsuit, and we hadn't talked about that.  I filed a lawsuit against the TV [WMC-TV, Memphis] station, because I couldn't get promoted.  They focused on that as one of the twenty-five moments in the history of the National Association of Black Journalists.
Story_ID: 37661
Speaker 1: Now let me explain why they did that. Because I was a weekend anchor [at WMC-TV, Memphis, Tennessee] for ten years, from '73 [1973] to '83 [1983], but I could not get promoted to the weeknight anchorship.  And the weeknight anchors had contracts.  I didn't have a contract.  They had a clothing allowance.  I wasn't given any money for clothes, and they made much more money than I did.  They even bought a weeknight anchor, his name was Clyde Lee, a Porsche to stay in the city.  Clyde had an offer from another cit--"Clyde, we'll get you a car"--bought him a Porsche.  And I was making, oh, less than $20,000 a year at the time.  And I told the station, I said, "Now, wait a minute, all I want is the opportunity.  If I don't have the numbers then you take me off.  I want the opportunity to do the weeknight."  By the way, and speaking of the numbers, I had a 53 percent share of the audience on the weekend.  Now stop and think about that for a moment.  In this day and age with cable, with all the stations, no one would ever get a 53 percent share of anything again.  But on the weekend news, at the time there were only four stations, I had a 53 percent share of that audience.  So everybody was watching me.  And my numbers were good.  My anchoring was not the best, but I wasn't the worst.  They promoted other people before me and gave them that chance before they took them off and never gave me that chance.  So, I eventually sued the company and won.  And my lawsuit was described by the judge as one of the worst cases of subtle discrimination in the history of broadcast journalism, and he ruled in my favor.  There was a five day trial.  Let me give you a time capsule on this.  I filed the EEO [Equal Employment Opportunity] complaint in 1980.  I left the station in 1983.  I left because I was being set up to be fired over some minor incident.  The minor incident was that I knew Jerry Lee Lewis.  Jerry Lee Lewis had gotten married.  His--the wife that he married drowned ten days later.  And 'Entertainment Tonight' called for the video, and I sent the video to 'Entertainment Tonight.'  They ran a twelve-second clip.  And the station said you violated company policy because you didn't have permission.  I said, "What are you talking about, we send stories to 'Entertainment Tonight' all the time."  I did stories for 'NBC News,' news program service all the time.  And they said, well, this was a violation of company policy.  So I realized they were gonna set me up to fire me for that incident, and I quit.  But anyway, you know, one story sort of leads to another here.
Speaker 2: So you filed--
Speaker 1: I filed the EEO complaint (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You filed a lawsuit in--
Speaker 1: --in 1980.
Speaker 2: '80 [1980], okay.
Speaker 1: 1980 was the EEO complaint.
Speaker 2: And didn't you quit?
Speaker 1: And you have to go through the--
Speaker 2: What year did you quit--
Speaker 1: I quit in 1983.
Speaker 2: Eighty-three [1983], okay.
Speaker 1: But you have to go through the EEO complaint before they give you the right to sue.  So the lawsuit was filed.  There was a nine day trial in 1985, nine days.  The judge, Odell Horton, ruled in 1987.  And at that time, he said this was the worst case of subtle discrimination in the history of broadcast journalism.  By the way, Judge Horton's seventy-four page ruling can now be found in a book on employment discrimination period.  I can't think of the--the, the title, but it's been written up, his case has been written up.  By the way, if you go to Fastcase on the internet, Fastcase has 'Lowery v. WMC-TV.'  You won't believe it if you read it.  And Judge Odell Horton--I won on all counts.  He gave me $100,000 in back pay, $100,000 in punitive damages, and penny-for-penny the price variation in salary between my salary and that of Mason Granger, a weeknight anchor, and that amounted to $74,000.  So, at the time, 1987, that was unheard of.  The first case ever won in broadcast journalism was mine.  And, so I served to be a role model for the people coming up, and I--that case helped open the doors for many people here in Memphis [Tennessee] and around the country so that they would be treated equally.
Story_ID: 37662
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any thoughts about--as you go from city to city or flip through channels on your television on a weekend, you still see most of the black and Asian faces anchoring the news.
Speaker 2: Change comes slowly.  You're exactly right.  You see some of the same things today that you saw twenty years ago.  But at the same time, there are some African Americans who are anchoring the weeknight, not a lot, but there are some.  It's gotten better, it's gotten better, but it's not where it should be.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanted your thoughts on it 'cause still, you know, we interviewed Carole Simpson.  You know, she was on ABC weekend news forever.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Long, long time.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And there are others I'm sure--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Carole Simpson should have had her shot at the weeknight, she deserved it.  But she had two strikes, female as well as African American.  I mean, how many females have you seen anchor the weeknight news on the networks, only a few.  There are not many Katie Courics around here or Barbara Walters.
Speaker 1: Things are better--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah, things are better.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And, and your suit, you know, certainly--
Speaker 2: Helped to pave the road, and I'm proud of that.  A lot of the new people in the industry, they don't know that.  But some of the folks who've been around Memphis [Tennessee] along time, they still say, "Thank you, thank you for what you did, making it easier for me."
Speaker 1: In that regard, do you think a lot of people just--do you ever think that some people are still going through what you went through then, not understanding that, that they could do something about it?
Speaker 2: Well, people understand that they could do something about it in this day and age with lawsuits and so forth, but it takes courage and conviction to be able to do that.  The minute I filed my EEO [Equal Employment Opportunity] Complaint I knew that I would no longer be a black Walter Cronkite.  I knew I was out.  I knew I would never get another job at another TV station, but I said it's worth it, because somebody will, and I've got to stand up.  And, by the way, I didn't care about making any money in a lawsuit; I cared about doing what was right.  I slept better at night because I filed my lawsuit.  It was principle, it was conviction, it wasn't money, you know.  I gladly accepted that back pay and everything, 'cause I lived off of credit cards for many years, so this helped me to--to get out of my own personal poverty, working being poor on TV.  Folks thought I made a lot of money; I didn't.  When I took that job, it was $12,500 a year.  I took a pay cut to come from New York City for this job.  And the reason was, it was a new opportunity.  At the time, I was making $25 an hour in New York City in the community center, and I was probably making at least $20,000 a year teaching school, plus $25 an hour as a part-time job.  I gave it up to come here because in the long term I said this would be better.  So even though I didn't make it in the broadcast industry, look, I didn't leave with any regrets.  I did the best that I could, and I moved on.
Story_ID: 37663
Speaker 1: Let me move back a little bit to your show.  How did 'Minority Report' [Lowery's public affairs show on WMC-TV, Memphis, Tennessee] get started?  I know that things were different then and maybe you could describe how FCC [Federal Communications Commission] rules are different in the stations (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: 'Minority Report' fulfilled a major need for that station.  The station had to create some local programming that focused on the community.  This solved the need so that the Scripps Howard Corporation could say look at what Channel 5 is doing for the--for the African Americans in Memphis, we've got this wonderful show.  They had another show called '40 Percent Speaks', the moderator, Benjamin Hooks.  That's right, Ben Hooks, '40 Percent Speaks' in Memphis.  So Channel 5 had a history of doing shows like this for the African American community, and they gave me pretty much a free reign to do what I wanted to do.  And I won some national awards with that show, as well.  I focused on a hospital in Mound Bayou, Mississippi.  The hospital was being forced to close.  It treated African Americans.  It was the only hospital within miles in the Mississippi Delta that did this, and they were being forced to close. And I focused on this hospital, and that show won a Columbia duPont award [duPont-Columbia] in 1973 or '74 [1974].  And as a result, that show was shown before the Congressional Black Caucus, and federal dollars were given to the hospital to keep it afloat for several years after I did the documentary.  So, 'Minority Report' was a good show, served a lot of good, promoted good will in the community.
Speaker 1: What year is that, that you won the Columbia-duPont--
Speaker 2: About '73 [1973] or '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: Okay, 1973 (unclear).
Story_ID: 37664
Speaker 1: Okay all right, so in 1983 when you, when you quit the station [WMC-TV, Memphis, Tennessee]--now you were there for--
Speaker 2: Twelve years.
Speaker 1: Yes, but, yeah--
Speaker 2: Twelve years.
Speaker 1: --but, but three years having--they knew you had filed a suit, right?
Speaker 2: And I came into work every day.  Now listen, you better believe that my work at that TV station for those three years was the best you'd ever seen.  I didn't call in sick, I didn't miss a day.  I came to work every day and I smiled, and I know they resented it.  Let me tell you why they resented it, because after I filed the lawsuit, they immediately pulled me off the air.  They said, "We cannot allow you to be on the air representing this station and saying that we're discriminating.  We're not discriminating, you just aren't good enough for the weeknight news."  I said, "Okay."  Went back to my attorney.  He said they have violated the law by retaliating against me, so we filed a retaliation lawsuit.  It took them two weeks, but they put me back on the air.  They didn't want to do it but they had to.  So moving through the courts was my first lawsuit from not being promoted fairly, treated equally, given the same benefits, and the second lawsuit, retaliation.  Now retaliation was dead to right.  There's no black and white on that.  They retaliated because I filed the first one, so I knew that was a won lawsuit.  It was subjective on the first, but the judge agreed with every point that I made in the suit.  So, yes, I came to work every day with a smile on my face, and I did a good job, and I made sure that my work was good.  At that time, too, I was going through a divorce, and I smiled every day and kept the pain inside for dealing with an unfair and unjust management and my personal problems, but nobody on the outside knew it.  So, I continued to do it until I saw that I'm not gonna make it any longer.  I saw the station fire people in an unjust way, African Americans as well as whites, and I saw people leave and didn't file a lawsuit after they left, and I said, "That's never gonna happen to me."  That's why I filed while I was currently working.
Speaker 1: Now, I was gonna ask you how--if there were other black employees when you filed it?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And how did they react to it?
Speaker 2: Most were afraid.  Most were afraid for their jobs.  Look, my mother [Mary Hill Lowery] told me, "Son, you've got a good job, you don't need to do this.  Drop that lawsuit.  You got a good job."  I said, "No, Mama, I don't have a good job.  I can do better."  Now remember, I had a master's degree, okay.  I had taught, and I didn't tell you this, but I had taught on the college level at the University of Memphis part time.  I taught at LeMoyne College part time.  I knew I could get a job in the school system teaching or teaching at the college level, so I wasn't worried about getting a job.  In addition, I had gone to school and received my real estate license, so I could go into real estate.  I've always believed in being cross-trained.  You don't take one venue and think you're gonna stay in this job for thirty years.  So I was willing to risk everything that I had based on principle, and that's why I filed the lawsuit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37665
Speaker 1: Did you need a sponsor for your show ['Minority Report'; public affairs report on WMC-TV, Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I--
Speaker 2: No commercials.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: I ran public service announcements between the segments, no commercials.
Speaker 1: And for the sake of history on this, like, things now have changed, haven't they, with the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], where stations are no longer required (unclear).
Speaker 2: They don't have to do as much as they were supposed to do then, no, they don't.  Reverend Samuel Billy Kyles, who was with Dr. [Martin Luther] King the night that he died, he was one of my first interviews on 'Minority Report', as well.  So I interviewed all of the history makers in Memphis at that time, and the show did not need a sponsor.  So I went rolling along.
Speaker 1: Okay, Federal Communications [Commission] rules change as we go.
Story_ID: 37666
Speaker 1: So--so what did you do in '83 [1983]?  Did you continue to teach or did you--
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was when I left [WMC-TV, Memphis, Tennessee], I ran for the Memphis City Council.  I figured I'd been on television for twelve years, everyone knew me, I'm gonna get elected, and I ran at-large.  At the time, no African Americans had ever been elected at-large in Memphis, I was gonna be the first.  I didn't win.  I was in a runoff with Bill Gibbons.  Bill Gibbons beat me by 9,000 votes.  Now that was very close, but wasn't good enough.  So, Congressman Harold Ford, Sr. hired me as his press secretary.  So I went to Washington D.C. [District of Columbia], and commuted back--Memphis and Washington, and I wrote press releases for the congressman for two years.  I stayed with him from '83 [1983] to '86 [1986], and then I went to the Memphis public school system.  I taught broadcast journalism at Central High School, at Melrose High School, and Hillcrest High School.  I taught at all three of these venues, from '84 [1984] to--let me see, eighty--'84 [1984] to '86 [1986] I was with the congressman.  It was '86 [1986]--it was after that, that I taught, '86 [1986] to '91 [1991].  I also taught again part time at the University of Memphis.
Speaker 1: Let me go back--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --to your service with the congressman.  What are some of the highlights of your service for Congressman Ford?
Speaker 2: Being on Capitol Hill, watching the State of the Union, not from the House but across the street from the House, was a thrill within itself, to see how our federal government actually works, to watch legislation move forward.  Harold was on the House Ways and Means Committee.  I traveled with him to the Democratic National Committee meeting in San Francisco [California], my first experience, and I'm now on the Democratic National Committee.  So, that was the seed for my political endeavors, as I started.
Story_ID: 37667
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were talking about some of your highlights and being on Capitol Hill with Congressman [Harold] Ford [Sr.].  These were the [President] Ronald Reagan, and I guess, the early presidency of [President] George Herbert Walker Bush?
Speaker 2: When [Thomas Phillip] "Tip" O'Neill was speaker of the house--now that's gonna take some people back, "Tip" O'Neill.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right.  So that's when I was in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia].
Speaker 1: This is when there was a Democratic majority in the [U.S.] House [of Representatives] and the [U.S.] Senate?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: But a Republican president?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How did that work?  I mean, you know, what was that dynamic like?
Speaker 2: Just like it is today, conflict, Republicans versus Democrats.  Things haven't changed much.  The rhetoric hasn't changed much.  Every--both political parties jockey for position and based on a philosophy of how this country should run.  So, it's about the same today as it was twenty-five years ago.
Speaker 1: What were the, the--some of the major issues that Congressman Ford was dealing with that you had to help him with?
Speaker 2: Poverty, children being insured, and the House Ways and Means Committee.  Again, same type of issues we have to deal with today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you--did it enrich your journalist--I mean, as a journalist, were you enriched by the whole experience, or--I imagine you had to be.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I could help the congressman with media relations, how to do an interview, what to say and not to say: "Don't ever say, 'no comment,' Congressman.  Say something, but answer the question the way you wanna answer it."  Governor Ray Blanton from Tennessee taught me that.  As a reporter I interviewed him once, and I said, "Governor, tell me about housing here in West Tennessee," and he said, "I'm glad you asked that question, Myron.  Our highways need to be improved, and this is what I'm gonna do, I'm proposing another $10 million for highway construction."  And I let him go on, and I said, "Governor, I didn't ask you about highways."  He said, "I answered your question."  I said, "Okay, Governor."  So I taught Harold Ford, Sr. that, you know, the question doesn't matter, it's the answer that matters and how you give it and how you swing the question to what you wanna talk about.  Nobody makes you say anything.  The question is not a bad one, you have to learn how to control it.  So, those were enjoyable times when I could help Harold like that, when he would listen.  He was a--he had his own mind.  Of course, you don't get elected to Congress listening to other people all the time, so he followed his own inner strength.  But it was really an enjoyable experience.  And you know while I was on Capitol Hill, I said to him once, I said, "Congressman, there's only one thing I want from you later on in life."  He said, "What's that?"  I said, "I want my son to have the opportunity to be a page on Capitol Hill."  He said, "Done."  So when my son became sixteen [years old], I reminded him, and he said okay.  So my son had the experience of being a page in Congress during the summer, working in the House and the Senate, delivering packages and meeting others.  And I thought that was just a wonderful experience for any young person to be able to do.
Speaker 1: It is, it is.
Story_ID: 37668
Speaker 1: Now during this period of time, were you starting to think of yourself as more of a journalist or a politician, or a teacher, or how are you?
Speaker 2: Again, I'd been in journalism for twelve years.  I'd also been a teacher, and I worked for a politician, and I knew that to really be able to put your finger on something and to do good, you've got to be in there--the mix of being able to set policy.  So I ran for the city council [Memphis, Tennessee] again in 1987.  Remember, I lost in '83 [1983] to Bill Gibbons, so in 1987, I ran again at-large city wide.  Once again, there had never been an African American elected at-large.  I was gonna win this time because I ran against a former school principal.  Her name was Florence Leffler, and she told the public I'm running because I don't have anything else to do.  Well, Florence beat me by 20,000 votes.  I couldn't believe it.  So I lost again in 1987.
Speaker 1: What do you think it was?
Speaker 2: It wasn't me 'cause I was a fine candidate.  I ran a great race in 1987, put more money in the campaign, put some of my own personal dollars in the campaign.  I'd just won this lawsuit with WMC-TV, but I lost by 20,000 votes.  Some people said, "Well there's jealousy on your lawsuit"--Well, I never thought about people being jealous of that.  I proved my case.  I proved that I was discriminated against, so there shouldn't have been jealousy.  But maybe there was a little racism.  I never said that, but maybe there was.  But 20,000 is a lot to lose by, so I wasn't gonna open my mouth to say that.  Black folks in this city simply didn't go out and vote.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a pretty tight democratic machine here in Memphis--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Not like in Chicago [Illinois] or other areas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There is a good, strong Democratic Party in Memphis, but it's not like other areas in the North.  We do have partisan primaries on the county side but not in the city.  In the city you run non-partisan.  So I didn't run as a Republican or Democrat, I ran as Myron Lowery, wanting to do good for the city.
Speaker 1: So you can't run as a Democrat if you want to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Not on the city side.  Now, on the county side, yes, you can.
Speaker 1: On the county side you can?
Speaker 2: Yes, you can.  So, after losing in '87 [1987], I said, "I'm not gonna do this anymore."  And, you know, I was back to teaching, and--I changed my mind, though.  I changed my mind because Minerva Johnican won in '87 [1987].  So, she was the first African American female to win on the Memphis City Council at-large.  So when 1991 came I said, do I wanna do this again?  I decided I would, and I ran against a twenty-year Republican who'd been in this seat, and I won.  Kenneth Wilhem (ph.), Sr. also was on the council as a district member, he ran at-large.  So, he and I both won that year, so we were the second and third African Americans ever elected at-large in the Memphis City Council, a city of 600,000 people.  So that was historic for both of us.
Speaker 1: Now, this is 1991?
Speaker 2: 1991.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We won when Dr. Willie Herenton won at the same time.  But both Reverend Wilhem and I received a larger percentage of the white vote than Dr. Herenton did during that time.  So I've been on the city council every since 1991.
Speaker 1: Okay, what did you do or how do you think that you attracted such a large number of white votes?
Speaker 2: People knew that I was fair.  I've always been fair.  As a reporter, I had to walk down the middle of the line on all the issues, so I think that was the reason.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37669
Speaker 1: But you know, before I ran [for election to the Memphis City Council in 1991] I also--I changed careers too.  We hadn't talked about this--from teaching, I was hired by FedEx.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: As a senior communication specialist.
Speaker 2: Now what year is this?
Speaker 1: This was 1990.  FedEx, as you know, delivers packages all around the world.  And FedEx believed in communicating with its employees.  So the company had a television network called FXTV, and the company ran a news show for FedEx employees only that could be seen throughout the United States.  So I was hired as a senior communication specialist to produce spots for FXTV.  Eventually, I produced the show called 'FedEx Overnight', a six to seven-minute newscast every day.  It was picked up by video recorders all around the country.  And I wrote that show, I anchored the show, and I traveled all over the United States producing segments for the show.  Flowers from Alaska--not flowers from Alaska.  Let me back that up.  The flowers came from Hawaii, a segment on Hawaii growing flowers coming to the United States--how they were to be shipped.  And Alaska, I went up to Prudhoe Bay the--where the oil was coming from the pipeline.  So I traveled to Alaska--traveled to every major city in this country, interviewing FedEx employees, putting together segments,  and after a couple of years, I started producing an international show.  It was called, 'FedEx World Report'.  This show was translated in seven languages, and it was done on NTSC, PAL and SECAM.  Now, for those of you who may not know, those are video formats based in other countries--PAL in the UK, SECAM in France.  And the show is translated into Chinese, Mandarin, Japanese.  And I had the opportunity to travel to Tokyo, Hong Kong, Taipei, Bangkok, Dubai, London [England], Paris, France, Zurich.  So I traveled all over the world for FedEx interviewing FedEx employees, putting together those segments for 'FedEx World Report'.  Eventually, I became the manager of corporate relations, so I handled all the hub tours in Memphis, and the speaker bureau.  Any time a company in Hoboken, New Jersey, would need a FedEx speaker that would come through my area, I would find a FedEx speaker.  We had speeches already prepared on general tracks of FedEx.  So, I did that, I handled communications for the Air Operations Division, the AOD, handled communications for something called Central Support Services Division.  So I had a wonderful seventeen career--seventeen-year career at FedEx, as well.
Speaker 2: Okay, seventeen years, all right.  That starts in 19--
Speaker 1: Ninety [1990]--1990, right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 37670
Speaker 1: During that time, though--FedEx is a wonderful organization with great company policies and procedures, but those policies and procedures is--are only good on paper unless they're carried out by everyone in an equal manner.  And sadly to say, that company did not follow the true convictions of its founder, Fred Smith.  The many pockets of discrimination within FedEx, there're many senior managers that don't treat their employees right.  Some are disciplined, others are let go.  In my case, I always prepared well for jobs, and I think I analyze myself well. And I applied for a manager's position in media relations.  Now you gotta remember, I had twelve years' experience in the media, and I wanted to do a lateral transfer from corporate relations to media relations.  I figured this would put me in a good position to be the managing director some day of corporate communications.  Well, I applied for it.  I was imminently qualified.  And I didn't get it.  And I asked the VP why not, and he said, "Well, I'm gonna meet with you, Myron [HistoryMaker Myron Lowery], and we'll talk about it."  He kept putting the meeting off and off, and I was persistent.  "Why not?  Tell me what I did wrong on the interview process."  He never fully explained it, and I said, "I need to challenge your position," and I did it.  FedEx has internal policies to get answers to your questions.  And I asked for those specific answers why I was not given this job.  Tell me, specifically, how I failed on the interview.  Tell me what I've done wrong.  My work, by the way, was great.  My performance reviews were impeccable.  I documented all of my work, everything in my work groups.  And they never really answered the question, but they sided with management.  Okay, fine, I let it go, but after challenging that VP internally, that was the kiss of death for me.  Nothing I did from then on was right.  All my reviews were still good.  I couldn't get promoted to anything.  I applied for seven positions, and I was never qualified for any one of the seven.  And after the seventh one, I said this is not right, so I filed a lawsuit against FedEx, as well.  And I know what many people in Memphis [Tennessee] were thinking, "Oh, Myron thinks he's gonna get more money."  "He likes to file lawsuits."  You gotta remember, this is a conservative town.  People just didn't do that, but I did that because I had my documentation.  And I continued to work at FedEx while I filed that lawsuit.  Well, to make a long story short, I saw the handwriting on the wall.  I wasn't gonna get promoted; they were not gonna do that.  And I eventually settled my lawsuit out of court and quietly retired.  So after seventeen years, I just moved on and retired from FedEx.  So, now my retirement job is still my political job with the Memphis City Council.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, let's see, so that's seventeen years at FedEx.  That's--you just figured it wasn't any use carrying the suit all the way out at a certain--
Speaker 1: Oh, I carried it all the way.
Speaker 2: Well to a settlement.
Speaker 1: I carried it all the way out as far as I was concerned.  I mean, the only thing I didn't do was to take it through court, to air all the dirty laundry in court.  And the reason I didn't was my attorney said, "Myron, you are a high-profile individual.  Everybody doesn't love you in this city like you think they might.  You know, even though we've got all this good documentation, anything could happen in a court of law."  So his advice to me was, "Settle--let's settle it and move on."  And I did decide to settle it.  We agreed not to talk about the terms.  I mean, for me, it was important, you know, at this point in my life that if I couldn't get promoted, why bother to continue to fight it?  Yes, I wanted to stay with FedEx--great company, good place to work, but I was just in the wrong department for a promotion and advancement.  Had I been in another department, things might have been differently because FedEx has a great number of African Americans in leadership roles in that company.  So, it's not the company, it's individuals within the company that management supports who are doing wrong.  And in my case, it was a guy by the name of Bill Margaritis.  Bill simply did not treat me fairly.  He knows it, I know, and he got away with it.  And he had the support of Fred Smith and Mike Glenn.  They stood behind him.  They should not have, but they did.  And what can I do?  You can only fight for so long.  But I know that they made sure that there wouldn't be anyone else to be in a position like I was in, in terms of having the amount of documentation that I had to prove a case.  So I feel good about it and moved on.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 37671
Speaker 1: Now I wanna go back to your political career.  And now what was your, your relation like in the early days with Mayor [Willie] Herenton?
Speaker 2: Willie Herenton and I saw eye to eye.  We were elected on the same day.  We were sworn in, in 1992, January 1, together.  And it was a wonderful association.  He also graduated from LeMoyne-Owen College, so we saw eye to eye.  His vision for this city was the same as mine.  And he was the best mayor that we've ever had in Memphis, Tennessee, during his first term.  During his second term, he was an excellent mayor.  I mean, this city made tremendous progress.  We have areas of housing right now.  Memphis has received more Hope VI grants than any other city in the country.  We've developed Uptown, Harbor Town, College Park, pockets of this city that have grown tremendously.
Speaker 1: Now what is Hope VI?  What is that?
Speaker 2: Hope VI are federal grants that you can receive to revitalize communities.  We have practically erased public housing from this city.  There are no more Poindexter Villages [public housing project where Lowery grew up in Columbus, Ohio] in Memphis like there were years ago.  When I say Poindexter Village, I'm talking about Columbus, but I'm also talking about LeMoyne Gardens, across the street from LeMoyne College, because that's what Poindexter Village looked like.  And right now we have scattered housing sites, Section 8, people on fixed income living beside someone who's paying market rate rents.  So that scatters the poor throughout the community, and communities are growing together better.  We've had tremendous progress with the FedExForum, the growth of downtown--still have a long way to go, but all this was done under the Herenton Administration, during his second and third term, which I helped to serve with, and we were friends.  I started something called the New Year's Day Prayer Breakfast on New Year's Day, and for twelve consecutive years, my keynote speaker was the mayor of this great city, Willie Herenton.  And then, after the election of his fourth term, he became angry at me, and he sent word that he was no longer gonna do my prayer breakfast.  He was gonna do his own.  I said, "What?" So I went to him and I said, "Willie, I'm sorry.  What did I do wrong?  I didn't mean to offend you.  Something's up, tell me what it is."  He said, "Myron you didn't do anything."  I said, "Willie, I did something, come on.  You been doing this at my prayer breakfast for twelve years and now you're gonna do your own prayer breakfast on the same day?"  And he actually called some of the same people committed to my event to come to his event.  So, needless to say, they felt torn.  Honor a request from the mayor or from a councilman?  Now we worked together on this, so I was thinking about not doing my prayer breakfast, but I said no, I'm gonna continue to do it.  And I'm glad I did because Willie Herenton eventually stopped doing his prayer breakfast.
Story_ID: 37672
Speaker 1: Well, what did he [Mayor Willie Herenton; Memphis, Tennessee] say was the reason?
Speaker 2: At the time, he told me nothing, but let me tell you something that I haven't told many people:  Three years later he said, "Myron, I wanna talk to you."  He said, "I wanna apologize to you."  I said, "For what?"  He said, "'Cause I was angry at you, and I wanted to hurt you."  I said, "For what, Willie?"  He said, "Because you didn't support my pay increase."  I said, "What?"  The mayor of this city was making $150,000 a year.  Councilman Rickey Peete, who was convicted twice of bribery by the way and spent two terms in jail, wanted to give the mayor an increase from $150,000 to $199,000 a year.  And Rickey got on, on TV saying, "We need to increase the mayor's salary."  Television reporter asked me, "You think we ought to be increased to $49,000 a year?"  I said, "Of course not, not that kind of money.  No, that's too much."  So that was the sound bite that ran, and Willie got pissed.  He said, "Myron, my friends came to me and said, 'You're not my friend.'  You didn't stand up for me."  I said, "Willie, please."  He's always respected my opinions in the past, even when we differ.  This time he didn't respect it.  He said, "You should have stood behind me for that salary increase."  I said, "Willie, look, $49,000 was too much."  And then he said, "But, Myron, you did say something that was good.  A few days later, you recommended that my salary be increased a certain percentage every year to get up to that amount."  I said, "Of course I did, why not?  You just don't increase anybody that much one time."  He said, "I wish you'd done that first."  I said, "Who thinks their best mind on their first interview?  Your thinking evolves."  But, he said, "I just need to apologize to you, because I wanted to hurt you."  Well, I give him credit for saying that.  He told me man to man.  And our lines of communication were still open, but the respect sort of dwindled.  And throughout his years as mayor, I saw him change.  I saw his personality change.  I saw him doing things in city government that benefited himself and not this community.  I saw him take an option on a piece of land with Greyhound, and he had plans for the city to occupy this land later on.  And he sold that option for $91,000.  I saw him direct the director of personnel services to pay him for the money that he should have received because he didn't take any vacation.  The charter says the mayor should make $170,000 now.  So, he took his vacation from the previous ten years at his current level of pay because he didn't go on vacation.  Give me a break.  That was a violation of the charter.  Nobody--you know, when council found out about it, it had been done a year earlier, you know what I mean.  I mean, you can give a leader a break if he hires his friends or does certain things, but he did certain things that benefited himself personally, and he stopped caring about people.  I don't know what happened to him, but his personality changed and he stopped caring about people.  So, eventually, we just didn't see eye to eye on many things because he was for protecting his own self, his own involvement.  He kept threatening to resign, and he didn't resign.  And when he did resign, he took all of his retirement in lump sum because he was being investigated and could have been indicted, and could have lost his pension.  So everyone knew that he took the easy way out.  And he resigned and said, "I'm gonna run for Congress."  Willie Herenton was the best mayor this city's ever had; he was also the worst.  He didn't care after he was elected to his fifth term.  He just didn't care anymore and eventually resigned.
Story_ID: 37673
Speaker 1: Now that [Mayor Willie Herenton's resignation as the mayor of Memphis, Tennessee] was good for me, personally, because I had the opportunity to serve as mayor for eighty-seven days during the fall of 2009.  I was council chair at the time, so I loved that opportunity.  But it was ninety days of strife only because I tried to straighten up some of the stuff here at city hall that was difficult to do.  I tried to fire the city attorney.  The city attorney gave the mayor carte blanche on some things he wanted to do.  And the council said you can't fire him.  I had to do that with the permission of the council.  They wanted to keep him on.  And then he was being investigated by the local Shelby County attorney general.  Well, he didn't come to work after thirty days that I was in office, and the city attorney eventually resigned because he was gonna be challenged in an ouster lawsuit.  You know, I fired another attorney.  He was working on the Beale Street case.  This attorney was making $35,000 a month, one attorney handling one case for the city, and this was part time for him, this case.  That was too much money to make.  And we were not resolving the lawsuit.  It was not--it was just lingering.  He was the only one making money, so I fired that attorney, Ricky Wilkins.  And folks didn't like this.  I was shaking things up.  When I was mayor, I had an open house at city hall.  I invited the whole community to come up to the 7th Floor of city hall.  People had never been to the mayor's office before.  People worked in city hall had never been up to the 7th Floor.  I said, "This is the people's office.  Come and enjoy it."  So I had an open and transparent government.  I listed everything that I did as mayor.  It's on the website right now by the way.  If you go to the city's website and you look under the city council under my name, you'll see everything that I did every day at city hall as mayor.  You'll see the number of dollars in contracts that I signed.  So, I set the tone that our current mayor has continued to keep, that is open and transparent government.  A C Wharton [mayor of Memphis] is now listing city contracts on the internet on the website.  That hadn't been done before.  You couldn't find out who was making what money from city government, and now we have a, a more openness in our government and our city is better for it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 37674
Speaker 1: Now you, you spoke before the Democratic National Convention in 1996, right?
Speaker 2: In Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Chicago, okay.
Speaker 2: I had been a member of the Democratic National Committee through the Democratic Municipal Officials.  Now, I'm a member of the National League of Cities.  I'm on the Board of Directors of the National League of Cities.  Within the National League of Cities, there is a constituency group called Democratic Municipal Officials.  At the time I was chairman, nationally, of the Democratic Municipal Officials, and I spoke at the Democratic Convention.  What an honor that was!  I was the third speaker on the first day in Chicago, and I spoke for [President] Bill Clinton who received the nomination that year.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a close affiliation with the Clintons.
Speaker 2: I interviewed Bill many times as a reporter when he was in Arkansas, as governor.  He knew my face; he didn't know my name.  [Vice President] Al Gore knew my name because Al Gore was from Tennessee, and I interviewed Al Gore many times, as well.  So, met both of them and--oh, the more I think about it, I've got a picture in the house, in the bedroom, with me, Hillary [Clinton]--well, it's Bill and, and I on it.  I didn't bring it for this session.  I should have brought it.  So, I've known them for many years.
Story_ID: 37675
Speaker 1: Well, we ended up last time talking about the Dalai Lama.
Speaker 2: All right--
Speaker 1: Why don't we--
Speaker 2: --we'll talk about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --finish talking about the Dalai Lama.
Speaker 2: All right, okay.
Speaker 1: They have a protocol group that precedes his [the Dalai Lama] visit to any city, and I met with them [In Memphis, Tennessee], and I said, "Listen, I don't wanna do anything that's awkward, embarrassing, but I've always wanted to say, 'Hello, Dalai!'" (Laughter).  And this protocol guy laughed, and I said, "You know and sometimes you can greet people with a fist bump."  He said, "Fine, go ahead and do it."  So they knew I was gonna do this.  And I met them out on the riverfront, Tom Lee Park, with Mayor A C Wharton.  I was city mayor at the time and he was the county mayor.  And he walked up, and he gave each of us a white scarf to put on its traditional way.  And I said, "I've always wanted to say, 'Hello, Dalai!'"  And he laughed (laughter), and I greeted him like this, with a fist bump, he responded, and some folks in Memphis said, "My God, did you see what Myron did?  How country can you be!"  But it was warm, it was friendly.  What few people saw was, when he left that day, he did like that [fist bump] to me.  And I saw him two other occasions here in the city, and when he left in his limousine from the Peabody, he reached out his hand and gave me a fist bump.  Now that clip made the national news at least 10-20 occasions and was shown around the world.  More than 20 million people saw it, and a lot of the news shows carried it and even some of the entertainment shows carried it.  Jay Leno had a ball with it, with a little skit showing the Dalai Lama being a little annoyed when I greeted with the fist bump.  But that was wonderful, it was a wonderful occasion.  He came to our city because he was honored by the National Civil Rights Museum with the International Award for all the work that he's done.  So, many people in Memphis became aware of his work, his history and his background, and it was just a wonderful time for our city.
Story_ID: 37676
Speaker 1: Can you reflect a little bit on how Memphis [Tennessee] has changed since you were here as a college student [at LeMoyne-Owen College]?  You know, when you look around, I know it's visibly different. There's the pyramid out here, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, Memphis is now a cosmopolitan city.  We still have a great number of challenges:  our crime is too high; poverty is too high; we need to graduate more students from high school; our educational system has a lot to be improved upon.  But at the same time:  Tennessee, and through Memphis, received a national grant, Race to the Top, $500 billion; the Gates Foundation is putting $90 million through the city.  So we have the potential to overcome the many challenges that we're facing.  So, I love this city, I love the people, I love the atmosphere, I love the lifestyle--laidback.  I love the cost of living.  You can't live in many other cities around this country for the same cost that you can live here in Memphis.  I love the weather.  You know we're not gonna have major ice storms here.  It gets too hot in the summertime, but there's a lot to love about Memphis, Tennessee, and there are many people who are promoting this city, as we used to say, the next Atlanta [Georgia], but I think we're better than Atlanta.  We have much to offer, in terms of our musical tradition, in terms of the river.  Many cities would kill for the river.  And we're developing Beale Street Landing on the river.  There's just--we've got so much going for us right now.  It's just a wonderful place to be.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37677
Speaker 1: Now we didn't touch upon--now you were superdelegate to the Democratic National Convention [DNC] in 2008.
Speaker 2: As a member of the Democratic National Committee and the Democratic Municipal Officials that I told you about earlier, I am a superdelegate.  They're three people within the Democratic Municipal Officials, the chair, the vice chair, and the representative to the DNC.  And I've been the representative since I've been elected chairman in 1987 or '98 [1998], so I've been the DNC representative for more than ten years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a superdelegate.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What role did you play during the--an election, in terms of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Superdelegates were thought to be critical.  If you recall, there was this guy named [Barack] Obama who was coming out of nowhere, and the frontrunner was Hillary Clinton, and what's that guy's name from North Carolina, the one got involved--you know who I'm talking about.  I mean, Obama was fourth or fifth, but he captured the hearts, minds, and souls of this nation.  I was firmly behind Hillary because I knew Bill [Clinton].  I knew Al [Gore].  It was a natural for me to go with Hillary Clinton.  When she came to Memphis [Tennessee], she called and I traveled with her to the National Civil Rights Museum, so I was a Hillary supporter.  And when she decided to give it up, I gave it up, and I followed her lead and supported Mr. Obama.  But I thought that she would make a great president.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what--do you have an opinion of the current administration?
Speaker 2: I think Obama is doing a wonderful job.  Given what this country is faced with, he's doing a wonderful job.  Now, he's faced a lot of criticism.  He will either go down as one of the best leaders we've ever had or one of the worst.  Now, I'm betting that he's gonna win.  I'm betting that he's gonna win because of the approach that he's taken and what he's done.  And I'm betting that this country will turn around.  Our economic conditions will improve.  He's rescued the banks--couldn't let them fail, our whole economy might have fallen.  Stop and think about that, where we were.  Unemployment is still too high.  We've gotta correct that.  Now, there are some minor faux pas that people get excited about that, that are beyond the President's control, but when they happen, citizens are looking for leadership.  The oil spill--maybe Mr. Obama should have stepped in earlier and said, "Look, the buck stops here, I'm taking this over."  He did wait a little while, but let's face it the whole country thought that spill's gonna be corrected in a few days right, wrong.  I mean, you can't second guess things like this.  You can only take advice from those who know best.  So, while he's had his challenges, I think he's done a fine job, and he's been a great leader for this country.
Story_ID: 37678
Speaker 1: Do you have--do you think you'll run for mayor of the city of Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: My personal philosophy is this: You've got to know when it's time to move on.  You've got to accept reality, that there will always be a younger, prettier, brighter face to come along.  I used to watch boxers that didn't know when to step out of the ring, and I said, why don't they quit when they're at top?  Now, I had my opportunity to run for mayor.  A C Wharton beat me soundly, and I have to get--tip my hats off to him.  I ran during a difficult time of transition after Willie [Herenton] left.  I did things in this city that some people didn't like.  I shook up the establishment, but I set the groundwork for the future of this city in terms of being transparent, and I'm happy because of that.  If A C Wharton indeed wants to run again, he will probably win because he hasn't made many mistakes--a few minor blimps, but on the overall picture, A C's been a fine mayor, a great mayor.  And I--his philosophy is in tune to mine, so I'm not inclined to run against someone that I agree with 90 percent of his decisions.  Yes, I could do a good job, a great job, but given the choice between someone who's been there and me, I think the average citizen would probably select our current mayor, so I'm not inclined to take on A C again.  Given the opportunity to run for my position on the [city] council again, perhaps I'll do that.  I still enjoy it.  I have a great deal of satisfaction being part of this legislative body that's helped to shape this city, and I'm proud of what I've done.  You know, one thing that I've done is a gun buy-back program, and I do this in conjunction with a program for high school kids called 'Done with Guns'.  And when I first did a gun buy-back program in 1995, we got 1600 guns off the street--public/private partnership.  Kroger [store] donated money for food.  Mapco gave us vouchers for gasoline.  So, I've put--and Kroger stayed with me.  So, throughout the years, my programs collected more than 2,000 guns off the street, and we've educated young people with being done with guns.  So I can do that because I'm a councilman.  I've got a little bit of clout to be able to call a private company and say, "I wanna get some guns off the street.  Help me do it."  So I'm proud of my 'Done with Guns' program.  I'm proud of my events on New Year's Day.  The prayer breakfast that I started in 1992 I've continued today.  In 2011, it will be the twentieth anniversary of my New Year's Day Prayer Breakfast.  Not many events go on like that.  And after the prayer breakfast, I have another event called the New Year's Day Jazz Champagne Brunch.  We serve collard greens, chitterlings, champagne, good music, good food, good times, and the money is donated to charity throughout the year.  Many people think that as a council member you get comped [compensated] to go here, and you can go here free. Not true.  People expect us to buy tickets and to do this, so I use my events on New Year's Day as the charitable arm for things I wanna do in the community.  There are back-to-school drives to buy school supplies for kids I support.  There's National Night Out to help buy food, hot dogs, for community groups.  People are always looking for donations.  People call all the time for help with their utility bills.  Yes, we have government programs and we try to help, but they expect you to do some things personally.  And I've done that, and I've been fortunate enough through my events on New Year's Day, having to find corporate sponsors to help with these events, to be able to give back to the community.  So that's what I see my role as--as a public servant, a city councilman, being able to give it back.  And I've already been to the top [mayor of Memphis] for eighty-seven days, that's more than some.  And so I'm grateful for having that opportunity.  So, If I stay on the council, if it's God's will, then that's what I'll do, and continue to enjoy life in my retirement job as a public servant.
Story_ID: 37679
Speaker 1: Three more questions, basically.  We always ask this.  What are some of your hope and concerns for the community today?
Speaker 2: Now you know that's a broad question.
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: What are my hopes and concerns for the community?  Given me a break (laughter).  That the community will be better, that there will be less crime, less stupid people in the world to do stupid things.  People should give it back.  One of the local TV stations--there's a program where they give people $300, but you can't keep it, you have to give it to somebody else, pass it on, play it forward.  That's what--I want this community and people to help somebody else, sel--help somebody else less fortunate.  I'm sitting here today--you're interviewing me, not only because of the things I've done, because somebody behind me pushed me.  The Lonnie Goodes of this country, my [maternal] great-grandfather, and the Zula Goodes [Lowery's maternal great-grandmother] from Union County, South Carolina, gave me the impetus and the value system to give back to the community, so I've tried to do that.  And I've urged my son, Mickell [Lowery], to do that because that's the great goal of life.  We're only put on this earth for a few moments to do the best we can do.  So when somebody watches this interview they're gonna say, "What was Myron Lowery's contribution?"  "What did he help?"  Well, they're gonna remember 'Done with Guns', 'Gifts for Guns', New Year's Day Prayer Breakfast, meeting with the Dalai Lama.  They're gonna remember my votes on housing.  They're gonna remember the contribution I played to help build this community up to where it should be, to be a role model for others in the community.  Where as many African Americans are being arrested and serving time in jail and on drugs, they're gonna say, you know: "Myron never did drugs"; "Myron didn't drink"; "Myron led his life as a role model for this community."  And that's what my hopes are, the community will become better.
Story_ID: 37680
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned your son--
Speaker 2: Mickell [Lowery].
Speaker 1: Mickell.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you have any other children, or?
Speaker 2: I have one, just my son Mikhail.  My wife has two but I had Mickell before I--I married my current wife, Mary.  We were married, by the way, in 1986 in Las Vegas [Nevada].  You asked me a city earlier, and I mentioned Las Vegas.  I'd never been to Las Vegas until 1986.  And it just opened my eyes.  It was a wonderful place to get married, and I encouraged others to do that, and we've gone back ten or fifteen times since then, that's why I like Las Vegas.  So, again, my son is Mickell.  He's the love of my life.  He's thirty-three [years old], he works at FedEx in sales in a different department than I worked at and he's making progress, and I'm proud of what he's done and what he's given back to this community, as well.  He's been a member of the board of directors of The Fire Museum, Leadership Memphis, so he's giving it back, as well, in his own way.  So, I'm proud of my son Mickell.
Speaker 1: It's interesting that the lawsuit against FedEx has not prevented your son from working there or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Once again, what I said earlier was FedEx is a great company to work for.  It's a huge company.  I was stopped by one individual, Bill Margaritis, who has the support of Fred Smith and Mike Glenn.  The company is not like what happened to me.  You know, what happened to me was--is--was not typical, but it happened, and I was wronged.  But they compensated me for it, and I'm not complaining today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, so.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Mary Hill Lowery] get a chance to see these challenges to the TV station [WMC-TV, Memphis, Tennessee] and FedEx--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My mother saw challenges to the TV station.  She did not--you know, she's been dead more than ten years, so no, not with FedEx, but--
Speaker 1: But she saw a successful revolution--resolution of the other--
Speaker 2: Right, but see, again, my mother was not a fighter.  She wouldn't have filed the lawsuit.  I--I'm the fighter.  I'm the one that says--that said, "I'm mad as hell, and I'm not taking it anymore."  And I knew I was right.  If you know you're right, you gotta go for it.  People shouldn't be pushed around in this world.  You gotta challenge wrong.  You've got to challenge wrong because if you don't who will?
Speaker 1: Now, how did your brothers [Michael, Steven and Dwight Lowery] make out?
Speaker 2: My brothers, one's retired from the Federal Reserve, Steve Lowery, in Columbus Ohio.  The other is currently working, he was working at Rockwell.  I'm not sure of what government agency he's working for now, but he's still in Columbus, Ohio, and they're doing just fine.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 37681
Speaker 1: Well, is there anything I have not asked you that we need to deal with before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: If I think about it, I'll throw it in after the last question.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Last question is very similar to legacy, I guess.  It goes like this, Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: You don't know how many times I have asked that same question on 'Minority Report' [Lowery's public affairs show on WMC-TV, Memphis Tennessee], and you don't know how many times we used that response when the person passed on here in Memphis, Dr. Blair T. Hunt.  They didn't use the question from Ben Hooks because Ben died recently, and I'd been gone from the station twenty-five years.  But that's a wonderful question, to ask people about their legacy.  How do you wanna be remembered?  Well, everybody wants to be remembered in a favorable light.  They want people to think good things about them and what they did.  So, when someone dies you usually forget about the negative things and you remember the good.  As Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. said, "I wanna be remembered as a man who tried to help people."  Sure I want good kind thoughts, but when you look back at the programs that I've done, people say, "What are you doing to stop violence?"  Well, my gun program is my answer to that.  "What are you doing to make the community better?"  My service in the city council is that because I represent a constituency out here and I speak my mind, and I do what I think and feel is in the best interest of the entire community.  So that's how I want to be remembered, as a man who tried to give it back, as a man who tried to pass it on, as someone who (unclear) sense of values in me to help the community, and I want other people to do the same.  Think about how much better our community would be if everyone did just a little bit to help make the community better, to mentor somebody, to help teach somebody, to work with senior citizens' programs, to work with the food bank, to work with MIFA [Metropolitan Inter-Faith Association, Memphis, Tennessee].  Think about how much better our community would be if every church did just a little bit more--just a little bit more, to make sure that your block is clean with the community organizations.  Make sure the trash is picked up around your block and the grass is cut.  Think about how much better it would be if Aunt Sally turned in that nephew that she know is dealing in drugs and stealing from somebody else.  It may be difficult, but somebody's being by hurt by these young thugs and hoodlums, and somebody knows who they are.  You gotta turn them in.  You gotta make this world a better place.  So, I wanna be remembered as a man who provided inspiration, as a man who told young people, "If it is to be, it's up to me," ten simple words, that everybody has a responsibility.  "If it is to be, it's up to me," not to depend on anybody else, but to do that which you can do, only you can do.  That's how I wanna be remembered.  Life goes on.  And I leave people with "Life is good" and "Take care."
Speaker 1: All right, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.  How about a--how about a [fist bump with Larry Crowe].
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Story_ID: 37682
Speaker 1: This is a photo of the political campaign for president in 2008, when Hillary Clinton visited the National Civil Rights Museum [Memphis, Tennessee].  I'm standing behind Hillary.  I was a superdelegate, pledged to Hillary.  On the other side of me is Dr. Benjamin L. Hooks, former head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], FCC [Federal Communications Commission] Commissioner, looking on at Hillary Clinton.  And then there's Mayor Willie Herenton, mayor of the city, and Al Sharpton.
Speaker 2: 'The Teen Appeal' is a newspaper published by young people here in the city.  I made the front page of 'The Teen Appeal' when I spoke to a group of young people with the University of Memphis when I was interim mayor.  I taught them about self-reliance and truth, and "If it is to be, it's up to me."  I enjoy speaking to young people throughout this city.  Turn that on the back, please.
Speaker 1: No, we do it so we'll fill the most number of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: All right, fine, let's--let's do.  All right, you're rolling?
Speaker 1: Yep, continuously rolling, so you can talk whenever you want.
Speaker 2: This is a picture in 1983.  This is from the booklet when I was selected as one of the Ten Outstanding Young Men in America.  I went through a special program at Tulsa, Oklahoma.  This program is sponsored by the Jaycees.  How about seeing the front of the program, just the front of the program?  Because they did this every year, and that says it all, 10 outstanding young men in America for 1983, and if anyone knows anything about the Jaycees program--they're many political figures, past presidents, and other civic leaders in that.
Speaker 1: "Mayor Who?"  That was the caption of the front page of the 'Memphis News' during a time when Willie Herenton, mayor of this city, said, "I'm gonna resign."  Well, I was scheduled as city council chairman to take over, but he rescinded his resignation, then he resigned again.  And folks were wondering is Myron gonna be mayor or what.  This played for about two months in our city before Willie Herenton finally made the final decision to resign.
Speaker 2: Go ahead, Sir.
Speaker 1: This was a photo taken about three years ago when I was chairman of the Memphis City Council.  It was included in the 'Downtowner' magazine, entitled "My 2 Cents."
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA CONVERSATION AND PHOTO ADJUSTMENT)
Speaker 1: Again, this is entitled "My 2 Cents," an article in the 'Downtowner' magazine in Memphis.
Speaker 2: This is a caricature of yours truly, Myron Lowery, TV 5.  This ran in 1981 when I was a weekend anchor at WMC-TV Channel 5 [WMC-TV].
Speaker 1: This is the inside of the article of the magazine with the caricature.  "Myron Lowery, loving the work, fighting frustration."  In this article, I talked about the joys and discouragements of being an African American reporter.  I was the first full-time African American reporter at WMC-TV, and I worked there from 1971 to 1983.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION - PHOTO ADJUSTMENT)
Speaker 1: This is an historic photograph, shows me with Dr. Willie Herenton, the mayor of this city for seventeen years, standing next to Dick Hackett, former mayor of Memphis, and Bishop J.O. Patterson, Jr., who was also a mayor of Memphis for twenty days.  He was council chairman when he resigned, and he served as mayor for twenty days.  Dick Hackett served a little more than two terms, about ten years.  Willie Herenton served for seventeen years, and I served for eighty-seven days.
Speaker 2: This is when I was sworn in as mayor in the lobby of City Hall by Judge Hardy Mays.  Standing in the middle is my wife, Mary Lowery.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA CONVERSATION)
Speaker 2: Good enough.  There's some other magazines from Fed--
Speaker 1: All right, let's go.
Speaker 2: 'How Time Flies' is the twenty-fifth anniversary book of FedEx.  My workgroup put this booklet together for the FedEx Corporation.
Speaker 1: Grab any one of those--any one of these on the floor right here.  Just, just.
Speaker 2: This is the 'FY98 Annual Report' for my workgroup at FedEx, corporate relations.  Turn that on the back, please.
Speaker 1: This is my workgroup in FY98 at FedEx.  We shot this in the (unclear)--did we shoot that in the plane?  Yeah--did we shoot that in a plane or was that superimposed?  No, we were in a plane inside a freighter when we shot this picture.  This is my workgroup at FedEx in 1998.
Speaker 2: My workgroup in 1997 at FedEx.  Turn the front shot.
Speaker 1: My annual report from FY97 at FedEx.
Speaker 2: A community service handbook that I did for the city as a councilman, letting them know where they could obtain services from the city.
Speaker 1: 1999 Salute to Fatherhood.  We did not talk about this.  I started a program called 'Salute to Fatherhood'.  We honored fathers--deserving fathers in this city, for being simply that, good dads.
Speaker 2: Let me know when you're rolling.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is my first community service handbook for my prayer breakfast.  I did this one in 1994.
Speaker 1: Okay.
