Story_ID: 10253
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.
Speaker 2: How you doing Larry?
Speaker 1: I'm the interviewer for the HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, James H. Lowry, better known as Jim Lowry.  L-O-W-R-Y.
Speaker 1: All right, and, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 28th, 1939, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a management consultant.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: That's a very good question.  I believe it's January 30th, I'm not even sure.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir, that's it.
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: And the year?
Speaker 2: 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in the offices of the Boston Consulting Group [Inc.], where I serve as vice president and director.
Story_ID: 10254
Speaker 1: There five 'People' magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask you.  And the first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Fried chicken.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Sir, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I love the, the fall.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Puerto Vallarta, Mexico.
Speaker 1: And, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Remember the quid pro quo.
Story_ID: 10255
Speaker 1: All right, now, sir, if you could tell me as much as you can about your family tree, not your immediate parents and immediate family, but how far can you--what do you know about your distant ancestors?
Speaker 2: Probably know more about on my maternal side.  My, you know, as, as you would suspect, many years ago of mixed marriage and, and ancestry in Mississippi.  And my mother was from Mississippi.
Speaker 1: An actual mixed marriage?
Speaker 2: No, her, her grand--her mother was of mixed heritage--parenting in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And what part of Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Hollandale, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my grandmother married my grandfather in, in Hollandale.  He was a carpenter, and he trained his two sons be carpenters.  And, but actually, my grandmother was an entrepreneur.  And she would go around the fields and sell medicines for people's feet and sell chickens.  And she had a buggy.  And my mother [Camille Caldwell Lowry] would regale me with some stories about her mother being an entrepreneur in rural Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Well, what are some of those stories?  I mean, you know, we've got time to hear them.
Speaker 2: Well, it was just, you know, people--you know, back in those days, did a lot of manual labor, you know, and working in the fields.  And they had sore feet, sore hands.  And my mother would laugh and say that her mother would come up with this concoction that would make the feet less sore and less painful.  And people would go out and see the buggy coming.  And sometimes they could pay her in money, sometimes they'd pay her in chickens.  They'd pay her in anything they could, you know.  And she was deeply religious.  My grandmother was deeply religious.  And there was my mother and her two sisters and her two brothers.  And there were five of them in the family.
Speaker 1: Now, do you know what was in that concoction?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't have the slightest idea, but the sad thing is that my--my grandfather was very attractive.  He was, he was--and we have photographs of him.  He was a very attractive person.  And he was very a competent carpenter.  And, and my mother swears it was not true, but it was alleged that he had made advance on, on a woman of the opposite race.  And one day a Jewish merchant in the, in Hollandale informed my mother's mother that they coming to lynch him.  And so what had happened is that her two brothers, in the dead of the night, just like you read about it, were able to get my, my grandfather on the, on the train.  And they stayed in the bathroom, they swear, until they crossed the, the Mason-Dixon Line.  And he moved up first to start, you know, the family in Chicago [Illinois].  That's how we ended up in Chicago.
Speaker 1: And that's not unlike other stories I've heard--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --of the time, you know, where people did have to leave, and get out fast.
Speaker 2: And they stayed, and the two older boys stayed up in Chicago.  And they were carpenters, and eventually one worked for the railroad and the other one worked for the Post Office.  And two--and the daughters stayed in Mississippi.  They went to a boarding school, Mary Holmes Seminary [now Mary Holmes Community College, West Point, Mississippi], and--in Mississippi.  And then my mother left, I think her sophomore year in seminary and came up to Chicago, and one of the first graduates of Wendell Phillips High School [Chicago, Illinois].  She's still living.  My mother is ninety, ninety-two.
Speaker 1: Now, what year was it that your grandfather left or what, about what time?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) It had to be in the '30s [1930s].  It was in the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: 1930s?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Things were rough down in Mississippi in the '30s [1930s].
Story_ID: 10256
Speaker 1: And your mother is ninety-two, let's see, I'm just trying think of how old she must have been [when her family left for Chicago, Illinois].  So she was--?
Speaker 2: She was a teenager.
Speaker 1: Yeah, when he left.  Okay, now, can you give us your mother's name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Sure, Camille, Camille Lowry, Camille Caldwell Lowry, C-A-L-D-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay, Caldwell.
Speaker 2: Caldwell.
Speaker 1: And Camille is?
Speaker 2: That's her, that's her first name.
Speaker 1: It's spelled the regular way?
Speaker 2: C-A-M-I-double-L-E.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: And my father was William Lowry.  And he, he passed in 1985.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And he, you know, his, his family, you know, I don't know.  They were from Memphis, Tennessee.  And basically, I think his, you know, I don't really know all the particulars, but I think the father had abandoned his mother.  So he was the eldest child.  And so the whole family was brought to Chicago, and he was breadwinner for my mother and for my brother and myself and for his family.  And there were five in his family.  And he worked several jobs and, but his main job was in the post office.  Both my parents were in the post office.
Speaker 1: Now, where did your father come from again?
Speaker 2: Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: From Memphis, all right.  And about what time period was it that--?
Speaker 2: I think he came up a little earlier.  He was, I think he was four years older than my mother.  So he would have been ninety-six.  And he also went to Wendell Phillips, and that's where they met at Wendell Phillips High School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: So they met at Phillips High School?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, and at that time, I think there were only a couple of high schools that black people--well, (unclear) more than one, but the main two were Phillips and [Jean Baptiste] DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: And DuSable came later.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: And Wendell Phillips was first.  And Harold [Washington] was part of that first generation--well, actually, Harold came a little later, I think in DuSable--[Mayor] Harold Washington.  But Nat King Cole, I think was part of that first group that went into DuSable.
Speaker 1: Those were the days of Captain Walter Dyett and the band and all that--.
Speaker 2: I know all about that, the Club DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois] and the Rhumboogie [Club, Chicago, Illinois], yeah, you hear stories about that.
Story_ID: 10257
Speaker 1: Can you tell me something about what your parents were like, starting with your father [William Lowry].  What was he like?  What did he like to do, and, you know?
Speaker 2: Ah, yeah.  My father was always a sports enthusiast, according to relatives and my mother [Camille Caldwell Lowry].  He was not a great athlete, but he was a very enthusiastic athlete.  And back in those days, the post office had these various leagues and basketball leagues.  And he was very involved.  So he was very involved in athletics and followed athletics.  And to this day, I remember my father, when Jackie Robinson first broke into the [baseball] major leagues, kept score of every game Jackie Robinson ever played.  He could give you details on how many hits he got, how many walks.  And he literally did it in little blue books, and our house was full of blue books.  And he did it for every black player that ever played for the first ten years in, in the baseball league.
Speaker 1: Needless to say, he was excited about a black players being in the major leagues.
Speaker 2: He was very excited about black players in, in major league baseball.  And so he always supported my brother and I as we, we, we grew up in athletics.  And my brother was an athlete and I was an athlete.  So that was it.  And that was a bonding between us, was athletics.  And, and really the plight of black people.  And so we were always very--you know, at an early age, we didn't really appreciate it as much as we probably should have.  But the struggles that he would always articulate that blacks had gone through and the injustices, both here and in the South.  And we heard it, and we lived it.  And so, I guess it's just a part of us because we got it very early in our childhood.
Story_ID: 10258
Speaker 1: Excuse me, was he [William Lowry] a part of any organizations?
Speaker 2: Well, the only organization he was a part of was something called the Knights of the Roundtable.  And it was an organization of all the postal workers.  You had to be a postal worker.  And to this day, they are the Knights of the Roundtable.  I mean generation after generation, they have had an organization which have been very supportive of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. For years and years, we would go to picnics of the, of the Knights of the Roundtable in Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois].  And we'd all, you know, have the chicken--and that's why chicken is always my number one choice of, of foods.  And we would go to Washington Park, and the Knights would support the NAACP and other organizations like that.  And they still do.  They're still in existence.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I've read and been told that in those days the post office was a repository for a lot of black people that had greater ambitions, but that's the best kind of job they could get.
Speaker 2: That was it.  I mean that was security.  I mean during the [Great] Depression, and, and there's no--and I'm sure you've heard stories, but it's true.  When we were growing up, if we wanted to go to a dentist, my father would talk to somebody--cause he worked in, in the main post office.  So there were dentists in, in the post office.  There were lawyers in the post office.  So all of our early, you know, professional, you know, services were rendered by people whose main job was the post office, and their second job was being a dentist or being a lawyer, and throughout our early years.
Speaker 1: Because there--it was secure, right, a secure?
Speaker 2: It was very secure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean it was very secure.  I mean it's interesting, that people don't think about, you know, security of one, knowing you're gonna get paid; secondly, that you would eventually have a pension.  And now, my mother [Camille Caldwell Lowry], you know, is ninety-three--ninety-two , going on ninety-three, has a pension.  She's had a pension for thirty years because she was in the post office and putting, put in all those years.  And she qualified.  My father qualified, and they both retired from the post office.  And, and many of the people--we're very fortunate, my generation because if you look at a lot of people who have Ph.D's or successful business people--I don't want to mention names 'cause they can do it themselves, but their, their parents came out of the post office, and that was, that was the springboard.
Story_ID: 10259
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your mother [Camille Caldwell Lowry].  Now, what was she like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was probably like that old school.  I mean my mother was not only the homemaker--I mean back in those days, you didn't have anybody coming in doing your laundry.  You didn't have anybody coming doing your food.  I mean she had, she put in eight hours a day, and she did all the cooking.  And we'd help her clean, but she would do the cleaning.  And then so, my mother has always been like a heroine to me.  I mean when you kind of reflect back on it, and you think of, you know, forty years in the post office, but yet and still, you also think of forty years of all those meals.  We never went out to eat.  I mean--I mean that was one of the things about, you know, the level of where we were economically.  I mean we always had food on the table.  We always had clothes, and we could always have, you know, a wonderful Christmas, but the thought of going out to dinner, I mean that was a real treat.  So we didn't--so that meant she had to cook.  She had to cook three days--three meals a day.  And then the other thing was on Sunday, every Sunday, we would entertain the family and the extended family with fried chicken and playing Tonk [card game] and later on, watching television.  I mean in the early days, we didn't have television.  We would listen to things on radio.  But that was it.  I mean when you go back on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois]--we lived at 60th [Street] and Eberhart [Avenue], which is, it is classified as Englewood.  And it was a wonderful, wonderful environment.  I mean it was like a village.  It was like everybody on the block knew everyone.  My mother was, you know, friendly with everyone.  We felt very safe, even at a very early age, walking from 60th and Eberhart all the way to 51st [Street] and King Drive.  And, you know, that was our life, and, and the basic--I never even thought about it, but I was kind of like what's really called a lock, a "lock-key baby".  I mean I would come home from A. O. Sexton [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], go to, go to--go home.
Speaker 1: You went the Sexton School?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to A. O. Sexton, and never thought anything about it.  And the family took care of me and people on the street took care of me.  And we were always into athletics, and my mother would come later, and she'd cook the dinner.  That was the way we worked.
Story_ID: 10260
Speaker 1: Can you reflect back on your neighborhood and give us an idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in--I guess it's, some people call it West Washington Park, and some people call it Englewood, but, you know, 60th [Street] and Eberhart [Avenue].
Speaker 2: It was 60th and Eberhart.  Yeah, you know, back in those days, you knew everybody, I guess from--the dividing line for us was 60th on the south 63rd on the North--I mean let me--no on the North, 63rd on the South, Cottage Grove [Avenue] and, and South Parkway, which is now King Drive.  That was our town.  And so we, most of us went to [A. O.] Sexton [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], so we knew everybody from Sexton.  And it was just a great little town.  And we--and at that time, we had our own show.  It was a show called Amo, the Amo Theater.  It was on Vernon [Avenue].
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: A-M-O.  That's--
Speaker 1: Amo.
Speaker 2: Amo, that was the name of the theater.  And, and my mother [Camille Caldwell Lowry] and father [William Lowry] would give us the money, and back in those days, I mean you could go to the Amo--I mean that was the neighborhood theater and, and you'd go there, and you'd stay there all day.  I mean we'd literally stay there all Saturday, watching cowboy pictures and things like Tarzan pictures, you know.  You're kind of halfway embarrassed when you think about it.  And then if you really want to go uptown or if you want to go, you know, high cotton, you would go to the Tivoli or the Maryland Theater up on 63rd Street on the other side of Cottage Grove, and which were just, when you look back on them, they were beautiful, beautiful theaters.  I mean architecture, it's a shame that they were torn down, truly a shame.  I mean, you know, thank God, that Ed Gardner and Betty Ann Gardner, you know, kept the, the Regal--the New Regal Theater.
Speaker 1: That used to be the Alhambra.
Speaker 2: That's right.  It used to be the Alhambra [sic,The New Regal Theater was formerly the Avalon Theater].  And the Regal was a fantastic theater, I mean down on, on the King Drive.  And that's what we would do.  We would hang out, and we would meet, and I guess young kids now are going to mall.  Well, we used to go to the show, and that's what we'd do, every Saturday, go to the show.  And it was great, felt very secure, had a lot of fun.
Story_ID: 10261
Speaker 1: Had great teachers at [A. O.] Sexton [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. I mean we had black teachers with masters degrees.  We had one teacher who had a Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] masters degree.  We had other teachers with a Ph.D.  Mrs. Stratton, who was a, a black history teacher, just, just enthused us so much about black history and about things.  And so there were things, you know, people are reading about now that, I mean we just knew every day because--
Speaker 2: What was her name again, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Mrs., Mrs. Stratton.
Speaker 2: And how do you spell that?
Speaker 1: S-T-R-A-T-T-O-N.  And she was brilliant, I mean, and she would make us write stories about Marian Davis [sic, Marian Anderson]--Anderson and, you know, Paul Robeson and, and, you know, before it was fashionable to do.  And she, she's taken pride in all of her students who have done well.  And so Sexton was a great place to go to school.
Speaker 2: Now, Sexton School was not named after a black person, I take it.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay, I didn't--
Speaker 1: But, you know, there used to be joke, you know, that Washington Park was named George Washington, and then they changed it to Booker T. Washington when the neighborhood changed (laughs).  I don't know about that. No, no, it never was named that.
Speaker 2: Okay, so Sexton was a pretty good school.
Speaker 1: It was a very good school, very good school.
Speaker 2: Now, what were your favorite subjects in school?
Speaker 1: History.
Speaker 2: History?
Speaker 1: History and political science, consistent through grade school, high school and college.  I was, I was always interested in affairs of state.
Story_ID: 10262
Speaker 1: And then you had the reinforcement at home with your father talking about the condition of black people.
Speaker 2: Right, and my mother [Camille Caldwell Lowry], yeah.  And then, the other thing too, the, the--I didn't mention her sister.  We had a, a aunt who was ahead of her time.  I mean she, she was the only one in her family to go to college.  She went to Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and learned cosmetology.  And she had a school called Apex Beauty School.  She was an entrepreneur in Atlanta [Georgia].  So that was a big trip when we--every now and then, we'd go down and see Aunt Alice in, in Atlanta.  And she set her mother up, the same grandmother I was talking about, with a beauty shop.  It's, and so everybody knew my grandmother on 55th [Avenue] and Garfield [Boulevard] because, you know, she was just like a neighborhood lady, you know, the same thing when she was down in Mississippi.  But that was the other thing that we, we saw Atlanta, and we saw it, we heard about Benny Mays [Dr. Benjamin E. Mays].  And we heard about people like that in Atlanta, you know, the old Rev. [Martin Luther] King [Sr.] before [Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.], through, through the eyes and ears of my aunt, who was part of that culture.  So that was another enlightening part of our early childhood.
Story_ID: 10263
Speaker 1: So as you matriculated through school, were there any other, I guess, were there any other teachers or adults that inspired you in the neighborhood or--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, I think there was--I, I wish I could tell you her name, but there was a person at--who was my brother's teacher at [A. O.] Sexton [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  My brother is Bill Lowry; he's four years older.  And she was a teacher at Sexton, and then she moved over to become a teacher at the Lab School, at the University of Chicago Lab[oratory] School [Chicago, Illinois].  And they had asked her were there any bright, young students that she would recommend for a scholarship at the University of Chicago Lab School.  And she selected my brother.  And so my brother never went to high school.  He never went to Englewood [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  He went to the Lab School instead.  And he spent two years at the Lab School, and then he transferred at Francis Parker [Francis W. Parker High School, Chicago, Illinois].  Well, my brother was always my hero, and so, you know, my brother was playing football, basketball, baseball.  That's what I wanted to do.  And so I followed my brother to Francis Parker.  So that really changed our lives.  I mean the fact that he was designated to go to the Lab School.  He didn't want to complete--at that time, Lab School was only a two-year high school.  And he wanted four years of high school.  So he transferred into another private school, which was Francis Parker on the North Side.  And then I applied, and I got in a year later.  So we never were, we were never at Francis Parker together, but we connected, you know, in terms of the continuity.  And so we were there, my brother was there for two years, and I was there for five years.
Speaker 1: Now, it's difficult to get in a Francis Parker.
Speaker 2: It was very difficult, and especially, back in those days.  I mean we were trailblazers.  I mean, and so, I mean it was--back in those days, everything was the first.  I mean we had 'Jet' magazine, you know, the first person did this, first person did that.
Speaker 1: So was he the first, actually at Francis Parker?
Speaker 2: He was one of the first.  He was one of the first.  I think Diane Dickerson, Earl B. Dickerson's daughter, who was the President and owner of Supreme Liberty Life Insurance was the first, and Judy Beasley, Dr. Beasley's daughter.  They were the first to--
Speaker 1: They named Beasley after her, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Dr. Beasley, the baby doctor.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That delivered all the babies.
Speaker 2: That's right.  His daughter was the second.  And then there were a few coming in.  And Diane Beasley--I mean Diane Dickerson was in my brother's class.  So they started earlier.  But, yeah, he was one of the first.  He was one of the trailblazers.  And then I followed him.
Speaker 1: All right.  So--
Speaker 2: Then we commuted.  I mean, and then, then for five years, I literally lived on the South Side at 60th [Street] and Eberhart [Avenue], and I'd take a train, three sub--three transfers and go to the North Side.  It was a tremendous, tremendous cultural experience going from the South Side to the North Side.
Speaker 1: Now, Parker is in Lincoln Park [Chicago, Illinois], isn't it?
Speaker 2: It's in Lincoln Park.
Speaker 1: Lincoln Park, right.
Speaker 2: So that was an hour, every, both ways.  And, but that wasn't the real challenge.  It was just, I mean it--Sexton was a great school, but compared to Francis Parker where kids were reading Shakespeare in third grade and reading things like that and having math, and you know, it was a challenge.  I mean it was a challenge.  And I've said this publicly before.  I don't know if I could have made it if I hadn't been an athlete in the sense that, because athletics was not, you know, something they had took--taken very seriously.  And I went up with another dear friend from Sexton by the name Jim Simmons.  And we went together, and were both big, and we were big at that time.  And we were able to bring glory to Francis Parker in their football, basketball and baseball team.  And because of that, I had a unique place on that campus which gave me the pride and, and the strength to carry on 'cause academically, it was very challenging for me when I first went up there.  But the people were very nice.  I mean Francis Parker was ahead of its time.  And we're talking about in the '50s [1950s].  And that's why to this day, Irv Kupcinet's a dear friend of mine because he was one of the first parents to kind of take a liking to me and Jim Simmons and others.  And there were others who, who kind of adopted us as kind of like our North Side parents.  And that got us over.
Story_ID: 10264
Speaker 1: So, and how were your grades?  Were they pretty good or?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, but, you know, looking back--and I'll be very honest.  I mean I--because we were African American or Negroes, back in those days, when we got B minuses, I mean everybody took their, stuck their chests out, and I stuck my chest out.  But the mindset wasn't that I should get As.  And, you know, and I tell younger people that now.  You know, if you--if the mindset is you're gonna get an A, you can get an A.  If your mindset is, you're a great guy for getting a B minus, you'll get a B minus.  I mean, it depends on where your head is.  And so it took me a long time.  I mean I had to go all the way to Harvard [University] Business School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] to, to really accept the fact that I'm just as smart as anybody else, you know, because I'd unconsciously, I thought I was a second-class citizen.  I wouldn't articulate that and nobody articulated it for me, but because I felt privileged to be at Francis [W.] Parker [High School, Chicago, Illinois], to be among other people who were very bright and, and a lot of kids who were very rich, I was just happy to be there.  And, and when I sent my daughter there and, I would say this, and, and her grades weren't where I thought they should have been.  And the teachers said, "Well, you know, she just wants to make herself, you know, acceptable to the crowd."  I, I literally had a hissy [fit] in front of that woman.  I said, "I'm not spending this money to have my daughter be liked.  I want my daughter to get an education," you know.  I said, "That the kind of thing you put on me many years ago.  You can't do it to my daughter."  And my daughter has always excelled academically from that point on.  I mean she was kid.  I mean she was only about second grade, but it was just the thought then that, you know, if we're there, and we just happen to be of a different background, then we should be happy there.  And I don't buy that.
Story_ID: 10265
Speaker 1: And you mentioned Irv Kupcinet, and I want to raise a quick question--I don't know if I should raise it or not, but I'll do it anyway. But it seems to be, you know, people in a situation where they're the only black in schools, I mean in high achieving schools, often bond with Jewish people, you know, black people.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And do you have any, and do you think, do you feel the same, I mean is that an observation that makes any sense?
Speaker 2: Well, let me put it like this.  Of the parents who adopted me and adopted my brother and adopted Jim Simmons and others who went--I would say the majority were Jewish.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean it seems it's always--
Speaker 2: The majority were Jewish.  David Wallerstein was a dear, dear friend of mine.  And at the time, he was the president of--it's probably before your time, of Balaban and Katz Theaters.  All the theaters, at one time, all the theaters in Chicago were controlled by a chain called Balaban and Katz.  Bobby Balaban is still making movies in Hollywood.  And it used to be called B&K, and David Wallerstein was the president of B&K.  And he was also on the board of the local ABC [American Broadcasting Company] station.  And he adopted not only me, but he adopted Jackie Robinson.  When Jackie Robinson first started coming in the major leagues, he, he went out of his way--he and wife, to, to take Jackie Robinson and Rachel into their homes and their kids in their home.  And they did the same for me, and I don't know if I could have made it without them.
Speaker 1: Now, do you think it's because the Jews had been an oppressed minority--
Speaker 2: No question.
Speaker 1: --and still, you know, catch some flak, you know, a lot of flak, I mean, that black people when they're in that situation, they, there's a--that's the link, you know, and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, and they've suffered.  I mean and for one to be slighted, you know, it's not a feeling, you know.  And, and the more I get into it, and this is my profession, this is what I'm supposed to be an expert on, I mean it's not just, just Jewish backgrounds.  It's not just people of color.  But it's also people who are fat.  I mean society is not good to people who are fat or overweight.  Society, unfortunately, even has, shows biases of people with southern accents or foreign accents.  Now, recent immigrants to the United States who happen to be from Mexico, Guatemala or Venezuela, you know, people are looking at them funny.  I mean it's, it's tough.  It's tough, and I think the Jews, throughout their history and through their very long history, have been discriminated against, not only in, in the United States, but in, in Europe and all over.  And so that there's a bonding that somehow they come together, and there's an empathy for us.  I think, as you know, and we, we talked about this before, I mean there was an empathy in the Civil Rights Movement--not saying, you know, I would never, ever say that, that whites of all different backgrounds and, and creeds did not come and support the Civil Rights Movement.  But in the early days and in the tough days and in the days of Mississippi, and, you know, [Andrew] Goodman [referring to civil rights workers Goodman, Schwerner and Cheney murdered in Philadelphia, Mississippi] and people like that, they gave their lives 'cause they care.
Story_ID: 10266
Speaker 1: Francis [W.] Parker [High School, Chicago, Illinois] had, I would say a higher percentage of Jewish students than, than say some of the other private schools.  It was probably more liberal in a lot of ways at that time.  And, and it just intrigued me to study, you know, the history and, you know, like that.  And I read a book called 'Our Crowd,' by Stephen Birmingham.  It changed my whole life, you know, see how they networked and how they worked together.  And how sometimes that they would fight, but that they would still come together in, in deals and, and things.  And it set a model that I always hoped that, you know, people of color, black--black people could do, emulate.  But we're getting there.
Speaker 2: Do you have any thoughts as to how, how that bonding that they have and networking that they have doesn't quite translate fully into the black community?  It's not quite, it doesn't seem--I know there's a religion there, and the more--we, we all don't have the religion--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 2: --black people have a lot of different denominations, a lot of different ways of--a lot of different allegiances to begin with--not that Jews don't--not that they're all the same.
Speaker 1: Right, right, definitely.
Speaker 2: I think we--well, what do you think?  I'm talking about I think about it.  What do you think?
Speaker 1: Well, I think that there's a long history.  I mean we're talking hundreds of years where, where Jews were in bondage or in, in--
Speaker 2: Thousands of years, right?
Speaker 1: Thousands, I mean--yeah, thousands of years.  And, and so we're talking about that.  So that has tremendous, tremendous impact and, and there's a lot of  pride in what they've been able to achieve and how they were able to survive.  I think that has a lot to do with it.  And I think it was reinforced that if, by staying together, united, first under the religion, but even extended beyond the religion, that they would, there was a certain amount of security even in bad situations by staying together and working together.  And I've always respected the Jews because even though, oftentimes, they didn't individually agree with everything the others said, in times of crisis, they would come together.
Speaker 2: Sometimes they didn't have the same--they don't even believe in the religion.
Speaker 1: Don't even believe in the religion.
Speaker 2: But believe in their people.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  You know, and there is a need to support.  And I think that even business, you know, we're Johnny-come-latelies to business, that there was always this, this need to invest in each other's business.  And they saw it grow, and because they were able to be very successful in the growth of businesses, that once again, solidified their security and, and their belief in why this was important.  And I think it, it kind of reinforced itself.  And over years, you keep doing it, and, and it works.  And sometimes when you venture out, and you say, oh, it's not so--it's not as comforting as I would like it to be.  And then you come to your people, and I think that we do it too, but it's more on an emotional, I think, basis, as opposed to a day-to-day kind of existence, that it's a way of life.  It's a, it's a mindset.  And it's, it's a culture.  And I think we're trying to get there.  But there are a lot of things in our way that kind of works against it.  But hopefully, we'll get there.
Story_ID: 10267
Speaker 1: As we are now, in your life story, you're at Francis [W.] Parker High School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You're an athlete.  Now, what sports did you play?
Speaker 2: Football, basketball and baseball.
Speaker 1: All of them.
Speaker 2: (Laughs) All of them.
Speaker 1: Almost all of them, football, basketball, and baseball.
Speaker 2: I was in season all the time.
Speaker 1: These are the high-profile sports.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Where--
Speaker 2: Team sports.
Speaker 1: Team sports.
Speaker 2: You get your name in the paper sports.  Right.
Speaker 1: Yes, right, right.
Speaker 2: And I was fortunate, I had a, I had a guy who was just like my brother, a guy, Jim Simmons, and actually went to [A. O.] Sexton [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], and we went to Francis Parker and we went to Grinnell College [Grinnell, Iowa].  And we all played--we played three sports in every school.  So he's like my brother.
Speaker 1: And what positions did you play in these sports?
Speaker 2: In baseball, I played first base.  And I caught.  In football, I played quarterback and fullback.  And in basketball, I played forward, in high school.  And--well, actually, I played forward in college as well.
Speaker 1: Forward? Okay. All right. So you played fullback and quarterback in, in--
Speaker 2: Well, I would shift.  I would, I would play quarterback underneath--actually, it was tailback.  I'd play underneath the quarterback and shift back to the tailback.  So, I was big, I mean let's be honest.  There weren't a lot of big people at the private schools, at least back in those days.  But, and in basketball, we played against public school teams.  We played against Hyde Park [High School, Chicago, Illinois], and we played against Catholic schools.  We, we did.  We only lost one game.  We had a pretty good team.
Speaker 1: So you had--what was the private school league here in Chicago?  Do you know who was in it?
Speaker 2: Who was in it?  Latin [School of Chicago, Illinois], Luther North [High School, Chicago, Illinois], Luther South [High School, Chicago, Illinois], University of Chicago [Laboratory School, Chicago, Illinois], Harvard [School], it's now Harvard-St. George [School, Chicago, Illinois], Elgin Academy [Elgin, Illinois], Glenwood Academy [Addison, Illinois], Chicago Christian [High School, Palos Heights, Illinois].
Story_ID: 10268
Speaker 1: So what was the highlight of your high school days, as you look back, is there a highlight or something, some big memory that sticks out from high school?
Speaker 2: You know, I feel, I still think--you know, the basketball, I mean the year, our senior year, when we only lost one game.  We never should have lost that game to, I forget--one of the public school teams.  I think it was Senn [High School, Chicago, Illinois] or another public school team.  They had a gym that they had a track.  And I kept shooting jump shots from the corner and it kept hitting the bottom of the track, you know.  And so the ball bounced back.  So that was the only game we ever lost.  So, and I mean it was a lot pride.  It was sort of like, you know, the [Tampa Bay] Buccaneers winning the Super Bowl, you know.  Tampa hadn't won anything.  Francis [W.] Parker [High School, Chicago, Illinois] hadn't won anything, and all of a sudden, you know, they've got these three kids from the South Side, you know, working with these other guys.  And we won the championship.  And so there was lot of pride, the parents and the kids and all (unclear).
Story_ID: 10269
Speaker 1: I think the other too, was I really came out of my shell in the sense that, and Francis [W.] Parker [High School, Chicago, Illinois] kind of encouraged that.  I mean we were encouraged to be on stage.  So I spent a lot of time on stage in, in productions and plays.  And that brought me out of my shell.  It forced me to articulate my words, and I was not doing that when I first went there.  And so that was good.  And I just learned about things, I learned about people.  And, and but it was the best of both worlds because I would be on the North side, and I would enjoy all the things of the North side and Francis Parker.  But I never left the South side in spirit or soul.  So we would go back and, and many of my friends today, even where I am right now and, you know, in the twilight of my career, are the same friends I went, I knew at A. O. Sexton [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  Eddie Ford is my jeweler, and I knew--he was in my class at, at Sexton.  He's one of my dearest friends, you know.  So I would go back to the South side, you know, and then, you know, to the clubs and I don't know if, maybe we were too poor.  We were never part of Jack and Jill [of America, Inc.], but we would go to Jack and Jill parties and stuff like that.  And so many of the friends from the eighth grade are still my friends.  So it was well grounded in the South side, and I think the black culture, but also I could, I could live in the other culture.  So I think that that was the thing that, that allowed me to do a lot of things later on in my career, of being very comfortable in all cultures, even when I lived in Africa.  You know, people are people, and if you accept people and the uniqueness of people, you will enjoy people and people will enjoy you.  And that's the way I live.
Story_ID: 10270
Speaker 1: Now, what was social life like for you, I mean dating and that sort of thing--?
Speaker 2: We brought our dates from the South Side (laughs) to be honest, that's what we did.  And the, it was liberal, but it wasn't that liberal.  I mean, so let's be honest.  You know, the parents are all right, you know, but, the, the interracial dating was not looked upon as the thing to do.  But there were so many beautiful young ladies on the South Side, and they, and it--really, it was true.  I mean we were always bringing beautiful girls from the South Side.  And everybody said, "Oh, where'd get that one"?  You know, so we'd do it just to have shock treatment, you know.
Speaker 1: And the whole side full of--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) The whole thing, I mean, the whole crew of beautiful girls.  So--and many of them are my friends now.  So that was great too.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did you major in, in high school [at Francis W. Parker High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: High school, I was, you know, political science and--
Speaker 1: Just (unclear).
Speaker 2: (simultaneously)--yeah, participated in prep stuff.
Story_ID: 10271
Speaker 1: When you were a senior, what was on your mind in terms of a career?  What did you think you'd be, you know, what--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I really didn't think about a career.  I mean I'll be honest.  I just thought I should go to college, and it was, you know, at Francis [W.] Parker [High School, Chicago, Illinois], everybody went to college.  It was, you know, very rarely did a person decide not to go to college at Francis Parker.  And, in fact, when I was going there, the headmaster, a third of his time was spent in getting the senior class into the right schools.  So he would travel the United States, you know, talking about Francis Parker is an academic institution, talking about the individual students.  So when it came time for me to apply, I always felt I wanted to play sports in, in college, but I wanted to go to a strong academic school.  So, you know, and really my brother and I were first generation, you know, college graduates in our family.  And my brother [Bill Lowry] had gone to a small school in Ohio, Kenyon College [Gambier, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Kenyon College, right.
Speaker 2: And I, I opted not to go to Kenyon at the time cause it was, it was an all-boys school.  I didn't think I wanted to go to a all-boys school.  And so they, you know, they said, "Well, we'll give you an option, you know, you can go to Kenyon or you can go to Carleton [College, Northfield, Minnesota], you can go to Grinnell [College, Grinnell, Iowa] or Lawrence [University, Appleton, Wisconsin]."  Midwestern schools, strong academically, but schools that, you know, Division III so I could play sports, enjoy sports.  So I opted for Grinnell.
Speaker 1: Most small schools (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I opted for Grinnell.
Speaker 1: All of those schools have kind of a liberal rep--Carleton [College, Northfield, Minnesota]--
Speaker 2: Carleton, yeah.
Speaker 1: Up in Minnesota--.
Speaker 2: Right, Carleton, and [Lawrence University in] Appleton, Wisconsin.
Story_ID: 10272
Speaker 1: When we were seniors, well, juniors actually, our coach at Francis [W.] Parker [High School, Chicago, Illinois] had gone to Lawrence College [now Lawrence University, Appleton, Wisconsin].  And he was very candid, it--I don't know if you know this, but Appleton, Wisconsin was the home of, of Joe McCarthy.
Speaker 2: Old Senator Joseph McCarthy (unclear)--.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Oh, and at that time, blacks could not stay overnight in Appleton, Wisconsin.  They could not spend the night in Appleton, Wisconsin.
Speaker 2: They could not spend the night?
Speaker 1: They could not spend the night.  It was against the law for blacks in the late 50's [1950s] or early 60's [1960s] in Appleton, Wisconsin.  So our coach--and he's still living, he says, "I don't think you guys ought to go there."  He says, "You know, I went to, I went to Lawrence.  It's a great school, but I don't think it's the school for you for the reasons, that reason is my--I don't think it's ready for you."  So with that, we, you know, we said, "Fine.  You know, we respected the honesty." The only problem, in the senior year, we won all these games and Lawrence offered him the head basketball coaching job.  And so they thought that he was gonna bring us with him.  And then he changed his story, and he literally took us back to Lawrence, made us meet everybody, took us to the barbershops, and said, "Hey, you know, it's not as bad as I thought."  But we didn't follow him.  We went to--we continued down the track to Grinnell [College, Grinnell, Iowa].  But it was funny.  But back in those days, even when we played sports.  And we would go into Wisconsin to play Lawrence, and Ripon [College, Ripon, Wisconsin] that we would stay in another town.  We could not spend overnight in Appleton, Wisconsin.
Speaker 2: And it's funny now that Lawrence College is considered a liberal kind of school.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) It's a very liberal, yeah, things change.  Now, I tell you another thing that probably, Al will probably kill when the--cause you may be getting my age, but I played also against another black guy--there weren't too many black players in, in our league at that time.  But one of them was a guy named Al Jarreau.  And he played at Ripon, see.  So he might look younger than I am, but we're the same age (laughs).  But he, he was a good athlete.
Story_ID: 10273
Speaker 1: So, you're then going to Grinnell [College, Grinnell, Iowa].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How did you end up choosing Grinnell?
Speaker 2: The 'Chicago Tribune' a long time ago used to have ratings.  And they would rate the liberal arts colleges.  They'd rate the Ivy League, just like 'U.S. News [and World Report]' today, but the 'Tribune' did it back in those days.  And so we just looked at the schools that were in, in, you know, X number of miles away, academically strong, rated in the top--at that, I think the top ten or fifteen, and just chose them.  And we went there, and we almost didn't go there because we met the coach.  And you know the first thing out of the coach's mouth, he said--when he saw us coming, he says, "Oh, gosh, I'm so glad you're coming to Grinnell.  I always needed two Watusis to win."  So we, we turned around, and we said, "Well, we don't think we ought to come here."  Now, (laughs) this--he did.  And the guy said, but John Fitch, God bless him, he's living.  He's one of my dearest friends, you know.  It was one of those things.  But we almost turned around and didn't almost go there because he was one of these Kansas guys.  He thought he could say anything he wanted to say.  So these are the things that were happening, and I mean, and we didn't date at all.  I mean we didn't date at all our freshman year.
Speaker 1: Were there any black females on the campus at all?
Speaker 2: About three or four.  That was about it.  And, and, you know, back in those days, any time you were a kind of trailblazers, you didn't just think about yourself.  You, you thought about people coming behind you.  The same thing at Francis [W.] Parker [High School, Chicago, Illinois], the same thing at Grinnell.  I mean we knew that everybody was looking at us, and, you know, and we wanted--we were very conservative in the sense of how far we would go and what we would do, et cetera.  Our third roommate, he, he dated, but he, he had a slightly different complexion.  So, he could pass so, it didn't make any difference.  So--but he wasn't passing.  I mean he did not pass, but he just looked different and more acceptable.  But we all didn't have to do it.
Speaker 1: For two years?
Speaker 2: No, for one year.
Speaker 1: For one year.
Speaker 2: And then, and then there was a very, nice, attractive, smart young lady from D.C., Washington, D.C., and I dated.  And then I had the luxury at one time of having two beautiful young ladies on campus.  And one was--I don't know if you ever heard of her.  Her name was Michelle Clark, who was the first black newscaster for CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System].  And she died in that famous crash [December 8, 1972] at Midway [International Airport, Chicago, Illinois], and she went to Grinnell.  And, you know, so those were my girlfriends.  Those--that was my girlfriend.  And it was, it was great.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, where is Grinnell in Iowa?  Where is it situated?
Speaker 2: It's fifty miles from Des Moines, Iowa and about sixty miles from Iowa City in the middle, right in the middle.  So we, we'd take the train up.  We'd drive up. Herbie Hancock went there.  Herbie Hancock was there when I was there. It was very unique.  I mean in the sense that Allison Davis [Jr.] is a brilliant lawyer, a very successful developer.  He was my room--he, he was a roommate.  Allison and (laughs)--
Speaker 1: Now he's got blue eyes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's him.  Now, you know who I'm talking about.  And Jimmy Simmons was a guy, that I talked about, and then Herbie Hancock was there.  Henry McCullough was from Waukegan [Illinois].  And he was, he turned to be a nuclear scientist.  Don Stewart, who was the President of Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], he was there at that time.  Sue Brown, the person I talked about, she's a doctor, Michelle Clark.  There were a lot of very outstanding people.  Randall Morgan who was president of the National Medical Association, he went to Grinnell.
Speaker 1: You had a talented group of people there.
Speaker 2: Very talented, very talented people.  It was fun.
Speaker 1: Did the black students hang together maybe?
Speaker 2: Every time, well, three of us.  We're all black roommates.  And we wanted it that way.  They wanted to split us up, and we didn't want to be split up.  So we were, Jimmy and I were roommates for three years.  And he became president of the fraternity--I mean, we didn't have a fraternity, of, of the dorm.  And Allison and I were roommates for four years.  So we bonded, and it was sort of like, sort of like Francis Parker where you, you had the South Side in your room and, and with the blacks.  And then you would, you know, do what you had to do, you know, in--without any fear or anything like that.  And it was fun. Great--it was a great four-year experience.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you play ball all four years?
Speaker 2: All four years.
Speaker 1: Did you play everything, I mean again, for the four years--?
Speaker 2: All four years.
Speaker 1: --baseball, basketball and football?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And studied?
Speaker 2: Yep, got a B average, did well.
Story_ID: 10274
Speaker 1: Now, did the surrounding community [at Grinnell College, Grinnell, Iowa]--
Speaker 2: They wanted to lynch us.  At one time--
Speaker 1: Well, that's worse than I thought.
Speaker 2: (Laughs) No, seriously, they once--this is a true story, you know.  Well, you know, my senior year, I did, I did date a young lady of the opposite sex--I mean of the opposite race for a while.  And she was, she was very nice.  Her family was very nice, and, but she was townie.  And so in essence, you know, they didn't care if you--they cared, but they did not care.  But to marry a very attractive girl who was what we called a townie, from the town, that went too far.  And it was funny cause all the little kids came up to me, and, and this is a true story.  And they came up and they said, "Jim, Jim.  My uncle or my cousin and my father," you know, and it was amazing, I got all calls, these little kids saying, "They forming a vigilante group to come and get you."  I said, "What?"  I, I thought they were lying.  But it was true.  They were gonna form a vigilante group and they were gonna come and get me.  And then the whole dormitory was armed, and the justice of peace of Grinnell College happened to be a professor.  And so then the police department was alerted.  But the last year of my senior year, I, I carried a .22 [caliber gun] the whole time.  And then Ron Gault, who was another very distinguished alum who's now--[married to journalist] Charlayne Hunter-Gault, you might know her.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That, that's her, her husband, was a year behind me.  And he went to DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois], and he spent his--he had a great career.  He's had a great career.  He's a partner at the JP Morgan [now JP Morgan Chase and Co.], and he's running the African, South African office.  He went in afterwards and that's when he realized what they were gonna--we didn't know what they were gonna do.  And that's when the, the person said, "You know what they're gonna do to Lowry and blah, blah, blah."  So I mean you remember those kind of things.  So it was great, you know, and you had a few incidents.  And, but I think we were so big, they really didn't, at that time come after us.  But I think two or three years after that, the harassment of blacks at Grinnell was, was worse and, and intensified.
Speaker 1: Were there more blacks on campus then?
Speaker 2: There were more blacks, and you know, probably not as high profile.  So.
Speaker 1: Cause when you were there, you were pretty well known as an athlete.  That's what I mean.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I had a lot of friends.  And, I mean really--and it--what it was I, you know--what it was is that there was, there was a jacket company.  And they had a sister factory, that the original jacket factory was in Tennessee.  So literally it was the people on the other side of the tracks who, who didn't--I mean the regular town people didn't--they were wonderful, and, but it was the people who--and it's always the case, the have and have nots, you know, the people who are jealous.  And these people were jealous, and they had, you know, started drinking.  And I guess they felt, we need to go and do something (laughs).  But, no, that was basically it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But I mean overall, I mean I just want to get it right, Grinnell was a great four years.  And without that incident my senior year, I didn't really have any problems.  It was very liberal, you know, it was very, a very liberal place.
Story_ID: 10275
Speaker 1: Now, the only college I ever heard, that may have a reputation of being more liberal than Grinnell [College, Grinnell, Iowa] or Antioch [College, Yellow Springs, Ohio] was Parsons College [Fairfield, Iowa, now Maharishi University of Management].  And do you remember that one?
Speaker 2: But Parsons, yeah, Parsons wasn't as liberal then, but Parsons now, I mean the Maharishi [Mahesh Yogi] took over Parsons college eventually.  But Antioch I would say was more liberal, at that time in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], Antioch had a, had a reputation of being more liberal, and Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio]. I mean Oberlin, you know, they had a long history.  Jewel Lafontant [MANkarious] went to Oberlin.  I don't know if you know that, and, you know, a long history of sheltering runaway slaves, underground railroad.  Oberlin was very conservative, outstanding academically, and it's still very outstanding academically.  But I would say, you know, of those types of schools, those were the most liberal.
Speaker 1: Grinnell kind of fits into that model.
Speaker 2: Yeah, still is.  Grinnell is very liberal.  I've been on the board [of Trustees] for over thirty-two years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I take great pride in them.
Story_ID: 10276
Speaker 1: Now, what did you major in at Grinnell [College, Grinnell, Iowa]?
Speaker 2: Political science.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And business, right?
Speaker 2: No, it's interesting, I mean I think that, that's a good question because when I was at Grinnell, and I always--I gave this in a speech, but when I was at Grinnell, I had four businesses.  I had a--I sold all the corsages for all the dances.  I had a laundry service that functioned every day.  I made sandwiches in the dorm, and I would sell them.  And I literally, I literally made loans to professors.  I used to carry so much cash, I would make loans to professors.  But not one professor ever, ever encouraged me to go in business.  You know, back in the, in the '50s [1950s], we just didn't think about business, maybe Madame [C. J.] Walker and a few others, but nobody thought about business.
Speaker 1: Now, were you always like that?  I mean--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I was always an entrepreneur.  I was always an entrepreneur, but nobody ever, you know, I would make money.  And, you know, and I would float loans.  I had a car.  I was driving around in a red and white Ford Fairlane.  You know, I had money.  I even had--I bought a car before I knew how to drive.  Allison [Davis, Jr.] taught me to drive.  I mean so it was amazing, and I never even thought about going into business. And so, back in those days, I thought about being a lawyer.  And I was gonna apply to, to law school.  I mean that was my thing--either gonna be a lawyer.  I didn't--I had no desire to be a dentist or a doctor.  And so back in those days, it was either you're a teacher, social worker, dentist, doctor, and that was it--politician maybe.  We didn't do that, you know.  And, and that was what I was gonna do.
Story_ID: 10277
Speaker 1: And my life changed in my senior year at Grinnell [College, Grinnell, Iowa]  when the political science teacher, who I really respected said, "Have you ever thought about applying for our fifth year abroad scholarship?"  I said, "What's your fifth year abroad?"  He said, "Well, we send a fifth year, you know, student, I mean a graduate of Grinnell to a, a developing country."  And what had happened is some rich alum had set up the fund to teach in China, but because it was Communist China, nobody ever used the money.  So the money grew, the endowment grew.  And so they said, well, let's use the money to do something else.  And so they would send one to three graduating seniors through a developing country to, you know, it was pre-Peace Corps.  And I said, "But most of the people who apply for that are, are philosophy majors or religious--I said, "I'm different."  He said, "Well, apply."  So I applied, and I was fortunate enough, I was accepted.  And I went to Tanzania.  And so--
Speaker 2: You went to Tanzania, now what year is this?  This is sixty--,
Speaker 1: '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: --one.
Speaker 1: I was in Tanzania on December 9 when it was liberated.  I was there for Independence Day.
Speaker 2: So you were there when it was still Tanganyika.
Speaker 1: Tanganyika.  And I lived in a place called Kivukoni College [Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania].  I taught at Kivukoni College--
Speaker 2: Can you spell that for us, I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: K-I-V-U-K-O-N-I.  Kivukoni College.  It was set up by Julius Nyerere.  It was a one-year academic institution to train many of the, the trade unionists and the local politicians and regional politicians in the basics.  And we did that for one year.  And there were four professors and myself.
Speaker 2: Now, I'm sorry again.  We always ask you to spell because of the transcribers.
Speaker 1: Sure, oh, Dar-es-Salaam.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but even the Nyerie.
Speaker 1: Now, you're gonna make it difficult, Julius Nyerere, and I, Julius--I should this.  It's history.  He's the first president, I should know this.  It's, it's, N-Y-E-R-R-E (sic), I think--Nyerere.
Speaker 2: N-Y-R-E-R-E (sic).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And he set up the school.  And--
Speaker 2: What did it mean?  I mean that means something in Kiswahili--Kivu--that doesn't mean something?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and what is it?  Something about the sea or something like that.  You know, "port of peace" is Dar-es-Salaam.  And it was a great experience.  I mean cause I didn't--but you talk about culture shock.  Now, you know, and you thought going to, up to Francis [W.] Parker [High School, Chicago, Illinois] was hard.  I mean here I'm from the South side of Chicago.  I'd just been at Grinnell, at four glorious years playing sports, getting there.  And all of a sudden I'm on an island, basically, on an island where the first day I was there, you know, you heard this strange music.  And everybody's talking Kiswahili and you were eating rice and beans.
Speaker 2: You didn't have any preparation for that?  Did they--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) None.
Speaker 2: Did they give you an orientation?
Speaker 1: None.  They put me on a, they put me on a plane.  I had two weeks.  I spent two weeks in Europe, and I ended up, and the headmaster picked me up.  None.  And I was there all by myself.  It, it was very lonely, you know.
Speaker 2: In those days, just to set this up for anyone watching this in the future, these were days when black Americans knew very little about Africa.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: I mean nowadays we, and we still don't everything about it, we know a lot more than we used--we did then.  But we knew very little about Africa.  Africa--African countries then were emerging then as independent nations--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) That's right.
Speaker 2: --throughout the colonial world in some ways anyway--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) That's true.
Speaker 2: --were becoming independent.  And--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the first independent African country was Ghana in 1958 [sic, 1957].  And then Sekou Toure and Julius Nyerere. And then Kenya came a few years later, 1963--Jomo Kenyatta.  But, you're right.  People didn't know.  And there were very few, I mean there were the Pan-Africanist, you know, who had been there for years, but very few modern, young people lived in, or knew, Tanzania.
Speaker 2: And you had no orientation whatsoever?
Speaker 1: None.
Speaker 2: Did you know anything about the country at all before you went?
Speaker 1: I went going over on the plane.  That's why, I mean, it just seemed like something to do.  I mean it was so intriguing, you know, but it's like anything.  If you're very impressionable, and the professor says, do it, you did it, you know.  And I said, Africa, you know, why not?
Speaker 2: Did your parents and friends like try to stop you from going, I mean, you know, and such was the fear of Africa at a certain--I don't know if your parents or friends had that fear, but did they express that?
Speaker 1: Well, parent, they've always been very supportive.  My mother, even to this day, said, well, you always, you were different, and you always did what you wanted to do, and you always kind of come out, you know, ahead.  And they really didn't, they didn't ask me not to do it, you know.  And it was a joke because, you know, I had a little money saved from Grinnell, but they didn't give me a lot of money.  I mean they gave me, I think they gave five hundred dollars, a thousand dollars for the whole year and room and board.  And the room and board came through a college, and that--all I had was literally five hundred dollars, and my father loaned me some money, gave me some money.  And then, you know, how I survived?  I taught social dance to, to Tanzania.  I mean if you could imagine, you know, all these, you know, now, high officials, you know, and ministers, now, finally, they're acceptable to the culture to the--and it was still British culture.  I mean the British were still there.  And it was a colonial state, as you said.  And all of a sudden they had to go to things like that.
Story_ID: 10278
Speaker 1: Yeah, we're in Tanzania.  And this culture shock, I just can't believe that they sent you over there with no--but you were like selling dance steps to people.
Speaker 2: That's how I got my extra money to live on and so that was good.  I met some people and met some nice people in the embassy.  I'd eat free in the embassy people, and they had PX [post exchange], you know, privileges.  So I survived. I survived for a year.
Speaker 1: You showed them how to do the twist and stuff?
Speaker 2: I taught--no, that, that was before the twist.  Chubby Checker was not in existence at that time.
Speaker 1: (Laughing) Oh, '61 [1961] sometime.
Speaker 2: No, we're talking about Fred, Fred Murray [sic, Arthur Murray], and you know, we're talking about fox trot stuff, you know.  Oh, yeah, you know, that old square step and all that kind of stuff.  But that worked.  And then I, then I gave lectures for the USAID, and, or USIA [United States Information Agency], and around the country.  You know, taking movies and kids wanted to hear about the, you know, what it was like being black in America and stuff like that.  So between those two things I got enough money to live, and I survived, went through Europe, came on home.
Story_ID: 10279
Speaker 1: I knew I was gonna go to graduate school, and I hadn't really made up my mind where or what, and I got a call from the Peace Corps.  And it was right around the time the Peace Corps had just gotten started in 1961.  And they asked me to be a training officer.  So I was Outward Bound training officer in Puerto Rico.  And that's where they would send, you know, a given number of Peace Corps volunteers to go through both cultural training and Latin American-bound people would get Spanish, and we'd put them with families and the big thing was Outward Bound, to really force people to live under conditions or stress that would push them to assimilate, you know, living in stressful situations abroad.  And so that was, that was great.  I was in great shape.  I--they did it because I was--I had spent time in Tanzania.  I was selected because I spent time in Tanzania, and also because I'd been an athlete.  So I, I did that for a year and a half.  It was a great job, it was great job.  I loved Puerto Rico.  I loved meeting all the different volunteers.  We'd have a different group coming in once a month.  But then I said, look, I got to get on.  I got to get my masters degree, and the Peace Corps didn't want me to leave the Peace Corps.  So Sargent Shriver, who's still a dear friend of mine, gave me a leave of absence to get a master's degree in international affairs at the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  So I spent a year and a half at the University of Pittsburgh, and then went to Peace Corps in Peru.  And I was associate director with the Peace Corps in Peru where I spent two years in Peru.  And while I was in Peru, I met [U.S. Senator Robert F.] Bobby Kennedy.  And once again, it changed my life.  And I met Bobby Kennedy.  He wanted to meet the people.  He wanted to meet the poor people in barriadas.  And, unfortunately, the people in the embassy didn't even know where the barriadas were.  And so he asked for the Peace Corps director.  And I became his chauffeur, translator for, you know, about--almost a week.
Story_ID: 10280
Speaker 1: And I got to know [U.S. Senator Robert F.] Bobby Kennedy and his wife, and--,
Speaker 2: Ethel [Kennedy].
Speaker 1: Ethel.  And he sent, he sent somebody down to get me.  He said, "Look, I'm starting a special program in Brooklyn [New York], called--in Bedford-Stuyvesant--called the Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation.  And we're gonna try and use private resources to develop a, an area the size of Cincinnati [Ohio]," you know.  And I said okay.  And so I, I would turn down a job with [R.] Sargent Shriver who wanted me to come back to Chicago [Illinois] and work for, for the poverty program.  And so I end up in Bed-Stuy, and I worked there for a year, a little over a year.  I started--I had the first black television show in New York City [New York].  It was called 'Inside Bedford-Stuyvesant' with Roxie Roker, Lenny Kravitz's wife [sic, mother].
Speaker 2: This is the actress, right (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the mother.  And we did that.  And I did that for about three or four years.  And then he [Robert F. Kennedy] was assassinated.
Story_ID: 10281
Speaker 1: Peru, what was Peru like for a black man?
Speaker 2: What was Peru like?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Peru, (unclear).
Speaker 2: Peru, Peru was great.  I mean I never lived, you know, for that long and because Puerto Rico's slightly different.  I mean Puerto Rico is, is, is a Latino, you know, culture, but it's still very American.  I mean you had a lot of American influence.  It's a commonwealth.
Speaker 1: You can go to parts of Chicago [Illinois] and see the same people?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, you can speak English.  I mean you could get by speaking English, but Peru, you, you had to learn the language. You had to learn the culture.  And, and it was great because I had volunteers--I had over 150 volunteers that reported to me.  And they were all in the jungle, the Selva and I had Amonda [sic, Amazonia] and in the Sierra in the mountains.  And I had a lot in, in Lima itself.  And, so I was basically looking after all these wonderful, wonderful very idealistic people who were living in barriadas, living in very, very dire situations and conditions, but really caring about people.  And it was, it was very heartwarming to see them do this.  And then I was also fortunate to play basketball again.  So I played with my team in, in Peru, and we won the national championship.  And they wanted me to internationalize.  I said I don't think so.  But that was fun.  And I did that for two years.  It was great.  And learned the language, and learned the culture and just like Puerto Rico, I always go back--periodically, I go back 'cause it's part of my life.  And so I, I did that.  And, and I think, you know, my work now is in diversity.  And I think in the experiences in Tanzania, Puerto Rico, places like that, it forces you to accept people as people.  It forces you to, to not be so egocentric or ethnocentric that you think that the only way you can function or live is like American in, in a very middle-class environment.  And, you know, most of the people in the world don't live in middle-class conditions.  And so you, you really have a empathy or sympathy for people and, and people who are less fortunate than yourself.  And all--I've been an entrepreneur, and I've never said I wasn't gonna be an entrepreneur but I've also tried to help people, you know, with the power or the wealth that I've accumulated.  And I think a lot of it goes back to my parents [William Lowry and Camille Caldwell Lowry], and a lot of it goes back to my early years, professional years, living abroad.  And, and that was very important.  And--.
Speaker 1: Did living abroad give you a different perspective on poverty basically?
Speaker 2: It gives a different--it gives you a different perspective on everything.  I mean it, you--just, you know, the whole question of democracy, and I believe in democracy.  I, I really believe it's the best form of government we can have, but you have to, you know, put asterisks behind what kinds of forms of democracy.  I mean Julius Nyerere's democracy was different from the U.S., you know, in Winnetka [Illinois] democracy.  You know, it's, it's different because you're a different culture and a different kind of thing.  So it forces you to deal with that.  It also forces you to deal with the larger global economic, you know, events.  And, and, and you deal with the whole question of developing countries, you know, the value of raw materials as opposed to finished materials.  Many of these countries have really deep resources, but they don't get the kind of value added, and the value added comes at the very end.  And so, therefore, the wealth that is created is really created at the end, not in the beginning.  So many of the people are still poor.  And that's the, that's the battle that everybody's trying to fight.  The importance of education in the third world countries. Education is the key.  You know, it's just like us coming up from the South--the people who were fortunate enough to go to college, and it separated us.  And it's truly the case in the third world countries.  If you have a degree or--God bless you if you have two or three degrees, you're just in the upper strata of that society.  And it's very unique.  No, it's, it was a great experience.  It was a great experience.
Story_ID: 10282
Speaker 1: Now I want to ask you about Brooklyn [New York, New York], Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn neighborhood].
Speaker 2: Yes, I can't spell that.  No, I can spell it (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) We should be able to find somebody to spell that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And Bed-Stuy, as they called it then, was one of the most beaten down parts of the United States at the time or if not the-well-
Speaker 2: It was beaten down.
Speaker 1: Other than the Mississippi Delta, it was one of the poorest.
Speaker 2: It was rough, but they had, but they had different sides.  I mean in all fairness to Bed-Stuy, there was a large West Indian population who owned homes, who were very, you know, like my old days in living in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois neighborhood] or North Washington Park as you defined it, I mean they, they were just good middle-class people.  I mean, so then you always had that, but you also had the rough part of Bed-Stuy.  But you had a very large, you know, striving--Earl Graves, you know, I met him--he was from Bed-Stuy.  You know, there are a lot of people from Bed-Stuy who went on to become very successful, and part of it was the strong West Indian bond, you know, which gets back to what we talked about in terms of the Jewish community.  I think that there's a similarity in the bonding capacity of West Indians.
Speaker 1: Yes, I--do you have any thoughts on why that's true because that's something that's an observation a lot of people make about the work ethic of the West Indians when they come here?
Speaker 2: It's real.  I, I--I think, I think part of their education and enculturation.  You know, they were acculturated by the British.  And I think one of the things I learned in Tanzania and it stayed with me.  And sometimes it's probably hurt me in my career, but I'd rather be respected than liked.  And I think too often people of color, and, you know, African Americans put a real premium on being liked first, within their own communities and the external community.  The British put more resp--you know, premium on being respected.  And I think that's true with the West Indians.  That the West Indians took great pride in, in the education that it achieved, but the accomplishments they achieved for themselves and for their families.  And if they, you know, could care--I'm not gonna say they could care less if they were liked.  But it was not of, of paramount importance like I think a lot of African Americans have, you know.  And I see a lot of people who do things and live a life and, you know, and you've heard it.  And we talk behind each other's back, but we won't talk candidly in front of each other because we want to be liked, you know.  And so, after a while, you spend too much time worrying about how to be liked instead of what you're doing, what you're accomplishing, what are you giving back to the people?  And there are a lot of people I see with Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] degrees, and not doing well.  They definitely are not doing well for other people 'cause their number one priority is being liked.  But in all fairness, there are people who are being rewarded in our community for being likeable people.  There's a reward system for being likeable and not achievable.  So, there, they are factors that contribute to that.
Story_ID: 10283
Speaker 1: You said you had a television show on--.
Speaker 2: It was great.  Well, I mean, it was great.  Back in the early days it was all black and white, and, and we'd do three shows in three hours.  I mean it was, I mean--'cause everybody wanted to get out of the ghetto, you know, all the cameramen.  And we, we were able to integrate the, the cameramen around, you know.  Finally, we got them jobs.  We got them in the union because it was the first program.  And that's one thing we insisted on.
Speaker 1: Broadcast from Bedford-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York neighborhood]?
Speaker 2: Bed-Stuy.  It was Metromedia.  It was seven o'clock in the morning and twelve o'clock at night.  We interviewed Harry Belafonte.  I got a old tape of Harry Belafonte, young Harry Belafonte, and I was a young Jim Lowry.  And we'd take, take the cameras in.  We'd have entertainer, we'd have, you know, Mad Poets, and we'd have, you know, local people.  And, and the program ran about five or six years.
Speaker 1: Now, what prompted that idea to, you know, of your involvement in the media like that, I mean a television show?
Speaker 2: That was a happenstance.  I mean if you, if you go back--we haven't talked about the riots, but the riots changed America, you know, the riots of the '60's [1960s].
Story_ID: 10284
Speaker 1: You were in Tanzania in '61 [1961].  That's when you were in Peru, was it the early '60's [1960s]--
Speaker 2: Mid-sixties yeah, '63 [1963] to '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: That time, you were talking about the enthusiasm of the people involved in the Peace Corps--,
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the spirit of volunteerism.
Speaker 2: It was, it was [U.S. President John F.] Kennedy, as they say, it was Camelot.  And it was the, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the New Frontier.
Speaker 2: New Frontier, and all of us--and you know, everybody had been liberated, you know, no bras.  Everybody was going around thinking it was gonna be a better world and that we could change the world.  I think that was the other thing.  We thought we could change the world.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in nineteen--and that's one of the themes of Peace Corps--,
Speaker 2: Oh yeah--.
Speaker 1: --the theme of VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America] and, and, you know, what now is AmeriCorps.
Speaker 2: What can you do for your country?  Ask, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: What can your country do, you know, so that was it.
Speaker 1: Ask not what your country can do for you--.
Speaker 2: But what you can do for your country.  That was JFK.
Speaker 1: Right.  And people--that also was a time when that great, great Freedom Summer of '64 [1964] took place, with people black and white went down to Mississippi to register those folks to vote, and to take that, hold that delegation to Atlantic City [New Jersey]. And I mean it was a--.
Speaker 2: And the March on Washington, I mean this is when it was, it was happening.
Speaker 1: [Andy] Goodwin and [Mickey] Schwerner, they were killed in Mississippi. They volunteered.  They went down there to do something, and [James] Chaney and other people, you know--,
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Bob Moses all into SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Where a lot of, the spirit of--.
Speaker 2: There was SNCC.  There was CORE [Congress of Racial Equality].  It was the Urban League, and then there was a faction, you know, who's the more conservative, and it was younger people, you know.  And we had them on television.  I mean it was, it was live.  I mean and, and back in those days, it was a lot of pressure.  I mean, were you black enough?  I mean people, and people don't talk about that now.  Were you black enough?  Is your--is our 'fro big enough, you know.  (Laughter) I mean, and so you had to deal with those kind of questions back in those days, you know.  And, and even when we had jobs in corporate America, you know, what are we gonna do to help the other people, you know?  So, it was, it was very much and the politics was different.  The politics, when you had liberals and you had conservatives.  I mean now one might argue that there's this blending of philosophies.  But back in those days it was clear.  I mean, [U.S. Senator] Hubert Humphrey was a liberal, and then so you, you wore liberal stripes on your shoulders and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, they had milestoned the death of Kennedy, John Kennedy first, then the--.
Speaker 2: Martin [Luther King Jr.].  And the [U.S. Senator Robert F.] Bobby Kennedy.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So, the riots--you, you were in--?
Speaker 2: I was right there when the riots were happening.
Speaker 1: Where were you when Dr. King was killed?
Speaker 2: I was taping the show.  We were in a production, and I was with Roxie Roker, and the producer of our show.  And the word came in he'd been killed.  And Kennedy, I was at the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  These are two things you just always remember.
Story_ID: 10285
Speaker 1: Now, did you work in the [U.S. Senator Robert F.] Bobby Kennedy campaign?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, now, what did you do?
Speaker 2: Just did everything, you know, people did, you know.  And, registered voters, and people, you know, it was a lot of young people.  And Marian Wright Edelman, you know, I remember when she was there.  She was part of it.  She was part of the brain trust.  And, you know, I just knew that he was going to the White House, just knew it.  And I remember when he was assassinated.  And I was just lost,  I was just lost.  I mean, you said, what does, what does all this stuff mean when these people get assassinated like that?  And then, I don't know where I would have gone.  I mean I, I was really, I was still doing the Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York neighborhood] thing, but it didn't quite feel the same.
Speaker 1: I just want to ask you--.
Speaker 2: What, go ahead.
Speaker 1: What was Bobby Kennedy like?  There's been a lot written about his different transitions.  He seemed to, in the beginning of the '60's [1960s] when his brother [U.S. President John F. Kennedy] was elected, not to be the most sensitive person in the Kennedy Administration.  People have said he was a, somebody who was very politically savvy, but he, you know, he wasn't necessarily the most sensitive person.  He had a number of encounters along the way, and, you know, that kind of changed him--.
Speaker 2: That's definitely true.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean I've said that I think, you know--I didn't, I didn't know JFK, but I knew Bobby Kennedy.  But at the end, in terms of heart and what he felt, I think he cared.  I mean, and, in, you know, one of the photographs on my wall, it's Bobby Kennedy and I in a barriada in Peru.  And I was in a car.  I mean I was, literally, was in a car with two other people, and Bobby Kennedy chastised, I mean--no, he didn't chastise.  He cussed him out for having no valid reason why the U.S. Government could, could not supply water to this city of five hundred thousand people, you know.  And they didn't have water.  I mean they had, they had trucks.  They would go around, people had barrels, and they would come off the trucks.  And so Bobby Kennedy asked, he said, "Why can't we have, why can't we have water?"  The man he heed and hawed, and--but Bobby Kennedy knew the reason why was that they had appropriated oil, wanted the oil.  That's why they were holding out for aid.  So he knew, he knew this when he asked the question.  But he was--I mean it was just four of us in the car.  So he wasn't showing off.  And he just started cussing the guy out.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's--.
Speaker 2: (Laughing)  Yeah, he just--.
Speaker 1: Other things you remember about him, have him showing outrage over things that sometimes you would wonder if he didn't already know about.  I mean there was a, I think it was a call in '63 [1963] from [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] about him being in jail in Birmingham [Alabama].  And Bobby said, "What is he doing in jail?"  You know, he was upset. "Doesn't he know my brother's running for the president?"  And someone explained to him on the phone, I think it was Dr. King's wife [Coretta Scott King ], that, well, "They were trying to register people to vote."  He said, "Why don't they just vote?  This is America," you know, like he didn't know, you know, at that point.  But when he, and then later, he, he shows all this indignation.  He was, he was indignant.  But he didn't--was, was he kind of sheltered person who got shocked--?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, who knows, historians will probably tell the story.  But I think the family has always been very political.  I mean his father was very political.  And I think they always had a plan, one way or another, and I think, you know, as we know, that [oldest brother, Joseph] Joe [Kennedy] was probably the person they had designated to be the president.  So, I mean from an early age, you know, the Boston [Massachusetts] family, very steeped in--his mother's father was very steeped in politics.  So they were very political.  And even--and we can't erase history.  I mean they, they were both corporation counsels for the same Joe Kennedy [sic, Senator Joseph McCarthy] who was from Appleton, Wisconsin.  And so there was a lot of, you know, when you go back in history, but I think over time, as they got exposed--exposure is, is the key.  I mean--and, and we're gonna rush ahead to, you know, what's happening at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], but the strongest case for diversity is just your exposure to different kinds of people.  We don't have the draft anymore.  So people of different backgrounds and colors and races are not exposed to each other.  And if you don't--if you're not exposed to other cultures, exposed to other people, you form your own biases, you form your own opinions, and many of them are false.  And so I think what happened with Bobby Kennedy, as he got into power, and he got to know Marian Wright Edelman and he got to know other people, and people like Martin Luther King and Bayard Rustin. I mean people don't talk about Bayard Rustin, but Bayard Rustin was an intellectual way before it was fashionable.  And he was different, and he was out--he was gay, and he let the world know he was gay.  I mean when you're exposed to all these very smart people then you form different opinions.  If you stay in Hyannisport [Massachusetts] or if you stay in West Palm Beach [Florida] or Palm Beach [Florida], and you only talk to your own people--and I've said this for Chicago [Illinois].  I mean Chicago still stays in their own communities, and I think at times it hurts us.  You know, I was fortunate.  I didn't stay in my own community.
Speaker 1: And it's funny, that Chicago is touted as a city of these strong communities, but at the same time, the very thing that they tout as being the strength of Chicago could also be a weakness, I guess.
Speaker 2: It's also touted as one of the most segregated cities in the, in America.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: You know.  And so, you know, what--it depends how you look at it, you know.  I remember talking to the senior [Chicago Mayor Richard J.] Daley, and he said, you know, "Jim, Chicago is strong because it's like a quilt and all these different patches on different communities.  And when they're tied together, it's sewn together tightly.  And that's why we have a very strong blanket."  I said all right, yeah--you know, I was young.  I said, yeah, okay.  (Laughter) But I also saw the other side of it, you know. Getting back to Bobby Kennedy.  I think he, he got exposed to a lot.  He was very smart, and he cared.  He really cared.  I mean, and who knows, you know.  The fights that he, and that he took down there probably cost his life.  I mean he took on fights that were not fashionable, that one could take the easy out on.  And he, he fought.  And when I saw his, his daughter, Kerry, Kerry [Kennedy] Cuomo, and I said, you know, "A lot of people say your father affected you, your life, but he really affected my life." And we became fast friends.  And he did.  He really strongly affected my life.  So when, when he died, you know, assassinated, I didn't know what to do.
Story_ID: 10286
Speaker 1: And then I got a headhunter.  I mean something always comes always comes out of the blue.  And they asked me would I interview for a job with this consulting firm called McKinsey & Company.  I didn't know anything about McKinsey, and, and I did a little homework but not that much.  And it was, you know, it was a very prestigious consulting firm.  And after nine interviews, nine interviews, I was offered the job.  And I didn't know what it meant.  I mean I really didn't know what it meant.  And it was a good thing, the bad news--'cause I probably would have panicked and I probably wouldn't have interviewed well.  But I was--still had my television show, and I was very excited working Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York neighborhood].  And they said, "We want you to come and work for us."  And it was on Park Avenue at 45th Street [New York, New York], everything was first class.  And it turned out, I was the first black there, in the history of the firm.
Speaker 2: So this is a big deal.  Now, for those of us who are looking at this--,
Speaker 1: It was a very big deal.
Speaker 2: --and for those of us who know nothing about the business world, or not much, which is a lot of us, then this is a real big deal, McKinsey and Company.
Speaker 1: It was a very big deal.
Speaker 2: Okay, and you--at the time, you didn't know it.
Speaker 1: I, no, I--and at the time, many of the people who were McKinsey at the same time are people you probably know. Lou Gerstner, who was chairman of IBM [International Business Machines] was there.  Leo Mullen, who was the president of Delta [Airlines] was there and people like that.
Speaker 2: People like that? (Laughs)
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean people, I mean, I mean--and really, I didn't, I really didn't know.  I mean they were only accepting people from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and Harvard Business School, you know.  And I said okay, so I said, I'll give it a try.  But I didn't really know what it was all about.  And they were great.
Speaker 2: I mean I worked there, and after three or four years, there were two things that happened in my life at, at McKinsey.  One, I was brought back to head up a team to reorganize the Peace Corps.  So that was like a labor of love.  Many of the people that I had left that I'd worked with, and one woman who wouldn't give me a raise, I remembered her, were still there, when I had to go back and reorganize it with the umbrella and the brand of McKinsey.  And then, and then that helped me.  And then the second thing while was there, they asked me to go out and be a part of a team to help decentralize Tanzania. So I went back with this Park Avenue [New York, New York] firm and spent two years of my life in Tanzania again.  And many of my students from, you know, ten years before, were now very powerful people.  One guy was the first ambassador to China.  Another one was the State House's chief of staff to [Julius] Nyerere.  And so many of my students were very powerful people.
Speaker 1: I say, some of them--ambassador to China was, I guess had a role to play in--,
Speaker 2: Huge.
Speaker 1: --in Tanzam [Tanzania-Zambia Railway Authority] Railway, which is the biggest (unclear) in East Africa.
Speaker 2: That's right.  When we were there, that was being built.  That was being built, the Tanzam Railway and Richard Ramborda.  I mean it's, so I knew all these people.
Story_ID: 10287
Speaker 1: And that's where [Tanzania] our daughter was born.  And that's how we named her--we, we named her Camille after my mother [Camille Caldwell Lowry], but her middle name is Aisha.  And [Julius] Nyerere named my daughter.
Speaker 2: Now, what is Aisha?
Speaker 1: Aisha, actually, it was the last wife of the Prophet Muhammad and they spell it different ways.  Interesting enough, her godmother was the, going with a guy who was Stevie Wonder's eyes, who would take Stevie Wonder around.  And she mentioned the fact to Stevie Wonder that she'd just been to Africa and she saw her grand-goddaughter, and her name was Aisha.  So he thought that was a beautiful name.  And so he named his daughter Aisha.
Speaker 2: "Isn't she precious." [ref. to Stevie Wonder song, "Isn't She Lovely."]
Speaker 1: "Isn't she precious, Aisha".  And so now the world's--because of that, the world's made up of thousands of Aishas, Myeshas, Tyeshas, and you know, (laughter), but, you know, that's the way, that's the way it is.  But that's a true story too.
Story_ID: 10288
Speaker 1: So, what happened next?  Now, you're with--
Speaker 2: I'm with McKinsey [and Company].
Speaker 1: McKinsey, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: And then--is it rolling?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was withMcKinsey, and then I came back from Tanzania.  And my daughter [Camille Aisha Lowry] was born.  And, and I said, now, do I want to do this?  And one of the things, and to be very honest, is that at--because so many of the, the consultants at McKinsey went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I felt I was not as good.  And so I asked, they had--Harvard has an executive program.  It's not quite a master's degree, but it's, it's a short course of five months.  And I said, "I want you to pay my way to Harvard."  So they said, okay, cause I'd done well in Tanzania.  And so they paid my way to Harvard.  I was in the executive program.  And it was at Harvard where I was competing with other people in the case method, and I excelled.  I really--I mean, and I, I, and it's almost embarrassing to say this.  But I finally realized I was just as smart as anybody else or smarter.  And, and that, I really felt liberated.  And that's when I knew I was gonna start my own business.  And I set--my goal was, I was gonna set up a quality consulting firm, that would be, maybe not as good as McKinsey, but on the same level in many ways.  And, but I still had a certain an obligation to McKinsey to give them two years of my life because they had paid my way at Harvard.  And I had an option to go to San Francisco [California], Cleveland [Ohio] and Chicago [Illinois].  And I opted to come and go to Chicago.  And it was great.  And I came back home because my parents were getting older.  I wanted to come home.  My, my wife at that time was from Chicago, Hyde Park.  Her father was a doctor.  He was getting up in age.  And so I came back here to start a public-sector practice for McKinsey in Chicago.  And Leon Finney, who I knew from many years back, said, "Lowry, you can't do anything in the public sector in Chicago unless you work for the Democratic Party and Mayor [Richard J.] Daley."  And I volunteered to work for Daley's campaign, his last campaign.  And we got to be friends.  And at the end of the, you know, the campaign, he said, "What do you want to do?"  I said, "I don't know."  He said, "Why don't you start your own firm, and I'll support you," he said, "Because I was impressed with you, and you're smart, and blah, blah, blah."  So that's how I started my firm.  Back in those days, you could do that.  And I started with two contracts from the City of Chicago, and I had a contract from McKinsey.  They put me on retainer to help them.  And that's--I started a company in my name, which probably was a mistake.  If I had to do it again, I wouldn't do it.  And there was this, I went back with Allison Davis [Jr.] who was my roommate, and he gave me--he had a firm at this time.  And I had a little room, and that's how I started my firm [James H. Lowry and Associates].
Speaker 1: Now, what year was this?
Speaker 2: That was 1973--no, '75, '75 [1975].  I came back in '73 [1973].  1975.
Story_ID: 10289
Speaker 1: So you developed a relationship with [Mayor] Richard J. Daley?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what was--
Speaker 2: He didn't know me.  He didn't know--I was new. Now, my brother [Bill Lowry] had established roots here, but he didn't know me.  And Neil Hartigan was at the time, was Lieutenant Governor [of Illinois].  And I knew a couple of people.  And they said, "You ought to meet this guy."  So I met him, and, you know, and all the old guys, you know, Cecil Partee, Clark Burrus and that was the black leadership, Earl Neal, I mean these were all my friends.  And, but I was a young buck, I was a young guy.  I was different, you know.  They assumed I was Ivy League.  I wasn't that Ivy League, but they assumed I was Ivy League, so--
Speaker 1: From the Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, Harvard thing, and you know, and so, and I think Daley was kind of moved that I would--you know, 'cause and he was catching a lot of flak at that time from the community.  And he was always very fair to me.  And I--you know, his photograph's up on my wall too, you know, cause he played a very significant role in my life.  And, and one thing led to another, and I, I hired a guy named Peter Bynoe who was a young guy, three Harvard degrees.  And Peter and I started working together and then start--looked up and did the first major study of minority business for the federal government.  And we did that and got a lot of publicity, and the firm [James H. Lowry and Associates] grew from five to fifty-five people in one year, doing mostly federal work.  And I became an expert in minority business.  And one study reinforced the other study.  And then we did the first major organizational plan on minority business for Pepsi-Cola [Company, now PepsiCo, Inc.].  And they funded it, and then we did work for Frito-Lay [Company, now PepsiCo, Inc.] and Ford Motor Company.  And we started designing minority business programs.  And [Mayor] Harold [Washington] was elected.  And it was at that time he asked to--at that time, I was on the board of the Chicago Public Library.  And Harold asked me to stay on the board and do two things: help him with the transition and also the design a minority business program, and to be the chairman of the Chicago Public Library.  And so I was the chairman of the Chicago Public Library under Harold Washington.
Story_ID: 10290
Speaker 1: Now, just--I want to backtrack a little to your studies.  And I wanted to ask--I had a question about Daley too, I guess, but maybe I shouldn't--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: --go all the way back to that.  But [Mayor] Richard [J.] Daley, at one point, someone was telling me earlier this week, one of the former aldermen of the [Chicago, Illinois] City Council was telling me that, unlike the perception that black people, that a lot of black activists had of Daley, as not doing enough for the black community, a lot of white people thought he was doing too much for the black community.
Speaker 2: Oh, there's no question.
Speaker 1: And what--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, maybe, yeah, I mean he was, I mean like you said, I mean they realized that this was a melting pot, when you think about, and you heard me talk about it before.  And you got to give something, you know, so it's a matter of giving and giving up power.  Now, they never gave up total power, but, you know, they gave up power in, in order to survive and grow.  And they did.  And, and like it's--like I got pillared, you know, for designing the first minority business program.  They tried to get me, you know, because, you know, I knew how the system worked.  I knew how contracts were let.  I knew how extensions were being get--you know, people do a low bid, and you get an extension.  And, and the contract ended up being five times larger than the initial bid, and I knew how people were, you know, taking it.  So I was part of the insiders.  So they didn't like that, that I was an insider suddenly doing minority business.  And, but I thought that was the thing to do, I mean, and I didn't hesitate.  I wrote this report that was brilliant, I would say it was brilliant report, not because I wrote it, my team wrote it.  And I, and, and that's only bitterness I have in life.  I don't have anymore, but I think that there were a lot of minorities who benefited from me nailing on the sword, who, you know, who now taking advantage third, twenty-five and five.  We never had a twenty-five and five, you know, system in the City of Chicago.  And that's--
Speaker 1: Can you explain what that means?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, under [Mayor] Harold Washington, you know, I said, 25 percent of all contracts should go to all minorities and 5 percent should go to women.  Never, never anybody to talk about that.  And Jim Wash--Jim [James] Montgomery and myself and Harold Washington sat in his living room and came up with that formula.  And Harold said, "You think we can find that many qualified minority entrepreneurs?"  I said, "Yes, and if we can't find them in Chicago, they will come.  They will come from Gary [Indiana], they will come from Illinois.  They will come from all over.  You will never have a problem getting that goal."  And it was true.  There were a lot of qualified entrepreneurs--and there were a lot of people who started businesses because the attraction of that pot of 25 percent.
Speaker 1: And this is the biggest pot that's ever--
Speaker 2: The biggest pot.  It was, we're talking about billions of dollars.  I mean, we never got it.  I mean our entrepreneurship was on the South Side, on 47th Street and 58th Street, they were ma and pa stores.  Now, you had architects coming out of the woodwork.  You had black architects leaving white firms to start their own businesses.  You had black engineers leaving white firms to start their own engineering companies.  You had, you know, people doing joint ventures.  We changed Chicago, you know, and, and I think, you know, there's no question that I made money during the fact that, you know, in twenty-six years, I had my own firm, you know.  I made money, but I think, once again, people started saying, "Well, Jim Lowry's making money."  But so what, I mean that's what free enterprise system's all about.  And it never hurt me that people from the other side said that.  It hurt me that minorities said that.  It really did.
Speaker 1: Well, do you think the people really knew what was going on?  I mean, and do they really know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think we, we know.  And this is, you know, it's the crabs in the barrel.  You know, it's unfortunate. We got to get beyond that, you know.  We got to get beyond that.  It's, it's about like with the West Indian story, if people are good, you should respect it, and you should support people.
Story_ID: 10291
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'll tell you that plenty of black people that are--in terms of business are extremely ignorant, you know.  I, I know this to be true, and criticisms that are laid on black businesspeople may not always be the--even the criticisms of [Mayor] Harold Washington by people in '87 [1987] when he was running again, a lot of people who are ideologues felt that he hadn't done enough for the black community, you know, black people.  And then, the counter was, well, there's never been this much done before.
Speaker 2: Never, in the short period of two years, takes a long time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, I think some people's expectations was that for some reason he was gonna just flip everything upside down and it would be, you know, completely just the, you know, but the world doesn't work that way.  I mean you can't just flip it completely upside down.
Speaker 2: You can't, not be re-elected.  And Harold had--you saw the growth of Harold in two years.  I mean the comfort that Harold had in dealing with people on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois] and the Gold Coast [Chicago].  He had them eating out of his hands, and, you know, and after that first term.  People were very fearful, very fearful.  I mean the only reason I got involved with Harold, I was not part of the original group.  People know that, but, you know, it was, it was the business community who knew me and had worked with me and said, "Jim, why don't you get involved with Harold Washington," 'cause they were scared.  And I went down to one of the first planning meetings with the business community, not with the ideologues, not with the people who had been in the campaign.  And, and Bill [William] Ware who was his chief of staff, asked me at that point, he said, "Why don't you come and help us?"  And I always felt very strongly about it, and I said, "Sure."  When he asked me to help, I did it and lost a lot of money in the process, made some, but lost a lot of money too.  I gave out a lot of time for Harold.  My team gave a lot of--and we thought it was, it was history making.  And the, and the legacy of Harold Washington, and I would give both Harold Washington, Gene, Gene [Mayor Eugene] Sawyer, and, and later, Mayor [Richard M.] Daley, M. Daley credit, is that Harold set the cornerstone so that minority business was something you could not mess with.  It was there.  You can't push the genie back in the bottle.  And Gene took it to another level, and then, of course, Rich Daley has been very smart in saying, you know, "This is what the younger blacks and Latinos really care about.  And there's an emerging population of young entrepreneurs coming out of the Ivy League schools, coming out of the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign, Illinois], coming out of Columbia [College, Chicago, Illinois] who care about entrepreneurship.  And I'd be a fool to mess with that."  And he, you know, he builds on that.  He builds on that image.  He builds on the contracts that are let.  And Harold set that in motion.  And Rich Daley has taken it and run with it, but it was Harold that did that.  And we lose sight of that.  I mean Harold did a lot of things for the city, but I think the most important thing, and I'm proud, proud of a lot of things I've done in my lifetime, but that was one of the things I'm probably most proud of, was I helped Harold Washington and Jim [James] Montgomery and people like that set in place a minority business program, which is now going on many years after his death.
Story_ID: 10292
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about the program, 'Minority Business Report'?  How--
Speaker 2: Well, that came out of it.  I mean it was around that time.  It was at the time I was going around giving to very small groups, at that time, what [Mayor] Harold Washington was planning for minority business.  And I was literally going out in the community.  And the ['Chicago] Tribune' scooped the ['Chicago] Sun-Times' and said, this is what Lowry is doing and Harold Washington is accepting.  And the 'Sun-Times' got upset, and so they, they went after me.  I became the bad guy.  You know, they tried to say I had, Mr. Con--they called me 'Mr. Contract', I was on the covers of, you know, the 'Sun-Times', 'Mr. Contracts.'  They had--I'd done nothing illegal, said, you can look at anything I've done, you know.  Yeah, I've gotten contracts.  Other people got contracts.  So what?  So, nothing ever happened to it, it just looked bad, you know.  So we went around, and, and Don Jackson, who, you know, has done a lot of television at that time, he said, "Jim, you, you know, you could go on camera."  I said, "I've been on camera."  He said, "Well, why don't we do a program called 'Minority Business Report'."  I said, "Okay."  And the rest of history.  We went on down to WGN [-TV, Chicago, Illinois].  GN--WGN said, great.  So they put us on air.
Speaker 1: You had the stats, you'd done the research already.  And you were (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, yeah, I can talk about it.  I didn't have to do any research.  I mean basically--
Speaker 1: You had your own research.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had my own--plus, I had my own company [James H. Lowry & Associates].  My own company was doing this for major corporations.  So that's what it was, you know, just getting out of bed and going down there and doing it.  And Deborah Gunn was there, and it was great.  It was--the only thing it did, it really did--after about five years, it influenced my business, my--'cause I don't do just local business.  And so I started doing, you know, stuff around the country and around the world.  So coming back every Wednesday and doing that, so I became associate producer, and then I finally bowed out.  But it was a great experience.  I really enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 10293
Speaker 1: And I really enjoy 'Minority Business [Report'].  I really think that this is my thing.  I've worked very closely with the National Minority Supplier Development Council [Inc.], Harriet Michel.  We've designed some very unique programs.  I teach this at Northwestern [University, Kellogg School of Management, Evanston, Illinois].  I teach diversity at Northwestern and work with major corporations again.  And the next big thing I'm doing at Kellogg School of Management is designing a special program for minority board members.  I think that that's another very important vehicle that we have to use to really add value.  And I really do think minorities, because of the uniqueness of our experiences, uniqueness of our insights, the uniqueness of our, our, huge, huge markets can be of invaluable assistance to major corporations if they can see it that way.  So that's a course I'll be teaching.  So this is my life.  I, I enjoy my life.  I enjoy helping people.  I enjoy--and I've been very fortunate at the end of my career, and this is basically the last job I'll have, is working here at the Boston Consulting Group [Inc.], which interestingly enough, was the number one competitor to McKinsey [and Company].  So when we would compete, it would always be, be against the Boston Consulting Group.  And so at the twilight of my career, I'm now a partner here at the Boston Consulting Group.  And they allowed me to take my practice, what I've been doing for twenty-six years, and merge it with their, their company.  And we're, you know, we're in twenty-six countries, forty-four offices, so it's a pretty big operation.  So the chances of really having an impact in, in the same areas have been greatly, greatly enhanced because I'm here.  And I have the support of my partners.  So, you know, I, I get up every morning.  I got a wonderful wife and I'm what I, I'm doing what enjoy doing, and I've made a little money in the same time.
Story_ID: 10294
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me what are your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's such a great question.  My hope has always been the same.  And we've touched on it eighteen different ways.  I, I just would hope one day, one day, that we, as blacks, could work together and put all the petty differences and jealousies and backstabbing and really work together as a, as a larger community.  Secondly, I would hope, because we cannot deny, be we in Tanzania or Czechoslovakia or wherever, that business is critical, and that more of our young people would really understand, even if they're not gonna be involved in business, understand business--to understand the free enterprise system and not run away from it.  You know, I think that it's important to know the good and the bad about the free enterprise system.  But it's not going away.  So if it has such a control over your life and the destiny of your society, in your communities, you'd better know it, you better understand it.  And hopefully, you can be positive assets in, in making this country and other countries very strong.  And when we go to South Africa, when South Africa was first--and I will say liberated when [South African President Nelson] Mandela came out of jail.  He was--and we had a lot of black people going over there.  But South Africans wanted people who could help them in economic development.  They didn't want any ideologues.  And when you get up on Monday morning, you got to help people make money, to help people get jobs, and too many of us went over there.  I was there, and we went over there talking about waving a flag and glory, glory be to Mandela and now--they wanted people to come over to add something to that country and to that society.  And we do have some people, Gene Jackson and my cousin, Ron Gault, they're doing great things and there are a lot of people who are trained to do that.  But I think it's very important that we should understand business and work our businesses, cause when I was working Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York], a wino told me something that was very profound.  He said, "Poor people can't help poor people."  You know, simple, it was cold blooded, it's crass, but it's true.  You know, be it a third world or be it in, in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], you know, the community of Englewood.  So I think that's very important.  And I think lastly, if, you know, if people of all races and you really understand, and that's why I believe in diversity, if you really understand the values of the strength of different people.  And we're not all the same.  We all fit in little boxes.  And we all think the same.  We enjoy music, I mean just enjoy people for who they are and what they represent.  I think that's very important.
Story_ID: 10295
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of black people in this country, and the solidarity, everyone pretty much says that, you know, every black person in almost any profession has the hope that black people will become more unified in their approach--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 1: --and, you know, working constantly with one another to a higher degree than they presently do.  But I wonder what do you think it would take to get people on that page.  We look, when we look at the black community now, where there were some businesses in the '70s [1970s] that have been now--
Speaker 2: This was happening in the '30s [1930]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean, in Oklahoma, I mean we owned towns.
Speaker 1: Sure, that's right.  They had thirty, thirty black towns in Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: Hey, look at (unclear), I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: But, you're right.  But I wonder, as we look now at the black communities in Detroit [Michigan], Chicago [Illinois] and any, any of the major cities, Columbus [Ohio], any place pretty much, you find a lot of small businesses in the cities are taken over by Arabs or Koreans or Indians or some other minority group that comes in with a history of entrepreneurship behind them--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --generally, that we don't, that we don't have.  And then the poorer our communities are, as you said before, I mean, poor can't teach poor people how to--don't seem to be able to teach poor people how to do it, where the cream of the crop of the black community, the educated group, generally moves into corporate America or some other, and it's not really rooted in the black community or the businesses.  And the people that are already there don't know how to do it.  Is it, I mean does that make any sense?  I mean how do we--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it, but we're working on it.  I mean one of the things I'm working on now with Congressman [William] Bill Jefferson.  I don't think the--you probably, he's just gotten started.  But Congressman Bill Jefferson who's head of the Congressional Black Caucus, he's also a congressman from New Orleans [Louisiana], is working with the [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] family and the White House [Washington, D.C.] on something called the Martin Luther King Initiative.  And the whole thing, when you think about it, it's so simple.  Every King Boulevard around the country, think about what it looks like?  (Laughs) So, so the whole idea is to have an initiative to have development around the King Boulevards.  And so the first model is gonna be in New Orleans.  I think the other one is Jackson [Mississippi], and they're using what they call targeted tax credit.  Now, if you would ask everybody on the street, you know, what is targeted tax credit?  But this is a multi-billion dollar project.  I mean, it's approved, I mean it's not something--it's a fact.  But nobody even applies for the money.  I mean, see you can, anybody can apply for the money.  So, I mean, so this is the whole idea.  And what I've argued, and, you know, some people agree with me and some don't.  I mean I don't think everybody should be a ma and pa store.  I think in the black communities like any other community, you should have small businesses, if it suits the entrepreneur.  If somebody wants to grow a business, to be $5 million, and they want to stop there, God bless them.  But there are a lot of us who could potentially run hundreds of million dollar companies.  And the black community will never be saved until we have a lot of people who can run hundred million dollar companies, 'cause hundred million dollars countries [companies], guess what they do, they create jobs, hundred million dollar companies create the positions, hundred million dollar jobs--companies creates power.  That's it.  So I think what we're dealing with now in this transition, there are many people in corporate America, especially because of stock options and things like that, it would not make sense for them, and I would not even recommend them to leave corporate America to run a ma and pa store.  But if we can make the opportunity large enough, with or without government support, so that your best and the brightest can make sizeable advances--economic advances by running their own businesses of size, then there will be a different--difference see, it will be a different situation.  And you will see a different relationship between races.  I mean South African whites got along very well with the Japanese, although Japanese for a long time could not be citizens of South Africa because they were doing business together.
Speaker 1: But they made them an honorary whites socially is what I understand from--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) What they did is they made the Japanese honorary citizens because they were doing business with the Japanese.  Chinese were not, until so many Japanese businessmen were insulted because people thought they were Chinese, that they made the Chinese honorary citizens too.  That's fact.  I mean so, it's about business and it's about relationships and understanding and the quid pro quo.  You asked me about my favorite phrase, the quid pro quo.  You got to understand the quid pro quo.  And we got to get out of --you know, because you have, you need to give.  I give a lot.  I expect a lot in return, and the people who helped me, if nothing else, just send me a Christmas card to thank me for whatever I--they will always have a special place in my heart because I've helped a lot of people.  I made a lot of people rich, and I don't even get Christmas cards.  I don't get Christmas--and so it's all part of understanding that there's a--and I think the other thing too, is that I think, unlike other communities, the business community is not part of leadership in the black community to the extent it should be.  And we're the only community I think that that's true.  And we--the Greeks, Italians, everybody, the big--the part of leadership, we're not, we're not there.  And I'm, I have nothing against the, the political leadership.  I have nothing against the religious leadership, but until we are deemed equal with those other leaders, it's like pushing a truck up a hill with a rope.  We won't get there.  We won't get there.
Story_ID: 10296
Speaker 1: Sir, what do you see as your legacy so far?
Speaker 2: My biggest legacy and even my strongest critics would probably tell you, is that I've mentored a lot of people.  I've--you know, and that was part of my original dream starting James H. Lowry and Associates.  And over twenty-six years, a lot of people have come through my door.  And I gave them the same hard love that you'll probably feel in, in this interview.  I mean I tell people the way it is.  I don't, you know, I'd like to be liked, but I, I really want to be respected.  And if somebody came in late or if they were sending me drafts or they have an excuse after excuse why they can't perform, I give them hard love.  Sometimes they wouldn't appreciate it.  Most of my former alums or employees tell me after the fact, how much they appreciated what I did.  During the time, they didn't like it because it was different.  I mean nobody talked to them that way.  You know, and I'm not talking about people who--I'm talking about people with Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] degrees.  I mean a Harvard degree gets you in the door, but you got to perform.  So I always made them perform.  I always had a high quality standard.  I have it here, irrespective of race.  And I work hard.  I still get up at five o'clock every morning, and I got a wonderful wife who's very understanding.  I go to bed at eleven o'clock, I'm working.  I'm on the road, I'm writing on the road.  I'm on planes, and I don't expect people to be any less if they want to perform.  Now, not everybody wants to do that, but you can't, you can't win working four hours a day.  You can't compete working four hours a day.  You can't compete doing work that's not quality.  You can't compete unless you're gonna try and be very good at whatever you do, irrespective of race.  It doesn't matter.  And, and black people got to understand that.  There are no excuses for failure.  There's no excuses for poor--fail--performance.  So we have to do that, and, and sadly, in the year 2003, Jackie Robinson, the concept of being Jackie Robinson is still there.  In many situations, we have to be better.  So that's a given.  Don't lose any sleep over it, just accept it and move on.  But I would hope, I mean the last thing I would say, but I would really hope that there would be some day in, in the future--and, now, maybe it won't be in my lifetime, when leaders from the black community of all different sectors, business, non-business, religious, could accept each other as equals and work for the common good, not only for just black people, for our country.  I mean, but you got to communicate, you got to respect one another.  And I respect Bill [Congressman William] Jefferson cause he can do things in Congress I never could do.  But Bill Jefferson respects me for what I can do for him, and that's why we work well together.
Story_ID: 10297
Speaker 1: Sir, this question is a little bit different from legacy, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I, I would like to be remembered as somebody who really cared about people, especially black people, who did the best he could--and it might sound trite, but did it his way.  And, and my way is learning from my experiences, both here and abroad, appreciating all the things that that gave me, and still giving back to the community, but in a way that at times was kind of cultured, you know.  And, and that hopefully, the people that I was particularly hard on, you know, coming up, when I was young--because I was very successful--young.  And so I didn't have the wisdom that went along with the smarts.  And I think the older I got, the wiser I got in the way I changed my behavior with people. But they would kind of forgive me for the early, you know, crustiness, but still accept the fact that in my heart of hearts, I wanted each and every employee or associate to be better than they were.  And that's what drove me, you know, I really believe that it's necessary.  We have to be better in order to succeed, and that I, I've really trained a lot of people in business.  And I take pride in the fact that so many of my former employees are entrepreneurs--even my former secretaries are entrepreneurs because I tried to instill the importance of entrepreneurship in our community.
Story_ID: 10298
Speaker 1: Now, has your mother [Camille Caldwell Lowry] been surprised at your success and the success of your brother [Bill Lowry].  And I don't know if you have any other siblings that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, and I always have fun with Ma.  I mean I keep her going.  She says, "You know, I'm getting kind of old and ready to go."  I said, "Nah, we got a few more biggies we got to do first, Ma, before you go."  And so she said, "Well, you always said things were gonna be bigger."  And I said, "Yeah, they're gonna be bigger.  We're not over yet."  And my nephew, my nephew's coming up.  He's a bright young guy.  So--and my daughter [Camille Aisha Lowry], and my other niece.  I'm, I'm putting a lot into them, but we got, we got a lot to do.  And I'm not giving up the fight yet.  I'm gonna be around for a while.
