Story_ID: 29037
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm gonna start by explaining where we are.  My name is Loretta Henry, and I'm doing the interview.  And Scott Stearns is doing the camera work for us today.  Okay, so here we go.  So, Dr. Lester, we want to thank you for joining us.  Could you please tell us your full name, first, middle and last name and spell them for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay, my full name is William Alexander Lester, Jr.  William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Alexander, A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R, Lester, L-E-S-T-E-R, and junior, of course, J-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Could you tell us your date of birth and where you were born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Chicago, Illinois, April 24, 1937.
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date is?
Speaker 2: April 7, 19--2004 (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  The location of this interview?
Speaker 2: This interview is occurring in my University of California, Berkley office in the Chemistry complex, more particularly, 212 Gilman Hall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you.  And your occupation is?
Speaker 2: I'm a professor of chemistry, but presently, I'm also a principal investigator at Lawrence Berkley National Laboratory [Berkeley, California].
Speaker 1: Okay, very interesting.
Story_ID: 29038
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna start this interview with a few very simple questions, kind of like "People Magazine" questions.  They're kind of, a little silly, so just bear with us, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Could you please tell us what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: What my favorite food is?  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  We stumped him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did.
Speaker 1: You did, right off the top.  I guess--
Speaker 2: Any favorite, what do you--?
Speaker 1: What's that again?
Speaker 2: Anything you like.  It doesn't have to be the favorite.  Just something you like or things, like everything?
Speaker 1: Well, many things.  I have broad breadth of interest in that respect.
Speaker 2: Okay, so what are some of the things you like?
Speaker 1: Oh, red beans and rice.  I like, oh, a good steak every now and then.  I like, oh, good Mexican from time to time; good French food, I guess a variety of ethnic foods as the case may be.
Speaker 2: Okay, good.  Could you tell us your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 1: My favorite time of the year?  Oh, I guess my favorite time of the year is spring.
Speaker 2: Okay, why?
Speaker 1: Oh, coming out of winter, the, oh, I would say the promise of spring and the coming year for me really develops around that time.  And for some reason I sense that maybe by nature of my birth date that special things always tend to happen in the spring, as you head into April and my birth date, April 24.  Maybe that's something that's important here or relevant.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, so we know your favorite food, your favorite time of the year.  Could you tell us your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color.  Well, I think it's black.
Speaker 1: And why?
Speaker 2: Well, I always liked black.
Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination.  Oh, oh, I like the Caribbean Islands, don't go there that often, but when I've gone there, clearly enjoyed it.  I like places which have nice warm breezes, water, sand, that sort of thing, and so I like Maui, Barbados.  I went on a cruise once in which the various islands there, through the chain, were visited and really enjoyed those interactions, all the way up to the Virgin Islands which were very nice, really, really enjoyed that.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying?  I do, but don't recall it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's actually contained at the end of my bio in 'Who's Who in America'.
Speaker 1: Okay, well we can--
Speaker 2: A nice little phrase which I like, but I don't, I can't quote it for you.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine.
Story_ID: 29039
Speaker 1: Alright, so, now we're gonna talk a little bit about your family, your background.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Could you please tell us about your mother?  What was her name?  Where was she born?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Her name was Elizabeth Frances Clark.  That was her maiden name; married my father, William A. Lester.  She was born in Chicago, Illinois.  And what was the other part of your question?
Speaker 1: Can you tell us something about her?  So she grew up in Chicago?
Speaker 2: She grew up in Chicago, attended Englewood and Hyde Park High Schools [neighborhoods on the South Side of Chicago] and went for a year to [Woodrow] Wilson Junior College [a two-year community college] in the city before marrying my father, just a delightful lady (laughter).  One should say that about one's mother, right?
Speaker 1: That's right.  Did she work outside the home or was she a homemaker?
Speaker 2: Well, she did some work in the home.  Actually, at one point, she did some piece work in terms of sewing garments.  I remember when she moved her small sewing machine out from the basement and brought in some power machines, some big things that you drove with your knees and made these quilted housecoats for women.  And then subsequently, she became a doctor's assistant, working in a doctor's office, this sort of thing, up until the last years.
Story_ID: 29040
Speaker 1: Okay, could you tell us about your father?  What was his name?  Where was he born?
Speaker 2: William Alexander Lester.  I take junior from him.  He was born in Atlanta, Georgia and the family moved to Chicago [Illinois].  I guess they arrived in Chicago by age eight, spent some time in St. Louis [Missouri] on the trek up from Atlanta.  And he basically was raised in Chicago.
Speaker 1: What did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see, I guess about the time I was born, as I understand it, he passed the Civil Service exam and became a letter carrier and for many years carried mail on the South Side of Chicago.  And then towards the end, he took a position as a supervisor in the Chicago Post Office downtown; retired from the Post Office, and then took a job with Aetna Insurance Company in downtown Chicago, in the mailroom, and then rose from the mailroom to other positions in the company.  So that's the sort of thing he did.  And then he retired from that position as well.
Story_ID: 29041
Speaker 1: Did your parents [Elizabeth Francis Clark and William Alexander Lester] ever tell you any stories about their growing up, for example, your mother when she was a child?  Did she tell you any of her memories from her childhood?
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  Not, not a great deal.  No, so I don't have, you know, a lot to say, you know, in that respect.  She has a brother, Lawrence Oliver Clark, who is in Chicago [Illinois], but in general, no.
Speaker 1: Did your father tell you any stories about his growing up when he was little?
Speaker 2: It's interesting.  Not a, not a great deal, not a great deal.  His conversations were primarily associated with, you know, his work later, where he went to high school, went to Wendell Phillips High School [later Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  I know subsequently he was important, an important player in establishing the alumni group at Wendell Phillips.   And he got back involved with the high school.  But beyond that, and that was done, of course, as a more senior individual.  Not a lot that I can, you know, convey to you in that respect.
Speaker 1: Do you know anything--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) engaged in sports in high school, that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, uh huh.
Story_ID: 29042
Speaker 1: [Ring] Sorry about that.  Did you know anything about your grandparents, your mother's parents [Elizabeth Francis Clark]?  Do you know their names?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, indeed.  She was a business woman, that is, Willie Belle Clark.  That's my maternal grandmother, maternal grandfather is Oliver Alfonso Clark.  And we're not sure where she came from.  I've discussed this with my uncle.  There's some speculation that she came from Florida, that she was part Seminole [Indian], but I don't know for sure.  This is, this is an uncertain aspect of my family background.  But it was discussed that she went to Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia] and I've attempted to find out further information in that regard but as you probably know, Morris Brown lost accreditation a year or so ago [2003], had a major fire and so on.  And I did talk to officials there with regards to gaining information on her.  But to this point, I've been unsuccessful.  My maternal grandfather was born in Savannah, Georgia.  I recall seeing a picture of him in the midst of a group of the football team, where he was holding the football.  And it was at his knees, so obviously, he played football as an undergrad at Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia].  He then went to law school at three different institutions in the North.  He went, spent a year at Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio], a year at the University of Wisconsin--Madison, and a year at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] and practiced law in the City of Chicago [Illinois] and received, actually, an award from the County Bar Association for the practice of law for fifty years in the City of Chicago, which in retrospect, in light of my experiences over the years was really an extraordinary thing to take place.
Speaker 1: So what--do you know about the general time period?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He went to law school in the period, I would guess about 1906 to 1909, something in that area.  One interesting thing in terms of his law practice in the City of Chicago was that Gwendolyn [Elizabeth] Brooks, the renowned poet was his assistant at one point, I've been told, authoritatively.  I think that's solid information.  But by the time I was of age and knew them both, they were separated, and the fascinating thing about the two of them is that they would refer to each other by title, Mr. Clark and Mrs. Clark, very fascinating anomalous sort of behavior for two people who had been married (laughter), a reality in the family.
Speaker 1: And your paternal grandparents, your father's parents?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My father's mother, Debora Lester, and that's Debora and not Debra, became a practical nurse over time.  She went to school and passed the appropriate examinations to have that happen, later in life.  My father's father died before I was born.  I think he died about 1935 according to my father.  So I never knew him.  And, of course, I have a picture that I can show you of him, but I did not know him.
Speaker 1: Okay, have you ever, has anyone in your family tried to trace your roots, your ancestors?
Speaker 2: I've done some of that and others have done so in terms of my mother's side of the family.  So I have some further information which I am collecting at this point.  I have relatives in the immediate Oakland [California] area by the name of Adams who have done some work in this respect.  My maternal grandmother's maiden last name is Adams, Willie Belle Adams, before she became Clark.  But we're still collecting information there.
Speaker 1: Okay, good.
Story_ID: 29043
Speaker 1: When you were growing up in Chicago, was there extended family?  Did you have aunts and uncles and cousins--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --around you?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  Where to start?  My maternal grandfather's sister, Annie, Annie Clark, was a public school teacher in the City of Chicago [Illinois], one who interestingly enough, attempted to teach my sisters [Florence Lester Johnson, Judith Belle Lester, and Karen Lester] and I French.  She'd have French classes.  And this is from a very young age, second grade, third grade, in that time frame.  And then would give us report cards, depending upon grades, superior or excellent, "tres bien" all this sort of thing, but I wasn't too diligent myself.  We'd go every Tuesday for these French lesson.  And after a while, it was decided, well, let me, let me play.  I guess I was a little delinquent in terms of paying attention to that particular thing.  But she was a real language person.  She used to go to Quebec [Canada] to practice her French, this sort of thing, to Mexico, the Spanish, just to practice her Spanish and so forth.  So she was very interesting lady, would drag us off to cultural places such as the Garfield Park Conservatory in Chicago, which I found at the time tremendously boring, I mean to go see flowers, to walk around looking at flowers (laughter).  So that was that side of the family.  She subsequently married a fellow by the name of Fred Williams and they, he was with Metropolitan Life the Insurance Company.  And that was later in life.  I think they must have been plus forties I'm sure when that took place, or even later than that.  So that was my mother's [Elizabeth Francis Clark] side of the family.  Actually, there was a family, another Adams' family in Chicago, Ruben and Gladys Adams, who are related, I can't tell you exactly, except that, of course, on my--related to Willie Belle Adams.  In addition, let's, jumping over to my father's side [William Alexander Lester], my father's sister, Laura Ellis Florence Azalea Lester, as I recall her name, she married Joseph Davis, who was a dentist in Chicago.  They had two children, Joseph Davis and Cheryl Davis.  Cheryl still presently resides in Chicago, though she has lived elsewhere, in Arizona at one point and Arizona is where my cousin, Joe Davis, resides.  He's a practicing dentist there.  And, let's see, who else would there be?  Those are primarily immediate cousins.  Oh, my uncle, Lawrence Clark, has two daughters, Marlene and Marcia.  And he was married to Frances Giles.  And they divorced later.  Marlene lives in the Los Angeles [California] area presently and Marcia lives in New York City [New York] and is married.  Can't give you a lot of details at this point.  Had I known, I could have dug down in the annals of the family--
Speaker 1: That's fine.
Speaker 2: --and give you something further.
Speaker 1: That's fine.
Story_ID: 29044
Speaker 1: You mentioned before that you have sisters?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes.
Speaker 1: So could you tell us your sisters and the birth order and where you fit in there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes.  My oldest sister is Florence Lester, now Florence Lester Johnson who is a resident of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and has been for many years.  She's married to Justin Johnson, Justin Maurice Johnson--Justin Morris Johnson, I believe it's actually, not Maurice, Morris, who is a member of the Appellate Court in the State of Pennsylvania, a law school graduate from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And they had three children, William Johnson, the oldest lives in Florida, the second is Justin L. Johnson who lives in Atlanta [Georgia] and is a neighbor actually of my son, William Alexander Lester III [racecar driver, first African American driver to win in a Grand-Am division in 2011], and a daughter, Elizabeth Johnson, now last name--oh, and they'll kill me for this (laughter).  Her last name is, see, you should have prepped me about these things.  And I can't recall at the moment.  I'm drawing a blank.  And she has three children.  Justin is not married, nor is William.  The two boys are not married at this time.  And then my next sister is Judith Belle, the "Belle" coming from Willie Belle, and that's B-E-L-L-E, whose oldest son is Darryl Wiley.  Darryl is married to Anita, and they live in Maryland.  He's a high-level executive with Kaiser in that part of the country, regional head or something of that sort.  And they have two children.  And then there's, she's has twin daughters, Jeanine and Jeanette, who are in the area.  Jeanette has a major design business in Montclair, has been featured in a variety of newspaper articles in terms of her company, interior design and all of that sort of thing, and has designed for various professional athletes.  And Jeanine lives in Fairfield.  Don't let me--before I leave Jeanette, she's married to Dante and they have one son together, and that's Cameron, but by a previous marriage, Jeanette has a son, Donny.  And then getting back to Jeanine, she has two boys.  We have one we call, the oldest one, E.C. and the second one is Julian, who are presently, I think of high school age.  Clearly, E.C. is high school age and Julian, I suspect is beginning high school or around that sort of thing.  And then there's my baby sister, Karen.  Karen presently resides in Boca Raton, Florida and is married to Jim Thomas.  She has, she was previously married to William Lewis, and they had four boys, oldest William Lewis, who is married and lives in Virginia, Manassas.  He's with the Secret Service actually.  And they have two or three children.  Second son is Brian Lewis, I think who has twin children, a girl and a boy; third son is Stephen Lewis, who's an engineer with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and lives in Florida near Cape Kennedy [Florida], who was on the [United States Space] Shuttle team at one point, that is, in terms of engineering aspects of it, and I think moved to the next big device.  What is it the--I can't recall what it is.  And he has three children.  And then the youngest is Richard.  Richard has one son, Paul and lives in Chicago.  So that's the four boys as I recall.
Story_ID: 29045
Speaker 1: Very wonderful family, thank you.  Could you tell us what was your earliest memory of growing up, when you were little?  What's the first thing you remember?
Speaker 2: The first thing I remember growing up?  My goodness.  Oh, staying at my grandmother's house [Willie Belle Clark] which is where we lived when I was born and also living there was my aunt, who was single at the point, at that point, Florence Lester, Florence Lester, Florence Davis.  Do we go back to her maiden name at that point?  So it had to be, no, it was Lester, Florence Lester, after William Lester.  The reason I pause is because of, my oldest sister has the same name, and, of course, Florence Lester, my aunt, became Florence Davis when she married Joseph Davis.  So I have to pause and think about these things, keep the players (laughter) in line.  Let's see.  But that was principally it, living there and before we moved down the street, 64th [Street] and Langley [South Langley Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] to our own apartment in a two-flat building.  That's what, that's about the earliest thought that comes to mind, playing at that house.
Speaker 1: Okay, when you were little, did you have chores you had to do, things around the house?
Speaker 2: Oh, of course, yes, indeed.  My father [William Alexander Lester] believed in that sort of thing.  Oh, carry out the cash, one primarily, keep your room straight, polish his work shoes.  He wore high tops as a mail carrier, that sort of thing.  So I learned to polish shoes early on.  Those are principal thing that I was involved in at that point, besides drying dishes, pre-dishwasher days, didn't wash 'em, but had to dry.  What else?  I think those are the sort of things that come to mind immediately in terms of being, you know, being younger.  I subsequently, when I got to, started high school, I started delivering newspapers.  So that became a major thing.  We had moved to Princeton Park [South Side of Chicago, Illinois], further south in Chicago.  And so, originally, I started with a rather limited distribution paper called "The Chicago Daily News", and I had the entire Princeton Park community because there weren't that many people subscribing to the paper.  And so I got to know all the streets where most people lived.  I had a more encyclopedic knowledge of that particular housing develop than I would think even the people who ran it (laughter).  And then later on I moved up and started delivering the "Chicago Herald Tribune".  I think it's now defunct as well, you know, which was an evening paper.   The interesting thing there, I had to do collections, so around collection, at that time, it was about forty-five cents a week.  It shows you a sign of the times, you know, what was going on.
Speaker 1: What were your holidays like, Christmas, Thanksgiving?  Did the whole family get together?
Speaker 2: Oh, principally, just our family, and that was a fair number because there were four by the time my younger sister [Karen Lester] was born, and they were always, you know, great, joyous occasions, this sort of thing.  Christmas is always exciting to a young child, you know.
Speaker 1: True.  You were the only son?
Speaker 2: Only son, yes.
Speaker 1: Three sisters?
Speaker 2: Three sisters [Florence, Judith and Karen], right.
Speaker 1: How was that like growing up?  Were you spoiled?
Speaker 2: Oh, not at all, except my sisters might disagree with you (laughter), but my view is, no; had a very interesting, pleasant relationship with my sister just younger than I as we got older in terms of being buddies and this sort of thing.  But for the most part, spoiled, no, I wouldn't put it that way, no, no.  I kept a very balanced head about these things (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29046
Speaker 1: You grew up in Chicago [Illinois].  Could you describe what Chicago was like at that time [1940s]?
Speaker 2: Oh, at that time, oh, growing up on the South side was a lot of fun, you know.  It was an all-black community.  When we went and crossed Cottage Grove, 63rd [Street] and [South] Cottage Grove [Avenue], my mother [Elizabeth Francis Clark] would go to shop at the High-Low, East of Cottage Grove, we went to another world, a fair number of white folks then.  So it was the residential segregation of Chicago at that time which was a primary aspect that one encountered growing up and something which I saw as I grew up in Chicago, you know, how the boundaries would shift.  The notion of blockbusting [a real estate technique employed to encourage white home owners to sell their property because of a presumed depressed value when black families moved in] was real, which you may recall is the aspect of city blocks shifting and realtors coming in and scaring white folks to move out so that they could make money by selling homes and all that sort of thing.  So it was really, something I would strongly emphasize that colored one's existence in Chicago growing up as a young child.
Speaker 1: But your immediate, in your immediate neighborhood, what were the streets like?  Everybody lived in apartments and there were local stores?
Speaker 2: No, it was a mixed bag.  We lived in an apartment in a six-flat building on the corner, and across from us was another large apartment building.  And once, and these were bordered by alleys, an alley which would cross, came across the street and continued behind these buildings.  And it would meet perpendicularly the alley behind the homes on the street itself, if you know the layout of Chicago and the South side.  And then there'd be some private homes and some two-flat apartment buildings, this sort of thing.  It was just a mix in that neighborhood.  I recall at the end of the block, 64th [Street] between Champlain [Avenue] and Langley [Avenue], lived the Young family, and this is where [Claude] "Buddy" Young [1926-1983] came from, the famous, All-American football player and pro player who even at a very young age, we little guys used to think we were as big as he was because he was only five-five [5'5"] or five-six [5'6"] in height.  Very memorable occasion, we used to play touch football in the streets, used to go down behind the car and catch the pass, that sort of thing.  And it was just a glorious day when the big boys let me play with them.  They would throw me the ball.  Oh, my goodness, you know.  That was exciting.  Around the corner, at that time, lived, Sam Greenlee.  Sam, as you know, is the author of "The Spook Who Sat By the Door" [1969], brother, Donald Greenlee, remember, were memorable guys who I knew at that point.  I got to know Sam very well at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] years later when he came back from [United States] Army service and attended the university, was running for the University of Chicago track club at that point, yeah, so.
Story_ID: 29047
Speaker 1: Do you have any other memories you'd like to share with us about your growing up, anything that comes to mind?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well, I think school was a critical aspect.  And I went to, I started off at McCosh Elementary [School, West Woodlawn neighborhood, Chicago, Illinois].  And McCosh Elementary was going through some changes.  There was some gang influence around the area.  We had an integrated teaching staff, both black and white teachers, a white principal at that timeframe.  But there were some tough elements.  And then the family moved south to the Princeton Park Housing Development and I went to a school which was not as tough in terms of the makeup of the student body, and which the teachers, really, I think, had more concern about the education of the students.  And so it was a very positive educational experience.  And I view it as one of those accidents of history that, as I look back, when I was in high school to what happened to many of the kids at McCosh, that would have been a less positive environment than where we moved to.  Furthermore, knowing a fellow who lived a few doors down from my grandmother [Willie Belle Clark] growing up was roughly my age, his family sent him to private school.  And so one was beginning to see that dimension occur whereas I was in public education at the time, which I think was less of a pressing need, to go to a private institution by nature of the neighborhood and the supportiveness of the neighborhood school at that time.  And I view it very critically that at that time, as an important dimension because of how schools changed with time in Chicago, depending upon the movement of families, as they attempted to improve themselves and whether or not teachers stayed at particular schools and so forth.  So public education was a very fragile educational experience, and I think I benefited by nature of the movement that my family undertook during that timeframe.  I think it was very important.
Speaker 1: What kind of a student were you?  Mischievous?  Were you serious?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was serious as a heart attack.  My father [William Alexander Lester] was such a disciplinarian, there was no other way to be (laughter).  Not to say I didn't want to, you know, occasionally do other things.  You know, I'd get in trouble at home, but, oh, no education was a critical dimension.  That was emphasized.  My father would say, as the years went by, that, oh, he did very well in school, after he dropped out of high school.  But before that he didn't do well; then, came back and excelled and so forth.  Education was a very important dimension.  And so education was always something which was valued in my household.  There was no question about that.
Speaker 1: When you were growing up, how important was the church in your family life?  Did you go to church together or not?
Speaker 2: Oh, we did.  We went to church together.  There were two churches we went to, my mother's church and my father's church was an interesting aspect.  My mother [Elizabeth Francis Clark] belonged to Good Shepherd Congregational Church [now Church of the Good Shepherd] on the South Side of Chicago.  My father [William Alexander Lester] belonged to Woodlawn AME Church who when I remember, for the longest time, the minister was the Reverend Archibald Carey who subsequently became a city councilman in the City of Chicago [alderman for Chicago's Third Ward from 1947 to 1955, Circuit Court judge from 1966 to 1978].  And in both, and I guess, Reverend Arthur Gray who was at Good Shepherd and later became president of Talladega College [1958].  But in both instances, I very much enjoyed Sunday school, but couldn't handle the sermons.  I found them long and tedious.  So.
Speaker 1: Did you have to go to two services each Sunday?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  We'd go to one or we'd go to the other.  None of that, not two (laughter).  It was bad enough going to one, if one had to go to the actual service itself at that tender age, you know, so.
Story_ID: 29048
Speaker 1: So we were talking, we've been talking about your family and growing up.  And you just happened to mention that your father [William Alexander Lester] recalls the [Chicago] Race Riot of 1919.
Speaker 2: Right, it was a lot of turmoil as you may recall, towards of the end of World War I [ended in 1918], and he did indicate seeing the beginning of this occur and an encounter, I think at 39th [Street] and Lake Shore Drive, in that area.  There was a water station and something happened [a black youth had been stoned while swimming in Lake Michigan].  And that triggered the whole eruption of, you know, just sort of took over the city in terms of racial conflict between blacks and white in the City of Chicago.  So, I guess that's about all I can recall, but it was something which he related to me at various times when issues would arise and we would see issues arise from time to time in Chicago because of the residential segregation that existed.  And so it was a difficult time, I think, and racist, to a fair extent at that juncture.  Chicago [Illinois], to a great extent, was populated by a lot of people who were coming from the South just as my parents or my father's side of the family had come up not so long ago.  And my parent, my mother's [Elizabeth Francis Clark] side of the family had done so earlier, I mean, and had arrived before World War I, as a matter of fact, owing to, you know, his [Lester's maternal grandfather, Oliver Alfonso Clark] education at law schools in the North and eventually, settling in Chicago and so on.  The one thing I didn't mention before was that my maternal grandmother [Willie Belle Clark] was a business woman.  And I subsequently gained a sense of what that meant because she bought large homes on then, South Park [Boulevard], now Martin Luther King Drive, and converted those to small apartments which took on the term kitchenettes, and was profitable in doing that sort of thing.  She had a large apartment, and I recall the address, 5936 South Parkway, and the family one floor above were the Hansberry's, Lorraine Hansberry's parents and that family and so forth.  And I remember my maternal grandmother was a successful business woman.  I mean she collected antiques, and I recall an Ebony desk with tusk with matching elephants carved out of them.  So she did very well, she was very successful.  A little situation here was the case that my maternal grandparents weren't too thrilled about my mother, actually seeing my father.  And at one point, as I understand it, suggested that this not continue.  But in the meantime, they had married and their finances were such that she was living with her parents and he was living elsewhere.  And she said, no, I can't stop seeing him.  I'm married to him, you know, this sort of thing, which did occur back in that timeframe, all too frequently because of the finances associated with getting together and being together, shall we say.  So a little bit of, you know, family background there, in terms of the very early days.
Speaker 1: That's a good story.
Story_ID: 29049
Speaker 1: So when you were in junior high school, how, there wasn't, you went straight to high school, right?
Speaker 2: Right, it was from eighth grade to Calumet High School [Chicago, Illinois], which was the neighborhood high school for where I lived.  Princeton Park [Chicago, Illinois] had been built during World War II [1941-1945] and with this creation, students were being fed then into Calumet Public High School, which had not had black students prior to the creation of this particular development.  And so, my sister and I, my sister, Florence and I were some of the earlier students to attend that high school.  In my graduation class from that high school, there were 365 of which thirteen were black, ten girls and three guys (laughter).  There were a few more that started, but what happened to them, I don't know.  But that was the nature of the racial mix that existed at that high school at the time.
Speaker 1: Did you have any conflicts, or did you feel accepted?  Were you comfortable?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a mixed bag.  I very much enjoyed sports, went out for the football team.  But I was young.  I went to high school at age twelve [ca. 1949], and I remember as a freshman, going out for freshman football at about five-four [5'4"] or five-three [5'3"] at 135 [pounds], the football coach putting a couple of us smaller guys from the neighborhood against a big fullback, and after he rammed us enough, I said, I don't think I'm really ready for this (laughter) kind of sport life.  And so that ended my football career.  But from the neighborhood, I learned to play basketball well and so though I was young, I did make the basketball team.  As a junior, at the junior level, and let me explain what I'm talking about.  They had a senior team and a junior team.  And this was not year in school.  This was dictated by height.  Junior teams consisted of people five-eight [5'8"] and under and you had to measure in, and seniors were five-eight [5'8"] and above.  My senior year, they converted to freshman-sophomore and varsity.  And though I had the last uniform on the junior team, I eventually started on the senior team, the start of the second semester of my senior year.  And I was primarily a feeder to the big guys, you know, that is, now-a-days, you call it a point guard.  But in the city playoffs, we got to the city playoffs and the quarter finals against a team from the West Side of Chicago.  The big guys had been so intimidated by the guys from the other team that the coach told me to shoot.  So I finally got the license to shoot the ball.  So I had my highest scoring game my last high school game that I played, very memorable, you know, sort of thing.  In other words, my game as a basketball player had developed that much.  Furthermore, from my junior to the senior year, I'd grown five, six and three quarters [5'6" and three quarters] to five-niine [5'9"].  See how memorable that is?  To this day, I can tell you those stats.  And so, you know, it was, for me, an exciting time, and I graduated high school that fourth year at age sixteen.  I turned sixteen that April and graduated, and I'd gotten a history scholarship to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And that was a singular event in the sense that the scholarship I went on was one created by the librarian at the high school I attended.  The Calumet High School librarian, one of them, had sufficient funds to endow a scholarship to the University of Chicago for students from Calumet High School.  This scholarship had lain dormant for a number of years, and there were three people in my graduating class who won it, a white girl and a white guy and myself.  And I was the only one to graduate from the University of Chicago.  The girl said the social life was too weak and she transferred to the University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana [Urbana-Champaign, Illinois].  The guy wanted to be an actor.  So eventually he left, and went west.  So, just interesting, you know, some aspects.  So I stayed on because this was the only hope in town, was to be successful at this place which I'd heard a lot about, and actually had seen before because my maternal grandmother [Willie Belle Clark] would take me and my sisters [Florence Lester Johnson, Judith Belle Lester, and Karen Lester] over to the University of Chicago and walk us through the place and look at the buildings and so forth, you know, sort of that enclave over there for those born near the university, but still it was other quarters so to speak as one experience on the South Side.
Story_ID: 29050
Speaker 1: You mentioned that you started high school when you were twelve [years old]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I'd had a couple of double promotions in elementary school, skipped grades and my sister, Florence [Lester Johnson], graduated the end of the first fall semester from Calumet High School [Chicago, Illinois].  And it was clearly stated that I would not graduate with her.  We would be separate in our graduations since she was older.  So I graduated in June and she graduated in, I think it was January.  That's the way they did it back in that timeframe.
Speaker 1: Okay, when you were in school, were there--did any teachers or events influence you?
Speaker 2: I recall in elementary school, for example, there was one teacher whose class I went into after a double promotion in third grade, who was a friend of my aunt.  Mrs. Davis was her name.  And I remember I was having trouble with long division at the board.  I remember her making a statement, you know, you really need to do better.  I have to speak to your aunt about you.  And I said, oh, gee, I really need this (laughter).  So that was one instance of a very memorable teacher.  And there were subsequent teachers at elementary school, a very concerned group, Mrs. Walker, I think it was Genevieve Walker who taught English and Mrs. Davis, Sadie Davis, who taught history, Mrs. Dentford (ph.) who taught mathematics and a Mr. Jefferson who taught art and science.  I remember vividly.  I can see them now.  I mean these teachers were concerned that you perform and that sort of thing.  And then in high school, there was an English teacher, I think Mrs. Drolson (ph.) who was very, who I remember vividly to this day. Oh, a Spanish teacher, Mrs., what was her name?  I can't remember--I can see her now, who said, "Well, if Lester can learn this, you guys can learn this (laughter)."  And then I, in German, the same thing happened as well because I switched to German because Spanish really was not a language for the sciences.  So after one year of Spanish, I went into the German class.  I did very well.  And the teacher made that kind of statement, Mrs. Martin, I'll never forget.  And then in my senior year, I took chemistry, as I mentioned to you.  And I had a, Mr. Schlesinger (ph.), and he used to have competitions, divide the class up in two and have competitions between one side of the class and the other and answering questions about chemistry.  And I used to win these things routinely.  And Mr. Schlesinger suggested I should go to the Little Red School House on the Midway [Plaisance Park, South Side of Chicago, Illinois], alluding to red being a school house, but also the Communist influence at the University of Chicago which was there at that timeframe, you know, and so forth.  But that it was a good education, you know, and this sort of thing, not that he was Communist or anything of that sort, but that, you know, he was a guy who called a spade a spade.  And he was very interesting, very interesting guy.  And then I did win that history scholarship and so forth.  So he was a very supportive individual.  And these, in high school, these were all white teachers at that point.  And I'm sure they were instrumental in my winning a scholarship at the University of Chicago, as a matter of fact, because that's the only way, of course, aside from grades that such things would happen, by recommendation of teachers.  And I told you about the athletic spell, playing basketball, and, oh, I went, I took all the math I could.  I went into solid geometry, and advanced algebra and all of that because I, it was essential for what I wanted to do.  If you wanted to go into Science, you had to take these courses, this kind of curriculum and so on.  So--
Story_ID: 29051
Speaker 1: So you knew you wanted to be a scientist early?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you recall when you first felt (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I always liked science.  I remember my, asking for science books from my mother [Elizabeth Francis Clark] when I was in first grade, kindergarten, around that timeframe, all the books on the dinosaurs and so on and didn't have chemistry set growing up and wasn't particularly interested in that.  I actually preferred to play ball.  In terms of class, it was something I enjoyed, enjoyed doing and did well at, you know,  In other words, if I wanted to get out and play ball, I did my homework, you know, and this sort of thing, and did that juggling.  And I, and the family was supportive.  But it's also interesting, but it's also interesting after--well, I'm jumping ahead of myself.  My mother died in my first year of undergrad, in my freshman year [ca. 1953].  And then after that, my father [William Alexander Lester] made it a very clear point that he needed to raise his three daughters and he expected me to take care of business.  I said, okay, fine, but I was more or less on my own, somewhat released from the very tight strictures that had governed my existence to that point.  And so I was having some difficulty studying in the house.  So I actually was able to bring home a desk from the university and stick it in the basement.  And I used to study in the evenings down in the basement of the two-flat we lived in Michigan, on Michigan Avenue in Chicago.  So things were interesting, you know, in that sense.
Speaker 1: Did I, how did you spend your time when you weren't in school?
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: After school.  Were you a part of, did you take, well, you were in basketball.  What other activities?  Were you in clubs, organizations in high school?
Speaker 2: In high school, I was involved in a number of extra curricula activities such as the school newspaper, school yearbook, primarily, I recall, the Honor Society, which didn't mean, I guess it was just, you know, came together for the picture for the yearbook once a year.  But the yearbook staff would meet on a periodic basis to write the articles and to sign the articles for it.  And the school newspaper would write from time to time this sort of thing.  So combined with homework, participating and playing basketball which was a dominant aspect of attention for me is what I did, loved the game, I absolutely loved the game.
Speaker 1: I think I read somewhere that when you were in high school you worked, you had a little part-time job at the University of Chicago?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was in my senior year--
Speaker 1: Senior year.
Speaker 2: --that I went over to the University of Chicago to look for a part-time job because friends of mine had indicated that the university was hiring, and I was asked whether I could type.  And I said, I've taken typing as a junior.  And I had a certificate for forty words a minute.  So they gave me a typing test, and I did thirty-two words a minute, no mistakes, and so I was offered two jobs, one working in the physics department with Robert Mulliken [leader in proposing molecular orbital theory in chemistry] and Rothon (unclear).  Mulliken subsequently won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1966.  And I am talking 1953 in terms of when this took place.  So the question of which job was totally clear when I went to physics as opposed to going to the medical school [at the University of Chicago] and cleaning monkey cages.  Physics paid more, $1.09 an hour versus 88 cents an hour at the medical school.  But prior to that, I had worked for my godfather who was a tailor.  He had a tailor's--tailor shop, cleaners, combination.  So I worked behind the counter after school there.  He had been a very successful tailor early on in the '30s [1930s].  Actually, I think he did, he made clothes for, you know, Joe Louis [Barrow, heavyweight boxing champion], at that point.  I recall my father talking about he owned one of these four-door Packard convertibles of the time, you know, it was one of the hot cars of the '30s [1930s] and so on.  Times had become more difficult after World War II and so on.  And so I learned how to press clothes.  I learned how to sew buttons.  I learned material and so forth.  I learned about clothing.  It was really a very educational experience at that time and to wait on people who were at the counter, do that sort of thing.  So it was a very interesting time.  And that was, that was, the location of that cleaners was 67th [Street] and [South] Champlain [Avenue], so we're back now in Woodlawn [South Side of Chicago, Illinois], you know, this sort of thing.
Story_ID: 29052
Speaker 1: Okay, so after you graduated from high school [Calumet High School, Chicago, Illinois, 1953], you decided to go, you went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you always knew you wanted to be a scientist, right?
Speaker 2: That, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so can you tell us about the experience, going to the university?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Well, one thing, I'd worked that previous summer at the Chicago Post Office.  And they were very supportive, same place my father [William Alexander Lester] worked, who said, you will take care of business at this place cause this is where I work.  It's absolutely that, no question.  But the supervisors were very supportive in the sense that, besides carrying a case, throwing a case and carrying one, that is, putting the envelopes in the appropriate pigeon hole for the case that you'd carried, and tying the mail appropriately so that the bags could be dropped off at the relay stations, after finishing up, I would also drive collection.  Driving, you know what driving collection is?
Speaker 1: (No audible response).
Speaker 2: That's where you drive to the drop boxes and collect the mail and put 'em in your truck.  And, you know, it's a real sense of power because you could hit a box on this corner and need to go down the street and across.  You could drive in front of the traffic and get in the left-turn lane.  The police wouldn't bother you because you were the U.S. mail (laughter).  So I did that, and so I came back with my pockets full that fall, the fall of my freshman year.  And so I applied to live in the dormitory for orientation week, which I did.  And that was interesting.  There were two fellows who were part of the greeting group for the new arrivals for orientation week and for school in the fall.  And one of them was a guy who subsequently married my oldest sister, Justin Johnson, who I talked about earlier.  Well, it was a very nice experience to be in the dormitories for a week, and then I collected my belongings and moved back home.  I was commuting student.  So those are the memorable work experiences leading up to college.  And then through college, I had, I worked at the laboratory of molecular structure and spectra which is the particular laboratory work that Mulliken headed and also alternated, as I indicated, some years with carrying mail in the summer.  Is that right?  Do I have that right or have I confused times?  I think that's--well, I carried mail during college.  Normally, I'm attempting to indicate that I carried mail after my senior year of high school, and that's probably not so because I wouldn't have been old enough to do that.  So, I'm possibly confusing something here.  So let me back away from that statement.  But anyway, I'd done something that summer to earn money which was sufficient to enable me to stay in the dormitories for orientation week.
Story_ID: 29053
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what kind of classes did you take and who were your teachers at [University of] Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, at that time, the structure of the University of Chicago was the college of the University of Chicago and the divisions.  And so the colleges were known for, the college was known to be the place where you would take exams before entering to see what courses you could place out of.  And every now and then, you'd read about somebody in the paper who passed all of these exams with flying colors and within one week got a Ph.B., a bachelor of philosophy.  Now, a bachelor of philosophy, we used to jokingly say, was a degree which enabled you to do nothing, since you had no expertise in any field.  Coming from the wonderful city of Chicago public high schools, I placed out of nothing.  So the entire curriculum lay in front of me.  But [University of] Chicago was going through some changes then.  Up until, I guess, '52 [1952] or '53 [1953], they'd been having some financial difficulties.  And so it was their game plan to change the degree structure so that one could complete Chicago in four years like most other places.  But if you didn't place out of anything prior to that, you took the full three-year curriculum out of the college of the University of Chicago, then moved into the divisions.  That was another two years to complete a bachelor in a particular area, bachelor of science in chemistry, for example, or physics or any other area.  So in '54 [1954] the curriculum changed, and so I took some college courses and then division courses which would have led to my completing the requirements in 1957 after four years, entering in '53 [1953], only to find out that a course which I understood I didn't have to take, based upon my discussion with my advisor.  He said, subsequently, "Oh, of course, you needed to take that."  So I had to go another year.  And in that subsequent year, I also took courses which enabled me to get my master's [degree] after another year, a little over another year later.  So, I have a master's, which I had gotten and earned it in '59 [1959], Bachelor's in '58 [1958], both in chemistry.  Getting back to teachers, oh, the first year at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], English classes were taught in the classic, classic with oval table, professor there who going around the room asking about people's backgrounds, said, asked everyone where they were from and learned about these very special prep schools on the East Coast and various places and Western Europe, in the Middle East and so on, and Chicago public high school (raises hand).  So it was an interesting experience, and I think it was a very powerful educational experience, especially in terms of English and writing.  This particular individual, I think, was only there a few years.  And his name is Bilski (ph.), Mano (ph.) Bilski I think was his name, but he was a very supportive individual in terms of my, improving my writing skills.  I also took U.S. [United States] History that year and did well in that, very well.  That was right down my alley.  What else?  Oh, "Humanities I," looking at architecture, music and some literature associated with that.  You know, you learn the columns, the Greek (unclear) columns which are original (unclear), and that sort of thing and look at the evolution of architecture in churches and all that sort of thing and the slide shows and all that sort of business.  And what else did I take at that juncture?  I took "Math I," I think, set theory and some other stuff, but on calculus.  At that juncture, calculus occurred the next year.  And what else did I take the first year?  There was one other course, humanities, English, "Math I" and something else, which I can't remember.  The next year it was first year calculus, chemistry, "Humanities II," and something else.  I think it was natural science, oh, I took natural science I the first year.  And so this was "Natural Science II," I think.  Let's see, natural science, the natural science sequence meant that you'd read excerpts from original writings of, for example, Galileo and Koneinzaro (ph).  And so again, you could talk about these areas in a certain sense without knowing substantively, the physics and chemistry associated with what these particular writings were all about.  So, but you could still talk about it.  So, oh, I guess the signature of a University of Chicago student at the time was the fact that you could talk about anything, whether you knew that much about it or not (laughter).  A fascinating, sort of situation, and then you took the more substantive courses and the division, divisions of various sorts, mathematics and chemistry and physics, that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 29054
Speaker 1: When you were in your freshman and sophomore year [of college at the University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], did you feel like this world was opening up to you?  Going to college, did it change any perspective, any views you had about what was going on?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, we're getting back into basketball now.  As a freshman [ca. 1953], I went out for basketball, and I saw these guys practice.  Now, mind you, the history at that point--the previous three years, the University of Chicago basketball team had won one game and lost forty-seven.  So my class, which started a team of four freshmen and one senior began to win games.  You see, we played around four hundred ball [unclear] in terms of percentage.  I didn't start the first game.  I started the second game and every other game for the rest of my four-year career.  And my second year, the coach, besides taking the courses I was talking about, the coach said to me, he gave me what was known as the green light, he said, if you see an opening, shoot the ball.  Oh, my goodness.  That was the greatest thing since sliced bread for me because I began to shoot the ball a lot, and that's when I broke the scoring record for the first time, in addition to taking these courses.  Oh, yeah, and I took German that second year, and oh, was that--you know, after being so successful in high school, they ran through all the German that I had learned in one quarter.  Oh, my goodness, and you were supposed to go to listening hours and all of that after, you know, after class per se and I had basketball practice and so forth.  So I did not do that well in that German course my second year.  And so, in many ways, academically, I probably should have done better in that second year but here I have all of this celebrity and success coming from basketball, and then there's this (laughter) academic dimension which I was doing okay, but not as well as I should have been doing based upon, you know, what I knew I had to do.  I mean how many hours are in a day?  So I have an appreciation of what a student athlete has to deal with there.  And so my junior and senior year, things went very well basketball wise, and the classes, I was okay, so-so.
Story_ID: 29055
Speaker 1: So when I finished undergrad at the University of Chicago, I didn't have the, I was below 3.0 in terms of GPA.  So the question is, where would I go?  So I applied to a number of places, turned down by all for graduate school.  And the chair of the department said, you know, you should stay here to get a master's.  It's the best master's you can get (laughter).  So that I did.  Now, this is a fellow by the name of Henry Taube, T-A-U-B-E, who subsequently came to Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] and won a Nobel Prize [in Chemistry in 1983 for his work in electron-transfer reactions] for his work at the University of Chicago, who was again supportive.  And it's just interesting.  You know, that's what I did, what I decided to do.  And at the time, I guess there was one other black student in chemistry who was also on the basketball team, a fellow by the name of Paul King.  And then later some came to graduate school, but in terms of the undergraduate experience, there was always just a modicum, maybe one or two in each class as the case may be.  So, and also by my senior year, I discovered that, there was one fellow who had been doing well through the undergraduate experience, who shared that there was a monstrous file of exams in the fraternity he was a part of.  And on the one hand, the rest of us are struggling, you know, with no inside scoop.  And there's one guy who's doing very well and could prepare with old exams and so on.  So I learned about that dimension in terms of a university education.  But you gotta be connected and understand how the system works and all of that.  And I really was not, not in that way.  No excuse, I mean I should have done better, you know, as the case might be.  So, as I mentioned, I finished with under, got a master's [degree] at University of Chicago and then after that applied two places to, for graduate school for a Ph.D.  And we can talk about that.
Story_ID: 29056
Speaker 1: Okay, I wanna go back to when you were in college.  You had mentioned that when you played basketball, you set some records?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That haven't been broken?
Speaker 2: Well, the single game record was broken.  I set a record of, the last record was forty-two points a game.  That was broken last year [2003], where somebody scored forty-four at the University of Chicago.  I still hold the record for the most field goals [a basket scored other than a free throw] in a goal because I played in the era of two points, not two and three points.  So I had nineteen field goals in a game, and also I hold the record for the highest average.  I averaged twenty-five and a half [25.5] points my senior year, '56 [1956], '57 [1957] academic year, and made little All American, "little" meaning, that small school, this sort of thing.  And the coach, assistant coach at that point, who had played professional basketball back in that era, said, well, are you interested in the pro's.  Well, no, not really.  They didn't pay anything.  I mean, if, indeed, professionals earned what they earn now-a-days, I'd a been there (laughter), in a heartbeat to try and compete for that kind of money.  But at that point, they made about what a second-level manager would make in some company.  The money wasn't there, you know, whereas there was this exotic dimension of going on to the Ph.D.  And as you will see in some material I have, I indicated that this is what I wanted to do upon completion of undergrad and master's work, was to go on and eventually teach at the university level which happened some time later, not immediately, part of a circuitous path I had professionally.
Speaker 1: Is that where you learned to make a basket from the top of the key (unclear).
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: When you were playing then?
Speaker 2: I learned how to do that--
Speaker 1: --I've been told that you can shoot a basket from the top of the key without any warm up or anything, just shoot it?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean one generally has to warm up some (laughter) what.
Speaker 1: But on a bet, you can do it?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, that's before rotator cuff repairs.  I mean--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Back in the time, back in the day, yeah, I mean I, but I could do that, I'd say, when I really began to hone my skills by my first or second, first year of college.  I became very proficient.  That's why the coach told me, you know, to shoot that funny-looking shot I have.  I shot a very low trajectory jump shot.  And my whole game was a matter of quickness and getting the shot off against much bigger people.  And so I, as was said at the point, I could stop on a dime and leave nine cents change and shoot the shot, you know, against sometimes much bigger people if they weren't quick enough.  So my whole game was quickness, feet and hands, this sort of thing, not necessarily speed.  There is a distinction.  But in terms of getting a fake and moving in one direction and being able to shoot clear, I could do that well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I should add that the jump shot was something that I saw develop.  It came in really in the late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s].  Where guys in the neighborhoods in the South Side of Chicago which were very basketball enthusiastic, one of the guys came in shooting the jump shoot.  We said, gee, look at that, and we all began to try and develop the jump shot which is now the "de rigueur" in terms of basketball.  And I go back that far.
Speaker 1: Wonderful, thank you. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  The old set shot.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, one-hand push or two-hand sets, this sort of thing, shooting off the back board, and if you were short, you got a smack back in your face, but with the jump shot, a little person could make a difference, relatively little person (laughter).
Speaker 1: Very good, very interesting.
Story_ID: 29057
Speaker 1: So, we've been talking about your basketball career in college [at the University of Chicago, 1953-1959], and I'm sure you did some other things in college besides play basketball (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.
Speaker 1: And we talked about your freshman and sophomore years.  Your junior and seniors years, did you start getting more involved in taking Science classes or--?
Speaker 2: Well, I was taking the appropriate curriculum all the time.  And so combined with the basketball, it was a vigorous schedule.  But with the basketball, I mean the success there and the fact that I was taking the kind of coursework I was taking, led to my winning one of the alumni dean's awards as a sophomore which I was delighted to have happen.  And so a combination of, you know, sports and being eligible and all that sort of thing.  And then before my undergraduate experience was over, I became a member of, was selected for two honor societies, the Iron Mask was one, in the honor society, and The Owl and Serpent [senior honor society] was another as a senior.  And so those were real pluses as a matter of fact.  And I should say that the other aspect was the part-time job dimension at the laboratory of molecular structure and spectra with Robert Mulliken that I began to learn more and more about what was happening in physical chemistry which you took in your third year after taking general chemistry the first year, organic chemistry the second year at which point I was beginning to wonder was it really chemistry that I wanted to do because I wasn't having that much fun.  Well, what does that mean?  You're taking these courses, but nor was it that interesting to me.  And when I took physical chemistry, I discovered the connection between that coursework and what I was doing in terms of work that one talked about molecular orbitals, the path electrons take and molecules as opposed to atomic orbitals, the paths that electrons take in atoms.  And I'm talking in what we call classical language because the distribution of an electron.  You can't pin it down to a path as such, but rather it's a distribution of where the particular electron is.  It's sort of a fuzzy circle so to speak for an atom which has spherical symmetry.  So that I found much more interesting, and, you know, this seemed to me the sort of direction to go, but not fully because when I did get my bachelor's degree [1958], and I did have the opportunity to stay at Chicago for a master's as I indicated, through Professor [Henry] Taube, I did work with a new assistant professor at the time, Stuart [A.] Rice [1932- , studied quantum chaos on excited molecules at the University of Chicago], who had come from Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], had his degree from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], who I took his "Math for Scientists" course and also his graduate-level physical chemistry.  And he was a very supportive individual and this sort of thing, and from him, it was suggested that I apply to Washington University in St. Louis.  And then based upon a research associate with Mulliken's group, by the name of Bernard Ransel (ph), I applied to [The] Catholic University of America [Washington, D.C.] because one of the issues here is that, well, the subject matter I'm interested in, namely, chemical physics and physical chemistry, electronic structure molecules, that for the most part, this was the U.S. [United States], was being done in physics departments.  And the brief reflection on changing my major to physics, to my vantage point, the difficulty I found with physics courses, I wasn't about to do that (laughter).  So I stayed with chemistry.  And as the interesting historical fact, that subsequently Mulliken and Rothon (unclear) both became faculty members in chemistry as well as in physics.  But getting back to the time, I did a master's project with Stuart Rice and this dealt with thermodynamics of argon, the rare gas [atomic number 18].  And this was okay, but not particularly thrilling.
Story_ID: 29058
Speaker 1: I, my senior year [at University of Chicago, ca. 1958], had applied to both Wash U [Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri] and [The] Catholic University [of America]; got the letter from Washington University indicating that I had, would receive a graduate assistantship would cover my costs and principal for a graduate education; heard nothing from Catholic University of America.  One had to commit by April 15th [1959].  Oh, about April 20th [1959] a letter came from Dr. William A. Lester, Jr. who had been head of student health at University of Chicago, who had a sanitarium in Elmhurst, Illinois, forwarding to me my letter of acceptance to the program at Catholic, but in the meantime, I had to commit to Wash U.  So I go to Wash U, and spend the year, and I think I mentioned to you casually that I got married that Christmas.  I had a honeymoon with a take-home exam in physics.  A personal note, that after our wedding, we had one night at the hotel, and then I went to my paternal grandmother's [Debora Lester] house where we were for another five days (laughter).  She moved out to enable us to have some place to stay 'cause I didn't have any money.  You know, I was a graduate assistant.  So in any event, I had gotten a "C" in a physics course at Wash U, and where I thought I was gonna get an "A" in the course to balance it, in chemistry, did not.  And so I was invited not to return for further study.  I got in touch with the folks at Catholic University who said, come on.  So, loaded a U-Haul [a trailer for moving large amounts of items] on the back of this car we had bought and drove from St. Louis to Washington, D.C. to start graduate school at Catholic University, and in essence, arrived in the fall of 1960 with Camelot, with the [John F.] Kennedy administration.
Story_ID: 29059
Speaker 1: There was no graduate student housing in Washington, D.C.  So, had to hunt for a place, and a very modest assistantship, even by the standards then that I had; found what one might call an apartment in the back of a single-family dwelling, back means upstairs in the back in Southeast Washington,[D.C.] around the corner from the D.C. Jail.  And I would commute from Southeast to Northeast to graduate school in this old car, which I should add at one point, broke, and you had to go through D.C. inspection.  I can't remember what broke.  I think it was the sliding gear, and it would take $400.00 to fix this thing.  And at the time, when my assistantship that was a significant fraction of one month's pay.  So the people at the shop that were gonna repair it, said, well, we'll take it off your hands for a hundred dollars.  And I think I had spent $1,100 for this car a year before.  It was an old Plymouth at the time.  So I said, "Yes, you can have it."  And here I am, living in Southeast at that point without a car and I was taking an advanced calculus course in the evening.  And one of the guys in the course was an instructor at the [United States] Naval Academy [Annapolis, Maryland].  He said, I have an old car you can have if can get somebody to bring you out.  So I had a buddy living in town, drove us, drove me out to Annapolis.  And there at this guy's garage was a 1950 Chevrolet Bel Air, old power glide.  And this was 1961 or so that I'm talking about.  So, this car I could always find because it sat higher than anything in the block.  I used to wash it with Tide so it'd shine, you know, (laughter).  You know, I mean, you know, it was just one of those sort of crazy things.  And so we brought the car back in and I went to Pep Boys and bought four tires for twelve bucks.  And I was driving, I was on wheels for the rest of my graduate experience.  And we moved from Southeast to Northeast.  My wife became resident manager of the apartment complex we moved into.  And by the way, this was the first time we were in an apartment that you could lock the front door.  Before that, you know, living in the back of this house, we had a john [bathroom], you came up the stairs, there was a john here with a separate door.  There another door that led into the kitchen.  One led into the bedroom because it was a back parlor.  The parlor was our living room (laughter), you know.  And, by the way, I neglected to mention a very important aspect, namely my wife was pregnant on our way to Washington, D.C., I mean, you know, bouncing along and so forth.  And, oh, by the way, part of our economic issue was that she would be working.  And she became pregnant.  Can you imagine?  I mean (laughter), so that went out the window--things got a little tight there.  But never fear, I mean my point here was simply I need to finish this stuff.  And so, in that respect, you know, the focus honed down, you know, more so than even before.  So I had transportation.  We moved to Northeast, not far from Catholic University.
Story_ID: 29060
Speaker 1: My wife became resident manager, eased the financial situation because now we're living rent-free.  She's working, you know, for that, and I'm getting a little assistantship.  And then it was at the end of the first summer, going into the first summer, funds, you know, savings had been more or less depleted.  I got in touch with the guy who suggested Catholic University, Bernie Ransel at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], who had, by the way, had said early on, oh, don't go to Catholic.  It's not the place it used to be.  I said, look, I'm committed.  This is my only option.  And so did that, and so Bernie said, well, get in touch with the people at the [National Bureau of Standards] Bureau of Standards.  They have summer internships, and they could pay something.  And this I did.  And there was a guy by the name of Morris Krauss there, he suggested.  I got in touch with him.  He said, yeah, come on out.  I worked that summer at the Bureau of Standards at a reasonable wage, saved some money to sort of cushion the assistantship.  And I went there to work for a woman who Ransel had worked for, one of the few women in theoretical chemistry.  Her name is Virginia, was Virginia Griffin.  When I was "was", she died quite a while ago.  It was actually toward the end of my second year.  I'm finishing up requirements on campus.  And I got a call from Krauss.  He said, "Hey, would you like to come out again this summer?"  I said, "Well, you know, I really need to finish up.  I've got one child," and by the way, number two is on the way, and so we needed to learn about this business of how children were born (laughter).  So I talked to Virginia Griffin, and she said, "Well, Bill, what do you want to do?  Do you want an education or do you want to make money?"  I said, "Virginia, I need to do both (laughter)."  She unfortunately died of an aneurysm that spring.  She wasn't that old a woman.  I guess she may have been early fifties, something of that sort.  So that summer I went back out to The Catholic University--to the Bureau of Standards, forgive me, and then it was suggested that, you know, you can do your dissertation work at the Bureau of Standards.  They had arrangements of that sort, and by the way, you went on at the government pay scale, went on as a GS-9.  See, by the way, I'm making, as an assistant at Catholic, I think it was $1,600 for ten months 160 bucks a month or something of that sort.  And then I go to a pay scale of maybe $9,000 a year.  I mean it was the difference between night and day and with that, as I say, my wife as a resident manager.  And so I'm in an office with this guy Krauss who, and a post-doc by the name of Fred Meese and being treated more or less as a peer.  And I'm a graduate student.  And it was really a marvelous educational experience because the nature of the problem we ended up doing came out in a publication in 1960, [I] was one of the early people to work on that particular direction.  It was what we call, and this gets a bit technical, yeah, should we continue?
Story_ID: 29061
Speaker 1: I just wanted to kind of go back.  Could you describe what it was like, the classes that you took at [The] Catholic University [of America, Washington, D.C.]?  What was the science department like?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're gonna talk a little bit about the program at Catholic University, their chemistry program?
Speaker 2: Well, an interesting point here, mind you, I'm a graduate of the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  I have a master's [degree] from that institution, spent a year at Washington University in St. Louis.  Now, I'm at Catholic University, being asked to take some basic courses again.  And by the way, their admission to [graduate] candidacy required that one pass qualifying exams in four areas of chemistry.  Well, I felt I'd had enough coursework.  But, still I had to satisfy these requirements.  And so I took courses again there, in particular, system mechanics was one of them. quantum mechanics from Griffin (ph.), and I'd taken a number of physics courses, atomic physics, math for physicists in the physics department, classical mechanics in the physics department and I mentioned the advanced calculus course in the math department and another course or two.  So there was a fair amount of course requirements even beyond others, compared to nowadays, I had more courses than you could shake a fist at.  I got a whole lot of preparation in that sense.  And I think it's argumentative whether all of that education was beneficial at that point.  I think there was a certain amount of redundancy when you take these courses, but well, all that's past (unclear).  And so I had to take qualifying exams in the field and in my minors, two minors by the way, physics and mathematics, besides chemistry as a major.  And then after writing my dissertation, doing this research, writing computer programs for this particular research direction and doing the computations and comparing with others and publishing the paper, we published the first paper in '62 [1962] with Krauss and the second one, I published after leaving there, but with work done at the Bureau of Standards [National Bureau of Standards] and under the byline of Catholic University.  In '65 [1965], I took my quall [qualifying] exam in the fall of '64 [1964], and that's six years after my bachelor's in '58 [1958], master's in '59 [1959] and so forth, and applied--oh, another interesting story, applied for post-doc 'cause I knew that's what you did.  I knew that from my days even as an undergraduate.
Story_ID: 29062
Speaker 1: What did you write your Ph.D. on?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Oh, correlated molecular orbitals.
Speaker 1: And could you explain that a little bit to us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the little background here.  It is a case that I described to you this mean field approximation.  I didn't mention the name of it.  It's called Hartree Fock, H-A-R-T-R-E-E, after somebody named [Douglas] Hartree and [Vladimir] Fock, a Russian, F-O-C-K.  Hartree Fock was the mean field approximation of, the issue is, how to describe instantaneous behavior of electrons by doing so-called post-Hartree-Fock calculations.  These typically took the form of what we call excitations from the determinantal wave function for system.  We represented a wave function for an atom or molecule by a determinant at the smallest or a linear combination of determinants.  So, this is all orbital based, that is, the orbitals are one electron functions, an orbit.  This is a generalization of the orbit.  These determinantal wave functions are mathematical representations of the behavior of individual electrons in the molecular system.  But it is a fact, and this was done by Hilerous (ph.) in the early days of Quantum Mechanics for the Helium atom, the two-electron system, is that if you put in a function which depends on explicit distance between two electrons, then this can tremendously compact the representation of the wave function of the system.  The reason this wasn't done routinely in other cases is that the integrals you get that you must evaluate for the expectation value of the Hamiltonian, and this is an integral, which means your integral rate over all space of the electrons, of an argument which is the complex conjugate of the wave function, Hamiltonian operator times the wave function in the greater overall space.  So it's an average of mathematical quantity.  How you represent that wave function is what we're talking about, in terms of the orbital development or one which involves explicit correlation.  And so it's the integral, the complexity of the integrals that you have to evaluate in using exponential functions for descriptions of orbitals.  And in the case of the explicit correlation, functions which depend upon inter-electron separation which leads to tremendous complexity that, until that time, really could not be done for systems beyond two electrons.  If, however, instead of using exponential functions, you use Gaussian functions, exponential of minus alpha R-i-j squared, then these integrals become possible to evaluate.  And this was a tremendous advance made by a fellow by the name of S. F. Boys of Cambridge [University of Cambridge, United Kingdom], and which we did, I did, as a part of my thesis, one of the earliest publications of the explicit correlation.  It had been done by some others as well, but in the [United] States, I was one of the first.  And that paper, even today, gets reference, my thesis work because it was, again, one of the first.  And this is what I tell my students, you know, you don't join the pack.  You got to try and identify a pathway which is novel and unique, which may offer then guidance to people in the field.  You don't always win with this, but it's a very important dimension in terms of what you do.  It's like anything.  If you're the first, you may get some recognition.  And by the way, I should say, this is back to my comment regarding competition in what you do, you gotta compete.  If you don't compete, what's your value to the institution or the organization?
Story_ID: 29063
Speaker 1: And this goes back to something, I'm getting off on a track, but I think it's a very important one.  To young black scientists I met at IBM [International Business Machines] who came to apply for jobs and said, you know, all I want is a job.  I said, man, that's not the mindset.  What will you bring to the table here which will be different from what we already have?  What are the skills and capabilities you have developed, and you must be able to convey that.  So I used to meet with them at the end of the day and sort of give 'em some feedback.  And every now and then somebody would come in with a sense of that mindset, but at least the folks who left had a sense of what I was trying to convey to them in this regard.  I was hired at IBM without the regular hiring process [1968].  Why?  Because the person we want, we tried to hire to replace somebody who departed in computational chemistry, was from IBM and said, "Hey, I'm interested in your place and I'm gonna come", until one point, he finally said, no, I'm gonna come.  It turns out, it was a negotiating ploy for him to have a department created at IBM on large-scale scientific computations.  And I've lost track of where I was headed, but I had a connection at one point dealing with, oh, the IBM environment and what I said earlier with regards to advertising in the "New York Times" your science, that basically, you can't, if you're gonna just do things that people, other people have done and maybe some slight improvements on that, you don't get high marks for that.  You've got to strike out in new directions, this sort of thing.  That's sort of the key element associated with all of this, and is a focus that I try to maintain.  Only now is it starting to pay off in my current research directions 'cause I changed research directions when I commented earlier about moving into quantum Monte Carlo, but I didn't describe what I had been doing earlier for which I have material, dealing with the collisions of atoms and molecules.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 29064
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll come back to that in a little while.  I just wanna go back a little bit.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We'll go back to graduate school.  How do you feel, were you a good student in graduate school?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I was.  I think I was (laughter).  I got, you know, good grades, but not--graduate school, you know, you, unless you really screw up you can get good grades.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers at [The] Catholic [University of America, Washington, D.C.] that really influenced you?
Speaker 2: Well, the influence came from the fellow was my research advisor at the Bureau of Standards, a young guy, who at the time was only three of four years older than me, Morris Krauss, who had been suggested by Ransel from [University of] Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], who treated me with respect, introduced me to this new problem direction and, oh, I should add--so that was good.  Then I wanted to do a post-doc [postdoctoral fellowship] and I had applied to three places.  The first place responded immediately, Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], with a fellow by the name of Octi Sadonagu (ph.) who offered me a job in January of '64 [1964].  I didn't finish, as I mentioned, until November.  Then to go back to [University of] Chicago with Rothon (unclear) and he visited and made an offer in May [1964].  And I wasn't too keen on that.  I really wanted to compute chemical reactions and I had been doing electronic structure, that is, the kind of thing I've been indicating to you before.  And that sort of thing or at least the basis for it was being done at Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin--Madison] by a fellow by the name of Richard [B.] Bernstein who was an experimental microbeamist but also maintained a theoretical scattering group.  And I had hadn't heard from Wisconsin.  Time was getting close and Krauss suggested, well, why don't you go to the American Physical Society meeting in Baltimore [Maryland] in March of '64 [1964] because the fellow who headed the institute, Joseph Hirshfelder (ph.), would be speaking at that time.  So I went to the meeting and I talked to Hirshfelder about the status of my application.  He said, Oh, we have plenty, many good applications.  Said, okay, I appreciate that, and hope that it might be possible for me to join the group.  And, oh, I guess about a month later, came a letter from Wisconsin that, you know, I got an offer for a post-doc there.  And by the way, I should add, the Yale position offered 3,000 [dollars] less than what I was making in D.C. living rent free, about 6,000 [dollars].  And I was making at this point about 9,800 [dollars].  And I couldn't see how could I live on that.  [University of] Chicago, well, I had a mixed view about going back cause I knew what that would be like.  That would be more like (unclear) structure.  And the position in Wisconsin paid 8,500 [dollars] so that was reasonable, and that's what I wanted to do.  So I took that position.  I get to Wisconsin, and it seems like there's some, yes, question?
Story_ID: 29065
Speaker 1: Before we get to Wisconsin, you're still in [Washington] D.C., and it's the '60s [1960s].  [John F.] Kennedy is in pow-- president.  What was it like being in D.C. at that time with all this history going on, the Civil Rights Movement is getting started.  What was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: You were a graduate student.  Did it affect your life or were you aware of the politics that was going on?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  Everyone was, oh, for sure, for sure.  No question, yeah.  That plays even a bigger role in Wisconsin, as a matter of fact.
Speaker 1: Does it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --in terms of the positions that I ended up being offered.  But at the time, I mean, you know, the March on Washington was in '63 [1963].  We were right there, front and center.  My sister came down from Pittsburgh with her family, Justin Johnson, who I was talking about.  And we were there, you know.  As a matter of fact, the two major marches I've been at, '63 [1963], Million Man March [1963], I was there.  I was on leave from the, from this place, the National Science Foundation, and I was there too.  My wife was at home, but I came over.  I said, I can't be here and not, you know, be a part of this scene, whatever it may be, you know, this sort of thing.  So philosophically, it was clear to me then and now that, to affect change, from my vantage point and what I wanted to do, the better positioned I am, the better leverage I can exert.  And I have found that historically to be the case in situations which one can even talk about where, because you're at the table, you can influence decision making.  And that comes about because of the quality of what I've been doing research wise, okay, and the respect I've been engendered related to that over the years.  So I don't take that slightly.  That is a very important aspect, and, you know, it led to my doing some other things subsequently, which we haven't gotten to at this point.
Story_ID: 29066
Speaker 1: Okay, so now we're ready to go to Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin--Madison, Lester was working on a postdoctoral fellowship].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so we get there, and then I sense that there's a question of who would I work for.  I wanted to work for Bernstein, but it wasn't so obvious.  But eventually, I did work for him.  And he introduced me to a problem which he said he couldn't give to a graduate student because it was too complex, but that, you know, with my experience from the kind of work that I had done, he thought I'd be the person to do it.  And that really launched me in another direction.  This was a new problem area.  This is a scattering sort of thing that I was interested in.  And I wrote new code, and I'm recognized for writing code which led to the evaluation of what we now call scattering matrixes which were sufficiently accurate that they can be a benchmark for other algorithmic developments to do a similar kind of thing.  And so I became known for doing very accurate calculations and new directions and wrote some of my first reviews solely by myself, this sort of thing, and began to be recognized for this work internationally, as a matter of fact.  But to get back to Wisconsin and when I say recognized internationally, that sort of came with the IBM [International Business Machines, 1968] stuff and so forth.  After being a post-doc for eight months, from November roughly of '64 [1964] to June of '65 [1965], [Richard B.] Bernstein comes in one day and says, you know, we're looking for an assistant director of the institute.  Would you be interested?  I said, I'm on leave from my position, which is what I was from National Bureau of Standards.  I was on a regular pay scale, and I knew I'd go back.  I would have a job there, but in the meantime, since I'm on leave, why not?  So I did this.  Okay, I take the position and in so doing, reading the file for the organization and materials from the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] program officers, the NASA supported institute, second paragraph of a particular letter a few months earlier indicated that you really needed to diversify the institution right away.  This is 19--early 1965.  The Freedom laws [unclear] are being discussed and NASA was already pushing at the door for this institute to become diverse and that's racially diverse.  And as you looked around that institute and that department, who you got?  (Laughter)  You got me.  I'm it.  So, I said, "Oh, this is interesting."  And also, it's, it was my introduction to many other dimensions because I knew of the handful of other black candidates who applied for there.  And so I'm reading the file, see what the situation was.  And it called my attention to the letters of reference which I re-read my own at that time, what they were writing about me, oh, Lester, he's okay, you know, and so forth.  Some of the white counterparts walked on water, some jumped lakes by single bounds.  I mean really superlative letters.  And one letter for another black candidate said, "Well, you know he's okay for one of them, doesn't have a chip on his shoulder and so forth."  It was just fascinating reading.  I mean, you know, this is true, this is history.  Okay, I thought this is interesting.  It just called attention to the fact, hey, you'd better take care of business or it's gonna be a very cold experience in this discipline.
Story_ID: 29067
Speaker 1: And I think, to a great extent, at a certain point, the nature of the competition associated with the pyramid of achievement gets you to a point, come what may, you need to be competitive.  And to see on occasion, since affirmative action went into place, comments by young people in high school that, oh, you know, well, because of affirmative action, I can do this, this, that and the other, really was very unsatisfying.  Mind you, I'm not a conservative (laughter).  I think there is a place for affirmative action, but I think the signals, things can be so misread and we see that in many instances, that people get confused regarding the role of it.  In the early days, I mean, as a tiebreaker in terms of two people of quality, you know, and would you make a distinction based upon race on that basis, but not that you reach down and get somebody who's not qualified to be in a given position.  So I mean seeing all that confusion and seeing some of the attitudes spurred by that kind of thing, I can see how some people would get a point of view, but they overlook the realities of the situation in terms of educational background, abilities to compute--compute?  To compete, that, you know, present problems.  So a critical issue is to think clearly about what it is that one is addressing as opposed to with some broad brush rather try to just put people into slots and so forth and count the numbers.  So, very strong views there so I'm very much involved in outreach kinds of activities, these sorts of things and so forth.  And they remain important as long as we have the educational inequities in our systems as they exist in this country at this time.  But it was because of affirmative action that that particular job [assistant director of the Theoretical Chemistry Institute at the University of Wisconsin--Madison] was offered to me.  And it provided excellent exposure and I became a--and then the question was to come onto the educational or the tenure ladder.  And I gave a talk.  Everyone said I did well, but there was one impediment, and that was [Joseph O.] Hirschfelder, the director of the [Theoretical Chemistry] Institute, was not supportive.  He felt that I belonged in some mid-tier level institution.  And so [Richard B.] Bernstein said, find a job someplace else, but don't tell [Joseph O.] Hirschfelder until it's secure because of his reach he had, he might make it, he might nullify it, was a reality.  And so when I visited IBM [International Business Machines] in the spring of '68 [1968], I was offered a job by the guy we had tried to hire in Wisconsin who had gotten his department.  And when I said I didn't come in the usual way, he said, "Oh, you know, I know what you do.  I know the "red" reports."  These were the colors of the covers of the preprints that were constructed. "And I know you would make a real contribution to this place."  And so then subsequently when guys were, black, were coming in interviewing and so forth, who were going through the regular process and seeing what was happening, I attempted to give them some sense of what they needed to do in this regard.  So wherever you are and whatever you're doing, it's my view, you can help the situation.
Story_ID: 29068
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  Okay, this is picture of my paternal grandfather, William Mason Lester, taken at a time that I'm not familiar with, but so I can't provide any further information than that on him.  William Mason Lester, yeah, paternal grandfather.
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  This is a picture of my mother, Elizabeth Frances Clark Lester taken, I would guess about age, mid-thirties, something of that sort.  She died young at age 39 in 1954.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great.
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  Okay, this is a picture of my family.  Left to right, the young lady sitting down is my oldest sister, Florence, Florence Lester Johnson, my father behind, William A. Lester.  I am to the right, and this was taken about 1944.  I base this on the baby in the lap of my mother, the youngest sister, Karen Lewis Thomas, and sitting at the bottom to the right is my second sister, Judith Bell Wiley.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great.
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  Okay, this is a picture of my father and his last wife, Mary Lester, taken as indicated in 1986.  He died in 1990.  She is also now deceased.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  One more time on this.
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  Oh, this is a picture of me done by an elementary school photographer.  And I would guess it's a picture in about 1945 or so, a year or so after the other picture, maybe age eight or nine or 10, maybe nine, I would guess.
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  This is a picture of a boy's club called The Musketeers.  I am to be found on the first row to the right.  It was a social club.  It's a social club that existed at the time and for which a major interest for me was the fact that they got basketball instruction.  They would get coaching from a local high school basketball, assistant basketball coach, on Saturday mornings for an hour.  And for me, that was a tremendous attraction and this picture was taken probably in eighth grade, I would guess, seventh or eighth grade.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Which one are you?
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  I'm to the lower right, first row.
INTERVIEWER:  In the dark suit?
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  In the dark suit.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  Here's a picture of the family on a boat somewhere, my son, William A. Lester III to the left, my wife, myself, my daughter, Alison, Alison Kimberly Lester, now Alison Ramsey, not sure of the year.  I have to really think about that hard.  My wife could probably tell us.
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  Family picture taken last year, my wife and myself with the child highest up is Charles William Ramsey, William after me, son of Charles and Alison Ramsey, and at the bottom is William A. Lester IV, son of my son and his wife, Cheryl Lester, Cheryl Sullivan Lester, taken last year.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  Oh, this was taken this year.  This was taken at the Allstate program.  Holding the, that's the Allstate Award.  I guess I don't have a HistoryMakers award in my hand at that point.
INTERVIEWER:  No, you didn't.  But you're not supposed to (laughter).
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  Yeah, that's right (laughter).  Oh, this picture is of my son-in-law, Charles Ramsey to the right, my grandson, Tre, Charles Tre Ramsey and to the left is a fellow many people might be familiar with, namely, Derrick Jeter, short stop of the New York Yankees who is a Michigan native, came from Kalamazoo who I think is very much involved with athletics at the University of Michigan.
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  This is a picture taken at a family reunion in about 1986.  My father, William A. Lester, is in the center.  His wife, Mary, is to the right and proceeding to the right is my oldest sister, Florence; next to Florence is my wife, Rochelle.  I'm on the end.  To the right proceeding now to the left in the red dress is my next sister, Judith Wiley, next to her is Karen Lewis Thomas, my youngest sister, next to her is Frances Clark, my aunt, who had been married to my uncle, who is in the next row, slightly to the left behind her, and on the end in the yellow dress is cousin, Cheryl Davis with son Rennie (ph.).  On the back line, on the end is Justine Johnson, Justine L. Johnson, son of my sister, Florence, and her father, Justine Morris Johnson who is three over from the left.  And the proceeding-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear)
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  No, no, that's my uncle.  It's the taller guy between the woman and the, and my uncle, Lawrence Clark, and next to Lawrence is Judith Wiley's oldest son, only son, Darryl Wiley, next to him is Stephen Lewis, my younger sister, Karen's third son, her second son is next to him, Brian Lewis, next to him is Richard Lewis, the youngest son and in the center is a former husband of my youngest sister, Karen; next to him is the, my--the oldest son of my sister, Florence.  That's William Johnson; next to William is his sister, Elizabeth Johnson; next to her is my son, William A. Lester III; next to her, or the next two are twins, Jeanette and Jeanine and behind, next to Jeanine is Jeanine's former husband, and next to, behind him is my daughter, Alison.
INTERVIEWER:  (Unclear) I'm impressed (laughter).
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  This is a picture of me at the Formula One Raceway outside, Nelson PK Raceway, outside of Rio de Janiero where I was as an official photographer, accompanying my wife who had a cultural VISA to do life in Brazil.  This was driven by research collaboration I had with a professor at the CBPF, the Central Brazilian Institute for Physics Research, a place known because of Fineman.  This is the place where you will find him with Bongo drums between his legs, but it's a Formula One raceway.  And at that time, that particular race Lyon (ph.) Prost and Eric Incina (ph.) both ran.  And I'm holding my ears because it is loud.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next. INTERVIEWER:  Next is an article that was done as a part of a periodical for the University of Chicago which shows me at various points of basketball, and I call your attention to the title, in all modesty "Billy Lester, the Mite Who Proved Mighty".
INTERVIEWER:  He's number 14.
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  And it does talk in this particular write-up about my intention to go for advanced degrees, including a Ph.D.  I was captain of the team for three years.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  A few years ago, '57 [1957], yeah, March '57 [1957], conclusion of my last day, year of eligibility.  I was just getting ready to turn, '57 [1957], in April of '57 [1957], I would have been twenty years old.  So I finished my eligibility at nineteen (unclear) sixteen to nineteen.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  Okay, I'm a member of Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity, and this was a picture taken as indicated at the Midwestern Regional Convention of 1956.  I, at the time, was the Midwest Assistant Vice President.  All assistant vice presidents were undergraduates, and so as indicated here, this is about my junior year as an undergraduate.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And where are you on here?
INTERVIEWER:  There I am.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Loretta, you point him out.
INTERVIEWER:  One, two, three, four, five, six from the right?
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, seven from the right.
INTERVIEWER:  Seven from the right.
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  Freezing to death.  You notice that everybody has, most of the folks have overcoats on.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great.
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  Yeah, this is a picture of my son, William A. Lester III, known professionally as Bill Lester, and the unique thing about this particular cover of 'Black Enterprise is that this is a copy of my issue.  So you have a mailing address, Mr. William A. Lester, Jr. in Oakland, California, and, of course, the caption relates to Bill Lester.  He is a NASCAR craftsman truck driver, the only African American on the circuit.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
INTERVIEWER:  In Benin, West Africa, in the City of Contonou.  I am in the center.  To my right, that is the left of the picture, is Dr. Norbert Howcannu (ph.) who is a professor there, and who I first met in 19--roughly 1990 or '91 [1991] at a satellite meeting, of an international meeting on Quantum Chemistry.  The meeting was, the satellite meeting was held in Prirest, France and to my left and to the right of the picture, is the chief executive officer of the University of Beneen.  We were, I was the co-chair of that meeting by the way.
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  This is a picture of the first U.S. delegation of African American scientists invited to the Soviet Union--Soviet Union, change that to China, the People Republic of China.  And I believe it was 1981 by the China Association for Science and Technology CAST.  The head of our delegation is in the center, Dr. Charles Meredith.  I'm the guy with the glasses on, three over in the back row, the man from Mars (laughter).  Can you see me?  Okay, and do you want other names?  Two in on the first row is Dr. William Gillory (ph.), two to the right of Meredith who's in the center, the tall fellow is Dr. Albert Bridgewater, then of the National Science Foundation, and two over from the right from him is a U.S. scientist from then Georgia Tech, Dr. C. S. Keung (ph.) and as we go to the back row, it's the late, Dr. Joe Johnson, furthest to the left.  And then behind Meredith, in the center of the picture is Dr. Charles--change that to Dr. Tom Cole, past president of Clark-Atlanta University; two over from him is Dr. William Jackson of the University of California-Davis, now chair of Chemistry at U-C-Davis; two over from him is Dr. James Perkins, now director of research at Jackson State University; two over from him is Dr. John Hall current chair of Morehouse College Chemistry.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Just to be sure we got it correct, this is you in the center of the-
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  Unfortunately, yes (laughter).  You know why you should take your glasses off when (unclear).  You can actually see my eyes in that picture.  That's why I said, the man from Mars.
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  For a three-year period, I served on the Army Research Laboratory Technical Assessment Board and this is a picture of the board in 1999.  It's a national research council created board.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):  Regarding reflective surface.
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  This is an article written in 1981 in the IBM magazine calling attention to my appointment as director of the National Resource for Computation in Chemistry, the NRCC which is the first national research organization for chemistry in the U.S.  Chemistry traditionally has been a cottage involving just a principal investigator and associate members of that group, and this was a step in terms of having a national organization similar to the kinds that exist routinely in Physics.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  This picture, no, this is not '81' [1981].  This probably taken in '78' [1978], you know, by, see the hair there (laughter).
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  This is the Fall-Winter edition of the LBL publication of me just, what am I doing, introducing people to the NRCC, a meeting at Lawrence, excuse me, at Lawrence Berkley Laboratory.  This is the main auditorium at LBL, LBL.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, thank you.
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  This is a picture of me doing a class as a part of Project Seed, special elementary education for the disadvantaged, a program developed by Dr. Bill Johnst of Berkley to introduce advanced mathematical concepts to elementary-aged children, a program which had its beginnings in Berkley and in Sacramento and which showed the abilities of young kids from disadvantaged backgrounds to do higher level mathematics.  And the other two folks are colleagues from IBM.  I should add that Douglas McClain was a graduate student when I started undergrad at the University of Chicago.  And he's one of, went to IBM much earlier, but Australia.  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  Okay, this is a picture associated with my period of being Associate Dean for Undergrad Affairs for the College of Chemistry at the University of California Berkley.  I instituted a program called the College of Chemistry Scholars Program directed towards students of color to assist them in the barrier courses in chemistry.  It had been demonstrated by the professional development program in mathematics here at Berkley that having a community of scholars is a real boon to learning for students from disadvantaged backgrounds and very much parallels the kind of support that exists and has existed at Berkley amongst the Asian community.  So this is the replication of the program from mathematics that Yuri Trisman (ph.) got a McArthur grant for, being replicated in the College of Chemistry here at Berkley.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  Now this is a picture, are you ready?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, go ahead.
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  This is a picture showing an interaction potential, that is energy plotted as a function of coordinates of the nuclei of the molecular system.  In this case, it is the reactive region of a lithium atom approaching HF, hydrogen chloride molecule.  And the part to the bottom lower is, shows the attractive well of interaction as lithium approaches the fluorine side of the molecule.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  This is a picture taken from one of our football programs, showing me in my role as a faculty athletics representative.  Every NCAA institution has a faculty athletics representative whose primary responsibility is student welfare.  In addition, I am responsible for, in this position, for eligibility and must sign off for eligibility for all student athletes, which in this case is 27 sports, comprising roughly 900 student athletes.  So I have a small staff which reports to me regarding issues related to eligibility, petitions, waivers and all sort of issues related to intercollegiate athletics at UC-Berkley.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Good.
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  Picture of the American Association for the Advancement of Science board that I served on for three years.  I believe it was 1993 to '97 [1997]; don't recall what year this is, but this is board.
INTERVIEWER:  '96 [1996].
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  Ninety six [1996] okay, let's call it 1996 (laughter). Great, thank you. WILLIAM LESTER:  This guy by the way was a science advisor to Truman.
INTERVIEWER:  Oh, really?
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  Yeah, he was the one that instituted, I think, the science advisor role in the Truman administration.  And this is Rita Coldwell who has been director of the National Science Foundation.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  This is an article that appeared in the 'San Francisco Chronicle', how long ago?  We got a date on this?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):  Hang on.
INTERVIEWER:  It is '97 [1997].
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  Yeah, okay, Black History Month, 1997.  So that's February 1997 (laughter).  There shouldn't be any doubt.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  Okay.  This is a picture of speakers at the 2002 Welch Foundation symposium on advances in Quantum Chemistry or computational chemistry.  It's actually on the back.  Can I touch this thing?  Oh, I don't even say what it is.  I'll just give the names.  But first row, second from the left is the late, John Pople, who share the Nobel Prize with the guy on the top row to the far right, Walter Kohn.  And I am, and also I should say, three in from the right, next to me is Ahmed Zewail who was a Nobel Prize winner some years earlier for Hemptel Second Chemistry and I'm next to him, of course.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Could you spell for us the men's names, Pople and-
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  Yeah, John Pople, P-O-P-L-E, Walter Kohn, W-A-L-T-E-R, K-O-H-N, Ahmad Zewail, A-H-M-A-D, Z-E-W-A-I-L.  Oh, and let me not forget the person who invited me and organized this symposium is in the center of the picture in the second row, and that Ywon T. Lee.  Ywon is a 1986 Nobel Prize winner in Chemistry.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  The guy in the center there with the kind of goldish-colored tie, bronze?
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  Yeah, the Asian fellow, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great, okay, we got that one.
INTERVIEWER:  The dates are on back.
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  This is a 2002 National Medal of Science Committee including the president and science advisor, Jack Marburger (ph.) next to me on my right, so the furthest to the left.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  Rio de Janiero of myself and to my left is Professor Carlton A. Taft who I mentioned earlier in the interview who's a professor at the Central Brazilian Institute for Physics Research, a long-time collaborator since 1988, and next to him is Professor Erkki Brandas from the University of Sala (ph.) Sweden who is editor of the International Journal of Quantum Chemistry.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Let's see.  Do we need to spell any of those name?
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  Let me, Carlton Taft, that should be okay, C-A-R-L-T-O-N, T-A-F-T, Erkki Brandas, E-R-K-K-I, last name, B-R-A-N-D-A-S.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, good.
INTERVIEWER:  And that's it.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  Okay, this is a picture taken our wedding day, left to right, my father, William A. Lester, his wife at the time, Norma, yours truly and Rochelle, my wife, and Rochelle's parents are next Sally K. Reed and Jonathan Reed.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Good, next.
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  This is a wedding picture of the two of us taken December 27, 1959 (laughter).
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  A picture of my daughter and her husband, Charles Ramsey, and their son, Charles Tre Ramsey.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Date and occasion?
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  At a wedding in St. Louis on the campus of Washington University a year or two years ago.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: WILLIAM LESTER:  Okay, this is a picture taken at the wedding of my son to Cheryl Sullivan and the parents are on the outside of each of the wedding participants.
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  Okay, this is a picture at the wedding of my daughter, Alison, to Charles Ramsey, parents to the right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Year?
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  Year?
INTERVIEWER:  1998.
Speaker 1: WILLIAM LESTER:  1998, thank you, Loretta.
INTERVIEWER: You're welcome (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Story_ID: 29069
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, it's good to see you again, Dr. Lester.  We're gonna start with Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin, Madison].  What can you tell us about your life in Wisconsin?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Actually, I went to Wisconsin on the post-doctoral appointment.  I had been a member of the regular staff at the National Bureau of Standards [NBS] where I did my work for my doctoral degree.  And in the spring of 1964, I applied to a number of places for postdoctoral appointments.  These included Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut]; subsequently, conversations that led to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], again, that is, returning there since this is where I got my bachelor's [1958] and master's degrees [1959].  And I really ideally wanted to go to Wisconsin because it was my interest to actually learn how to do collisions, that is, to compute cross-sections for reaction in the transfer as well as reaction rates.  And so it was the case that I had not heard from Wisconsin, but I had heard from Yale.  I already had a post-doctoral appointment at Yale, but it paid only $6,000 a year at that time.  And I was already salaried at the National Bureau of Standards at about 9,500 [dollars] a year.  And so with a wife [Rochelle Lester] and two children [William Lester III, Alison Lester], it wasn't clear to me that I could survive in New Haven on 6,000 [dollars].  So I was holding out.  Now, by March, one has the American Physical Society [APS] meeting occurring in Baltimore [Maryland] and my mentor, Morris Krauss, suggested that I go to the American Physical Society meeting because there was a symposium on theoretical chemistry at which Joseph Hirschfelder would be present.  He was the director of the Theoretical Chemistry Institute at the University of Wisconsin [Madison].  It was my idea to go and work with Professor Richard Bernstein who had recently arrived at Wisconsin from the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  But by having a conversation with Hirschfelder, I could find out what the status of my application was.  And so I went over to the meeting and met Hirschfelder who told me, "Well, we've got a lot of, you know, good applicants for our postdoctoral openings" and so forth and, but, we'll consider you.  And so I had a conversation with a number of people who were well known in the field on that particular day, returned to Washington, D.C. where I was [at the National Bureau of Standards and The Catholic University of America].  And, oh, about two or three weeks later, received a letter from the Theoretical Chemistry Institute indicating that I had been appointed a research associate.  And so this was great.  And so that fall, actually, in November, I completed all requirements on campus.  And we packed up our belongings and drove to Madison, Wisconsin from Washington, D.C.  And I should add, because of the now change of financial status, having had the job at the National Bureau of Standards and also having my wife, had the job of being the resident manager of our apartment complex, we were able to buy a new car for our trip to Madison, Wisconsin.  We bought a Volvo 122S so we were big deals on that trip.  And so we got to Madison.  We had made arrangements for an apartment there, and that was fine.  And I was then a member of the staff, that is, as a postdoctoral associate working, it turns out, with Bernstein, although it appeared that, when I first arrived, there was some ambiguity as to who I would work with.  Would it be Hirschfelder or Bernstein?  Never any confusion in my mind, but in terms of what I saw transpire in terms of discussion around who I would work with.  In any event, Bernstein accepted me as a part of his research group.  His research group was predominantly experimental.  And I went there as a theorist, and he had a few theoreticians associated with his group, a superb, quality individual, Richard Bernstein, was, now deceased.
Story_ID: 29070
Speaker 1: And so he [Richard Bernstein at the University of Wisconsin, Madison] put me on a project actually which was very important in terms of my professional career development.  It was the calculation of cross-sections.  They're essentially probabilities for energy transfer between an atom colliding with a diatomic molecule, where one has energy transfer between rotational energy levels.  This is the so-called--
Speaker 2: Excuse me.  This is wonderful.  But we're going to have some children, students.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Could you just break that down a little bit more and kind of explain exactly what it was you were doing?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know if that's possible.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's see what we can do here.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Let's see what we can do, okay.
Speaker 1: The problem basically was, for a diatomic molecule, a molecule consisting of two atoms bound together by a bond, it rotates, besides vibrating.  The problem of interest here is looking at the change of rotational motion as a consequence of the atom hitting the diatomic molecule.  This is a so-called close coupling problem.  Why?  Because the energy levels for rotation are more closely spaced together than those of vibration.  In other words, you have a ground-state vibrational level, a series of rotational levels and then a next vibrational level, another series of rotational levels, which are going right on up.  And this means then that the effect of a change in any given rotational level effects others very strongly.  And that's why it's called the close-coupling problem.  And computationally or in terms of mathematics, it leads to the need to solve a system of partial differential equations which can be reduced to a system of ordinary differential equations for the calculation of the cross sections.  And maybe that's sufficient--
Speaker 2: That's sufficient, okay. Got it.
Speaker 1: --detail in terms of the science.
Story_ID: 29071
Speaker 1: It was a problem which [Richard] Bernstein had indicated it, it was too difficult a problem for a graduate and with someone to my experience around computers, that hopefully, I would be able to make some headway.  And I did, in part, by talking to people knowledgeable about close coupling.  The same kinds of equations arise also in the scattering of electrons off of atoms, electrons off of molecules.  In the mathematical formulation of each of these kinds of physical problems, the mathematics boils down to the same kind of appearance.  And subsequently, one has to translate these differential equations into a form that the computer would understand.  And this is actually the development of an algorithm.  And in that respect, I interacted with some people at the Argonne National Laboratory [Melrose Park, Illinois], which were helpful in terms of their progress regarding the electron-atom problem, which I could then translate into the atom diatomic molecule problem, and was able to write a code which would do the job.  And so, as a consequence of this, I was able to compute results which subsequently became a standard against which people would test new formulations, new algorithms for solving this kind of problem.  And so I had some very nice, oh, comments made about my work because of its impact on the field, and the advance of the field as a consequence of this contribution.  So this was a case that at Wisconsin, I was, and after eight months or so, asked to be the Assistant Director of the [Theoretical Chemistry] Institute.  And mind you, I was on leave from the National Bureau of Standards, on educational leave, essentially, for a year.  And I thought about it.  I said, yeah, that sounds interesting, but recognize I'm on leave from a regular job.  Said, "Oh, well, that's okay."  Well, after taking the job, I was going through the files the next day and discovered that part of the concern that I take the job was tied to the fact that the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] program officer, this was a NASA-funded institute, had indicated to [Joseph O.] Hirschfelder that there was an important need to diversify the organization.  And I should add that this was 1965, and you know, the Freedom Rides had just begun or about to happen in that general timeframe.  And as one looked around in terms of diversity, I was the only thing around that could have conceivably played a role in this regard.  And so I accepted the position.  My predecessor in that position was someone who had found a job as an assistant professor elsewhere.
Speaker 2: How did you feel?
Speaker 1: Um?  What the--?
Speaker 2: How did that make you feel?  I mean knowing that they were hiring you because they needed to diversify?
Speaker 1: Oh, I had no problems, I was gonna learn something new.  I mean at the time, I mean this was a way of learning additional aspects which I wouldn't have known otherwise.  I had no problems in terms of this.  This was a reality of the times, and you look at your opportunities, and you see what's possible.  If I could not have done the job, I would not have been asked, notwithstanding the fact that they needed to diversify because they still needed somebody in the position who could carry out the obligations, the requirements of the, the responsibilities of that position.  So in effect, what the job boiled down to was hiring post-doc's, postdoctoral associates, handle the paperwork for that and other, sort of small administrative responsibilities because I still had my research program to pursue.  So this went on for a couple of years, and then the thought of going on the academic stepladder at Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin, Madison] was very important to me.  So I did the usual thing, and that is, I presented a talk to the department.  It was very well received according to [Richard] Bernstein, but that the reason that a faculty appointment would not be possible was because Hirschfelder was not strongly supportive of this notion.  He felt really, well, Lester, belongs--well, one comment he made was that I was basically too "happy-go-lucky."  Another comment was to the effect I belonged in, you know, a second-tier institution and not appropriate for Wisconsin.  So I stayed on, actually, as a lecturer for a couple of years.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Bernstein had talked to me about the fact that really you have no future here, so you need to find a job somewhere else.  And once that job is cemented, then you might inform the folks back at Wisconsin that that was the situation.  This was because there was some concern about whether Hirschfelder might confuse the issue and lead to problems in terms of maintaining a newly, a new appointment at another institution.
Story_ID: 29072
Speaker 1: What happened then in terms of the spring of '68 [1968], the spring of '68 [1968], of course, is memorable because of the assassinations of Martin Luther King, Jr. and Robert Kennedy, was that in March, end of March of that year, there was a major American Physical Society meeting at the University of California, Berkley [Berkeley, California], and then two weeks later, a major American Chemical Society meeting in San Francisco.  And so this was an ideal time, actually, to bring my family out because I had a sister living in Berkley [California], Judith Wiley, opportunity to see her as well.  And I recall the times vividly because in a sense, leaving Wisconsin in March, end of March of the year, you're sort of leaving gray people, gray skies, gray days, typical gray days of the Midwest, and arriving at SFO [San Francisco International Airport] and the sky was blue, and the grass was green and the breezes were much warmer.  I tell you this was very nice.  And so I had the smart Physical Society meeting that I went to.  And then in the week in between, cause it was a week off, probably visited some of the people at IBM Research Laboratory in San Jose, California.  Many of these people were graduate students when I was an undergrad at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And so they welcomed me with open arms, talked to them about things and what was going on.  And before the day was out, they suggested, oh, would you like to come and work here?  And so, gee, that was a fantastic idea.  As a matter of fact, the head of the group from which the offer came, a Dr. Enrico Clemente, had been someone we had been pursuing at the Theoretical Chemistry Institute in Wisconsin as a senior hire.  And point of fact, as I understand it, it was a negotiation base because Clemente was on leave from IBM [International Business Machines] to the University of Chicago to indicate to IBM, well, if they didn't come through with the creation of this department, he would give serious consideration to leaving.  Well, they created the department.  One aspect of the result of the creation was my being hired and others as well.  There must have been four or five other new people who came into that research group, research department actually, in the spring of '68 [1968], spring and summer of '68 [1968].  And so we moved.  When did we move?  We moved in August of 1968 from Madison, Wisconsin to San Jose, California.
Story_ID: 29073
Speaker 1: One thing comes to mind immediately in terms of the experience in Madison is that our daughter, Alison, suffered frost bite on her little finger because she dropped her mitten in the three-block walk from school to home during the previous winter [1967].  And winters could be severe in Madison.  I mean winters were tough in Chicago, but Madison was, on occasion, not to be believed, and again, that's not as severe as it can in say Minneapolis [Minnesota] and further North and North Dakota and so forth.  So we were pleased to get out of Madison, though in many ways, it was a very nice place.  But Madison had its difficulties.  I recall one Thanksgiving weekend we returned from Chicago where we had family, to our house and found some racial epithets painted on the side of the house.  As a matter of fact, every black family in that general area, which there were very few, had had something happen, oil on the car or painting on the house and so forth and so on, in this, I think relatively speaking, very liberal community.  I mean this shows you that there's a mix of folks wherever you might find a mix of people in many ways.
Story_ID: 29074
Speaker 1: So I went to the large-scale scientific computations department in IBM [International Business Machines] in San Jose, California [in 1968] and there, had the opportunity to do the kinds of studies I had been doing with difficulty in Madison.  What does that mean?  That means that the kinds of calculations that took me weeks on end to do in Madison, I could do in matters of hours because of the access to the very fast machines that IBM had.  And so as a result of this, I was able to publish papers and provide information that would have been otherwise very hard to get, thoughts that I had growing out of the scattering theory work I had done early on when I first arrived in Madison.  So this laid a foundation in many ways for recognition of the work that I had been doing.  And I began to be invited to a variety of meetings in my field and so on, led to the first time I went to Europe in the basically, I guess, late spring, summer of 1971.  And it was sort of a funny trip in the sense that we didn't know when we would get there again.  My wife [Rochelle Lester] accompanied me, so it was like the classic movie.  You know, if it's Tuesday, you must be in Belgium, in the sense that we were living out of a suitcase, spent a couple of days, a couple of days there.  We went to, oh, I just--many countries, and spent just a very brief period in many of them and so on; a very, very memorable experience, in part assisted by the fact that when such travel took place, IBM in San Jose would ask IBM country, Italy, Germany as the case may be or France, did they want to have me speak at some particular institution, this sort of thing.  And that contributed to the many talks that I gave over the course of that particular trip.  So it was very exciting, sort of culminating in a major meeting INTRES [unclear], International Center for Theoretical Physics [ICTP], which I think was created by Abdus Salam, a Nobel prize winner [in 1979], and at which I met many African scientists who would come there in the summer to do research because they were so busy with teaching at their home institutions during that timeframe.  So that was a critical aspect of the IBM San Jose experience.
Story_ID: 29075
Speaker 1: What was San Jose [California] like?
Speaker 2: San Jose was a fascinating place, so different from what it is today in the sense that, you know, it had been orchards.  This is the Santa Clara valley, and I lived there six months before I discovered we were actually in a valley.  I mean, well, finally one day it rained and discovered, gee, it's beautiful down here.  Oh, there are the mountains and so on.  It's actually gotten better, you know, over the years.  In terms of racial composition, it was interesting that whenever you saw a black person, you sort of waved, you know.  It was a very infrequent occurrence.  And I had, just prior to going there, I received a map from the one IBM [International Business Machines] professional who was black by the name of Joe Gales, who had on the map of the San Jose area, sort of laid out the demographics in terms of ethnicity and rough income and so forth so that we had a sense of what neighborhoods were like when we went apartment or house shopping, I should say, not apartment.  And it was also interesting in the course of the, looking for a house, which we did prior to actually moving there [1968], of course, that when I would ask about, well, is this a heterogeneous community and so forth, people would say, well, what do you mean, you know?  And then they would turn to, well, you know, the Mexican Americans are on the other side of town.  They comprised about one third of the population of the Santa Clara Valley.  But black folks comprised a little than a percent at that time, and almost of them who had come in, had come in as professionals.  So you could see there was this different dimension in terms of numbers, my perception and my, I think, solid basis in terms of how, indeed, and the views of minorities are received, depending upon the numbers and the potential impact on the, as perceived by the majority community, on that community.  So it's an interesting, interesting aspect.  In any event, we found a home in an Eichler tract.  Eichlers are these, you know, which you come open the door, and this big atrium and then you have glass all around the inside, and you know, a real California house.  And so we enjoyed that tremendously until it got cool and discovered the amount of heat loss through the glass windows.  But that's the way it was, you know.  So we enjoyed it.  Our kids [William Lester and Alison Ramsey] went to school there.  And I should add, by the time I went on leave in '78 [1978], our children by this point were in high school and were two of the five black students in the high school in Willow Glenn [Elementary School, San Jose, California] which is where they attended.  So when we actually moved, they transferred to Skyline High School in Oakland [California, ca. 1981], and they asked the question, "Well, why didn't we move here before?  This is much more interesting."  I said, "Because I worked in San Jose."
Story_ID: 29076
Speaker 1: But backing up a bit, through the early '70s [1970s], I had achieved somewhat of a positive reputation and I was viewed to be on the fast track for advancement in management.  It was suggested that I go and spend time on the technical planning staff with the vice president and director of research, Ralph [E.] Gomory.  This I did.  And this meant going, moving to actually White Plains, New York for the year.  That laboratory is located in Yorktown Heights, New York, it's the T.J. Watson Research Center.  And that was a very interesting experience.  I was on a committee or--which involved other young people, and it was clear to me that these folks really were, wanted to pursue advanced management in IBM, and it became clear to me that really I preferred my research to rising in the system at IBM per se. It reached an interesting point when I returned to San Jose because it was suggested that things didn't work well for me in Yorktown.  I said, "Oh, I don't understand that."  Well, then as I reflected on it, very possibly in terms of what you did while you were there and so on and how people spent their time, and so the commitment to the IBM administrative management direction was not fully there, that that's probably the basis upon which this decision or this view was held.  Now I should back up and say also that prior to this, some two or three years earlier, I was selected to participate in a career development workshop.  And the guys who ran this said, you know, in effect, you know, they're looking at you for management.  I said, "Oh, yeah, really?"  And so they went and volunteered that, "Yeah, we can shade it one way or the other."  I said, "Really, at this point in my career, I really want to pursue my science as opposed to management."  And they said, "Well, okay, we'll indicate that in the report," which they did, that, although Bill has, you know, potential for being a successful manager, he really should be allowed to pursue his research at this time.  So there's this dilemma that confronts one, I think, early on in the management scheme in an institution of that type at that time, since things are very different now in terms of IBM and the parallel research laboratory that existed at the time, Bell Labs, in the sense that there is considerably less freedom.  There's more pointed research towards the mission of the company than there was at the time I was there.  So they're very different institutions in that sense.
Story_ID: 29077
Speaker 1: In any event, in the meantime, what had happened in my field was that, again backing up, in the early, oh, early '60s [1960s] and later '60s, [1960s], there were National Academy of Sciences or National Research Council reports on the creation of a national center for computation in chemistry.  And this had very little impact on me in those early stages because I'm working or began to work at IBM and had plenty of computer time to do the things I wanted to do.  But the mandate for this organization was one which provided computer time, but also created robust software for the use by chemists nationally.  Now, friends had indicated that, based upon my experience in computational chemistry, that I would be someone who should be, who would contribute the policy board of this organization.  But as I reflected on it, it seemed to me, in light of my experience in management, this was my professional field, that I could direct such an organization.  And so I put my name in the ringer for directing the NRCC, [National Resource for Computations in Chemistry] and I was selected as director.  It's one of the earliest national organizations for research in chemistry in the country, jointly funded by the National Science Foundation and the Department of Energy.  And in February of 1978, I arrived in Berkley on leave from IBM as the new director of what we call NRCC, National Resource for Computation in Chemistry, arrived at Lawrence Berkley National Laboratory which had been selected as the site of this institution with someone simply opening mail.  In other words, space had to be found to have offices and so forth, and I won't bore you with the details of that.  But that eventually happened.  It was part of a three-year pilot period for the organization.  But as I was quick to find out, based on the usual budget cycle, we would have been reviewed for continuation in one year.  And I said, this is not a sufficient period of time really to have something to really review and examine.  And so I was, I received an extension in terms of review for another year.  So they're giving me two years to put the organization in shape and then there would be a review at that time, but no additional funds being made available.
Story_ID: 29078
Speaker 1: Did you have any staff?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, the immediate thing when I was arrived was to advertize and hire staff.  As a matter of fact, I had enough staff--I arrived in February of '78 [1978], had enough staff to hold workshops in the summer of 1978, young people who were aware of the concept, who were very much interested in it.  And so I made these hires, you know, very early on.  That was interesting too from the prospective of the fact that I said, well, we can't really pay the standard pay scales for people in this situation because we have a mandate to get something done, and if we run into money problems in terms of being able to make these hires, then that really, you know, presents real problems for me in terms of meeting the goals of the organization.  And so I was able to persuade the salary committee that this was an appropriate thing to do, to give a little higher salaries to the people that are hired.  And so it was a very successful activity in my view in the sense that the workshops were those geared to answering the question, "What can computation do to advance the state of the art in this particular sub-discipline of chemistry?"  The sub-disciplines consisted of, for example, crystallography, physical organic chemistry, quantum chemistry, chemical kinetics and other areas, the more standard areas of chemistry, but where computers, computing can play a role.  And so with each of these workshops that we ran, we had a proceedings which gave condensed, contained condensed presentations, written, of what people had talked about and so forth which were distributed widely and advertised for their availability.  And so we had this three-pronged aspect of the organization, and that is, software for the library and the workshops but in addition, in-house research.  And so the people who were doing the software and so on also needed to do research and were doing research because the continuation of their careers successfully really depended on their research productivity, just as if they had been at a university or industrial research laboratory.  These were all Ph.D.s that I'm talking about, that I hired at that time.
Story_ID: 29079
Speaker 1: So the review came around within two years.  We, I laid out, just what we had done over this period of time.  And it became very clear that that point of view regarding NRCC which was, even before the creation, was the following, that, at that time, that is, fall of 1977, the heads of the top ten chemistry departments in the country had written to the National Science Board.  The National Science Board is the policy arm of the National Science Foundation.  They'd written to them saying that they did not want to see NRCC created, and the primary driver for this point of view was the fact that there's only so much money for research in chemistry.  And here you're gonna carve out a certain amount for research using computers.  Well, in 1978, this was not looked upon too fondly.  And relatively speaking, there was essentially less to show in terms of the potential benefits of computation in chemistry, but nevertheless, it also calls attention to the foresight of many people with regards to moving ahead in this general direction.  So after the review, it was suggested--suggested?  It was proposed that the organization continue for two years, then be reviewed again.  But it would continue under the basis of not having any staff; that I should sit in Berkley and dole out money to the field.  And I said, the head of Lawrence Berkley Lab and I agreed that this did not make sense, and so based on those constraints, we decided to close the doors of NRCC.  So then it was a case that some people said they would like to see me stay in Berkley.  You know, I had the option of returning, of course, to IBM, but in addition, because of the kind of exposure, should I say, that NRCC had, I received a lot of invitations to take jobs, a lot of them heading computer centers, which was not interesting to me because of my research interests but jobs of a variety of sorts at various places.  You see the sort of guidance coming out of those NRC studies which led to the creation of NRCC also led to the creation of comparable organizations in Japan and in England, and there was a negotiation with the heads of those organizations to share expertise, to share people and so forth, to raise the overall standard of software in the field in general.  So, all of this was budding, and then the one operation that closed doors is the one that started it all, namely, the one in the United States.  Anyway, getting back to the situation in terms of what I would do, I said, well, really, there's only one way that I will stay in Berkley.  They said, oh, you don't want to stay at the lab.  No, I'd go back to IBM first or go to one of these other places, only if I stayed as, you know, a professor.  Now, mind you, I had been selected in a nationwide search to be a director of the NRCC.  And people said, "Well, you know, it's not so clear that that can happen."  I said, "Well, I understand."  I'd had my Wisconsin experience behind me.  It happens or it doesn't happen.  But if you want me to stay, that's the way.  And point of fact, it was made to happen, that some of the faculty on Berkley chemistry at that time were very strongly supportive, I have been told with regards to my being appointed to the faculty and so that's how that came to be.  So in 1981, I was appointed professor of chemistry and of the Chemistry Department of UCB [University of California, Berkeley].
Story_ID: 29080
Speaker 1: So you've been accepted to start your research at Berkeley (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, yes. I was appointed professor of chemistry at UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley], and well, what's to say except that--oh, I should back up a little bit because the nature of my research changed dramatically while I was director of the National Resource for Computation in Chemistry.  One of the people I had hired was a physicist, condensed matter physicist, by the name of David Ceperley.  And David came into my office one day indicating he had a 100 percent of the correlation energy for the electron gas.  Now, the correlation energy is the difference between the theoretically, the theoretical exact energy for the system in energy of the system in what we call the mean field approximation, that is, an approximation in which you consider that the system is one in which a given electron is in the field of the N minus one other electrons.  And each electron is viewed in this way.  Well, anyway, this leads to well-known approximations in the electronic structure for molecules, it's called the Hartree Fock approximation, H-A-R-T-R-E-E, named after a fellow by the name of Hartree, who was English and Fock, F-O-C-K, who was a Russian.  And I won't say what the contributions of each of them was.  It gets a little bit technical for lay people in that respect, but simply to say that a 100 percent of the correlation energy was really quite an achievement.  But it was foreign model system and electron gas is one way of considering a solid, in which you don't treat the solid in its explicit detail, but basically electrons in this see our gas, electron gas model.  So I said, "Well, what about atoms and molecules, something which I understand."  He said, "Well, really I'm a condensed matter physicist," and to some extent was not so keen about pursuing that but would do in collaboration.  And this was done.  I hired a fellow in the last year of NRCC [National Resource for Computation in Chemistry] by the name of Peter [J.] Reynolds who came from the East Coast.  He had been a research professor at Boston University but had gotten his degree, his undergraduate degree, from Berkeley.  He was a Berkeley product, a very brilliant young man, who wanted to come back to the West Coast.  And so as a consequence, this led to our first publication of Quantum Monte Carlo for Molecules, which was published in or appeared in 1982.  NRCC closed in 1981 and based upon the quality of results coming out of that study, I--and having done electronic structure for my Ph.D., this was really fascinating stuff.  I mean the results were as good as the state of the art by any other technique that people were pursuing who had been engaged in electronic structure of molecules up to that point.  And so I changed my research direction when I came on the faculty, continued to pursue Quantum Monte Carlo for molecules.  And we began to build and extend the capability of the technique for larger systems, for higher accuracy, for understanding what was needed to improve upon results that had been obtained at that time.  I should add that one aspect in terms of Ceperley that I hadn't mentioned before, and that is the idea of hiring him was the notion of a fellow by the name of Berni [Julian] Alder.  And Bernie Alder is a scientist at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory [Livermore, California], internationally recognized and respected for his work originally in classical Monte Carlo.  Quantum Monte Carlo means that one is taking into account the fermion character of electrons and nuclei.  By that I mean that--
Speaker 1: Fermion?
Speaker 2: The fermion is a system which has spin, and that indeed, you can have regions of both positive and negative phase, which means that, in terms of Monte Carlo simulations, what you are doing classically is adding up numbers of the same sign to get a mean and an uncertainty associated with the evaluation.  With Quantum Monte Carlo because the system, the function can have both positive and negative phases, you have to find a way so that you end up adding up numbers of the same sign in order to get a mean and an uncertainty.  And without going into detail, it is possible to do that in the way that, something we call a fixed node approximation, which says that--well, I don't, I don't want to go into that.  That's another half hour or so just in terms of the general ideas of Quantum Monte Carlo in its simplest manifestation.
Story_ID: 29081
Speaker 1: How did you come up with the name Monte Carlo?
Speaker 2: Oh, Monte Carlo comes out of the fact that one is actually using a random number generator to make decisions with regards to whether or not you keep certain results.  The Quantum is associated with the fact that we're dealing with quantum systems.  So Monte Carlo actually had its origins in World War II in the simulation theory which was associated with the creation of the atom bomb.  And it is the fact that what you are doing is simulating the solution to problems for which you are not solving the exact differential equations that are associated with the problem area.  And so some people, in terms of electronic structure of atoms and molecules said, well, gee, we don't like that because this means that you have some uncertainty because it is (a) stochastic or probabilistic theory, but in point of fact, the benefit of it is that you can treat much larger systems than you can otherwise.  And it turns out you can treat smaller systems essentially as accurately as you can systems by other state-of-the-art techniques.  And something we've been able to do very recently is actually carry the Quantum Monte Carlo into a regime for size systems larger than any other, what we call first principles or ab initio technique can do.  So we're looking presently at systems of greater than three hundred electrons for calculations of energy-level differences.  But anyway to go back to that period, that was a period when we were laying the foundation in terms of our approach to this problem.  Others were as well, a handful of folks scattered around the world. [James] "Jim" Anderson at Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] was really a pioneer in this business.  The earliest practitioner for bosons, these are systems for which spin doesn't matter.  The system can be in a state which is not restricted in terms of aspects of fermions, that Mal Kalos was a primary contributor back in the early '60s [1960s] in this regard.  It's an approach which has been postulated by [Enrico] Fermi in '49 [1949] that said, based upon comments made by [Stanislaw] Ulam and somebody else, whose name escapes me at the moment, in a paper in the late '40s [1940s] and early '50s [1950s] as a way of solving the perfect crystal problem, that viewing the problem as a diffusion problem.  This comes about because one takes the time-dependent Schrodinger Equation, transforms it to imaginary time which means one has no real-time dynamics but one is solving this sort of problem which has a relationship to the problem of interest, and getting results which bear on the particular physical systems that one is interested in.  And maybe we should stop at (laughter)that respect, at this point.  But it's just a very powerful technique and also an interesting way to look at problems, how can you formulate problems which can be cast into the form of particular differential equations into a Monte Carlo framework, which means then that one can draw on even more easily the capabilities of large-scale computers, fast computers to provide you with these kinds of simulation capabilities which can give you answers to very difficult problems, in many instances, as good as--and even faster than, and sometimes for larger systems than you can treat otherwise because the algorithms that solve partial differential equations and ordinary differential equation systems directly require, in general, a lot of crosstalk between processors and a multi-processor or scalable system, computer system.  And in that respect, the Monte Carlo procedure does not require crosstalk.  You let each of the processors do its own thing, do the calculations based upon initial starting conditions and you collect your results at the end of the simulation period, add 'em up and get a mean and a physical uncertainty.  So there're real benefits to be derived from this kind of technique that people only have in more recent years reached a point where they could appreciate the value of this kind of approach.  And I think increasingly, no question about it, people recognize what the technique can bring to bear.
Story_ID: 29082
Speaker 1: This may sound like a stupid question, but could you describe how you do your work?  Do you work alone in your office?  Do you go to a lab?  Do you work with a team?  Do you work with computers or their--(unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, all of the above.  I mean my hands-on computing nowadays is non-existent.  I guide my research group.  At the present time, I have three graduate students, and let's see, one visitor and two postdoctoral associates in my group and discuss what needs to be done.  The graduate students have to sort of find their way to decide how to do that.  If they have questions, then they come and see me, but also discuss that within the group itself.  One of the majors ways that graduate students in my kind of field learn is from each other.  In the sense that some learn faster than others, some have learned different techniques than others have, and it's the sharing of that information which makes that research group viable that really even movement forward in terms of research in this respect, depends upon the quality of the graduate students and other associates.  And that's why Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley] is a very good place to be.  It gets some of the best graduate students in the world, and it gets a lot of them.  I've heard a lot of lamenting on the part of colleagues in other institutions, well, they're not seeing many graduate students and so forth.  Well, we see a lot.  We don't get a 100 percent yield, but we get a good yield of some of the very best students in the U.S. [United States] and abroad.  One of the limitations in terms of students from abroad is that they cost us as much as a post-doc does because unlike domestic graduate students who become residents of the state after a year, foreign students never can.  So when you become residents of the state, the fees fall dramatically and so that makes a big difference in terms of what one can do.  But it's really the quality of the graduate students and also the reputation of the institution.  As a consequence of the historic contributions that have been made that are so vitally important in terms of what we get done.  So I have a research group meeting once a week.  I meet with each of the graduate students for about a half an hour each week, with the post-docs on and off, infrequently, as the need arises, this kind of thing.  This is the way the interaction flows.  We write papers.  This is done, I insist that my graduate students and post-docs write a first draft.  This gives me a real sense of where they stand in terms of the development of their skill.  Critical issues are, besides being able to do the research, you know, to write it up and also to go and talk about it in an intelligible way that people can understand the principal things that you're engaged in.  And one needs those three skills to advance in my field.  There's no "if" "ands" or "buts" about it.
Speaker 1: That's true.  So I gather your experience at Berkeley is different than your experience at Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin, Madison].  You have a lot more support from--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I'm a faculty member here at Berkeley.  Wisconsin, I was a lecturer.  I mean you just gave lectures, had no students, this sort of thing.  It's so, it's a world of difference.  Had I gone the academic step ladder at Wisconsin, very likely to have been a similar kind of experience, but that didn't happen, you know.  So, it's hard to contrast the two because that was a very different position.
Story_ID: 29083
Speaker 1: Okay, then what happened, so you're here, and I know you got an outstanding teacher award from the National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers in 1986?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about that organization?
Speaker 2: Oh, that organization, call it NOBCChE.  The terms that's ascribed to it was one which was created in about 1971 by six black chemists and chemical engineers at a meeting they went to in Texas.  I joined the following year in this fledging period, and I heard about it, went to that first meeting and have been a member essentially ever since.  And in 1978 or '79 [1979], I received an award from them, the Percy Julian Award for pure and applied research and in 1986 an award for teaching, being nominated by members of the organization in the Bay Area [California] who knew the work that I'd been doing, this sort of thing.  So, it's a very nice honor to receive from folks who knew me and knew what I was doing, this sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us some of the other members of the group, black chemists and chemical engineers--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --and name some of the things they are doing, a few things?
Speaker 2: One was a fellow student at [The] Catholic University [of America, Washington, D.C.] during the time I was there, William M. Jackson.  Bill Jackson subsequently went on the faculty at Howard University for a number of years.  He's a laser chemist, known primarily at that time, written up in "Ebony" back in that timeframe for bringing in over a million dollars worth of research support when he was at Howard, who subsequently joined the faculty at UC Davis [University of California, Davis], and just this past year, stepped down being chair of chemistry at U.C-Davis, an outstanding scientist.  Let's see, others include, John [H.] Hall.  John Hall is currently head of chemistry at Morehouse College.  Also, Troy, Troy Story [Chemical physicist], a faculty member at Morehouse who had spent a sabbatical year with me during the NRCC [National Resource for Computation in Chemistry] days.  Let's see, just to go back in time, let's see, some of those who were in the organization.  Robert ["Bob"] Shepard who set up an organization to assist students of color in the sciences, set up an organization, called SEA [Science and Engineering Alliance], which I can't remember exactly what SEA stands for, S-E-A, in Washington, D.C. who had been, and worked with a major industrial company for a number of years and decided it would be better to assist young people in terms of their education and research and development by creating this organization which to a great extent interacts with historically black colleges and universities in chemistry and making connections with, in particular, Lawrence Livermore [National] Laboratory [LLNL, Livermore, California] in terms of internships,.  Gee, I have to, let's see, who else comes to mind?  Oh, Bill Guillory, William Guillory was one of the creators of the organization.  Bill got his degree from--ghee, where did Bill get his degree [University of California, Berkeley]?  I can't remember.  But he did research at National Bureau of Standards in part with Dolphus Milligan.  Dolphus Milligan was one of the early great black scientists, generally not well appreciated, did matrix isolation and spectroscopy at the Bureau of Standards who when I was, when he was first pointed out to me by my mentor at NBS, my mentor said, "You see that guy over there?"  He said, he's a hard worker.  This is Dolphus Milligan who became internationally recognized for his work in matrix isolation spectroscopy, which is some of the work that Guillory subsequently did.  Guillory held positions at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and Drexel [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] before going to the University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah].  And while at Utah, he became chair of the department of chemistry at the University of Utah and subsequently went into the human potential movement and created an organization which went around dealing with diversity training and so forth, got out of chemistry and did that sort of thing.  Another early member is Charles Merideth.  Charles was the chancellor of the AU Center [Atlanta University Center, Atlanta, Georgia] system back in the beginning in that timeframe, subsequently became president of New York [City] Technical University [sic, College], I believe is what the name of it was and so forth, for a number of years [1990-1996].  Let's see?  Others?  Well, let me think about that because I guess I'd have to dig in my files to trigger my memory a bit on that one.
Speaker 1: We understand.  You--
Speaker 2: Oh, the present head of it is [Joseph] Joe [S.] Francisco, running up now to the present time.  Joe is a professor of both chemistry and atmospheric science at Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana] who previously had been at Wayne State and has been a real driver in terms of NOBCChE, especially in terms of student chapter at Wayne State University and also has a student chapter at Howard University and a number of other places.  Oh, another name comes to mind immediately, and that's James Perkins.  James is at Jackson State University [Jackson, Mississippi] presently.  When I knew him, he was professor of chemistry at Jackson State University, and subsequently became head of the department and then became dean of science, then became a major player in the State of Mississippi research organization, then created his own company which, I guess actually sold video or, yeah, I think it was videos or some other media information regarding black scientists and has returned to Jackson State as, oh, director of science and is involved with Washington agency programs in conjunction with Jackson State and its science programs and development of students, and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, wonderful.
Story_ID: 29084
Speaker 1: You have taken what I consider to be kind of--I know you're interested in sports?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: Not baseball.
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: No baseball, but you like basketball and you football?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So you're the president of the PAC-10 [Pacific-10, athletic conference of ten universities in the western United States]?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I am the--
Speaker 1: PAC-10 Conference?
Speaker 2: --past, a past faculty athletes representative for the University of California, Berkeley.  The FAR [Faculty Athletics Representative] position is one which NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] institution has.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That position is held by a faculty member who is involved with confirming eligibility of all student athletes and deals with all issues related to the NCAA in a direct way--um, I must have gotten a smudge in my eye or something.  So in that regard, in the PAC 10 conference, it is the case that the president of the PAC 10 is always the FAR and the position rotates among the member institutions.  And I think it was 2002, it was Berkeley's [University of California, Berkeley] turn and so therefore, I became president of the PAC-10 Conference.  What does that mean?  I gaveled the meetings together.  The meetings consisted of the councils of each of the institutions.  The councils consist of the chief executive officer, president or chancellor, the athletic director, the senior woman administrator.  There's always a woman involved in the council who that institution designates as the SWA, Senior Woman Administrator, as the FAR, the Faculty Athletics Representative.  And we do the business of the conference at these meetings which the president gavels it together and sort of runs the meeting.  So for a year, I ran the meetings, you know, as the president of the PAC-10.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29085
Speaker 1: All right, thank you.  Okay, you've been, you belong to a number of organizations.  Could you tell us about some of your professional organizations?
Speaker 2: Yes, sure.  I'm a member of the American Chemical Society, have been so for many, many years.  When I was at Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin--Madison] '67 [1967], '68 [1968], I was the secretary treasurer of the Wisconsin Section of the ACS.  I'm also a past president of the Division of Physical Chemistry, that is, all the physical chemists nationally become members if they so choose of that particular division.  They don't have to.  But in that respect, I ran those meetings for a year.  And they--first you start off as president-elect, I guess it is, then president, and then a past president, so you serve a three-year stint for the consistency of the administration of the division.  And I'm also a member and fellow of the American Physical Society, been a member of that since back in the '60s [1960s] as well.  And I'm a past president or chair of the division of chemical physics, see physical chemistry versus chemical physics.  And again, the same succession of kinds of positions I held and oh, basically, it must have been the middle to late '80s [1980s] actually.  In addition, I am a fellow of the California Academy of Sciences [San Francisco, California], and I'm also a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science [AAAS].  I'm also a past board member of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, served on the board in the mid-'90s [1990s] and in that capacity, served on a variety of committees of the board in terms of its running and functioning and so forth, that sort of thing.  In addition, I guess '95 [1995], '96 [1996] was relevant, here is that I went on leave, IPA, inter-personnel governmental, something or another.  I can't remember what IPA, I think it's interpersonal government associate or something [sic, Inter-Personnel Agreement].  I can't remember the exact term.  It's the mechanism by which faculty remain whole in their home institution.  That is, you don't go on leave.  You may physically be away but in that respect, you are maintained whole in terms of your institution.  You might as well be there in the sense of there's no distinction made in terms of being paid or so forth and so on.  And you obtain a supplement for living elsewhere through the National Science Foundation.  I had been asked by the then director of the National Science Foundation [NSF], Neal Lane [Lane served as director from 1993 to 1998], if I would come back and assist him regarding issues of diversity both in the foundation and in terms of national programs.  He is someone I knew from the '60s [1960s] when we did similar kinds of rotational energy transfers, scattering theory.  And he had in the meantime become president of a college, had returned to Rice University [Houston, Texas] which was his home base, and gone on and had been appointed by Clinton [President Bill Clinton] to be head of the NSF.  And so based upon his request, I took leave, well, did IPA into NSF and was in charge of all of these aspects in addition to being a part of his close administrative staff, one of three folks who met with him each morning to discuss issues related to the foundation and its programs.  And I did that from March of '95 [1995] until the end of '96 [1996].  And it was a very interesting program.  I became very conversant with the national efforts regarding diversity, the books of [R.] Roosevelt Thomas [Jr.], for example, aspects of valuing others and all the other words to describe critical issues regarding how we should view one another in terms of equity considerations and so on.  But then returned and was doing research after 5:00 [o'clock P.M.] there.  Because of the time different. this could be done in terms of contacts with my research groups and that continued, you know, this sort of thing.  So it was a very interesting experience and one, which again, from my perspective, was one that I did not wish to pursue vis-a-vis the research directions that I had in mind to continue with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But a very valuable experience.  And Neal Lane is a superb individual.  It was a delight to work with him.
Story_ID: 29086
Speaker 1: I know you've had some wonderful, some interesting places you've gone on sabbatical and your leave, some of the places.  Could you tell us about some of the places you've gone on leave, some of the other universities you've been associated with?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: You got some wonderful shoes in Italy (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, in the past year I was at the University of Trento [Trento, Italy] for six weeks as a part of the Europe Abroad program, between the University of Trento and Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley].  Also, I had an award from the France-Berkeley Fund [FBF, established 1993] which led to my students going to visit a person also in Quantum Monte Carlo in France by the name of Michel Caffarel.  And so one of the people he collaborates with, Earl Lanosera (ph.) came and visited my research group, two people, Alan Aspuru-Guzik of my group and [Alexander] "Alex" Kollias visited France.  And so when it came time to write the final report, that was around the time I was returning from Italy.  And so I stopped off in Paris [France] for a week, and we got the final report put together and so forth for that particular period.  And so it's a very invaluable kind of program from the perspective of that University of California, Berkeley has these arrangements with institutions, excellent institutions around the world which enable these kind of exchanges to take place, supported by the respective institutions.  That's been invaluable.  Also, during the course of my sabbatical year, there was a major meeting in Cape Town, South Africa [in 2005], a meeting of the World Association of Theoretically Oriented Chemists [WATOC, later named the World Association of Theoretical and Computational Chemists] which I was invited to give a paper at and did so, and combined that with some vacation, a couple of days in Johannesburg and then Kruger National Park [Mopani, Zimbabwe] and so on.  And while in Cape Town, visited Robben Island, did all the tourist things in addition to going to the business sessions of a very beautiful place.  Cape Town is just an amazingly, I think, phenomenon in terms of the beauty of the place and so forth, notwithstanding, that they have their separate townships similar to Soweto [South Africa] in that respect, which is a real problem.  Johannesburg, we did go out to Soweto, and we had a black guide who talked about it.  He says, I wanna show you the good, the bad and the ugly.  The good being the areas where Bishop [Desmond] Tutu and Winnie [Madikizela-]Mandela lived, and then to the other middle-class areas which he called, so called them bad and places where electricity was being gained from the street lights into homes and then finally into places which had no floors.  I mean it was just dirt and so on, and very difficult living circumstances.  So you have that range of situations in the townships which is still a major issue that people in South Africa are contending with.  It's a major, major effort, and it was really just a fascinating time to be there.  Actually, it was right, following on the heels of that meeting was another one in Germany.  I had been invited to give a talk in Karlsruhe [Germany], a guy whose theoretical chemistry, who I knew well, was being honored.  And the people who organized that meeting asked me to go there.  Now, mind you, going from below the equator, warm, short sleeves, to Germany in January, and I had sort of called myself packing in layers, but it got cold in Germany.  My wife [Rochelle Lester] went with me as well, and it was just interesting.  It was just, just fascinating.  I mean, I remember one memorable evening we were out (unclear) meeting, and I started, wandered in this particular bar and restaurant and they happened to have, it happened to be the night they were giving people free exposure to various scotches.  So here we are, we've having this German beer, and then we're having all this scotch on one side and that sort of thing, just fascinating, and then having conversations with the bartender.  He left family in the states and so on, and it was just very interesting, very interesting kinds of involvements.  My first actually visit to Europe was to Germany as well, to the Max Planck Institut for Wave Motion (speaking German) and which after dinner one evening, we went--this is back in the days, of course, when the divide was still there, petitioning, and not far from Goodingham (ph.) was where the [Berlin] Wall was, and the Wall, there was no wall there as such.  It was an open field, and you could see conning towers [a watchtower], you know, along the route, and the guy discussed how people escaped.  They sent a pig out first, and they followed in the tracks of the pig.  If the pig makes it, you make it.  Yeah, this kind of stuff.  It was just very interesting.  They had to go various places and I found historically that really the only place that, the way to visit some place is by knowing folks who you have something in common with and willing to show you what exists in their local environments.
Speaker 1: Have (unclear) different viewpoints.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Actually, on that trip, I'm reminded that, that's when I first saw Rome and Florence, subsequent meetings in Perugia [Italy], which is, you know, the Perugia chocolates and so forth.  That's a fascinating place to be, some of the old Roman mosaics there and so forth, into Tuscany [Italy] and, oh, just on and on.  Oh, before the WATOC meeting in Lugarno, Switzerland, we went to Cinque Terre [Italy] which is along the western side of Italy, below Genova [Italy].  And that's an amazing place.  I suggest you visit given an opportunity.  Oh, it's, we stayed in a little town called Batoroso (ph.), and a little hotel which is right down near the train station.  And each night you were sort of rolled to sleep by the waves lapping up against the beach.  I mean it's, oh, it brings back memories, great memories.
Speaker 1: It certainly does.  I wish I was there now.
Speaker 2: And there are many other places too.  I think that's something which I learned many years ago when I was mentioning earlier that I had this job typing in the physics department of the University of Chicago.  And the person in charge was Robert Milliken who subsequently won the Nobel Prize in 1966.  And I was there roughly '53 [1953] to '58 [1958] or nine [1959].  And he was gone half the time.  He was the U. S. [United States] attache to England for the Office of Naval Research and so forth, and so it seemed to me, if you're in science, man, it's time to travel, you know.  That's one of the pluses, and I would say meetings--
Speaker 1: Well, hold for a minute--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 29087
Speaker 1: Okay, we have been talking about your, you've been on sabbatical and you're a member of all these professional groups and organizations and we've talked a little bit about your work.  Could you tell us about some of the applications of your work and all that you've been doing?
Speaker 2: Sure, I'll be happy to.  Actually, in the early work on collusions, and all the work that we do presently is basic research.  This is not tied to a product or a particular application as the case may be.  But in the collusions work there was one instance of a study we did which grew out of work that Charles [Hard] Townes, Noble Prize winner [1964] here [University of California, Berkeley] in physics and his group had taken place.  They were attempting to explain the anomalous absorption of infrared radiation in formaldehyde in the interstellar medium, that is, above the atmosphere is the interstellar medium.  And up there, there are clouds of formaldehyde and other species, and the issue here is one of spectroscopy.  Spectroscopy is tied to the issue of the emission of lines or the radiation that's emitted from the molecule which is a signature of the energy-level spacings that characterize a particular molecule.  In this instance, he was trying, he had postulated a, what we call a collisional pumping mechanism that the collision of the atom or molecule onto the larger polyatomic molecule that in this case was a hydrogen molecule onto formaldehyde, CH20, led to populations which were not those anticipated or to be expected based upon the background, black body radiation temperature, that temperature associated with the Big Bang.  There is an ambient three degrees Kelvin temperature which is associated with the Big Bang.  Well, one of my present colleagues, then a good buddy because I was at IBM [International Business Machines] at the time, William Miller, Bill Miller, had raised this question.  I think also a fellow by the name of Sheldon Green who was at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] at the time, that this was an important problem to resolve.  And we, in chemistry, knew that the potential that the Towns' group student had used was really not adequate, excuse me, for the accuracy needed to test this mechanism.  So the kind of close-coupling calculation I've talked to you about before is what we carried out for the case of treating the H2 molecule as a helium atom colliding with formaldehyde, this polyatomic molecule that, whose composition I just gave you.  And what we discovered, and in particular, "we" being, the primary driver being a woman by the name of Barbara [J.]Garrison [Ph.D., University of California Berkeley, 1975].  Barbara was a graduate student in the Berkeley chemistry department at that point, who came daily to IBM in San Jose to work with me on this particular problem, who, by the way, in the past, has already been chair of chemistry at Penn State University, who's done very well professionally in a number of ways, she pursued these calculations under my direction.  And what she was able to show is that based upon the accuracy of the potential energy surface that was constructed from computations done in my group and then use of that force or potential in a scattering problem, was able to show that it was not the lowest two doublets that were important for this collisonal mechanism, but that the lowest three doublets were important.  And we could show computationally that there were, it's what we call cooling curves, curves that show the behavior of the system as a function of temperature which fit the observations if you took the three lowest doublets, instead of the lowest two which had been the aspect discussed by the Towns group to explain the anomalous absorption back in the day.  So that's one aspect where the basic science we were engaged in actually led to an explanation of a phenomenon and that's been a widely quoted, quite widely referenced particular study.
Story_ID: 29088
Speaker 1: Actually, one I'm very excited about is one we're doing now in which we earned a million hours of super computer time in order to carry out a study of photo protection and bacteria in plants.  What this is all about is ascertaining in detail the energy transfer and energy-level separations for the mechanism by which plants and bacteria are able to protect themselves from radiation.  Basically what happens is that plants and bacteria absorb radiation from the sun.  There is, and this is done through antenna molecules which then end up having an energy transfer process occur, which if the system is not careful, with all this radiation coming in, on a hot day it might burn up.  And point of fact, carotenoids, carotenoids such as lycopenes, spheroidine, betacarotene is also a carotenoid, can carry off excess heat.  Okay, they can dissipate the heat so that the bacteria chlorophyll does not become excited, leading to formation of what we call singlet oxygen molecule which is a well-known detrimental molecule.  So the point is, you wanna avoid that, and the plants and animals can avoid that if there are carotenoids around to do this.  Where we are playing a role, and this generally well known, is to actually compute the energy level separation.  What is the amount of energy required to excite the carotenoid from its ground state to its lowest triplet and likewise, the bacteria chlorophyll, the other species involved, to do the same thing so that we know the energetic as well as wanting to compute, which we haven't done as yet, the energy transfer matrix element, which gives you as a result the magnitude of the energy-transfer rate associated with this process.  And so we're in the midst of doing this now.  This is being done for some systems which are larger than any other computational approach other than Quantum Monte Carlo can do nowadays with the rigor that Quantum Monte Carlo brings to bear which is comparable to the best rigor that one can apply to small systems.  And so, it's interesting that at the time, our estimates of computer time we needed were not sufficient.  I think we should have asked for about two and a half to three million hours because we were not able to complete the studies with levels of uncertainty that were useful to us in terms of the energy-level difference analysis that was necessary.  And so I have been in the last year or so, been in discussions with various people at IBM [International Business Machines] because the fastest machine currently available is the so-called blue-jean system, for which there is, the largest one has been put at Lawrence Livermore [National Laboratory, Livermore California] by the government for some obvious defense reasons and so forth, but there is, there are non-classified machines at the Watson Laboratory in Yorktown Heights which I mentioned earlier where I had spent some time.  And they have a program whereby one can utilize that system for this purpose.  We are engaged at the present time of making our codes sufficiently robust that we know it will do the job.  So we're running test, modifying various aspects of the code, actually introducing some time-saving features by reanalyzing and reconstructing aspects of just what the code does, is the simplest way to put it, so that it's as fast as it can be within our present view of the world in terms of algorithms for improvement.  So I would expect within the next few months we should be able to carry out at least the calculations of the energy levels--energy-level separations and then over the next six to eight months, hopefully compute the energy-transfer matrix elements.  And if we do that, it would be widely recognized in the photosynthesis community that we've made a major contribution to understanding how photosynthesis occurs and how bacteria and plants protect themselves.  And this becomes a very important aspect overall in terms of the world with regards to mechanisms by which you can grow more stuff and utilize it in a variety of ways.  You could think about biomass as one alternative in terms of energy.  This is work supported by the [United States] Department of Energy and it shows you, to some extent, the extent and range of basic research that's tied to very practical aspects of how much the gas costs at the pump and so forth.  So I think those are two aspects, two kinds of problems which I think immediately relate to applications.  But most of our work is not geared to that, though, nowadays, more and more, we, and others are geared towards, well, look, this is potentially what might come out of the research that we do.  So tying what we do to applications is an important aspect in terms of selling the research to funding sources.
Story_ID: 29089
Speaker 1: You mentioned you used a super computer for millions of hours.  So about how long, from the time you come up with your theory to the time that it's finally realized, about how long does it take?  Several years?
Speaker 2: Well, it depends.  It depends on the problem, depends on what you're dealing with.  The extension of our approach to these large systems has led to a total rewriting of our approach.  We have a new software practice--
Speaker 1: Really.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, because the previous code wasn't able to handle systems this size, so it meant really a reexamination of what was needed in order to compute systems of very large size.  So a new code was written.  The previous code was in Fortran [a computer programming language].  The present code is in C programming language.  The nature of what's necessary to keep the compute balance, so that no time is wasted in terms of additional steps, required analysis and interaction with other technical experts at Lawrence Berkeley National Lab [LBL, Berkeley, California] who were interested in assisting us to a large extent because we were the only recipients of the Insight Award [from International Business Machines, IBM] out of the laboratory, out of Lawrence Berkeley National Lab.  The first set of winners was a group out of the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] in cosmology and a group from Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] in turbulent flow.  And so, I mean the lab wants to look good.  They provided us with some people who do imaging and enabled us to actually have pictures which show how these molecules look, how they change, and how you can look at a particular molecule and see the calculation of the density, indeed, looking at such things as spin density, how much density is associated with the spin-up, spin-down electrons which starts to get a little technical (laughter), but electrons can up spin, down spin and so forth, and more or less things of this sort.  I mean it's helpful to visual simply because the system gets so complicated that people have no sense of what you're talking about unless you have some capability to show them what it's all about and what's being generated.
Story_ID: 29090
Speaker 1: Okay, sounds interesting.  You have been working in your career for a very long time, spending many hours in the lab.  How do you relax?  Do you have hobbies or other interests?
Speaker 2: Oh, sometimes.
Speaker 1: Sometimes?
Speaker 2: Well, for many years I played basketball until I blew out my knee and had it repaired, and played, well, again, longer until I had my rotator cuffs [rotor cuff, located in shoulder] repaired because I was having so much pain and had to give up basketball because as a result of the operation was such I couldn't do what I used to be able to do.  So I tried to learn golf and I'm still trying to understand, learn golf.  But I find that in the tug of war between playing golf and my research, the research takes priority.  I'm a movie buff.  I belong to Netflix so when a movie comes, I can get a CD because it turns on all my five speakers and I can get something like a theater effect in my basement.  So I, you know, whenever I can, whenever a new one, I watch a movie before I go to bed.  You know, I wake up in the morning, and I'm a little groggy, but I mean that's a reality.
Speaker 1: Is there a particular kind of movies you like or all kinds?
Speaker 2: Just good ones, just good ones.
Speaker 1: Good ones?
Speaker 2: I've started looking at some and five minutes into them, I package them up and ship them off.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, you can quickly tell, you know.  And even though it has a good, you know, reputation, oh, hee, what is this, you know.  What else?
Speaker 1: Do you read?
Speaker 2: A little, not as much as I ideally would like to because I have a lot of reading professionally that I do and I have actually even a reading folder which travels with me, things I've clipped out that I'm gonna read and so forth.  And I'm quite behind on that.  Oh, I like, well, I also engage in some, believe it or not, bodybuilding.  I exercise a few times a week in terms of weights.  When I was in, well, I had collaboration with a fellow in Rio de Janeiro [Brazil], Panamanian native who got his degree in physics, master's in Illinois.  I can't remember where he got his bachelor's and he got his Ph.D. in Brazil, who visited me when I was head of NRCC [National Resource for Computations in Chemistry] and gave him some software from that time period.  And he wrote, he sent me a Christmas card and said, "Brothers must communicate."  Okay, said, okay, so I had a sabbatical coming up, this was back in the mid-'80s [1980s], and I said, "Hey, I'd like to come down to Rio, you know, it's a nice place to go."  He said, "Oh, I'd love to have you, but we don't have any money," but there's a bilateral agreement between the U.S. and Brazil.  And so he wrote the respective paperwork and so forth and got funded.  So he visited me and I visited him.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Anyway, during the early stages of one of these visits, I went wandering out in the street and if you've ever been to Rio, you know that they have these exercise studios every other store, so to speak.  So I ran into this one guy, actually, how I ran into him was that my wife was in a jewelry store; turns out that the salesman she was talking to had been "Number Three," Mr. Rio, the year before.  He was a bodybuilder, a guy about five three [5'3"] or five-four [5'4"].  And he suggested to her to have me come by his studio; went by his studio, and that's when I began to learn bodybuilding techniques and all that kind of stuff, you know.  And it was warm down there.  You really appreciate that when you go--we only went down there, we did the science other times, but we only went down there at Carnival time.  So, you know, I mean Carnival is generally February [forty-six days before Easter], just before Lent, right?  And I wanna tell you, you know, you appreciate what the Puritans did to us when you go there.
Speaker 1: You do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you appreciate that, you're, gee, what a waste?  I mean, you know, hey, hey!
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Why?
Speaker 2: I mean this would be a very different country if the Puritans hadn't (unclear) (laughter).  In any event, off-camera we can talk about some of the aspects of it all, but in point of fact this was fascinating experience.  And my collaborator, we got a lot of work done.  He was a tremendous host, and we got a lot of science out.  We did all of the science during the year and we would see each other at Carnival where we could relax and talk to each other and so forth.  And the music was in the air.  And the last year that we went down, maybe it is early '90s [1990s], my wife [Rochelle Lester] danced in the Carnival, with the school, one of the schools.  She was one of the, she still has that outfit because of buddies, through my friend, he said, "Oh, yeah, we can get you in the parade."  They went out to this dressmaker on the outskirts of Rio, and they fitted her up, came back and, a little side story there, that she danced in the Carnival parade.  You know, it's really, you know, kind of a high point.  After that she didn't wanna go back down.  She said anything else would be a step down from that, you know, being at the mountaintop and stepping down.  But it was just, it was just so very interesting, you know.  So, and my, our son [William Lester, III] accompanied us a few times, and it was back in those days before he got married and so forth.  And, oh, he loved it too and so on.  We didn't take our daughter (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't?
Speaker 2: It's a macho community, hey, gee, I mean.
Story_ID: 29091
Speaker 1: You mentioned--
Speaker 2: Huh?  What's that?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  You mentioned your wife.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us something about her?
Speaker 2: Oh, Rochelle?  Yes, she's a wonderful lady, very smart woman, graduated Howard University [Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 1: You (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Huh?  What's that?
Speaker 1: You've been married a long time, you've been married about--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we've been married, let's see, 45 years [married in 1959].
Speaker 1: Forty five years?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Congratulations.  That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: Oh, thank you.  And we still enjoy each other.  I mean there are always bumps along the way, but, oh, what am I saying?  I'm on camera (laughter).  But, yeah, she's, how should I put it?  She, when we first got married, she was a social worker for the City of Chicago [Illinois].  We got married and went to St. Louis [Missouri] for a year.  I was at Washington University.  She became a social worker for the State of Illinois.  After finishing Howard, she taught elementary school for a few weeks and decided that really wasn't for her and she got out of it.  And then, as I jokingly tell people, then she got pregnant.  And so we went to D.C., to [The] Catholic University [of America, Washington, D.C.], and I took her into D.C.  And it was along with Camelot in the fall of 1960.  You know, we arrived with the Kennedys [President John F. Kennedy, 1961-1963], and so we stayed at different places.  Instead of 1600 Pennsylvania, we were at 1800 'D' Street, SE which is right around the corner from the old D.C. jail if you know the area.  And, oh, in a couple years, we had our daughter [Alison Lester] as well, you know.  So subsequent things that she did, she was a co-owner of a manufacturing operation of women's raincoats.  She was the head of the West Coast branch of 'A Better Chance' which placed students of color, high potential students in prep schools across the country, and a lot of, well, past member of the Fine Arts Commission of the City of San Jose [California] when we were there, a past member of the Board of the Museum of California here in Oakland at one point and likewise, the symphony, a whole range of things that she was engaged in.
Story_ID: 29092
Speaker 1: And you have a son?
Speaker 2: We have a son William [A. Lester III], the third.  William the third is a, as I mentioned, well, no I didn't mention.  Both of our children were born in Washington, D.C., since you can infer this.  I was at [The] Catholic University [of America, Washington, D.C.], early years in Madison [University of Wisconsin--Madison], the four years I was there, you know, and so forth.  And then we moved to San Jose, and they grew up in San Jose [California] basically, their formative years from '68 [1968] to '78 [1978] when I went on leave, that ten year period.  And I mentioned, you know, very little diversity in San Jose at that time, and probably not much more at this point in terms of black folks.  But then going on leave to Lawrence Berkeley [National] Lab [LBL, Berkeley, California] to head NRCC [National Resource for Computations in Chemistry], after three months I discovered I really couldn't do that commute.  I was trying to build this organization.  And I was staying over one night a week.  And I would drive from Berkeley to San Jose and my neck would be stiff.  So I actually had an amplified antenna put into my car.  And that didn't help because you go through Milpitas [California] and the signal would fall off.  Anyway, that's another story.  So we moved.  And so the kids went to Skyline [High School, Oakland, California], my daughter in her junior year and my son in his senior year.  He won a Regent's Scholarship to the University of California, Berkeley, majoring in electrical engineering and computer science and finished in that curriculum, felt that his Berkeley experience was such a grind he didn't wanna see the place for three years after finishing.  And I suggested he go to graduate school and his comment was, and "work like me, no way".  So, it was interesting also that prior to his finishing, he'd have summer jobs at Hewlett Packard [Company, HP].  He had become interested in IBM [International Business Machines] as well, but IBM said, no your GPA isn't good enough and so forth.  But when he finished with the experience he had gained at HP, IBM was interested in him.  And he interviewed down there, and he came home and he said, "Hey, Dad."  He said, "That's a sort of cold place."  I said, "Yeah, it's a little different from HP," I gather because I visited him subsequently at HP after he took the job there.  It's a much warmer place just in terms of the ambiance of a given work situation.  So he was one of the youngest first-level managers at HP, but backing up again, prior to his completing engineering curriculum by his junior year, he wanted to drop out and go race cars.  And I said, "Oh, hold it, son, hold it.  Let's finish our degree."  And he's very disciplined.  He said, "Okay," finished up, came home a few months later and had a helmet with his blood type on it.  And his mother [Rochelle Lester] liked to freak, well, what does this mean?  Well, got to know your blood type, if you have a problem in the race car.  So he started driving amateur.  His first year driving amateur for Sports Car Club of America [SCCA] led to his being named rookie of the year.  The next year, he said, "I gotta move up in class."  And I said, "Well, how are you gonna do that?"  Because the car he was driving was one for the, when he was rooky of the year, one which I'd helped him buy, oh, I think his first year as an undergrad because he had to commute from Oakland [California] to the campus 'cause he lived too close to be I n the dormitories.  And he had actually called me in Chicago and I was with my father [William A. Lester] at the time, to say that, "Hey, I found the car I want in Los Angeles [California]."  He had to be down in Los Angeles with his cousin.  So can we go down and see it, buy it?  Yeah, well, okay, next weekend.  We did this, flew down and there was this old lot, and way in the back of this old lot was this dingy old car.  And I said, you brought me down here for this?  He said, "Dad, that's a Mazda RX-3SP.  It's the hottest thing going."  He had the car done up, done up.  It went--oh, it was fast.  Generally not appreciated by some aficionados of racing.  And so he then got another Mazda his second year, and he won class that year.  Now, SCCA is road racing, that is, you turn left and right, go over hills and around and about.  And he did that for a number of years.  He did the Rolex Endurance in Florida [Rolex 24 at Daytona] and a variety of other races.  But, he still had hope to maintain the day job with Hewett Packard.  And then it became clear the only way that you really could live as a racer is to go NASCAR [National Association Stock Car Auto-Racing].  And you can't drive NASCAR for the Bay Area [California].  So in the meantime, he got married.  His wife knew of his interests.  Her name is Cheryl Sullivan.  Cheryl is a product of San Francisco, graduate of U.C. Berkeley, undergrad.  She holds a masters in Business from Stanford.  They decided to move to the Southeast, moved to Atlanta [Georgia] to enable her to continue her professional work.  She had been the marketing head of Bright Smile.  You remember Bright Smile, when she was out here, and this sort of thing so a very talented young lady in her own right.  So they moved to the Southeast.  Bill latched on in the diversity program that Dodge [automobile company] put together about five years ago and drove in that program for a couple of years.  He was the successor to Willie T. Ribbs [1955- , racecar driver, first black man to drive a Formula One car].  Willie had driven the year before and things had not gone so well.  Actually, in a head-to-head competition for the seat, Bill had done better than Willie, but Dodge decided it would take Willie because he had a more well-known name.  So after things didn't work too well the first year, they put Bill in the seat.  And things went reasonably well.  And then they said after two years, "Well, we don't have a lot of money for this."  So there he was trying to find another seat to drive.  And I should add, during that time period, he's being paid solely as a racer, okay.  In other words, there's enough money crossing the threshold, he didn't need to hold another job.  And, yeah, I was envious of his salary, but anyway, that's another story.
Speaker 1: Oh, really?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: He was doing well?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I mean the base salary is okay, plus a percentage of whatever, wherever you place.  And wherever you place, you make something.
Speaker 1: Oh, really?
Speaker 2: But that goes to the team.  There's a formula for dividing it up and all of that sort of thing.  And then Toyota [automobile company] decided they were going to field a team in the Craftsman Truck Series.  This is the Craftsman truck series that he's driving in, I should add.  And the last couple of years, he's been doing that.  I should add the first year or the second year with Dodge, he went on TV and became the color man for the NASCAR Southeast program on Sportsnet South.  You could always see him on Monday night, at our time [in Bay Area, California] 10:00 p.m. [sic, 4:00 p.m.] because at 7:00 there [Atlanta, Georgia], he would come on.  And, you know, he could handle himself very well behind the camera--behind the camera?  In front of the camera, you know, as a person making comments regarding the technical aspects of the races at all levels, at Nextel cup.  And in those days, it was the cigarette manufacturer with the cup.  Anyway, and I guess he's done a lot of things since then.  I mean he was, cover of "Black Enterprise" [magazine] and a lot of interviews of one sort or another, this sort of thing.  So things have gone well.  In the meantime, William Alexander Lester [IV] the fourth arrived about, now, two and a half years ago [ca. 2003].  We call him Alex because there's so many Bills in the family.
Story_ID: 29093
Speaker 1: So he's a fine little fellow, and then there's our daughter, you know, Alison.  Alison is about a year and a half younger than Bill, lives in Pittsfield Township, Michigan.  Her husband is Charles Ramsey.  Charles is a past assistant coach at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and is presently, became this Spring the head basketball coach at Eastern Michigan University [Ypsilanti, Michigan], his alma mater.  But they met here in Berkeley [California] because Charles came to Berkeley with Ben Braun, the head basketball coach at UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley].  And in the course of time, owing, they first met owing to the fact that Charles has a cousin who's a very dear friend of ours, Greta Clarke, Wims now, who was having this affair, had the kids come over and meet her cousin and so forth.  And then some time later they started to go out, and before you know it, look, hey, they're getting married.  How about that?  And then along came Tre.  Tre stands for Charles William Ramsey [III], the third Charles in Charles' family, Charles Ramsey's family.  He's five and a half now, and then about a year and a half ago, we had Chandler Jewel arrive.  So I have three grandsons, and things, they're delightful folks, as we were talking about grandchildren earlier, you know, just fantastic.  So.  Alison is a former stockbroker.  She handled jobs in San Francisco [California] for a number of years before getting married and this sort of thing.  And, oh, did some of that actually when she first went to Michigan, but then decided to stay with the young people, which I think has actually turned out to be a full-time job with these two young rascals that she's got.
Speaker 2: Yes, full-time job.
Speaker 1: So those are the kids.
Story_ID: 29094
Speaker 1: (Unclear) the kids.  We, one of your cousins is a HistoryMaker [an individual interviewed by The HistoryMakers archive].
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.  You mentioned William A.J. Ross.
Speaker 1: Right.  Could you tell us a little bit about him?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Jackson, Jackson's mother is a cousin of my paternal grandmother [Debora Lester].  And I first met her before I ever met him.  She would come to Chicago [Illinois] from Detroit [Michigan] which is where he grew up.  And got to know her, and her name for us was Cousin Julia.  And Cousin Julia had a son, Junior.  And that, (laughter), you see, his first two names were the same as mine, William Alexander.  And the Alexander we ascribed to an Uncle Alex from somewhere in Georgia who I met once, you know.  He must have been an institution to get so many folks named after him.  My father was William Alexander Lester.  And we met for the first time in the mid '50s [1950s] when I went over to visit relatives in Detroit.  So I have a number of relatives in Detroit, and my paternal grandmother's half brother is there.  And in that family, the youngest boy is the late Tommy Flanagan [1930-2001], the famous jazz pianist, as a matter of fact, whom many people have heard of.  So Jackson is an orthopedic surgeon, had a practice in the Bay Area [California] for any number of years and continues doing, you know, various aspects of orthopedic medicine at the present time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There was an article about him in 'Ebony Magazine'.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, yes.  Many years ago, he was, he was the first black captain, submarine captain, physician in the [United States] Navy which led to the article in 'Ebony Magazine'.  As a matter of fact, and he's married to Edna Ross, and Edna will kill me for not remembering her maiden name, "Ford", Edna Ford Ross, yes, of course, okay.  And they have four kids, three sons and a daughter.  The oldest is Halle Ross.  Halle is married to Kathy Earls Ross.  Kathy was just recently in 'Jet' last week regarding obesity of children.  She's on the faculty at Morehouse School of Medicine [Atlanta, Georgia].  Alice, Ally, is a practicing orthopedist in Atlanta.  The second son is Peter, Peter Ross.  He's married Charrie (ph.), and Peter is an engineer.  Third son is Benjamin.  Ben is married to Regina, and they live in the Bay Area [California], all--the latter two, Peter and Benjamin.  And actually Benjamin has a son, Justin, who is roughly the same age as my oldest grandchild, Tre.  And they have a daughter, that is Jackson and Edna, who's Roxanne.  We call her Roxie.  Roxie had been teaching elementary school in Atlanta [Georgia], but I think was moving to Chicago at this point.  Can't say for certainty there, but these are dynamic situations here and so forth.
Speaker 1: I understand.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, and I have another cousin, probably not in the magazine, but who's fairly well known.  He's a dentist in Phoenix [Arizona], Joseph [H.] Davis.
Speaker 1: We can talk about him in a second.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 29095
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about your cousins.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you were going to tell us about the one who lives in Phoenix.
Speaker 2: Yes, in Phoenix [Arizona] is Joseph Davis.  Joe is the grandson of my uncle on my father's side who married my father's [William Alexander Lester] sister, Florence Lester.  Joseph Davis, the father, Joseph Davis, Joseph H. Davis.  The son is a dentist in Phoenix, recently married again, has three daughters, I believe, and just a great human being; has a sister, Cheryl, who is in Chicago [Illinois], as a matter of fact; has a son, Rennie (ph.).  Rennie is, I guess a sophomore at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], as immediate cousins that come to mind.  There's also my uncle on my mother's side, my mother's brother, Lawrence O. Clark in Chicago.  His former wife was Francis Clark, and they have two daughters, Marlene Clark and Marcia, don't know Marcia's married name.  But did I mention my sisters to this point?
Speaker 1: We did in the first--
Speaker 2: The first part, okay.  And grandparents?  Did I mention--
Speaker 1: You can talk about them because you (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I just wanna mention on my mother's [Elizabeth Francis Clark] side, there's Lawrence, no, Oliver A. Clark, who was married to Willie Belle Clark, and Oliver was a lawyer in Chicago, but doing a little background, he was originally from Savannah, Georgia, attended Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia] around the turn of two centuries ago.  I remember seeing a picture of him holding a football on the football team around 1900 or something of that sort and got his law degree by going to law school a different place each year because he had to work.  He spent a year at Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], I think a year at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] and a year at Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin--Madison].  And then before he retired, got a plaque from Cook County for his work in the City of Chicago [Illinois] for fifty years in the practice of law in Cook County [Illinois, where Chicago is located] which is quite something, I would say considering race relations in Cook County and the Cook County Bar back in that timeframe.  Willie Belle Clark, my mother, mother's mother, was a business woman.  And it later became clear to me what she did.  She actually bought buildings on the South side and converted them for kitchenettes for people coming up from the South to have a place to live in that sense.  And they lived in a, she did, lived in an apartment building at 59th [Street] and now [Rev. Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Drive, was South Park [Boulevard, Chicago, Illinois], the floor underneath the Hansberry's who were big real estate folks and whose daughter is well known for "Raisin in the Sun" and all that sort of thing.  And then on my father's side [William Alexander Lester], I mentioned my paternal grandmother.  We called Dear Debora Lester, later Debora Williams who became a practical nurse through night school education after coming up from the South.  My father came up, I guess he was age two, from Atlanta, and the family lived in St. Louis for a year or two before heading all the way to Chicago.  My mother was born in Chicago, and I never knew William Mason Lester who was my father's biological father.  He died before I was born actually.  So that's, you know, it's just a few words about grandparents which I wanted to throw in.
Speaker 1: It's very important.
Speaker 2: Um?
Speaker 1: Important.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: You wouldn't be here I'm sure.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, sure.
Story_ID: 29096
Speaker 1: And you've lived in the Bay Area [California] for quite a while.  So I know you've met some interesting people in the Bay Area?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Would you like to tell us about a few of them?  Is there anybody in particular?  Your friend, you mentioned, Price?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, Price Cobbs.  Yeah, I mentioned Price because, it dates back a bit to when I was in IBM [International Business Machines].  And it was a case that, a woman by the name of Nettie Goddard.  Nettie was a member of the school system.  I think she was a special teacher in charge of curriculum in some way, back in the mid-'70s [1970s] who had encountered some difficulty in terms of the literature she was suggesting for classes, some of it involving black literature.  And so to assist her and to support her, we formed a committee called the black liaison committee in San Jose Unified School District which would meet with the principal around issues of what made sense to support in this general regard and to gain a support of the superintendent, whose name I remember, Charles Knight, at that point.  Anyway in terms of some of the difficulties Nettie encountered, she was able to get Price Cobbs' management systems to assist her in terms of issues of race in San Jose [California].  And, of course, by this time Price is known for a couple of his books, "Black Rage" and "Jesus Bag" and these sorts of things, Price being a very well-known black psychiatrist.  And so in light of this, I thought it would be an interesting and positive stuff to have Price present a program to IBM [International Business Machines] research.  I don't know it was before or after a particular incident occurred at the laboratory in which after a survey of laboratory attitudes and so forth, we all met in the auditorium.  And I recall asking the director of research, well, when will we have another black professional or something of that sort and saw him turn every shade of the rainbow.  It became very clear to me I had to go see this man real quick in order to keep my job (laughter), which I did.  And he said, when I came in, he said, "Bill, I thought you were--" quote, unquote--this is literally what he said, "I thought you were pissed off".  And I said, gee, no, no, I'm just inquiring about the situation, and proposed that, you know, either then or at some other time, that, you know, Price with the kinds of capabilities and techniques that he brought to the table.  We had an offsite retreat, and we had this program for the day, and, okay, and we had the program.  The next day the number two person in the laboratory said, "Well, Bill, you know, I didn't think that was very much."  You know, I said, "Ah, I couldn't argue with him."  Well, somebody pulled my coattail a year and a half later.  They said, Bill, did you know that?  I said what?  That's corporate headquarters had called Price the night before the retreat and had told him not to rile their Ph.D. scientists.  And I saw Price many years later, and I said, "Price, is this true?"   He said, "Yes."  I said, "Price, why didn't you just tell me, you know, give me some peace of mind as to why things played out the way they did, you know, and so forth."  But those things happen, you know.  It was good to find out eventually because Price was just going through the motions at this particular session.  And I said, gee, and I'd seen him otherwise, and so I, you know, it just, just didn't compute in my view.  So it was another, you know, interesting aspect, and it led to me philosophically for a while not to be involved in sort of mass movement kinds of situations to address aspects of inequality.  If there was a particular situation or incident that warrants response, then I would deal with that.  But this broad based, you know, stuff, nah, no, you know.  There were too many things going on to which I wasn't privy to, didn't know what was happening and what was going on behind the doors.  I didn't need that experience again, you know.  So it tamed me down a bit, and I guess I'm slowly coming out of it over the years because I do deal with actual situations and I help wherever I can.  But you know, getting on street corners and the banging the drum, no, no, I can't--
Speaker 1: That's not your personality?
Speaker 2: Personality, but based on your experiences, life experiences and so forth that--it's, I haven't seen that it's been all that fruitful, though congratulations to Marcus Garvey [1887-1940, founder of the Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League] for his successes at his time.  I saw the movie the other day, by the way ["Marcus Garvey: Look for Me in the Whirlwind", 2001].
Speaker 1: Oh, (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a documentary that was done, very well done not so long ago.
Speaker 1: Was it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Who was it who did it?
Speaker 2: I can't remember off hand, but if you Google "Marcus Garvey" with Netflix, you can find it.  So that's one aspect.
Story_ID: 29097
Speaker 1: Oh, another aspect of Pacific Management [Inc.] is when NRCC, the National Resource for Computation in Chemistry was finished [1982], it was suggested that I join the group at a retreat for young black professionals, that Pacific Management was running.  And it was fascinating to me to hear the stories of these young professionals who'd gone into new companies, I mean this is roughly 1980, '81' [1981] and I must be about fifteen, twenty years senior to most of these young people, you know.  So, to hear the situations they were dealing with in companies, a young guy who was the manager at some company in Green Bay, Wisconsin, every time he met somebody, they'd say, oh, do you play for the Green Bay Packers, you know, stuff like this, you know, which was mild compared to some of the other things you might encounter, which you know, were less telling in that respect.  But it was just interesting in terms of, I remember [Ronald Harmon] "Ron" Brown talking or conveying now separately at NOBCChE [National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers] meeting workshop the aspect of entitlement, approaching issues and how, indeed, in your mindset, you should recognize when you are entitled to something.  And that is the framework from which you operate as opposed to going hat in hand seeking something, you know.  So there's a lot of these dimensions which I think need to be taught and re-taught as I see young people out there nowadays that don't have a sense of these aspects, how to address aspects of their backgrounds which are, have not been completed vis-a-vis many of their white and other counterparts, that you need to recognize and work from in terms of positive steps on behalf of your own situation.  And the meeting of folks who can convey that with the folks who need it is still quite a chasm it seems to me.  And so in that respect that's what I feel very important to be involved with young people, even now at this stage of my life, you know.
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about that.  And I have the opportunity to do some of that just with students in general, being at a university [University of California, Berkeley].  It's a real plus, and this sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Oh, good, so you help to, you like to motivate young people?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, but to help clarify, thank you, not just motivate, to help clarify thinking on issues.  I really think that's an important aspect in light of the experience I've had and people who have been helpful to me, you know, in a variety of walks of life, you know, at various points.
Speaker 2: Do you belong to any organizations that are not related to your career, like fraternities or--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm a life-time member of Alpha Phi Alpha [fraternity].  I'm a member Sigma Pi Phi, the Boule and that takes care of the fraternities.  Any others?  No, that's it.
Speaker 2: Have you enjoyed working with those groups?
Speaker 1: I do.  I haven't been active with Alpha though for quite a while.  I used to be very active, especially in San Jose [California] when we were down there and even before that in Washington, D.C., but not so much more recently in terms of schedule and so forth.  So less so, in terms of Alpha, but as I say, I'm a life member.  I had two uncles who were members and so it was clear to me what fraternity I would go to when I was in undergraduate school.
Speaker 2: You've got no choice?
Speaker 1: Well, I had a choice, but I didn't wanna take it (laughter).  So, yeah, I pledged Alpha as a freshman walking in the door at the University of Chicago, was made by the beginning of my sophomore year, that sort of thing.  And also I'm a past national officer of Alpha.  I was the Midwest assistant vice president in about 1957, '56' [1956], '57' [1957], '58' [1958], somewhere in that region.  So I appear in the history book actually, at least online, the name for a given period of time.
Story_ID: 29098
Speaker 1: You've done a lot of things in your life.  Are there some things that you still wanna do, both in your career and in your personal life?
Speaker 2: That's a very interesting question.  I would just like to be successful in what I've been pursuing, see if it will come to fruition, the professional directions I set out in terms of these calculations I was referring to which I think will leave a stamp on the field.  That's very much a professional sort of thing.  Oh, as I say, I'd like to be able to play a little golf a little better so I'm not a drag on any foursome I go out with.  But that, in a certain sense, is not a big deal.  I can't lose any sleep over that in the sense that my professional work takes precedence over that.  Oh, I just always wanna keep close ties with my grandchildren for sure, no ifs, ands or buts to share thoughts and experiences with them, really, in terms of, if I can, you know, that'll be an important dimension.  And hopefully, that might be possible in light of their ages being so young and this sort of thing which leads me to think about writing some stuff.  So--
Speaker 1: Are you thinking about writing your autobiography?
Speaker 2: Yes, some time after retirement, for sure, I am.  Price was talking to me about this, he wanted me to do it, Price Cobbs, and some other folks have as well.  My wife [Rochelle Lester] has just reminded me of something regarding this whole aspect this morning.  I said, gee, I forgot about that (laughter).
Speaker 1: What did she say (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh, she talked about the experience and why, she didn't talk about it, she just mentioned it in terms of my not going on the academic step ladder and the point of view that [Joseph O.] Hirschfelder expressed to me.  I said, ghee, I'd forgotten about that in this context.  You know, if you're gonna write a book talking about your experiences and what I just indicated to you with respect to that time period which was a while ago, gee, already, the memory is starting to fade.  So maybe I have to hurry up.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You can start writing it down right now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  But I think that there're, you know, probably enough triggers lying around that could do it, and I mean, in the sense that I have files of one sort or another talking about this, that and the other, which brings up another interesting questions, that if I get around to that time, will it be done at home or will I still have an office at the university [University of California, Berkeley] and the question of, you know, once retired, I got a lot of stuff.  There's no way in the world I'll get that stuff put in my house, you know.  So the interesting question is what do you do with it and all that?  But that's far, far?  Well, it's a while in the future, at least, not far.  But, yeah, I have thought about writing something?
Speaker 1: You plan on working many more years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at least a few until my graduate students all finish, and also I have brought to fruition this current project that we're talking about and so on.  I think I need to bring that to closure, yeah.
Story_ID: 29099
Speaker 1: Okay, that's good.  Okay, is there anything, okay, do you have any--you seem to love what you do.  Am I correct?
Speaker 2: Well, there's a ying and a yang to everything (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, you seem to be--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I get, there are some benefits.  I come in and I'm not dragging.  I mean I, and I find it interesting in the course of my days that I can find time talking to students and so forth and gaining a sense of how they're coming along and so on.  But there're other times, fighting the bureaucracy, saying, I don't need this.  You know, that, one of my students owes some fees.  Well, the student is gone.  I don't have unrestricted funds to pay for this, and I'm sure not paying for it out of my pocket.  Oh, are we on camera (laughter).  But, you know, for somebody, if somebody were to suggest that, I would say, you know, you've got to be kidding.  You guys owe me a bonus.  You want me to pay this?  So, I mean this weird stuff set up by some policies which, now, who set these policies?  What were the conditions?  Do they bear on the circumstances or situation we're talking about presently?  I don't think so, but we have to see.  So, you know, it's, you know, I enjoy what I do and I think overall, when you add it up, the pluses outweigh the minuses.
Speaker 1: You never thought, oh, gosh, I wish I had been a doctor or anything--?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  That, you know, when I was a young fellow, I remember an older man saying, "Gee, I wish I were young like you and just start over again"--I think it was either to me or to somebody else, I can't remember.  I must have been, because we were still living in Woodlawn [Chicago] at the time so I must have been under eight years of age, and I remember this vividly.  And I said to myself, I will not live a life of regrets.  We make choices in life and you live with those choices.  I think about 'em every now and then, and I have no regrets.  I mean maybe I could have gone this way and stayed with management at IBM [International Business Machines].  No, I wouldn't have liked that.  Maybe I should have stayed in Washington with NSF [National Science Foundation].  No, I didn't really, you know, vis-a-vis what I'm doing, as you say.  So, no, no, regrets.  Keep it going, keep it going, make it happen; live each day fully for who knows what tomorrow holds.  I mean it's a critical issue in terms of my philosophy.
Story_ID: 29100
Speaker 1: Do you have any hopes or concerns for the African American people?  How do you see--we've come a long way--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But how do you see the future of African Americans in this country.  We're becoming a smaller and smaller minority--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --compared to the Hispanics?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, I think it's not so much numbers that I'm concerned about.  It's what we're doing as a people.  I mean just today, and maybe you saw it as well, the stats related to the number of black males in college versus black females.  I mean, my gosh, where are the men?  You know, the whole business of levels of incarceration.  Why even that because of education?  If you look the recent documentary done on Demetrius Hook Mitchell.  Do you know the name?  You know the name?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Hook Mitchell was an extraordinary playground basketball player in the Bay Area [California], okay.  And what happened to him by nature of his early life experiences and how people get exposed or can get exposed to situations which can improve their situation with just a little bit of intervention, you know, this sort of thing.  One, I was once involved in a project that worked with young folks over in Richmond [California] in an area of Richmond I'd never seen before.  And, oh, wow, you know, and I was doing demonstrations in science and so forth and the kids, you know, were loving it, but still in all, the overall sort of daily life experience that these kids were having, it wasn't clear to me that, you know, any of them would get out or have a sense of what's necessary to get out or would have the educational preparation to make that transition at some subsequent point.  And then I look back, and I say, well, it was the accident of having lived here, that I have a decent education, and we moved there.  And by accident, we went to this.  Hey, there are rolls of the dice all along in terms of opportunities, much less choices that you consciously might make.  And as a young person, you don't have those choices to make.  It's sort of accidents of history that these things happen, that I am sitting here with you now.  So whatever one can do consciously to improve the situation, it's critical.  And so that's why I do, you know, what I can in this regard and try to simulate others or to assist other situations.  For example, there's MAAT.  You know about MAAT?
Speaker 1: Tell us about MAAT.
Speaker 2: The Mexican--Mexican American?  The Museum of African American Technology.
Speaker 1: That's right.  It's gonna open very soon.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: It's gonna open very soon.
Speaker 2: It's open.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.  I was thinking about something else, I was thinking about the other one in San Francisco.
Speaker 2: It's on, it's at 14th [Street], and what is it?  Franklin [Street, Oakland, California].  You know where Geoffreys [Inner Circle] is?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay, downstairs.  You know where Joyce Gordon's [sic, Gordon Joyce] picture gallery?  Right next door, there's MAAT, which is a small neighborhood, community-based sort of science museum.  And they're trying to keep that little fledging open.  I'm on the board of it, along with Pete Bragg [physicist, interviewed by The HistoryMakers 2011].  Do you know Pete Bragg by the way.  Have you done Pete Bragg, by the way?
Speaker 1: No, I haven't.
Speaker 2: Okay, he's a retired professor of material science here at Berkley [University of California, Berkeley].  And he's got stories to tell, I'm sure.  And this happened.  The doors open one time and a couple was walking bad, and said, well, we need you actually to teach high school down the street and so forth.  And I said, no (whisper); the situation in terms of black instructors.  It's just young people would see somebody in this regard, doing that sort of thing, that that happened so infrequently that it appears here and probably in other places as well, that people are saying, there are no role models.  And I go, well, wait a minute.  That was being said when I was coming along.  You know, where are we here, you know, and all of this.  So in the nature of the educational experience being what it is, the nature of, it seems to me, society that the young black folks are exposed to and what I view of my experience, from a mixed bag of, gee, I mean he looks like an old fuddy duddy, but is that gonna get you there, you know, in terms of things you need to be doing to assist yourself.  Education was the way out.  I was told, get an education and it will be better.  How much better?  Who knows (laughter), but at least it will be better.  Absent an education, look what you're dealing with, and all the stats point to it.  At least you'll do better financially, except for that rare hip-hop phenom who may have some money for a certain period, but will they keep it?  You know, or basketball phenom, as far as that's concerned, and this sort of thing.  I don't know.  You know, some will and some won't, but the question and issue of being exposed sufficiently that you have a sense of what the outcomes might be if you travel in a certain way, I think is so important that whoever, I can't, you know, I try to comment, intervene, be involved, this sort of thing, you know, after the fundaments, oh, gee, I gotta teach my class and (laughter) so forth and so on.  But even that is interesting.  It's also interesting, I do not, in my undergraduate, physical chemistry course have a single black student.
Speaker 1: You don't?
Speaker 2: Un-un.  This is a junior level, physical chemistry course here at UC Berkley, okay.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They're either chemistry or chemical engineering majors.
Speaker 1: Oh, my.
Speaker 2: But okay, come over to this side of campus.  Really, it changes, it changes dramatically, complexions change, they've got a few Latinos, Latinas too, as a matter of fact, doing well.  It's a very interesting aspect.  In that regard, I helped our "Upward Bound" program a number years back and put together a proposal for their summer Math Science Institute.  And the young lady who was in my course as a product of that.  This is Upward Bound, is where, if you're limited by financial income in terms of whether or not you qualify for the program, this sort of thing.  And I'm just, I was just delighted.  You know, she told me her background.  I knew the guys who put the, who head the program, Keith Flory, Munyiga Lumumba, just to see that one of their products, you know, is now into stuff.  Hey, you know, that argues a great deal cause the nature of her life experience and what she's gone through in experience, then I know that she'll be sensitive to these issues with those whoever she comes in contact with, you know.  So that it spreads that way, but that is not sufficient, you know, in terms of that one aspect.  And this aspect of black males and opportunities in our country is a deep and troubling issue.
Speaker 1: It's scary.  It really is scary.
Story_ID: 29101
Speaker 1: Are there any values that probably your parents or your grandparents taught that are really important to you and that you had to pass on to your children?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess whatever I had to pass on to my kids, they have (laughter).
Speaker 1: I mean, you know, hard work?
Speaker 2: But in terms, yeah, well, hard work.  I mean, you know, the issue of integrity is a critical one.  Mainly, very basic stuff, integrity, honesty, yeah, hard work, is a part of it.  But I like to say, working smart, whatever that means for you in whatever situation, you know.  And that takes some thinking about, you know, things.  I think that, those are the sort of the general sorts of issues that have always mattered and continue to.  I haven't thought about this in that way, you know, in terms of leaving a record.  I'll have to wait for the book, I guess (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, and we have, I can hardly wait for the book.  How would you like to be remembered?  What would you like for people to say about you?
Speaker 2: Oh, did the best he could under the circumstances he encountered.  Hey, you know, in all aspects.
Speaker 1: Okay, good.
Story_ID: 29102
Speaker 1: Well, I wanna thank you.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, thank you--
Speaker 1: --for being so gracious with your time, for coming back and meeting with us again.  I have enjoyed it.  I've--I have a little of confusion, but I've learned a lot.
Speaker 2: What's confusing?
Speaker 1: Well, I'm, I guess it's the language.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  It's when you're talking about your field of work because it's theoretical and specialized (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It's this, the science, your field.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And so I'm sure a lot of people, you know, can follow you to a point, and then unless they're with you (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, that is a problem, no question about it.
Speaker 1: That's not easy.  But I did learn a lot, and I really enjoyed it.
Speaker 2: Because that's I'm teaching right now, the rudiments of Quantum Mechanics to these juniors I was mentioning.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Well, I think too, I know that I do not have an adequate grasp of it, but I've been fascinated by this whole concept of randomness and to know that that's really important in what you do in the whole Monte Carlos thing because that's what it's about.  It's how you really create random numbers, and I know those, when you're working with large-scale problems, that's what allows you predict things, I think, if I understand that correctly.  And it's, I don't think, by the population as a whole, and I'm probably pretty much a part of them, but maybe a little, understood, like what, it's really hard to create something that's truly a random string of numbers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it is, it is.  There're always pseudo-random, is the term we ascribe to them because no matter, there're a variety of algorithms to generate them.  So they're not truly random, random numbers.  They are pseudo random numbers which, for which it takes a long cycling before it comes back.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  But if it is pseudo-random and the kind of models that you're trying to create, that's a big problem, isn't it?
Speaker 2: No, not really if the string is long enough, you don't see recurrents.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's especially important when you use multi-processor systems because you need different seeds in all the processors for the whole thing to be truly random in terms of what you're doing.  And some people have discussed this.  This is not, you know, not a trivial issue.  I mean it's being discussed.  It is a research area as a matter of fact, but to this point, there appears to be no problems associated with it as far as anyone's been able to see to this juncture.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  So does the Monte Carlo method generate pseudo random numbers or random numbers?
Speaker 1: Well, it uses the pseudo random numbers--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: --but the pseudo random numbers are really the random numbers that we talk about.  And I'm telling you that fundamentally, they are pseudo random because there's an algorithm for generating them, okay.  And now, you could have, well, I don't know what it means to have truly random numbers.  You can put the numbers you might generate by whatever scheme you generate through a test to see whether or not there's recurrence.  Recurrence means that they cycle back at some point, but if it's way off into the space at some point, then, you know, it doesn't matter.  It doesn't matter, you know, really, that sort of thing.  I'll have to think about how to say some of this stuff--
Speaker 2: In your book, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: --when I do, well, I'll be giving a talk in Durban, South African, I mentioned to you, to a bunch of laser types in November, and I'll be talking about this method, you know.  And even though they are scientists, they don't play my game.  So I have to, you know, sort of break it down.  I'll give one talk on basics and the other fun applications, sort of talking about what we did do with this technique, but the first one is just to give an idea, what is it that we do at a level which is understandable.  So it makes you step back and look at what you're up to, this sort of thing.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Right.  It's almost harder to reduce or distill into a short answer than it is to give a long answer.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because it's so dependent on your background, one's background, you know, this sort of thing.  But I have the advantage there.  These folks know quantum mechanics (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's right.  (laughter)  So they've got a head start.
Speaker 1: Yep, yep, yep.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, thank you again.
Speaker 1: Thank you
Story_ID: 29103
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm William A. Lester, Jr.   William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, the A stands for Alexander, A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R, Lester, L-E-S-T-E-R, Jr., as a suffix.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born April 24, 1937 in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: And what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm presently a professor of the graduate school in the department of chemistry at the University of California, Berkeley.  I am a theoretical chemist, which is to some extent, a sub-section-yeah, I guess it would be a sub-group of physical chemists.  And when I was a professor of chemistry, which was up until 2010, I taught courses and did research and service for the department for the university.  Becoming a professor of the graduate school in 2010 and continuing to now, I continue with research, because I have research support and service to the institution.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is November 7, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're presently in my office on the campus of the University of California, Berkeley in Gilman Hall, and my office is Room 212.
Story_ID: 29104
Speaker 1: So, what we're going to do today is follow up on some questions that we touched upon in 2004, and kind of bring us up to date, I guess, with your biography.
Speaker 2: Okay, great.
Speaker 1: So, I think we wanted to talk a little bit more about the quantum Monte Carlo and the related approaches.  Can you sort of--
Speaker 2: Yes, I'd be happy to do so.  Quantum Monte Carlo is the primary research topic that I've been engaged in since roughly 1980-'81 [1981], back when I was director of the National Resource for Computation and Chemistry [NRCC].  That organization, NRCC, was a [United States] Department of Energy and National Science Foundation [NSF] funded entity, which is an outgrowth of major National Academy of Sciences studies as to what and how computation could advance the field of chemistry.  On my staff at that time, a fellow I'd hired---and by the way, I should add that I hired all staff during that period, building the organization from scratch.  I hired a, condensed matter physicist, to work in chemistry as our expert in statistical mechanics.  His name is David Ceperley, C-E-P-E-R-L-E-Y.  David joined the NRCC, to a great extent, at the urging of a fellow theoretical chemist by the name of Bernie Alder, A-L-D-E-R, first name, B-E-R-N-I-E.  Bernie is internationally recognized, and was so then, as a primary developer of molecular dynamics, the solution of the motion of systems based upon classical mechanics.  And David had worked for a research advisor who was primary, with regards to the development of the quantum Monte Carlo method.  Now, what do I mean by quantum here?  Monte Carlo is a long-standing, well, relatively long-standing research direction, which had its birth, to a great extent, during World War II.  It was the basis of simulation associated with creation of the atom bomb coming out of Los Alamos [National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico].  Classical mechanics, of course, relates to systems large enough so that one need not worry about so-called quantum effects.  Quantum effects are associated with the behavior of electrons and their quantum behavior.   By that, I mean we can step back and say well, what is special about electrons?  Well, they can display both particle and wave motion.  This is the wave particle duality.  So, then molecules--you have this situation in which the behavior can be, depending upon the particular problem or situation, that is, speed of the systems that is of the molecule itself, can be either described classically or mechanically.  If the motion is relatively slow, then it takes on quantum behavior, which means that it is describable by something called a wave function.  A wave function is a fully quantum mechanical term.  It is based upon so-called Schrodinger [named after Austrian physicist Erwin Schrodinger] quantum mechanics, as opposed to say, matrix mechanics, which is an alternative formulation of quantum mechanics.  The Schrodinger equation is a wave equation whose solution is a wave function.  So, we don't have time to go fully through quantum mechanics, but all of the information on a system is contained in the wave function.  So, if we knew the wave function, we could say everything about the properties of that particular molecular system.  Now, it is a case that as a wave, the function has both positive and negative regions.  If you think about a, let's say, a mathematical function such as a sine or a co-sine we know that has values above and below the node of the system.  And this is associated with the aspect of phase. Is the phase positive or negative?  It depends upon whether or not you're in that region of the wave function, which is above the node, the zero of the function, or below.  Well in Monte Carlo, you can only get results for quantities of the same sign, s-i-g-n.  But, if you have a wave function which can display both positive and negative regions, depending whether you're in a positive region or a negative region, you can't do Monte Carlo, because you don't have a positive definite quantity for which you're going to sum to get some result.  That is, add up the contributions.  So, we have--it was developed and had been available to a limited extent in the late '70s [1970s], to a great extent in the mid-'70s [1970s].  Well, no, let's back up even further.  It had been postulated by Enrico Fermi [Italian theoretical and experimental physicist] during his days at Los Alamos, that one can solve for the motion of a pure crystal using a quantum Monte Carlo idea.  He never did anything computationally in this regard, but the notion, the idea, to my understanding, was put forth by him.  And that idea was contained in papers by Ulam [Stanislaw Ulam, Polish American mathematician], and someone else whose name I can't recall, from that time period.  After that, the first study or publication that directly described, or was dealt with using quantum Monte Carlo as an approach, was work by Malvin, M-A-L-V-I-N, Kalos, K-A-L-O-S.  Mal, I believe at that point was at the Courant Institute [of Mathematical Sciences, New York].  He was a theoretical physicist, and by the way, I should add, is still around.  He went from Courant to Cornell University [Ithaca, New York], and after that he was director of one of the National Science Foundation's [NSF] super computer laboratories when they were first created, a number of years ago.  And then with retirement from that position, he joined Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory [California], where he is to this day.  So, in many ways, Mal has been a key player in the development of quantum Monte Carlo.  And David, separately, the fellow I hired, had interacted with him, but also did his work with a fellow by the name of Jeffrey Chester, in the physics department at Cornell University.  And so, it was a case that Bernie Alder approached me with regards to the notion, you know, "You really ought to hire this guy."  "Oh, really?"  And, "Oh, he's very good."  And I saw his CV [curriculum vita], and I said, "Yeah, he is."  What was the motivation on Alder's part?  He wanted to learn how to do quantum Monte Carlo.  And so, while separately he was working in our organization as the expert or the person to handle the development of software for statistical mechanics, he worked with Alder, going out to Lawrence Livermore Laboratory from time to time, to do calculations on a system which was a model system.
Story_ID: 29105
Speaker 1: It was a model for a condensed matter system.  That means a solid, when I say condensed matter, it's called electron gas.  Electron gas is a sea of electrons in a medium, no nuclei, just a bunch of a collection of electrons, so we'll leave it that way.  And they were able to get a 100% of the correlation energy for the electron gas.  Now, what do I mean by correlation energy?  Well, it's a difference in energy between the exact non-relativistic energy for the system in the Hartree-Fock approximation. Hartree, English physicist, H-A-R-T-R-E-E, and a Russian physicist by the name of Fock, F-O-C-K.  Hartree-Fock is what we say in English nowadays.  And Vladimar Fock was that individual's name.  And the model in that approach is that one views, again, the electron as existing in the field of the N-minus 1 electrons of the system, of the inner electron system.  And you consider each of the electrons individually in the field of the N minus 1 other electrons.  And you call this the Hartree-Fock energy.  The difference between the exact non-relativistic energy and the Hartree-Fock energy is called the correlation energy.  It's called the correlation energy because that energy is associated with the instantaneous interactions of the electrons of the system with each other.  So, if you get 100% of the correlation energy, then you have described the energy which results from the fact that the electrons [do] field, each on an instantaneous basis.  And for many years, this had been the Holy Grail, that is, the major obstacle in terms of more accurately describing the energy, or computing energy and other properties of the system, to the extent that the wave function for the system yielded all the correlation energy.  Then you had, basically, an exact solution.  In point of fact, that was the goal never reached.  We theoretical chemists and many theoretical physicists, concerned about condensed matter systems and molecular systems, have always been involved in trying to improve the description of correlation, never quite reaching it, because only in this model system of the electron gas, did one get 100% of the correlation energy.  And so, the efforts on the part of theoreticians was to generate improved approximations that got you closer and closer to the full treatment of correlation, whatever the system is that is of interest--be it atoms, molecules or solids, as the case may be.  So, the point here is that with 100% of the correlation energy from the electron, for the electron gas, I suggested that, what about atoms and molecules--as a chemist, theoretical chemist.  And separately, I was not too attuned to this idea as a condensed matter physicist.  And so, an excellent physicist who had been an undergraduate at [University of California] Berkeley, by the name of Peter Reynolds, had contacted me earlier with regards to coming out.  He was at that point a research faculty member at Boston University.  And I said, "Indeed, hey, if you come out, I have a year's salary for you, if you work on this problem."  "What's the problem?"  "Carrying out quantum Monte Carlo calculations on systems of molecular interests."  And this was done, and the quality of the results was as good as any correlated method that existed in chemistry at that point.
Story_ID: 29106
Speaker 1: On this basis, I should add, I changed my research direction.  I had been engaged, since beginning of my post-doctoral study, in the calculations of cross-sections for a collisional energy transfer, for the most part.  What do I mean by that?  That atoms collide with molecules and molecules with each other.  They can undergo, in general, three different processes.  Elastic scattering, where they bounce off each other without exchange of energy; with inelastic energy transfer, where they exchange energy between the partners; or reactive collisions, in which an atom of one goes over to the other, this kind of thing, another standard way, when you think about a chemical reaction.  And I carried out such calculations at such a level that they became standards for accuracy.  And even in one case we showed how an experiment was wrong, because the results did not agree with what we were able to generate.  There's a fair amount of detailing involved here to provide the basis for why, indeed, our computational results could be believed, to the extent--and establish the error associated with these experiments.  But in point, there was the case.  But there was a limited aspect to these calculations.  And that was that the ability to carry them out depended upon the energy level spacing of the molecules in the system.  How much further apart were the internal energy levels?  What do I mean by internal?  The rotational and vibrational energy level spacing, if it's large enough, reduces the expansion of the wave function for the system, so that the number of equations which arise out of this expansion are small enough to be tractable with the kinds of computers that were available at the time.  And so, what would happen as you went to molecules made of heavier atoms, the energy level spacing gets closer, which means that in order to make the calculation tractable, you had to go to lower relative collision energies.  Relative is how fast one particle is moving with respect to the other.  And so, it will almost become the case that you had to carry out calculations at energies which represented high atmosphere, interstellar media, which was not of interest to me as a chemist who wanted to deal with problems that occur on earth.  And so, I was ripe to make a transition, and this is what I did after seeing the results for quantum Monte Carlo for the molecular systems which appeared in an article of General Chemical Physics in 1982.  And since that time, we've carried out a wide range of studies using the quantum Monte Carlo technique.  We explored other properties of molecular systems using the procedure.  We found, really, that it was a calculation of the energy, which was where quantum Monte Carlo had it over other competing techniques.  And it was as good as the best available procedure that was then available, and even to this day, the so-called coupled cluster method with single and double excitations and treatment of triples, and so forth.  This gets into the jargon of the business, and I don't think we want to go any further with this, unless there are some folks who are really interested.  And then they should get in touch with me, I think that's the thing to do.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, that's what we've been pursuing ever since.  And to this day, it is now generally appreciated that quantum Monte Carlo stands, at present, the most accurate technique available.  Well, why isn't it used by everyone?  Because it is very computationally demanding.  We use the largest computers available in the world in this regard. And based upon the quality of the results that we've generated over the years, a number of years ago I received this--or earned--something called an INCITE Award.  This is I-N-C-I-T-E, all caps, which I can't remember exactly what that acronym refers to, but it's a [United States] Department of Energy program for making available large amounts of computer time on the very largest systems available.  And this must have been about 2006, when we were going to look at photosynthesis processes at the molecular level.  And we made some headway with that, but then we had to depart from it, as personnel changed.  And the capability which we had developed could not that easily be transferred to people without great experience.  And even last year, this past year, I received another INCITE Award, to look at sequestration of carbon dioxide by ionic liquids, I-O-N-I-C.  And that's work that's going on presently in my group. And we're looking at physisorption, the actual energies of physisorption associated with CO2 [chemical formula for carbon dioxide], interacting with one of the ionic, a couple of the ionic liquid systems which are available.  So, let me end that at this point.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 29107
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about graphene in your work.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.  Owing to interaction with a colleague in mechanical engineering, Professor Michael Franklock, some years ago I learned that he had the experimental capability of making graphene.  What is graphene?  Graphene is a single layer of carbon items, that in principle or in general, is infinite.  And this has become a system of very high interest in physics, and to a fair extent, in chemistry as well.  But our focus, that is, in terms of the interaction with Professor Franklock, was in terms of looking at what we call graphene patches, sub-sets of the full infinite dimensional system, where you might have a patch consisting of five by six rows, five say, vertical, six across a patch filled in in that way--and looking at reactivity, that is, reactivity along the one direction versus the other.  And that, I should indicate that the nature of the positioning along the one direction versus the other, is different.  And to some extent, we need a board to draw the picture as to what that difference is.  But another aspect of it all is that these carbon atoms don't generate a fully aromatic system.  That's aromatic in the full chemical sense, of being benzene-like, for each of the bonded sub-species that form the patch of graphene that we would look at.  And there can be all kinds of related kinds of systems.  Our colleagues have been looking at hexaglenes [ph?], various geometric shapes of carbon atoms, which lead to different kinds of chemical behaviors.  And Dr. Michael Philpot, a former collaborator, not collaborator--colleague, I should say, at the IBM [International Business Machines, Inc.] research laboratory in San Jose [California], since retired, is working on these kinds of systems, and comes to my group to interact.  He lives in San Francisco [California] nowadays, and he collaborates with people in Japan as well.  He's been doing very nice work in this general connection.  So, it's primarily though, through the work of Professor [Michael] Franklock and his students and post-doctoral associates, that we have pursued this direction.  And in my group, it has really been work on the part of a wonderful post-doctoral associate by the name of Dmitry, D-M-I-T-R-Y, Zubarev, Z-U-B-A-R-E-V, who came from Utah State University's [Logan, Utah] chemistry department--who worked for Professor Boldrev, B-O-L-D-R-E-V, I believe is the spelling, but we need to check that.  And he has contributed in a major way to the work that is done on graphene in my group, as well as work dealing with quantum Monte Carlo over the last four to five years.  He left, not, oh, only a few months ago, as a matter of fact, to continue study with a former student of mine who is now a professor at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in the chemistry department there by the name of Alan, A-L-A-N, Aspuru-Guzik, A-S-P-U-R-U hyphen G-U-Z-I-K, who came to my research group from UNAM, the [National] Autonomous University of Mexico.  UNAM being U-N-A-M, all caps, which in Spanish is a descriptor, or are the initials of the institution in Mexico City.  So, we plan along with Aspuru-Guzik to continue some studies, because of the expertise we can bring together on interesting, mutually interesting, chemical systems.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29108
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, let's kind of update your activities since we last talked to you.  So, from '81 [1981] to 2010, as you said in the beginning, you were a professor of chemistry here at the University of California at Berkeley [California], and also at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory chemical science division.  And you were a faculty senior scientist?
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: So, in 2010 you retired from the regular--
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  Actually, spring of 2010 was when my wife passed.  And with that change, I decided to retire.  But it was the case, or is the case, that the university has a program that will bring retired faculty back to the various departments, called Professor of the Graduate School, the position I instituted in the mid-90s [1990s] as a consequence of the VERIP Program instituted at that time. VERIP, V-E-R-I-P, all caps, which stands for Very Early Retirement Incentive Program, was brought into play because some faculty were leaving who were critical to the research programs of selected departments, especially in STEM [Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics] fields.  And the university felt it important to have these people back.  And so, this is the basis upon which this POG, Professor of the Graduate School, P-O-G, all caps, position was established.  And so, that's what I am presently.  It's a position which one holds for an academic, well, yeah, academic year, a full year, actually, July 1 to June 30, by vote of the department.  The department has to agree that one is deserving of this kind of position, which gives you full privileges as a regular faculty member, although one is paid from retirement funds.  But one has the benefit of earning some additional monies via grants and contracts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I presently am a POG.  (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's what they call you? (laughter)
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that's the in-house terminology for the position.
Speaker 1: It seems to indicate some kind of greedy-- (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, at one point it was jokingly said, "Oh, they're PIGS, Professors in the Graduate School."  But then they decided that was not good.
Speaker 1: Professors in the graduate school, PIGS.  Alright.  So, now, do you see yourself, you seem to have a lot of energy.  Do you see yourself ever retiring at some point?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm presently retired, as I indicated.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're retired now, but you're not really--
Speaker 2: Well, I don't see it going on forever, that's for sure.  I've discovered that as the years have gone by, even the last couple, that little things associated with age are creeping up on me.  I have developed a little bit of arthritis, which every now and then speaks to me in ways which require pain pills and that sort of thing.  But other aspects from my days of playing basketball, that's how I view it--is that I had a shoulder replacement, right shoulder, in January of this year.  And now it seems to be working well--
Speaker 1: Did you have a rotator cuff injury, I think?
Speaker 2: Oh, I had a rotator cuff injury about a decade ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The pain got so bad that I was operated on, and that was a painful recovery process.  So, when it became clear that I very likely needed shoulder replacement, I was very hesitant, because of the pain that I recall from the rotator cuff repair.  But in point of fact, the shoulder replacement was a piece of cake.  No pain to speak of.  I know I have metal in there, because when I go through these detectors at airports, it sets off the detectors.  And so, I am always looking for the kind where you raise your arms over your head and they view you, because that way I don't have to go through the pat down process--if you go through the other kind of detector in going through airport security.  So, but, it's a case that, when I was going through physical therapy for the right shoulder, I was complaining to the surgeon when I would see him, that, you know, my left is really a problem.  So, I think he had enough of me at about the time that I was completing physical therapy on the right shoulder.  And he said, "Well, here, I'm going to make an appointment for you to go and have an MRI on your left."  And so when he looked at the films for the left shoulder, he said, "You can't go a year with the condition you're in."  And he pointed out to me how indeed the bone at the top of the upper shoulder was so deformed that, he said, "You must have a high threshold of pain."  Well, possibly so, but it needed to be replaced, just as the right had been replaced.  So, the next April, I had to undergo the knife again in terms of the left shoulder.  And as somebody jokingly said, "Oh, you're turning into a robotic man."  So, let's hear it for medicine (laughter).  So, there we have it, in that sense.
Story_ID: 29109
Speaker 1: Now, we last talked to you in 2004, and since that time you were selected for the Allstate calendar, entitled 'From Whence We Came and Scientists of the Future'.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, that was a very interesting surprise.  And as you describe it, that's what the situation was.  I was the subject for April of that year.  And as a matter of fact, there was a program held at the Hilton Hotel that year for those of us in the area, to receive an award for the public, by Allstate.  It was an Allstate calendar.  Allstate Insurance Program held this dinner.  And if you see that picture on my wall, that's taken from the meeting, dinner, that night where they had this nice large picture of me, and "Allstate congratulates you" and so on.  So, I said, "May I have this?"  So, they gave it to me, and I got it framed, and it sits here in my office.
Speaker 1: So, the purpose of this calendar is to, I guess, to let people know who the black scientists are, or the pioneers of black science?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that it's not just science.  There's a number of folks who have made some headway, made some progress in selected areas of society to us in this general regard, and that's how it came about.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who were some of the other people on the calendar?
Speaker 2: That was 2004, wasn't it?  I can't tell you offhand.  I mean, one fellow I know, who I see in front of me.  But I don't remember off-hand.  I'd have to look at the calendar.  We'd have to take a look at it to see who was included.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: My memory isn't what it used to be.  That's just a reality of the times.
Story_ID: 29110
Speaker 1: Now, in 2004, you also were inducted into the University of Chicago's [Illinois] Athletics Hall of Fame.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: You may have mentioned this the last time, but I think it's worth it to go over it again.
Speaker 2: Okay, happy to do so.  Basketball became really a major interest to me in high school.  I went out for the basketball team in my junior year.  I was the thirteenth man on a twelve-uniform team.  So, in the picture of the team, I am at the very end of the bench, with a jersey on, which has a different colored number than from everybody else.  And in those days in Chicago, high school basketball was divided into seniors 5'8" and taller, and juniors 5'8" and under.  And I was the thirteenth man on the junior team.  That summer, however, I saw someone shoot a jump shot, and I thought this was the thing I needed to do, and I learned how to shoot a jump shot fairly well, because the next year, they changed the program from juniors and seniors to frosh-soph, freshmen-sophomore, and varsity.  And I made the varsity team as a starter.  Now, I did grow three inches during that summer.  I went from 5'6" and three quarters to almost 5'10", 5'9" and three quarters.   And so, I would say up to that point in my life that was a major success.  I was absolutely delighted to be a starter.
Speaker 1: About what year was this?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can tell you what year this was.  This was nineteen fifty--oh school year, '52 [1952]-'53 [1953], because I graduated in June of '53 [1953].
Story_ID: 29111
Speaker 1: Yes, and started University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] fall of '53 [1953] on a scholarship from my high school, Victoria Adams Scholarship, a scholarship created by a former librarian at Calumet High School [Chicago, Illinois], you know, a City of Chicago public high school.  And I should add, a scholarship that lay--was dormant and had not been used for a number of years.  And three people in my class were awarded this scholarship.  And I should remark that Calumet at that point was a mostly white high school.  Out of a class of 365, there were thirteen of us who were black, three males and ten females.  And I graduated, actually, I guess it was fourteenth or fifteenth, in that class.  And so, I did fairly well.  But in point of fact, though I applied for scholarships at various places, I was not successful, and would not have been, at one of these key major institutions like University of Chicago, were it not for this scholarship from my high school.  Now, the other two winners, a white fellow and a white girl--the white girl decided that the social life at the University of Chicago was a piss and decided to go to the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champagne] down-state.  And the guy wanted to pursue acting, so he went out to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles].  So, for me, I stayed at the University of Chicago, because this was the best game in town.  But my folks could not afford to send me to that institution.  The alternatives were the public institutions of the city at the collegiate level, the city colleges and also Chicago Teachers College, which was an alternative at that point.  So, it was the case that's where I was.  Now, I worked hard at the University of Chicago, but I discovered when I went out for the basketball team my first year, that this team was not so very good, nor were they that big.  We had a fairly tall high school team.  The center was 6'5", and one was 6'3" and a half, the forward.  The other one was 6'4".  And we had gone to the quarter-finals for the city championship for the City of Chicago.  We lost in that first round to Wells High School, on the Westside.  But so, in going out for the basketball team, I made it.  I'm not sure anyone was ever cut, because there weren't that many people who were that interested in participating (laughter).  But in any event, after the first game, I started every game thereafter.  I think I averaged around ten points or so in my freshman year.  And then in the beginning of my second year, the coach told me, he said, "Well, you know, when you have a shot, you should take it."  And in basketball, we know that's the green light.  And I mentioned earlier about--maybe it was an informal discussion--having a shoulder replacement, right shoulder replaced.  And some people jokingly say, "Yeah, because you never saw a shot that you didn't like."  I said in fact that may be.  It may have been the situation.  But in any event, in that sophomore year, I broke the scoring record for the school.  I think it was twenty-seven points, something of that sort.  And before I graduated, I broke it again with forty-two points in a game against a small college in Illinois, Aurora College.  And also that senior year, I averaged twenty-five and a half points for the season.  And also, I set the record for the most field goals in a game, with nineteen, and made some little all-American teams, that is, in terms of honors and in terms of small college basketball, and that sort of thing.  Well, moving further along, because of what I did in that timeframe, and the fact that these records still held, when University of Chicago created an Athletics Hall of Fame, I was part of the second group of folks to be inducted.  I was inducted because of the points I just mentioned a few moments ago.  And so, that was an exciting time, 2004, being inducted into the Athletics Hall of Fame.
Story_ID: 29112
Speaker 1: It seemed like a proper athletic hero for the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], becoming a theoretical chemist, you know.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Yeah, well, it's interesting times, for sure, for sure.  But I never lost sight of the academics I needed to pursue, because there was no question in my mind that if I were to do the sort of thing that I saw being done in the physics department at the University of Chicago, that I would have to go on to a doctorate.   Now, when I say I saw this, I had gotten a job in the physics department at the University of Chicago as a high school senior.  Buddies were saying, "They're hiring, they're hiring over at the university."  And so, I went to the employment office, and they said, "Well, can you type?"  And I said, "Oh yeah, I just finished my junior year of high school, and got a certificate for typing."  So, they gave me a typing test, and I did thirty-two words a minute, but no mistakes.  They said, "You're slow, but you're accurate.  We have two jobs.  One is cleaning monkey cages in the medical school at 88 cents an hour, or typing in the physics department at $1.09 an hour."  And so, I went where the money was, to the physics department, and actually began to type on a machine, an IBM [International Business Machines, Inc.] machine with the interchangeable keys.  This was one of the earliest IBM electronic typewriters.  And when I say interchangeable keys, besides the regular alphabet, it also had the Greek alphabet, had mathematical symbols of all sorts.  And so, I typed these technical reports of the Laboratory of Molecular Structure and Spectra, a laboratory headed by Robert Mulliken, M-U-L-L-I-K-E-N, who subsequently won the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1966.  By the way, I should back up and say that I took this job in 1953 and held it through my entire undergraduate experience, getting a bachelor's in 1958 and a master's in 1959.  And the other person, well-known during that time period for theoretical chemistry and physics, was a man by the name of Clemens, C-L-E-M-E-N-S, Roothaan, R-O-O-T-H-A-A-N.  And, because of being in that environment, I got a sense of what these people did.  They did not punch clocks, punch in and punch out to get paid.  They came in in the morning, and the graduate students and the faculty sat around the tables and talked to each other and drank coffee, and in those days smoked cigarettes, and go to the boards periodically.  Which struck me as a nice lifestyle.  The head of the laboratory, Professor Mulliken, one year during the time I held a job there, was the naval attache in science for the Office of Naval Research in London.  Gee, interesting stuff.  You go spend a year, you know, working elsewhere in the world and all that sort of thing, and with many scientists, who I later learned were very influential in the field of theoretical chemistry or physics, however you wish to describe it, depending upon their home department.
Story_ID: 29113
Speaker 1: And so, I earned my bachelor's degree [at the University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and based upon the fact that when I finished undergrad, I had a grade point average under 3.0, I could not get into a good graduate program.  And so then, the head of chemistry at [University of] Chicago said I should stay there and get a master's degree from Chicago, because it would be the best master's degree that I could get, based upon what my GPA had been.  And this was a man by the name of Henry Taube, T-A-U-B-E, who subsequently won the Nobel Prize as well.  So, these are the kinds of folks that--not realizing at the time I was interacting with, and gaining some sense of what they did.  And I always felt I could compete.  Now, maybe my GPA didn't reflect it at the time, but that was my sense of self, maybe exaggerated, but that was real.  And so, I did very good work, I should say.  I had a B plus average with my master's.  But then the question still was one of getting into a graduate institution, and there were two places I ended up getting assistantships to.  Assistantships are awards that enable you to be paid in graduate study.  Typically, as a first year awardee, you're a teaching assistant, and subsequently, you become a research assistant, this sort of thing.  And a young professor at Chicago at that time by the name of Stuart, S-T-U-A-R-T, Rice, was very supportive of my situation, and wrote a letter and made contact with the people at Washington University in St. Louis, which enabled me to get an assistantship there.  But also, a man who was a research associate, post-doctorate associate with Mulliken in the Laboratory of Molecular Structure and Spectra, S-P-E-C-T-R-A, by the name of Bernard Ransil, R-A-N-S-I-L, suggested the Catholic University of America, where he had attended.  So, it was the case that the letter to me from the Catholic University of America went to Dr. William A. Lester, Jr., head of student health at the University of Chicago.  Well, I didn't see the letter until after the deadline date to respond to the institution, so I had only one letter to which to respond to, and it was the one to Washington University in St. Louis.  And so, that's where I went.
Story_ID: 29114
Speaker 1: And I actually got married that Christmas to Rochelle Diane Reed.  I had a take-home exam in physics on my honeymoon.  Oh, my goodness.   And so, I was there for the year.  Things didn't work out, so I got in touch with the folks at Catholic University [of America, Washington, District of Columbia], who said come on.   And so, I went there, and that's where I did further work.  Actually, I eventually got my degree from them.  But in so doing, I was in somewhat of a desperate situation financially because Rochelle, who said she was going to work, got pregnant.  And so based on that--it was a case where she wasn't working, and I had only an assistantship.  I got in touch with [Bernard] Ransil at [University of] Chicago, and he suggested I talk to a fellow at the National Bureau of Standards [NBS] by the name of Morris Krauss, K-R-A-U-S-S, because they had summer internships there.  So, after one academic year on campus at Catholic [University of America], I had gotten in touch with Krauss, and he said, "You know, come out."  And I made some good money that summer.  But let me back up and say that I had gone to Catholic to work with a woman professor in theoretical chemistry by the name of Virginia Griffing, G-R-I-F-F-I-N-G.  She was the research mentor of Ransil.  And after completing that summer, I'm back on campus to complete my campus requirements for the doctorate, that is, coursework.  And Krauss got in touch with me that spring and said, "Oh, would you like to come out again?"  I said, "You know, I really need to finish."  And by the way, the second child had arrived, and so money was still a matter of concern.  And so, I went to see Griffing.  And so I said, "Gee, you know, I would like to go back out to the [National] Bureau of Standards this summer, and I want to make some more money of a more significant level than what I was making on campus."  And she said, "Well, what do you want to do, Bill?  Do you want to get an education or do you want to make money?"  I said, "I really have to do both."  And it was the unfortunate circumstance that she died that spring of an aneurysm, brain aneurysm.  And so, I did go back out to the Bureau of Standards.  And it was possible to carry out research, research leading to my degree as a member of the regular professional staffs of NBS, and this I did.  I became a GS-9 as a graduate student, and money worries which had concerned me to a great extent up to that point disappeared.  As a matter of fact, things became much better, because we moved to an apartment complex where Rochelle became the resident manager.  So, I'm making, I'm a GS-9 now.  She's a resident manager.  We were living rent-free.  And so my economics got so good that when I left NBS on educational leave to take a post-doctoral appointment at the Theoretical Chemistry Institute at the University of Wisconsin, Madison [Wisconsin], we bought a new car, a Volvo 122-S, and drove from D.C. to Madison in that car.
Story_ID: 29115
Speaker 1: Now, can you, I don't know if they asked you last time--
Speaker 2: What's that?
Speaker 1: We're going over ground we went over before, but can you tell us who the other black students were at Catholic University [of America, Washington, District of Columbia]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, yes.  That's a very important point.  Because when I arrived at Catholic, within the first week, I had been asked maybe seven or eight times, did I know a fellow by the name of Harry Morrison.  I said no, I didn't know Harry Morrison.  But it was clear to me that Harry Morrison was black.  And I subsequently met Harry Morrison.  He had finished, gotten his Ph.D. just before I arrived, in the previous academic year.  He was at that point a post-doctoral associate at the National Bureau of Standards in the physics section.  Harry originally was from Virginia, had gone to Catholic, and had done very well academically.  But in the course of getting his Ph.D. in chemistry, he made a transition into physics.  And let me say this about Harry, a delightful, brilliant guy, who because of a service commitment, I think it was the Air Force ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], ended up going to the Air Force Academy.  And based upon records, and it was discussed, that he was the first black to teach at the Air Force Academy.  It was Harry in the physics department there.  And when he completed his obligation, he went to work at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory [California].  And while there, he was asked to join the physics department here at the University of California, Berkeley.  And to my knowledge, and since I've been on the faculty since 1981, and knew about physics here, he has been the only black faculty member, to my knowledge, in physics at the University of California, Berkeley.  Harry died, now, maybe ten or fifteen years ago.  But he was really a wonderful human being.  Now--
Speaker 1: Now, I think Dr. Jackson who was with you at Catholic University--
Speaker 2: I was going to mention--
Speaker 1: --yeah, he says that Harry Morrison was the brightest individual he's ever met in his life.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Would you agree with that, or--?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know--.  Harry was very bright.  But to say he's the brightest individual I ever met, is a mouthful.  A very smart guy, unquestionably the case.  But I've met a lot of smart people over the years (laughter).  He ranks with them, there's absolutely no question about it.  Don't misunderstand me in this regard.  He's a fantastic human being, besides, which I guess is a very important consideration.  I've met people as smart, but not as solid a personal individual with a wonderful personality as Harry had.  I mean, no question about it.  But, you mentioned Bill Jackson.  William M. Jackson was, you would call him a school-mate, since he was at Catholic University, but I never saw him there.   I met him at the National Bureau of Standards.  He got into Catholic two years before me, and was doing experimental work at the Bureau leading towards his degree.  And we got to know each other well in that timeframe.  And over the years, I mean, as I'm sure you know from doing interviews, that Bill subsequently became a professor of chemistry at Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia], and established a major laser laboratory for chemistry at that institution.  And he subsequently was attracted to the University of California, Davis, to that chemistry department, and eventually he was selected as chair of the chemistry department before he retired, maybe a year or so, a year or two ago, something of that sort, but continues his research at U.C. [University of California] Davis.  Bill is a fantastic human being as well.  I mean, he was honored by the American Association for the Advancement of Science [AAAS] for his mentoring activity.  This is a national award, in terms of the kinds of things he contributed in this regard through the U.C. Davis campus.  So, extraordinary human beings that I had the pleasure of interacting with at Catholic.  Another black student was Howard Foster.  Howard was in the physics department at Catholic, and subsequently I think joined the physics department at Alabama A&M [Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] when he finished.  Howard died a number of years ago.  And one of the things that Howard could do, he was a fantastic piano player.  When we were at a theoretical meeting, he went to the piano and he started playing, and boy, he just mesmerized everyone with the quality of his playing.  Another person, by the way, I should add, is Mylous O'Dell.  I believe you spell his first name M-Y-L-O-U-S, last name O, apostrophe, D-E-L-L.  When I met Mylous, he was working at Fort Belvoir's Night Vision Radar facility while he was working on his Ph.D. at Catholic.  And Rochelle, my wife, knew him from Howard University, where he had studied before.  So, oh, and furthermore, there was a post-doctorate associate with [Virginia] Griffing by the name of Pauline Piper who was there during the period that I was, you know, spending a good deal of time at the Catholic University of America as well.  I should change that to at the Bureau of Standards while a student at Catholic University, to better phrase that.  Let's see, who else?  Who else was around during that juncture?  Those are the ones that come to mind immediately.  Maybe if one of these synapses opens sufficiently, I'll remember some more.  But there weren't that many.  I mean, we're counting folks on the fingers of your two hands at this juncture, you know, that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 29116
Speaker 1: Okay.  You achieved your Ph.D. in what year?
Speaker 2: I did my final oral in, it was, well, I know it was in 1964.  I was trying to remember the month.  And yeah--because I was invited back for an actual ceremony in June of '65 [1965].  Economic hardship had taken my family, and going back to [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia] at that point on a post-doc salary, wasn't in the cards.  So, I didn't go back.  I had my degree mailed to me.
Speaker 1: Well, we kind of strayed away from the basketball question.  But I'll, you know, I thought it might be good to go back over that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We were talking about the Basketball Hall of Fame, Athletics Hall of Fame.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you were at [University of] Chicago and, so you're still, you still have this record, really, for the--
Speaker 2: Well, there were three records that I set, a single game at forty-two, the most field goals in a game, as I mentioned, at nineteen, and a season average of twenty-five and a half.  The single game record was broken--not maybe--well, I think it would be seven or eight years ago now, but in the three point era.  My record was set in the two point era.  And those of us who follow basketball know that we have a three point line, you know, nowadays.  They did not exist in my day.  And at that time--well, actually, the fellow who was the M.C. [master of ceremonies] for the Hall of Fame Dinner is someone with ESPN, who is a graduate of [University of] Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], who, he's a lawyer with ESPN. And he talked about the fact that had they had the three point rule when I played, I would have scored fifty-something odd points, because all of my points were jump shots from the three point line, that sort of thing.  So, well, it is what it is, in that sense (laughter).
Speaker 1: Just a, just a question that occurred to me.  Did you know any of the DuSable Panthers?  I think they were the first black high school team to go to the state championship in Illinois.
Speaker 2: Can you name any of them, I didn't know?
Speaker 1: Charlie--well, I don't know...
Speaker 2: Were you going to say Charlie Brown?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew Charlie.  I played Charlie and his brothers.  His brothers, I can't remember their names fully.  Paxton Lumpkin, Shelly McMillan, Deter Grant, he played on the team before.  And these are all guys I played with in Washington Park.  And so, having played with these guys, and then I go to the University of Chicago, hey, that's a whole lot easier situation then.  Oh, and another guy who didn't go to DuSable who was a basketball legend in those days, was Willie the Bird Jones.  Do you know that name?
Speaker 1: No, I don't.
Speaker 2: Willie Jones subsequently played with the Detroit Pistons after being on the Big Ten at Northwestern [University, Chicago, Illinois].  And as an aside there, when Northwestern played West Virginia, there's this fellow by the name of Jerry West, who said, "Gee, that guy Willie Jones is quite something."  Why?  Because Willie stole the ball twice from Jerry.  You know, you go, you reach back, and you snatch the ball.  So, Willie was quite something.  I played against Willie as a freshman at Chicago Teachers, when he was at Chicago Teachers college.  And then the next year, Willie went off to Kentucky State and played there as a freshman.  And then he got declared a freshman at Northwestern and began his final four years of college (laughter).  So, Willie was quite something.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a freshman, a starter, on two different teams? (laughter).
Speaker 2: On three.
Speaker 1: Three different teams?
Speaker 2: Three different teams.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think at this point the NCAA is not concerned.  But anyway--(laughter).
Speaker 1: Willie Jones, okay.
Story_ID: 29117
Speaker 1: Now, tell us, in 2004--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Tell us about INCITE, Innovative and Novel Computation of Impact on Theory and Experiment.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, that's what INCITE stands for, yes, yes.  Yeah, I did mention briefly that we got an award for carrying out, for plan studies dealing with photosynthesis.  The idea was to carry out calculations of the photosynthetic process using quantum Monte Carlo.  And we made some headway in that regard, but I can't remember exactly what it was that led to us not going much further.   I think it was the inadequacy of the computer time that was made available, though large by standards of the day, still not sufficient for using a very computationally intensive technique such as quantum Monte Carlo for those kinds of larger molecule applications.  Things have come a long way since, and we can do those kinds of calculations now if that were still in the cards, but the nature of the science has advanced sufficiently far that there is less of a need for the kind of very accurate energy calculations that I had mentioned earlier.  Whereas now, there's more of a question of the kinds of mechanisms that govern photosynthetic processes based upon what's been learned in the interim, as to how indeed photosynthesis takes place.  And that's a complicated process, which one needs more of a sense of what the mechanism is than existed back when we were exploring that problem, and that exploration of mechanisms can be done with cheaper computational approaches, to get a more quantitative or semi-quantitative appreciation, and then move to the kind of high accuracy sort of techniques that we have developed.  And I think you may see that I also won an INCITE Award in the past that's going on presently, which I mentioned.  That's the CO2 [chemical formula for carbon dioxide] sequestration with bionic liquids that I talked about a few moments ago.
Story_ID: 29118
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in 2005, you were a visiting professor in the department of physics at the University of Trento [Trento, Italy]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, yes.  That, there was a visiting professor, Francesco, F-R-A-N-C-E-S-C-O, first name, P-E-D-E-R-I-V-A is his last name.  And he got in touch with me.  He was interacting to a great extent with Kalous at Lawrence Livermore, and they used to come over and visit me.  And so, after those weekly visits, one time he said, "Yeah, you know there's an agreement between our respective institutions for a collaborative research."  "Oh, really, I didn't know this."  He had explored and found this out, and so it was on that basis that I spent a sabbatical period at the University of Trento, which we thoroughly enjoyed.  They had, and probably have, a very nice set of apartments for visiting scientists, visiting scholars.  And so, I very much enjoyed that period.  Trento was a delightful place.  Across the street from the university, as a matter of fact, is the Italian wine maker cabinet, one of the largest ones in Italy.  While we were there, there was a major parade of law enforcement through the town of Trento.  And from Trento, you had nearby very interesting other cities to visit.  Trento is located at the foot of the Dolemite Mountains.  So, it was a delightful time.  My sister, Judith Wiley, came to visit, flew into Venice.  And we spent a day in Venice touring there, since she hadn't been there before, before going back to Trento.  Just a wonderful time.  Just one of the wonders and benefits, I would say, of international science, are the people you meet, the experiences you have, all the places that are of a very different sort that you're not used to at home.  So, I've had the benefit of not just going to Trento, but periods in France.  In Paris, I organized workshops on quantum Monte Carlo over a span of about a decade at the University of Paris South in Orsay, which was under the direction of an expatriate American, Dr. Carol Moser, M-O-S-E-R.  And that was delightful too.  I mean, in Paris--and then on a daily basis catching a train to Orsay and coming back and deciding which restaurant we would eat at that given night, that sort of thing.  And one of those experiences, we decided to take our children, my son William, III, and my daughter Elison Kimberly.  They were about, I guess ten or eleven, or eleven or twelve.  And I had to be in France early.  So my wife brought them through London, where they spent a few days and then they went to Bruse, Belgium, and from there came to Paris.  And we stayed in a suburb, Neuilly.   You have to check the spelling of Neuilly, because I don't remember it offhand--N-I-E-U-I-L-L-Y, or something of that sort.  We got an apartment of an American medical student at the Sorbonne, who was going to be leaving for the summer and taking his son, who had come over to tour Europe.  And it was a nice little apartment which had sort of French appliances, a very small little washing machine and stove, no TV, just a short wave and plenty of books.  So, we spent our time listening to the short wave and reading the books.  So, it was a time which my children, who my son is now fifty-one and my daughter is fifty, remember vividly.
Speaker 1: And about what year was that?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  On that basis, let's see, if I do a calculation, it had to be in the ballpark of '74 [1974], '75 [1975] because I was still at IBM [International Business Machines, Inc.]. Is that right? Whoa, let me slow down.  No, that's not right.  Is it?  Ummm--and I indicate those ages--no, I was still doing the scattering at that point.  And I also organized workshops at University of Paris South in scattering as well.  So, I am not sure which--you know, I indicate those ages.  My son was born in '61 [1961], and you throw on 12 years there, and you get '73 [1973], '74 [1974], you got early to mid-70s [1970s].  So, presumably I was still at IBM at that point.  Yeah, I guess I was, because I would not have had the flexibility, it seems to me.  The workshops I decided to teach--except in the summer, but maybe those workshops were in the summer.  So, I'm hazy.
Speaker 1: In the mid-1970s, we'll say then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I'm not sure about that.  So, but based upon ages--oh, yeah, it would clearly have to be of that time.  Why?  Because my son went to college in '78 [1978].  So, it had to be--so you back up--maybe it was earlier in the '70s [1970s], okay.  Four years or so from seventeen when he went to college--whoa, let me--I'm getting my years all confused, aren't I.  Yeah, I think, four years of high school--well, the early '70s [1970s], let's leave it there.
Story_ID: 29119
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, tell us about the Chancellor's Award for Advancing Institutional Excellence here at the University of California Berkeley in 2006.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  The chancellor in this case is Robert Birgenau, B-I-R-G-E-N-A-U.  I believe I spelled that correctly, who created this award for contributions toward enhancing the campus, primarily in terms of diversity issues.  And in my case, there are a number of things I've done over the years.  When I first came on board, that was in 1981.  It was around the time my son was finishing up as an electrical engineering computer science major.  And he had been in something called the Professional Development Program.  And the Professional Development Program was a program created on campus during the urban upsets of the late '60s [1960s], to assist students of color through the barrier courses for the sciences.  And so, it was focused in mathematics.  Not a remedial program, but a program in which students had to work more intensely to get to a point where they're fully competitive, if not better, than their peers in these various courses.  I became a member of the policy board of that association, and subsequently a chair of it.  And that was about four or five years I was engaged in those activities.  And then, subsequently, I became in the early '90s [1990s]--I guess it was about '91 [1991], the associate dean for undergraduate affairs in the College of Chemistry here.  As was the case, it seemed to me that it would be wonderful to have a comparable capability in the chemistry department for the chemistry courses, notwithstanding the fact that many students in chemistry were taking or were involved in the Professional Development Program for mathematics, but that there could be a comparable kind of program with similar goals in the College of Chemistry.  And so, it was established, and I think these were two of the contributing factors over the years besides work on other committees and so forth, but sort of the principal ones which led to my being considered for the Chancellor's Award, which I received in 2006.  I can't remember the full details of the other components that played a role there, but I'm sure that those were two that enabled me to win that award.  And there's a picture, or I'd say a painting, on my wall, which commemorates that occasion, which is very nice to have.  And so, it was a nice award to receive--and a delightful reception.  There were about four or five of us campus-wide who received this award and reception at the Chancellor's home, which many folks on campus came.  And so, it was a nice recognition, let's put it this way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There were other honors, too.  In 2007, a symposium was held in honor of your seventieth birthday, here at the University of California.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  This was spearheaded by two of my former graduate students, Alana Spurigusik, who I mentioned earlier, who's on the faculty of the chemistry department at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and John Harkless.  John Harkless is the only black student who's gotten a degree under my guidance in all my years here, in the sense that there have been very few, only one or two other black students, who have pursued theory for their doctoral degrees.  John is very capable.  He came from Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].  He was a double major in chemistry and mathematics at Morehouse [College].  Prior to coming to [University of California] Berkeley, he had spent a summer in the Bell Labs program for students who are high achieving in the sciences.  And James Mitchell, then at Bell, had suggested that he contact me when he came to Berkeley.
Story_ID: 29120
Speaker 1: And that contact, actually, with Mitchell--his knowing me was an outgrowth of our membership in NOBCChE, National Organization for Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers, which I had been involved with almost since its inception, '71 [1971], '72 [1972], '73 [1973], sometime during that timeframe, which by the way, the American Chemical Society expressed some concern about early on.  Why do you need this organization?  I said, well, to network, because if you go to an American Chemical Society meeting, "Oh, there's a black person, there's one."  And so, it was a concentration effect, you know.  How would you meet these people, or at least be in a setting where you can exchange significant information?  And so, that was the reason for the creation of the organization.  And it really has fulfilled those goals, someone you know, someone who's involved in the calendar.  We talked about Isaiah Warner [also a HistoryMaker], who I met originally through NOBCChe, and so forth.  Well, I should back up.  I didn't meet--yeah, I did meet him through NOBCChe, but subsequently--well, I can't recall for sure now.  My memory gets hazy.  But when I was director of NRCC [National Resource for Computation in Chemistry], we had a workshop at Texas A&M University [College Station, Texas] where Isaiah was on the faculty.  And we met at that time, so that had to have been--oh, excuse me--1980.  I guess it was 1980, or something of that sort.  And then, you know, subsequently, there was the calendar and so forth.  But we've known each other over that time, but always there was the interaction of NOBCChE, which he was very active with as well.  And undoubtedly, Isaiah has been a major, major player in the terms of the number of black students who have gotten Ph.D.s in chemistry at Louisiana State [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  And that was a significant and indeed noteworthy aspect of his contribution to chemistry in the United States, I would argue.  And so, I just, you know, he's done a lot of wonderful things.  I've mentioned that, and I'm sure that you have information in more depth related to Isaiah and his contributions.
Story_ID: 29121
Speaker 1: And by the way, where were we headed here?  What were you asking me?
Speaker 2: I was asking about the birthday symposium and--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Who spoke at the symposium?
Speaker 1: Oh, I can reach over there and give you a program of it before you leave.
Speaker 2: Well, I just thought that this--
Speaker 1: Oh, just major, well, people--my former students, colleagues--people who have worked with me, and some of whom have just been on the same programs for meetings.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, they send out a general announcement regarding the fact that the celebration of my birthday, my 70th birthday, would take place.  The symposium would take place, and this is how you register.  And so, people, based on their own inclinations, came.  And so, it was a wonderful meeting.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now in 2008, the Journal of Physical Chemistry published William A. Lester, Jr.'s Festschrift.
Speaker 1: The Festschrift was a collection of papers from the symposium in honor of my seventieth birthday.  The papers that were developed, I mean it was a call for manuscripts because this Festschrift was being created, and that became, was a publication in the Journal of Physical Chemistry, which honored me.  I mean, that entire volume is connected with my seventieth birthday, as a matter of fact.  And it's a wonderful, when I reflect on it, it's a wonderful honor.
Speaker 2: It seemed like quite an honor.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: A singular honor.
Story_ID: 29122
Speaker 1: Now, in 2008 you won the Stanley C. Israel Regional Award for Advancing Diversity in the Chemical Sciences.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  That--people in the department here nominated me for the Diversity Award.  And that's the award I won, the American Chemical Society.  So, it was, I got the award.  See that big thing up on top, on the wall there, that's where, that's the reward that I received.  That's the Israel Award if you will look at it.  It's probably the most elaborate award on my wall, as a matter of fact, but for the sort of things that I talked about earlier, basically, you know.  The nature of the award was based upon the same kinds of things we talked about earlier in terms of what I've been engaged in with regard to diversity issues on the campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's internationally, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And there are probably more awards, and we could probably go on and on with those, but we always ask this question.  When you look back on everything you've done to this point in life, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could back and change it?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  I've been, as they say, I've been blessed--that no idea that I'd be here talking about the sort of things that we're talking about when I started on this route to get my degree.  And so, people often ask, they say, "Why chemistry?"  I say "Well, growing up listening to the radio--TV wasn't around yet--so, listening to radio programs sponsored by DuPont, "Better things through better living through chemistry."  And later on, it was "Better things for better living," because they dropped the "through chemistry" because "chemistry" became a bad word (laughter).  Interesting stuff.  But I decided that was the case, and I wanted to pursue chemistry.  So, as a sophomore in high school, we were asked to write about our future vocations, go to the library and look it up, and all that sort of thing.  So I wrote about chemistry.  And I look back and think about, well, I got information from the library, the local, well, the branch, you know, Chicago [Illinois], the branch.  I think it was on 61st Street, 61st, east of South Park, or King Drive.  There was a branch of the Chicago Public Library on 61st Street.  I went there and wrote this out, and so forth.  And then in my senior year of high school, I took a chemistry course at Calumet [High School, Chicago].  In my class--I guess I was the only black student in that class at that point.  Well, maybe there were one or two others.  It had to be girls, because that's predominantly what we had, and these other guys weren't taking chemistry.  And the teacher used to line us up and ask us questions, along the lines of a spelling bee.  You know, you answer the question or you sat down, this kind of thing, if you didn't get it right.  And so, I used to do very well in those.  I said, "Oh, gee, I'm going to like this chemistry stuff."  Then I go to the University of Chicago--Man, it's much more intensive, whew!  I mean they got all these bright kids from all over the world, you know, that you're competing with, and so forth.  And after taking organic chemistry, I said, "Chemistry, huh?"  (laughter).  Tough, I mean, very different from general chemistry.  But when I took physical chemistry, I said, oh yes, this is what I want.  The subject matter in chemistry was in the same sort of thing I was doing and typing about on my part time job at the University, and that's where it came together.  As a matter of fact, the regular clerk-typist would seek me out during the day to come and read Professor [Robert] Mulliken's handwriting, because they had a difficult time discerning it, because he would write things and then insert, you know, and so forth.  But one of the major stumbling blocks they encountered was the difference between "bond", B-O-N-D, and "band", B-A-N-D.  Bond comes up in the context of molecular structure.  Band comes up in the context of spectroscopy, and recall that the name of the laboratory was 'Molecular Structure and Spectra'.  So, it is in that aspect that, interestingly enough, these things came together, you know, in a very interesting sort of way.
Speaker 1: And getting those words mixed up can make a world of difference.
Speaker 2: Well, somebody has to straighten them out before it gets out.  Now, he would have--okay, before he would let it out--I mean, by reading what they would prepare for him, that sort of thing.  But it became clear that this was the subject matter of chemistry that I liked.  And though I got there through a path in which I knew very little upon which to make this judgment.  So, it could have been equally the case at some later point that I could have changed direction and gone a different way.  It turns out in my case, gratuitously enough, that the choice was okay, let's put it that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29123
Speaker 1: Now, now the follow-up question for this is, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, again, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, I would say, you know, success in what I've achieved in the field of theoretical chemistry, marriage to a wonderful woman and two wonderful children, and now four wonderful grandsons.  So, in that respect, a very positive professional career, being able to help black students and other students under-represented in a whole range of activities in my discipline and outside of it as well.  So, it's those sorts of things.  I mean we discussed earlier, the Museum of African American Technology, a local product of the Northern California Counsel of Black Professional Engineers, which I served on the board of, my role in assisting the people who run the Upward Bound Program here at [University of California] Berkeley here up until a few years ago with regard to the creation of their math and science summer institute-- that my guiding them led to their success, and the National Competition for Resources, to enable that to happen.  I feel very good about that, and I'm still in touch with those folks, many of whom have moved to Mills College, which is in Oakland [California], as you know, not so very far away.  So, there are other things of this sort.  Another aspect of this all, of all this, rather, is that working with the Oakland Boys and Girls Club in terms of science aspects. I'm now on the board of it with regard to assisting them in terms of stem directions, which now, you know, are nationally of greater importance than they have been, especially for young people of color to have a better appreciation of this sort of thing.  One aspect recently in the last, well, last week or so, there's a report out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] regarding the fact that black students do not want to pursue the STEM [Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics] fields.  In the course of discussing that amongst some folks here on campus, there were some comments made with regard to the fact that black males, black students, were having trouble with chemistry 1-A.  And for me that was an eye-opener, since I talked earlier about the creation about the College of Chemistry Scholars Program.  Well, in the interim, since when I created that program, I guess until a few years ago, there was sufficient funds to have the program assist students in the first year chemistry course.  And when funds got very tight, that program, the monies only went towards those who were majors in the Chem [Chemistry] 4 Series.  Chem 1 Series, of course, is for non-majors.  But that's where a lot of the problems are occurring for students.  And, of course, with the passage of Proposition 209, one cannot focus these efforts strictly on students of color.  And so, there's the interesting point of people knowing about the possibility of participating in an activity of this sort to enhance their success in the course.  So, that's what we're talking about now.  And in my thinking, can I go out and find some additional funds to enable, support these students in the non-major chemistry course, since there are many more black students in particular in that course than are in the majors who are majoring in chemistry.  And not just black, but we have a larger Latino population, which can truly benefit from these sorts of consideration as well.  So, it's a critical thing at a time which in the state funds, you know, are very hard to come by.  You obviously read about California and its problems.  And Proposition 30, which is to assist the university, has just passed as of yesterday, last night, you know, and it actually--
Speaker 1: It was close.
Speaker 2: It was close.  And as a matter of fact, was thought possibly not to pass, two days ago.  So, I sort of felt that it might.  I mean, you know, come on folks, I mean--
Speaker 1: Well, at a certain point last night, it was trailing and--
Speaker 2: Was it?
Speaker 1: Pat Brown was discussing--
Speaker 2: Jerry?
Speaker 1: Jerry Brown, yeah.  He was discussing this.
Speaker 2: That's his daddy, Pat (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, Jerry Brown was discussing the possibility--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean--
Speaker 1: --whether he thought it was going to pass or not.  He was optimistic last night, but when he was speaking, it was actually trailing in votes.
Speaker 2: Uh huh, uh huh.  Yeah, now I was optimistic, too, that--come on folks, I mean, I understand the fact that it'll cost you an extra couple of bucks, you know--because individually, it's not that much.  But overall, when you consider a state of this size, the population in which you're asking--
Speaker 1: Are you saying that you think we need to sustain these programs in order to really do something about the lack of black youth involved in stem--
Speaker 2: No.  We're talking about Proposition 30.  We're talking about sufficient funds just to keep the community colleges and the universities moving, and all that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: But I think we started talking about some of the programs that were designed to do that and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --do you see--is there any optimism that we'll have enough resources to keep young people involved--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm optimistic in that respect.  Why? Because I think if you look at the long term demographics, even in near term, if we don't, the country is going to have some serious problems in terms of what communities are growing, okay.  The Hispanic Latino community is growing.  The black community is there more or less in a quasi-steady state, but will be growing, too, to some extent.  But clearly as projected, the white community is decreasing in percentage.  Maybe you heard the same discussion yesterday, that had the population of the white folks in the U.S. been up to 76 percent, [Mitt] Romney [Republican candidate in the 2012 presidential race] would have won, but it's down to 72 [percent].  And somebody, some pollster--some quantitative, analytical individual made that judgment, made that projection, based upon the population in the country, what conceivably might have happened.  And now it's interesting, also--I guess maybe you saw the same article I saw with regard to the folks who really follow statistics and the projections they made as opposed to the "in your gut" sort of talking heads, saying what the outcomes would be.  And these folks, who follow the numbers, did a far better job in the sense of being able to predict the outcomes than the other folks who speculated from here to there.  That is, the so-called talking heads whose names and figures you see all the time.  So, you know, it's, hey, follow the numbers--even here, and what we're talking about, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I think, you know, for the country as a whole it's a very important aspect.  And also, what one is seeing, or what I am seeing, at least in terms of the interest of major corporations and companies, not just in California, but across the country, that this is an important dimension.  And I think it will be really interesting to see what happens with the new administration with regard to this situation, in light of the polarization that exists in Congress at this juncture and so forth.  And obviously you read also the projections that Nancy Pelosi [Democratic Party; former Speaker of the House] had with regard to how many additional Democratic seats she expected--25, didn't get there, so, a Republican House, and all that, you know.  With the polarization that exists, can one overcome that in terms of coming to the table for the national good?  Well, we'll have to see.  If you're President [Barack] Obama, your work is cut out for you, you know.  And can folks come to the table for the national good in a wide range of areas, you know.  We got the economic cliff coming up at the end of the calendar year, and all that sort of thing as well.  I guess we didn't come together just to talk about the national political scene, did we?
Speaker 1: But it's good to hear your views.
Story_ID: 29124
Speaker 1: One of the questions we do ask is what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Oh, clearly back, in my view, to the old values.  What do I mean by old values?  Education is primary.  I grew up, that's what I heard.  If you're going to do anything in this life in this country, you need your education.  And recalling when my children were in school, that to work hard academically was acting white, was utterly bizarre--that things get twisted in such a way so the kids would not work hard because they did not want to appear to be acting white.  Man, where are we with folks listening to that kind of hogwash, in my view.  That, you know, no way can we advance without education.  Education is critical.  It is totally critical, and then you move from there.  Because even the quality of life you will lead will be improved, even if you don't worry about these other general issues, just in terms of the education you have, the people you interact with.  The nature of the interests and concerns and views you develop as a consequence of education can just truly enrich your life in many ways, many ways.  So, I'm hopeful that that can be turned around, but this means that we increase focus from K-12, with regard to education, and that we have to work hard in that respect.  And let's put it this way, of course, there's no free lunch.  So, those of us who can assist, we should be about that task, because that's, well, in a certain way, that's the only way we're going to make it.  We, being everybody, you know.  But, especially in terms of our community, because of the history of overcoming the legacy, so to speak, as it's been described and so forth.  So, I'm hopeful.  Hey, there's no other way to be, I would suggest.  I mean, otherwise, it makes no sense, you know.  So, I'm on my soapbox at this point, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, is there anything that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can't think of anything in particular.  As a matter of fact, I've tried to, you know, lay out what seems to me would be of general interest, in terms of the issues that we've been talking about, and what might conceivably be of some interest to someone who would be, would take the time to find out about Bill Lester (laughter).
Story_ID: 29125
Speaker 1: Could you, now I thought about this before, and I forgot about it.  But, can you speak to your involvement with The HistoryMakers' ScienceMakers Program with the National Science Foundation [NSF]?
Speaker 2: Oh, to go back, I was asked to be on the advisory board, and then subsequently it was the question of would I help with, you know, chairing.   And Willie Pierce and I talked about co-chairing, because we're both very busy, but that may be a way of assisting Julieanna [Richardson, Founder and CEO of The HistoryMakers] with the ScienceMakers' component of the HistoryMakers Program, which I think will be very important.  I mean, it is a repository which can have benefit to many people in a whole range of ways in terms of who these people are.  I think in this context, a name, an icon, like Percy Julian [African American research chemist], you know--if there were a comparable interview with him.  I've learned things about him over time:  One way, in terms of through the Boule', Sigma Pi Phi, the fraternity for which he is the past president, and the nature of what he did, and various folks who were involved with that organization.  For example, the sort of things that slowly came out.  But--my gosh, I mean, you got to know this person or connect with that person.  And to make this kind of information more readily available, it seems to me, would have a profound effect, not just for black folks, but everybody, in terms of what's been done and who's doing what and where, and what that history is all about.  So, in that respect, we're all enriched by the nature of the kinds of activities that the HistoryMakers is doing--and because of my own bailiwick, the ScienceMakers, you know, the ScienceMakers component of the HistoryMakers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29126
Speaker 1: Alright, now, my last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, a guy who worked hard and was good to people and did what he could for the people, is fine with me, you know.   He did what he could, where he could.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you very much for spending the time with us.
Speaker 2: Oh, thank you, I really appreciate it.
Speaker 1: Alright.
