Story_ID: 90181
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Joyce Ann Ladner, spelled J-O-Y-C-E, the middle name is A-N-N, the last name is L-A-D-N-E-R.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 12th, 1943.  I was born in Battles, B-A-T-T-L-E-S, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Most recently, let me see--I'm a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution.
Speaker 1: All right, and you, you were the president of Howard University--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was president of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  I was vice president of Howard provost, or vice president for Academic Affairs is just a, was a specific title, from 1990 to 1994.  And I was interim president with Howard from 1994 to 1995, after which I went to be a member of the District of Columbia's Financial Control Board to restore fiscal solvency to the District after we'd gone bankruptcy.  And that was a presidential appoint from President Clinton for a period of three years, and so I was on that board from '95' [1995] to '98' [1998].
Speaker 1: And you are a trained sociologist--
Speaker 2: I am a sociologist, a PhD sociologist by training.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 8th, I think, 8th or 9th--
Speaker 1: Ninth.
Speaker 2: --ninth (laughter).
Speaker 1: June 9th--
Speaker 2: Why'd you ask me the date?
Speaker 1: Well, it's to slate it, to authenti--authenticate and verify--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --what date this is and that--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --you are, you are--(unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Believe or not, nearly everybody gets that question wrong the first time.
Speaker 1: So don't worry--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I just told him--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I had just told him that I don't remember.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Today's date is June 9th, 2003.
Speaker 1: All right, thank you.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at 4201 Cathedral Avenue, Northwest, at my home.
Speaker 1: Okay, before we go into--
Speaker 2: In Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Yes, all right, in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 90182
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five "People" magazine-ish-type, lightweight questions we always ask.  And they just require a brief answer.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: The first is, ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: That's a difficult one.  I have a sweet tooth, and I like peanut butter, cheesecake.
Speaker 1: Peanut butter and cheesecake together?
Speaker 2: No, but I was just--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --trying to think of things that I, I--not cheesecake so much, maybe peanut butter--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which is unusual.
Speaker 1: All right, and do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color, yes, it's fuchsia.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I like the spring.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: St. Martin.
Speaker 1: And, and ma'am, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, that was it (laughter), I said--no, I was--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --just going to say child, you won't believe it (laughter), yes; or girl, you will not believe (unclear)--I may be speaking to one of my male friends--you will not believe this.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well--
Speaker 2: I preface things that are either hilarious, kinda slightly shocking, or you know, need a little extra verve in them.
Story_ID: 90183
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell me about your family history.  How far back can you trace your family?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can trace my maternal family back to about 1820 or 1825.  It was my mother's [Annie Ruth Woullard] grandfather, four generations removed from her, and four generations removed from me.  And his, his name was Benjamin Woullard, W-O-U-L-L-A-R-D.  And he was oh, about 18 years old when he and our grandmother, a Creek Indian woman named Mary, and we don't know anything else about her.  And his mother, and father, and his brother went to a town called State Line, Mississippi, just on the border of Alabama, Mobile, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Now, now where did they come from?
Speaker 2: They came from Rockingham County, North Carolina.  And he [Benjamin Woullard, maternal great-grandfather] was white.  She [Mary Woullard, maternal great-grandmother] was Creek Indian.  And we had a, an inte--terracial family reunion several years ago, because my sister, Dorie Ladner Churnet [HM] (ph.), who lives here, does genealogical research on our family.  And one day she got a letter from a woman in England.  As it turned out, it--a genealogy librarian on the Coast of Mississippi where Dorie had been doing her research told a woman who was inquiring about a member of this family, that you may want to contact Dorie Ladner Churnet in Washington [D.C.] because she--you're doing research on the same family.  As it turned out, this was a, a white cousin of ours, who was born and lived until, you know, the '60's [1960s] here and then moved to England.  And so she came over and her sister, Sandra, who lives in, in Columbus, Georgia, and Cassandra's daughters came for a reunion.  And we went back to our--my mother had died by then, but we went back to our homestead to the Community of Battles where I was born.  And they had pictures of, of their grandmother.  He, he married--our grandmother married, was his common law wife.  She had bore five children for him, and he deeded 320 acres of land to her and their children.  And it's, it is said that he used to tell the white wife, who was the fifth generation removed grandmother of the white girls, women we had the reunion with, he told her that I'm going to hop the train and go down to the next town and have a cup of coffee with a friend.  And he would be gone five days to see his five children and his common law wife that, who had come with him from Rockingham County, North Carolina.  Now, he-
Speaker 1: Now--
Story_ID: 90184
Speaker 1: About what time is that?  That was--
Speaker 2: This was in 18--late 1820s, but he appears in the 1880 census as well.  And my--when we were growing up, my mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] and her siblings, her, especially her brothers used to tell us that there's a--Grandpa Ben [Benjamin Woullard], there's a picture--our grand, grandpa captured the Copeland Gang.  And I came later to know that the Copeland Gang was I guess Southeast Mississippi, Alabama's version of Jesse James.  And he was a businessman, farmer, a spotter, as they called them, people who would find criminals, and then the sheriff would go and, and arrest them.  But he--they had pictures of their grandmother [Mary Woullard].  They had pictures of him, but my mother also told us that there was a picture--a book written about him in, in a library.  And my sister found this, this manuscript in the Mississippi State Archives written by a Dr.--someone of--I can't remember the name--about Benjamin Woullard [maternal great-grandfather].  And so we have this picture of him as well.  So it was fascinating that my sister was able to, to trace--I mean to, to, to take, you know, a story we heard from, as, as little kids from my mother and turn that into reality by finding this book.  And she found it after mother was dead I think.  Yeah, because we had the reunion the year after my mother died.  But her, two of her brothers were there.
Speaker 1: Okay, your, your ancestor, ancestral grandmother [Mary Woullard, maternal great-grandmother] was a Creek Indian--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: woman?  And--
Speaker 2: And the grandfather [Benjamin Woullard], maternal great-grandfather] was white, but they--we've not been able to determine if there was any slavery because he, he said that, or it is alleged that he said, he did not want to see his blood spilled all over the nation, that is he didn't wanna enslave his children and have them taken, you know, sold and so on.  So they stayed.  I mean they--I was born on that land, that three hundred and--I forgot, whether it was 20 or--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--So the land stayed in the family--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  My grandmother stayed on the land with--because there were five--they had--she had five--my grandmother had five children with Benjamin Woullard.  And our grandfather, who's now dead, and I have a very vague recollection of him one time, and I was a little kid.  But they lived on that land until he was old, and they moved to Hattiesburg [Mississippi].  And my grandmother lived until about 1968, '67' [1967], '68' [1968].  Now, that's on my maternal side.
Story_ID: 90185
Speaker 1: On my paternal side, again, my sister [Dorie Ladner Churnet, HM] and our cousin, David Lee, who's done a lot of research on the family, the Ladners.  I have a very interesting background.  There's a man whose name was Christian (ph.) Ladner.  We're not sure if, if Christian meant--we're becoming more and more convinced that that was not his first, his given name, but rather it was that he was a Christian.  But my family and one other black family are the only two families with black Ladners we've been able to, to find.  Very recently we've been in contact with Lardner, members of the L-A-R-D-N-E-R family in, in Freetown, Sierra Leone and Lagos [Nigeria].
Speaker 2: Is that, that a German name, a Swedish name or--
Speaker 1: It's, it's German, right.  Now Christian Ladner went to the Gulf Coast of Mississippi, just on the border of--very near to New Orleans.  And we think we're descendent from him, but we've never been able to identify the black woman with whom he, he or one of his descendants--perhaps one of his own son, one of his sons had, had a relationship with a black woman.  But there is a lot of interracial--I was about to call it a different name.  It's just a lot of crossing of the racial lines among the Ladners.  They, and they tried to keep what they considered to be the bloodlines pure by--they do stupid things like removing bodies from the black cemetery into the white cemetery.  They spent a lot of money on genealogical studies and--you see, what's involved is a lot of land that was stolen from a lot of wealth that's been acquired, status in the community, if it were know that they had--were, were part black.  And they're very swarthy complected.  For example--
Speaker 2: So the, the people folks think are white Ladners may actually be black Ladners--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, they are and they're mixed too.
Speaker 2: --United States you usage anyway (laughter).
Speaker 1: Exactly.  But, but very--I mean there's so much mixing. Brett Favre, for example, of Green Bay [Wisconsin] comes from that same community.  And there's been so much inbreeding--
Speaker 2: So he might be a black quarterback (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Maybe, but it--there's so much inbreeding in that area where he comes from that they--(unclear)--some, some geneticists down to study it because they have some unique disease.  My sister had stopped doing research on the Ladners.  Well, we're about to get started again.  It's her, her work and David's work with the, the, the African side of the family because David and Dorie had determined that the Ladners--well, also we don't have any history of slavery in the family--migrated to say, Veracruz, Mexico, to Haiti--I'm sorry, not Haiti but to Cuba.  And there's a section, a suburb of Vancouver [British Columbia, Canada] called Ladner, so they were north as well.  But we thought also thought that there was a--I don't know where Dorie found this out, but she knew that, that some had repatriated after slavery to Africa and to Sierra Leone.  And for years I--every Sierra Leone person I've met I ask them if they knew of any Sierra Leones.
Story_ID: 90186
Speaker 1: Then I was in, in Salisbury, Austria, two years ago, and I met a fellow at this conference from Sierra [Leone], Freetown.  And I asked him if he knew any Ladners, and he said yes, I do.  And he said he would--he took my email address, and he said I will, will see if I can get their email address and have them write you.  But he was working out of in--far away, you know, from technology and so, out of the bush, so I never--he didn't follow through, but I got a letter last year from a man who, a Sierra Leonean, who wanted to know how could he get a copy of my book, "The Ties That Bind."  And I told him I would give him a copy, so I--if he would--he sent me an email, so I, I wrote him back, and I told him that I'll give you a copy of, of, of my book.  I'll send it to you if you can--and I wonder if you would do me a favor.  Do--I asked him do you know anyone--any Ladners, and if so could you get, get their email address or mailing address or whatever?  And it was six months later, but about two months ago, got this long letter from a woman in Sierra Leone.  And then she introduce me to one of the cousins in, in Lagos [Nigeria].  And so we write a lot now.  And the story of that ancestor is that he--they, they are descended from a Nigerian boy.  They called him Prep (ph.), sounds like it might be a teenager, might have been a teenager who went with, to the states with--by ship--with a--that's the only way he could have gone--with a white man who was captain of the ship.  And the question then becomes, did he take on this ship captain's name, and are we descended from that person?  It's like, I think the next step would be to start checking shipping records, you know, to see if we could find him that way, and would his--would it be his descendants or even himself who repatriated to Sierra--Freetown, because there as a repatriation to Liberia and Monrovia under President James Monroe as well.
Story_ID: 90187
Speaker 1: So this is fascinating--is it--it gives us some context into--I mean I wish I could put flesh on Grandmother Mary [Woullard].
Speaker 2: How she was a Creek, but was she a black Creek Indian or--'cause many Creeks were black in those days--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think she--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: We don't know.
Speaker 2: --Creeks and Seminoles down in (unclear)--Georgia were black in, in, and Indian, a lot of them were--
Speaker 1: Well, we don't know what color she was, but she lived in the black community, in the colored community.  I wouldn't say black community--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Perdie (ph.) Simmons married black men?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: And children.  And she lived in the community of colored people.  So it must mean that she was colored, because I remember my mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] and all of her siblings are identified on their birth certificates as colored--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --which was a common occurrence back then.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Creek War, that was [President] Andrew Jackson that said, at one point he said this isn't an Indian war; this is a nigger war, he said.  This was in 1830s I guess--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --fighting the Creeks down there.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They never did beat 'em actually.  They just hid in the swamps--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --couldn't get around them.
Speaker 1: There's--also, I read a lot of--an interesting book not so long ago on whether the history of the Indians in Oklahoma, black Indians there (unclear) home of the Creeks was written on, on the life of Jake Simmons, who was an oil--a black, black man who did a lot of oil business.  And he was the first person to go to Nigeria and, and to Ghana, for example, to--and he was--I know his son, and he was--Jake, about whom the book is written, was a grand--his parents, you know, were Creek Indians in the--
Story_ID: 90188
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about your--well, well are there, there any other stories associated with your family history that you can remember that you can tell us--the stories about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --slavery or nineteenth century or, or, or Reconstruction that are interesting?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but our grandfather, my mother's father, whose name was Jerry Woullard, Woullard, W-O-U-L-L-A-R-D, was the only, only black person to sit on a grand jury in Wayne County Mississippi in the 1920s.  He--there is a funny story about him.  He, he was kind of an entrepreneur, man about town, and he managed a baseball team.  And he took them to the big city of Mobile [Alabama] to play.  And he came back and told my grandmother [Martha Woullard] that--he said I saw the darndest thing, you know.  I stayed all night trying to blow out that lamp.  And it was his introduction to the light bulb (laughter).  And also, when blacks were being urged to--actually sent to Oklahoma, you know, to settle in, in Oklahoma, State of Oklahoma, he refused to go.  I--and he--there's a, a--I thought a lot about what I acquired from them because it, it was almost impossible not to, to because my grandmother's name was Martha.  My grandfather's--we called him papa, but he died when I was very little, but I knew mama very well.  And they had 11 children.  My mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] as fifth oldest.  And they were--each of the, them was so very independent minded, almost fiercely so.  And they had a, their mantra was that there--I am as good as anybody.
Story_ID: 90189
Speaker 1: And what I've learned is that that was passed on from one generation, probably from, from Mary and Benjamin Woullard [maternal great-grandparents], you know, to those children, because he [Benjamin Woullard] had a relationship with her [Mary Woullard].  He had a relationship with those kids I mean.  And he--as I said he never enslaved them; he never indentured them; and he gave her the land; he gave her everything but his name, you know.
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: And it is said that she was living in--
Speaker 2: Well, the name, the--you have, you have ancestors named Woullard, right--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --on that side?  So--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I guess he did give her--well, the kids took, took the name.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and that's what she became too, but she would, she wa, was what we would today call a common law wife.  Now he, he married for--in terms of, you know, social status or whatever, conforming, he conformed by marrying Unity Wooliford (ph.), a white woman that we saw a picture of her as well because she was the grandmother of the white relative who contacted us.  And she had eight children for him.  And we think she died in childbirth because she was just in her forties when she died.  And at one point, it said he took one of his children from our grandmother, Mary, and took the child into the home where he lived with his eight kids and so on.  And there was a--we met the--I didn't meet her, but my sister met a grand--an aunt.  She's the grand--great-aunt or the grand-aunt of, of white cousins, and she lives down in Florida.  And my sister [Dorie Ladner Churnet, HM] met her at the first reunion, and she said--and they took her to the homestead where we, you know, where I was born and so, and Dorie said, she'd made the comment: so now I know why Grandpa Ben gave all this land to the colored people.  We wondered all--it was funny (laughter)--now we know.  Yes, Grandpa Ben had another family.  Said we could never figure out when papa told us that our grandpa gave this, all this land.  But I was so shocked in meeting these people because I grew up in a very, very seg--rigidly racial and segregated, you know, society.  And I think I had more trepidation about meeting them and wondering what is it going to be like and so on than they did.  I mean they were not quite, (laughter) they didn't quite bowl me over, but I mean Sandra who lives in Columbus (unclear) was going to come up to visit.  For example, she was going to come when Dorie told her I was going to get an award.  I was Washingtonian of the Year.  And she wanted to know if she could come, and Dorie said yeah.  And she said oh, I took that pretty little picture of Joyce, took my hair--went, went to get my, my hair done.  And I showed it to everybody, and they said oh, y'all look so much alike.  I mean this is impossible for me to think of--white people in Columbus, Georgia, today in 2000, you know, saying to a white girl that you're brown skin--this brown skin woman looks so much like you.  You know, in my growing up, (unclear) would have said, what is wrong with you?  I mean, and she would have been cast out of the race.  But I don't--it's, it's--now I mean it, it's, it's--
Speaker 2: America--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Very--
Speaker 2: --your history.  It's crazy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it is.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Especially because of the arbitrary boundaries that, that have, people have set, you know, to keep people divided.  I mean there's no way you can classify people as being purely this or purely whatever, you know.  I suppose you could, but it's so rare.  I mean, and then why should you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it won't stay that way (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, no, not at all.
Story_ID: 90190
Speaker 1: At any rate, well, now tell us about your--I'm asking about your father.  If you could give us his full name and spell it for us and his date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my biological father his name is Eunice, E-U-N-I-C-E, Stafford, S-T-A-F-F-O-R-D, Ladner, L-A-D-N-E-R.  And he is now 88.  He lives in Oroville, O-R-O-V-I-L-L-E, California.  He and my mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] were married.  And this is 1941, and my sister--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--is there a story about how, how they met?
Speaker 2: My mother had gone to--from this little community of Battles, Mississippi to Hattiesburg [Mississippi] to stay with one of her brothers, older brother, who was a barber.  And she went to seek work.  They lived on a farm, and she had come of age, and she, well, she went to stay with, stayed with him.  And she got a job--was a maid and then later the war [World War II] broke out I mean--in a box factor for--they were building boxes for the Army.  I think she, she used to go to visit a woman next door to where my father was living with his parents.  And I don't think there was any big drama behind it.  I think that's where he saw her, she saw him, and they began to court, as they called it in--and they married.  But it was a turbulent and short marriage.  My sister was born June 28th, 1942, and my grandmother, paternal grandmother, Mama Della, named her for [Doris] Dorie Miller, the naval cook who shot down the planes over Pearl Harbor.  And I was just looking in "Jet" the other day, that, that he shot those planes down I guess in either July--no, I mean in, in May I believe of 1942.  (Unclear) and--
Speaker 1: December 7th, '41' [1941], yeah.
Speaker 2: It was?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what they always say, a day that will live in infamy and all that, December 7th, 1941--
Speaker 2: Oh, because, well, "Jet" was wrong.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Anyway, my grandmother named my sister for Dorie Miller, so that's how she got the name Dorie.  Mother added the Ann, A-N-N, on Dorie's name.
Story_ID: 89743
Speaker 1: Well, I was asking you about your father Eunice Stafford Ladner.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And did you give us his date of birth?
Speaker 2: June--no I didn't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My sister [Dorie Ladner Churnet, HM] knows all these things.
Speaker 1: Well, you know about when he was born?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's a Gemini, June 8th--
Speaker 1: Well, the day, I mean the date right now, but about what year?
Speaker 2: Oh, he's eighty-eight, so--'cause he was four years older than my mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] I think.  So eighty-eight from 2003--eight from thirteen is 5, so, what, 1915 or something?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1915, yeah, yeah, yeah, okay.  So, he, he was born in Mississippi and--
Speaker 2: He was born a town called Hilldale [sic, Hillsdale], Mississippi.  And they moved, the family moved to Hattiesburg [Mississippi]--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: They moved to Hattiesburg later, but my, my father's mother's name was Della McCloud Ladner.  And my grandfather--she married Thomas Ladner.  I named my son Thomas Ladner Carrington, so he could carry part of our name.  The, the--I don't know in what year they were born, but my grandmother was actually born in North Carolina.  And she, and her mother, and sisters, and brothers, and her dad moved to, first to Georgia I believe, then to Mississippi, and settled in Hill, Hilldale [sic, Hillsdale].  They--my grandmother died in 1980.  I remember taking my son, who was five, almost six years old--he was five years old--out to California to see her.  He--my grandmother and grandfather lived in--on what is now Martin Luther King Street in Hattiesburg, but it used to be Royl, R-O-Y-L, Street.  The house is still sitting there, and it's always been occupied, I mean.  And it seems that whoever buys it keeps it up very, very nicely.  And we, my mother and father--after my mother and father married, they lived with my grandparents.  And my grandfather by that time had tuberculosis, and he eventually died of tuberculosis.  But he was, my Grandfather, Thomas Ladner, was a--taught--was  deacon and taught Sunday I think at Antioch Baptist Church.  And I would assume--I think he was a laborer until he became ill.  My grandmother was a homemaker.  Grandmother was a very fair-skinned woman.  Her name is Mama Della, but she, she was, she had a kind of aristocratic bearing, you know.
Story_ID: 89744
Speaker 1: And my parents I said earlier--oh, my father [Eunice Stafford Ladner] had been married before he and my mother married.  He was married to a woman name Sarah Lou in Hattiesburg [Mississippi], and, and Sarah Lou had a, one child, a son by my father.  And when they broke up, he got divorced and married my mother [Annie Ruth Woullard].  But their child, their son, Woody, Woodrow Ladner, Woodrow Charles Ladner lives in Orange, California.  And he and--we're very, very close to him.  And he and his wife come here.  We go, stay with him when I'm in California.  I'm closer to him than I am to some of my other siblings interestingly enough, not intended that way, but we just, you know, we used to write letters to him when we were kids.  I had his address, and, and my father's two wives, my mother an Woody's mother, you know, were friendly.  They both, you know, sit sometimes and talk.  Whenever Woody's mother and father came back to Hattiesburg from Annapolis, Maryland, where they moved when Woody was a boy, they'd visit mother.  And they both said oh, we got rid of that man that (laughter).
Story_ID: 89745
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: Okay, 'cause your mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] and father [Eunice Stafford Ladner] weren't married very long you said.
Speaker 1: No, no, in fact, what happened is that after my sister [Dorie Ladner Churnet, HM] was born, my sister was delivered by a doctor Smith who came to the house to, to deliver the baby.  My father was a--went to bars, he drank.  He was, liked to have a good time and was not at all responsible.  And mother said that he gave his paychecks to his mother [Della McCloud Ladner] (laughter), not--I mean, and he never got a home for her.  She remembered that, and she used to tell us be sure that you have some--if you marry, make sure the many is independent minded.  But their relationship was doomed.  She left him after Dorie was born because he was in the streets, you know.  And my grandmother--mother went home to her parents with Dorie, and my grandmother, Mama Della, came over to Battles [Mississippi] and asked--begged mother to come back.  Now there's a funny story associated with Mama Della going to, to this little small country town to, to get mother to return.  Mother and--mother was one of eleven children.  I told you she was fifth of eleven, and they were poor, really tough, I mean they had hard times.  And--but not hand-to-mouth, you know.  They had a farm, you know.  But when Mama Della came, and they didn't have any warning that she was coming.  What happened is that someone they know came from the nearby rail--I mean, rail station I guess, which she would have taken a train there, and said there's this Ms. Ladner is up there, and she's going to be getting a ride down here.  Mother said oh, my God, so they--you know, you have to have the sparkling house.  I mean they had a clean house, but they--between the time she got off the train to eventually get a ride out to where they lived (laughter), they not only mopped the floors and made everything spic and span, and--but they had gone--they didn't have any major food in the house.  They had vegetables and no meat.  My mother said she and one of her brothers went out into the woods, and they saw--they were looking for a boar, you know, a, a wild hog.  And they found one, and, and the way they killed it was that one took--they both took the front legs, and they put it--pushed it into--pulled it into a tree trunk.  And that's--yeah.
Speaker 2: They killed him by hand.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, they killed him by hand.  And so Mama Della never knew the difference, because that evening mother said she ate and ate and talked about what good food this is.  It's so fresh, country food, so (laughter)--
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: It was indeed very fresh.  And she, her mission was to come to get mother to come back.  Mother went back.  She got pregnant with me.  She went home again, and she never went back.
Story_ID: 89746
Speaker 1: Now what happened to your father [Eunice Stafford Ladner] after that time?  What, what did he--
Speaker 2: He, he stayed in Hattiesburg [Mississippi] until after our, our grandfather [Thomas Ladner] died.  I can re--remember, but mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] remarried within a year and a half or so.  She, she married my stepfather, and they were together, you know, until she died.  She--we used to when--and we lived in, in a little all-black neighborhood outside Hattiesburg called Palmer's Crossing.  And mother used to take us over to see our grandfather and grandmother [Della McCloud Ladner] and my dad.  And she, you know, she always tried to make sure the, the family ties were kept strong.  So, what happened is that after our grandfather died, I remember the took us to the, to the fu--to his funeral.  We were little kids.  And he--they went to--see, my older--one of my uncles, Uncle Thomas Fontaine (ph.), went to Chicago.  First he went to Cincinnati to stay with a, a relative, then he went on from there to Chicago.  Then one by one, let's see, my, my, my uncle, who's dead now, Valois, spelled V-A-L-O-I-S, went to Chicago to stay with Uncle Fontaine, and then my father went.  And then we have--they had one sister, one aunt, my Aunt Christine Dixon, was at Alcorn College [currently Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi] when she met my uncle Oliver Dixon from Jackson [Mississippi].  And they got married, and he went to the University of San--University of California at San Francisco's dental school.  And so, once she moved to California, Mama Della, who was in Chicago by the, moved to California to stay with her daughter, then Uncle Val went, moved to California, as did Uncle--I mean as did my father.  So all of them were in California--and then, oh, and also Uncle Charles.  So all--there were three boys and the one girl and my grandmother were all in San Francisco.  Eventually my grandmother met and married a minister, Daddy Barrett, who had property and business in Oroville, where our father now lives.  And so my, my grandmother moved up to this little town on, near the Oregon border, north of Bakersfield, married him and moved up there with him.  And their oth--but, and then my--her mother, my grandmother's mother, Grandmamma McCloud, was also in a--was brought to Oroville.  It's, as I talk about it, it's interesting because they really did look after each other.  I mean they, they're a very close family.  And the survivors now are: my father, who is in the hospital for long-term care now.  It's they have a feeding tube in him, and he can't--I need to go out to see him too.  And also my Aunt Christine is--she survived her husband, Oliver Dixon, the, the dentist.  And she took care of him; she took care of--my Uncle Valois had cancer, and she even took him to Mexico to get (unclear) for him.  She was a nurse for the family.
Speaker 1: Tell, tell me now, so, so your father ended up in California.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did, did you, did, you stay in contact with him or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --does he stay in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --con--contact with you?
Speaker 2: He did, not, not on a frequent basis.  Christmastime there was a $50 dollar money order, and mother took us shopping to buy, especially to buy pretty little dresses to take pictures in to send to our father.  One time when I was about seventh grade, my father came to my school, he and my Uncle Val.  And so the prin--principal sent someone to our class and told us to come to the office.  And we went, and they said which one of us is your daddy?  And I picked Uncle Val (laughter).  I didn't know, I mean, what did I know?
Speaker 1: 'Cause you hadn't seen him in so long, huh?
Speaker 2: Well, of course.  I didn't know what he looked like.
Story_ID: 89747
Speaker 1: Tell us about your, your mother [Annie Ruth Woullard].  What was her full name, and can you spell that or us--
Speaker 2: Yeah, mother--
Speaker 1: --and her date of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother is, more than anyone else, responsible for me being who I am.  He name was Annie Ruth, A-N-N-I-E, R-U-T-H, Woullard, W-O-U-L-L-A-R-D.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: W-O-U, not W-I.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)-(unclear)--like that.
Speaker 2: W-O-U-L--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --L-A-R-D.  There was a big controversy over whether it's spelled with one "L" or two "L"'s, should be one "L."  Mother was born on May 14th, 1921.  As I said earlier, she was the fifth oldest of eleven children.  And there were six girl--no six boys and five girls.  And she--mother was--I'll show you pictures of her--if I didn't pack them away.  Mother was a very beautiful girl, woman.  She--my stepfather always jokingly referred to her as that old Indian woman there.  She--dark brown skin, a brown, brown--I'm gonna say brown, brown skin, heavy, she had wavy hair.  Her, her hair was--all of them had the heavy, wavy hair.  It was not straight.  It was curly hair with big waves, and not straight like Indians, but--and she--it's easy, easier to describe mother's demeanor than it is what she looked like, 'cause she was a very nice looking woman, but she was very no-nonsense.  I' think I'm a lot like her in that she--and my sister, Dorie [Ladner Churnet, HM], who lives here is very much like her in terms of temperament and cutting to the chase.  I mean she, mother would walk into a room and look around.  That'd be the first time she's ever seen it, and in two minutes she had, she'd summarize everything that was going on.  When my sister had--and a lot--some of that was the gift of insight, a lot of it was the gift of insight 'cause she really was not educated at all.  She went to fourth grade.  And they just didn't finish school.  I think my, my youngest aunt, the baby of the family, is the only one who, she finished eighth grade.  And I remember at that time in that, in the country eighth grade was like considered as high as the school went.  But mother was very strong, tenacious, unrelenting.  If she--she always--and I've, I use her phrase that if I put my mind to--and my son has said that about me before he left Saturday going to graduate school down in Alabama.  He said--I said Thomas, do you think I can do this?  I said do you think I can, I can become a good artist of note?  He said if you, you put your mind to it, you can.  I said why do you say that?  He said 'cause anything you wanna do, you, you figure out how to do it, so you'll, yeah (laughter).  And my mother said that.  Thomas heard me say that, if you put your mind to it, you can do it.  And she had, she taught me, she always told us if you, you, you know, lie down with dogs, you get up with fleas, but also that if you fall down--it's not important if you fall down, but that you get right back up, and dust yourself off, and keep going.  And she could bounce back, Lord, and she taught me--I mean she gave me just a strong mental constitution and, and physical too.  But I was always frail.  Most people don't know, but I, I've always been sickly.  And my mother said I had pneumonia when I was three weeks old.  And Aunt Mariah went out in the--was a roots lady, so we went into the--wake up--she (laughter) went out--
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm all right.
Speaker 2: --and he--she went out into the woods and got the--and my two uncles told me they went with her and got these different roots.  And she--herbs and she made something for me to drink, and I got better and I lived.  But I had respiratory problems, you know, the rest of my life out of that.  But, but mother was very resourceful.  My father's--my stepfather's pay, weekly pay was thirty or thirty-five dollars a week.  And there were eventually eight children.  The bay--
Speaker 1: Did they grow food and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Mother had what she called a garden, but I called it a farm on someone else's property somewhere.  I hated it.  I couldn't stand the small town.  I always imagined going to where the bright lights were.
Story_ID: 89748
Speaker 1: Because Palmer's Crossing [Mississippi] and Hattiesburg [Mississippi] were just too small to contain my spirit, you know, and my curiosity could not be satiated at all.
Speaker 2: Now what were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up when you were in Hattiesburg and Palmer's Crossing?
Speaker 1: The, the, the, the sights in the evening of, in the summer of the ladybugs--lightning bugs, and we used to catch them and put a little, little piece of thread around them, and run around with the light, you know, in the darkness; of the oppressive heat; of wake--being cold in the morning because we had heaters in each room, gas heaters.  And mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] said, was always--amazing thing about her was that she was so tough, but yet she was fright--there was a kind of level of fear in her.  And so she was scared that, you know, the ha--something would go wrong, one of the heaters would blow up at night, so she turned them all off, you know, would make it--"this house may catch fire while we're asleep."  And it happened to other people, you know, so she figured--so I can remember be--getting so cold when I woke up in the morning before they'd turn the heaters on, you know.  I remember that, and then now I have central heating (laughter) and air and don't have to worry about it.  I remember the oppressively hot summers.  All my childhood I, I was very, very hot.  So people would say well, you must be accustomed to the heat, you grew up in the South.  I said I was the kid who sat underneath the shade treat.  The heat bothered me tremendously.  I remember just seeing the dirt roads.  I remember when the main road in Palmer's [Crossing] was, was paved.  And I remember Uncle Archie, who fought in World War I and went to France, he told us all these stories.  He told us about how the French would ask the black soldiers to pull down their pants so they could see the mon--kind of monkey-like tail on them.  That's what they'd been told, they had tails like monkeys.  And he told us about California; he'd been to California, and he met my Aunt Icie in Birmingham [Alabama].  I remember smells of her Sunday morning breakfast, and I would go over there and stand around; all of us would stand around till she said sit down.  Here's your--let me make a plate for you, I mean, 'cause I know you want my food.  She had been a cook for a wealthy who lives in Birmingham, and they never had children.  And he talked to us about his travels and hi--he was a sharp man.  He had this gold watch in his pocket, and he used to go--and a striped vest and brown-striped suit.  And he used to get his hat and his shined shoes and go up, we call it up on the hill to the ballpark, baseball park and old Negro League, you know, maybe not those teams, but that we had a local team, Hattiesburg.  But they, they--and that was--they had baseball all summer.  And, and I remember looking out over early in the morning and seeing the fog, you know.  And I remember the, the, the sleet, the frozen icicles on the house or on the garage or, but I never saw snow until I was a lot older.  I remember the signs on the telegram posts, we called them, electric, electricity one, these big signs of BB King [HM] be at the Embassy Club June 12th, or, or James Brown, and you know, just up--maybe five minutes from the house, driving, you know, and Etta James.  I mean they were all on the chitterlin' circuit, and peoples from all over Southeast Mississippi used to come to hear--to see these, these great people, people who are great now, they were great then.
Story_ID: 89749
Speaker 1: And we lived next door to a family, and up the street was another family.  There were two sisters and their children, and their children were grown except--no, they weren't all grown.  They had some grown children, or maybe they were just older teenagers.  But the nick--they had a, and they had a juke joint, and the nickname that these men who patronized their juke joints they called all of these women the goats because beautiful, the oldest who was very, very pretty, was nickname was goat because when she little, she, whenever she laughed, she bleated like ah-aah--[goat sound effect]--like a goat.  So these men from all over Southeast Mississippi would come there on Friday evening after they had gotten paid, and most of them were pulp, pulp wood haulers because timber, the pine trees was the industry.  And they spent their money on them.  But at the same time these women also used to fight each other, the two sisters.  First cousins would get out in the street and fight over who was going to bring BB King [HM] home with them that night and--or James Brown.  And they got new outfits, and I--one thing that always wondered why they did, why did they take this beautiful new dress they bought for the dance, and wash it on the rub board, and then put it on the fence to dry.  That's what I remembered, and I remember my sister going down to the Smithsonian a few years too, when BB King was there, not--you know, it was, it's, it was a program, not a--he wasn't playing, you know.  So, so she went up to him afterwards and asked him if he remembered the goats from Palmer's Crossing, Mississippi in the Embassy Club.  He said Lord, Lord, Lord (laughter).  He said how are they doing?  How is goat doing (laughter)?  And Dorie [Ladner Churnet, HM] said well, Bertha Lee is her name now, and she is secretary of the church, so you can't call her goat no more.  And he said tell her said hello.  And I told goat this, and she said really?  She started laughing.  She said I remember me BB Kang.  (Laughter) She called him K-A-N-G.
Speaker 2: Kang.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she said--and she laughed.  She said the girls in the choir the other night at choir practice, one of 'em mentioned BB Kang, and I told, hey, I know BB Kang.  Y'all don't know 'em, but I know 'em, I'm known 'em a long time ago (laughter).  Those are the things I remember.  And those are the, the, the--I remember the smell I remember that, that I loved was the smell of rain on the dusty ground, and then there's a smell that comes from the ground.
Story_ID: 89750
Speaker 1: It was amazing, yeah (unclear)--
Speaker 2: But can you--what kind of little girl were you when you were growing up.  What were you like?
Speaker 1: Hyper, hyperactive.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Very quick, very hyper, hyper, very inquisitive, shy.  I hid behind Dorie [Ladner Churnet, sister, HM].  I never had a single fight in my entire life.  Dorie used to fight on the playground with the guys and girls.  And she was my protector, actually until I was in, well into adulthood.  Even when we were in, were in SNCC [Student Non Violent Coordinating Committee], Dorie would get up and just tell people off and shake her fingers at them and so on.  And the SNCC guys would say Dorie Ladner, I'm not gonna do anything.  You know, so when I think about people saying women in SNCC were oppressed by the men they--no, the feminist stuff, but it was just the opposite.  Dorie was, was my, my protector. She always felt--she said recently, she said you were so frail, you were so little, and I, I just couldn't stand to see anybody mistreat you.  And she--we, we--I was--my mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] divided the household duties.  I did the cleaning of the help, or helped her with the cleaning of the house and cooking, and Dorie helped her with the younger children.  Sub--consequently, not subsequently, consequently, if you get--Dorie does not know how to cook today, and has never wanted to learn to cook.  And she only wanted one or two children--she didn't any children when she was younger.  She has one daughter, 'cause she said I, I raised enough younger sisters and brothers, you know, 'cause she did all the babysitting.  And I did the cooking, and that's why I always have, you know, a comfortable home because that's when I learned how to do it with this division of labor.
Story_ID: 90191
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us about errands.  You said the ladies from the neighborhood would send to the store because you would come right back?
Speaker 2: Right, they always said that we know if we send Joyce she'll be right back or she'll go in a hurry. And I--it was because I ran to the store.  I, I got what--I was quick, and my mind was very quick.  So I would get there and--the, the store was a block away--and I'd run right back.  I'd probably be back in five minutes (laughter) in a way, no longer than ten minutes.  And learning came very easy to me, so, let me tell you the story of me--my going to going to school for the first time.
Speaker 1: Now what school did you attend in grade school?
Speaker 2: We, we attended DePriest, D-E-P-R-I-E-S-T, for Oscar DePriest.
Speaker 1: Okay, was Oscar DePriest from down that way?
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: I know he was the first Congressman in Illinois--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, no, it was--
Speaker 1: --since Reconstruction--
Speaker 2: --just a sense of racial pride that they named (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, Oscar DePriest--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: He was an alderman and then he became a Congressman--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --twenty.  There are lot--it's so many Mississippi connections in Chicago, I thought may, maybe he might be connected--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't know that he, he is from that area, though.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, it, the, it was a frame school painted white.  There were one, two or three buildings, three buildings, yeah.  And the principal lived about three blocks from us, and Dorie [Ladner Churnet, HM] had already started school.  She was four and a half or so, or five.  And I was the youngest child at home 'cause my oldest brother, Harvey, was raised by my grandparents.  So, mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] took me by the hand one day and Dorie by the other hand, after school, and took us down to Mr. Earl Travillion's (ph.) home.  He was the principal.  It's spelled T-R-A-V-I-L-L-I-O-N.  And omther asked--told him that I--Joyce is at home all day by herself, and she's lonely.  And I wonder if you could let her come to school just to play with her sister, Dot.  They called Dorie Dot.  And he looked at me, and I remember very well this tall man standing up over me.  And I was, I was also very little, I mean I was frail looking, skinny, and I had one, one braid up here--
Speaker 1: One braid?
Speaker 2: --that they put a ribbon on, and I didn't have any hair on here.  So (laughter), I have that picture.  You know, you know, you know, if you look at the old pictures, kids don't smile; no one smiles on 'em.  Have you ever noticed that?  They just--I guess the photographers tell them okay, now look at me, take a picture--look. So I have this one picture where I'm just looking like (laughter), funny looking.  Anyway, Mr. Travillion paused for a while, and then he told my mother--I verified what I remembered I told her, and she, she, she--we, we got the story collectively together.  I told her what I remember, and then she--it was pretty much like what she and Dorie remembered as well.  Anyway, he told mother--and he put head--hand on top of my head.  He said you give this little girl a cigar and have her bring it to my office tomorrow.  I'll see what I can do.  And on our way home we stopped at Hudson's Grocery Store, owned by a white man.  It was, it was a little store about the size of my bathroom.  And now Hudson's store, they've got about 30 stores (laughter).  They're all over Mississippi and with--he, he built his business by taking--but liquidated say a burned building, or a flood--clothing store had been flooded, or furniture store, whatever.  And he brought merchandise in.  A lot of it was very, you know.  I don't if you had to wash it or whatever, it would be okay.  Now, he--we stopped at Hudson's store, and mother bought this cigar.  And we went home, and mother laid out our little pretty little ruffled dresses.  She dressed us alike too, like twins.  And I remember her getting--you ready--and, and she took us each by hand to school the next morning.  And we went in Mr. Travillion's office, and I remember, and Mr. Travillion, here's your cigar.  And he called Ms. Zola Jackson to his office.  And I--he said take this little girl to your class with you, and I went with her.  I mean all the people would take you by the hand then, you know.  It's interesting, now that I think about it.  She took me by the hand back to her classroom.
Story_ID: 90192
Speaker 1: And one day I, I remember two events in that classroom.  One day she told me, "Little girl, if you don't stop walking back and forth to my office, asking me, 'Ms. Jackson, is this right? Ms. Jackson is this right?' you're going to get holes under the soles of your shoes."  And I could not figure out (unclear) what?  How can I get holes on my shoes, you know what I mean.  And then the other thing I remember about--but I always finished my work before everyone else.  That's it; it came very easily, you know. She--
Speaker 2: You were in your sister's classes and--
Speaker 1: Okay, but--no, my sister--this is pre-primer; it's like pre-K today.  And Dorie [Ladner Churnet, HM] was over in first grade, and it was in a different building.  But I remember, the other recollection I have is the day Ms. Jackson told me--took me by hand again, and took me over to another building.  And let's see, first grade and second, first, second, and third were in that building, I think.  I know first and, first and second were there, yeah. But Ms. Barnes was the teacher, and she took me by, up to Ms. Barnes, and she said--she was just saying something, Ms. Barnes, I guess I want--we'll skip this little girl 'cause she's ready for this work.  But I saw Dorie sitting--they were all sitting around these little bitty tables, you know, little chairs, and Dorie was sitting with all her friends.  And she said that's my little sister, that's my little sister.  And then when they told me to--they put a chair beside Dorie, and I sat there beside her at that table.  And then from then on we were, we finished high school together.  I was valedictorian; she was salutatorian--went to college together, and she dropped out three times to work with the movement [Civil Rights Movement].  One time she told me, Joyce, I can't study because my people are suffering.  I can't study.  I gotta get back out here to work to free my people.  I said okay.  And I dropped out once for a week.  And the registrar and former president of college told me that they never dropped me from the rolls of the college, and I said why?  Tell me that reason.  And he said we knew you, we knew you were coming back.  And I had dropped out because my boyfriend told me that he wanted me to work with him and the movement full time, and we, at the end of the year, we would go back to--he had dropped out of Michigan State--go back to Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan], and we were getting married that November and of my senior year, and then we'd, at the end of maybe May or June we'd go back to Michigan and to Michigan State.
Story_ID: 90193
Speaker 1: Okay, well, we'll, we'll get to that story.  Let's get you through grade school and high school--
Speaker 2: Oh, this is gon' be long.  Let--okay--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Let me-
Speaker 1: Let's, let's go back--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And stop me when I meander too much.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now grade school, what was your favorite subject in grade school [DePreist Elementary School]?
Speaker 2: Reading, social sciences.  Even though I could, in grade school I could do all of it well, but you know, math, it was okay.  But I remember I would--the favorite subjects were those subjects that, that told me something about other places, the world, you know, yeah.  So I liked the stories, you know, in, in first grade.  You know, to read about Dick and Jane is okay, you know, but I had some curiosity about what they, who they were and especially when I got old enough to see that--read the names of, of the white kids who had owned the books before the books were sent out to the black schools.  I used make up fantasies about maybe Joe Bell McIntyre.  I'll bet, I'll bet Joe Bell McIntyre is probably taller than.  I bet she's a big old fat white girl, or I'll bet the other--some typical name I mean--Joe Lee, I'll bet she's ugly, you know, or you know, I mean, but we--you know, you had to do something to deal with, with racism I mean.  Here you get old books five--after they've been used five years in the white schools.  And you knew how many years because there was a sticker inside and the name of the student that, that got them each year was there, so.  But I, I liked English, and I liked writing.  And writing, writing has been one thing that's always come easy for me.  And I have never had a struggle over writing unless it was--I've had to struggle when we're trying to write fiction.  I, I mean I can do great dialogue in a novel I've drafted, but I can't set up a scene, you know.  I would love to write that great novel.  No, I wouldn't, not really, but, in writing my memoir, and the idea of trying to make it more--I had a tendency to constantly get away from myself and start talking about people around me, and that, that was a problem.  But writing I liked.  I liked diagramming sentences, you know, when you--and I think that, that has, that helped me to develop the kind of strategic mind I have, 'cause I can look at globally and fit all the pieces very much quicker than I can deal with solving the little bitty problem, I mean.  I can deal with systems and run big things, but if you asked me to do--I mean I can do mundane things too, you know, but I, I guess it's because of the way my mind works.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: I don't do well with little bitty things.
Story_ID: 90194
Speaker 1: Now who were your favorite teachers and why?
Speaker 2: Oh, my favorite teachers were Ms. Travillion--not, I'm sorry, Ms. Jackson, my first teacher.  She was the grandmother of Danny Manning, the basketball player.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Danny's sister and I were in the same class and Ms. Jackson's.  Ms. Zola Jackson was her name.  She told us that she used to listen to opera on the radio while she was doing, doing dishes after she cooked and fed her family.  And I remember she used to go off in the summer.  She and a lot of the teachers would go away every summer to, to study, and some went to Alcorn College [currently Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi].  But some others went, a lot of them went to Indiana State [University, Terre Haute, Indiana], and some went to Columbia Teacher's College [Columbia University, New York City, New York], and they finished their degrees.  Some of--you know, a lot of them didn't have bachelor's degrees yet, so they sent to Alcorn and, an some went to Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] later on, but more Alcorn than Jackson State I guess, early on.  But I liked Ms. Jackson because I just remember her as the person who gave me a foundation when I was three and a half years old.  And she, she, she, she never told me, you know, to go sit down.  And she just let me keep walking up asking, you know, how to write something else, the alphabet, I means is--did I write it?  Did I do it right?  She said yeah, or, or you do it this way, and she, she was very patient, and she had this passion.  The other reason I liked her, she had a passion for learning.  She had what passed for a library in her classroom.  They gave her, our school, $100 dollars a year for the library for books.  Ms. Jackson had the task of ordering them.  And she kept them on bookshelves in her classroom.  And that's why I used to be angry about not being able to go into the white Hattiesburg [Mississippi] Public Library, because we had very few things to read.  But she ordered books, and she'd read the book, then she'd give it to Dorie [sister, Ladner Churnet, HM] and to me.  And Dorie could read very fast.  I've always been a slow reader.  One reason is that my mind does stay on what I read 'cause it's going--it, it just never really will shut down unless I get real sick with chronic fatigue, and then it'll stop.  But Ms. Jackson, I remember she--one book she gave us, and I used to say that was a, that's a big book.  How are you gonna read all the book?  It was "The History of Western Civilization."  And my mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] would tell us to put the bed--the light off at night; it's time to go to sleep.  Dorie would get on the floor with a crack of light coming through our bedroom door, and read, continue to read, and then I would read the book.  And she--we read the biographies of, of famous Negroes.  I remember reading Shirley Graham's biography of William, W.E.B. DuBois.  I remember reading "No Green Pastures" by [Vincent] Roi Ottley, R-O-I, O-T-T-L-E-Y.
Story_ID: 90195
Speaker 1: Another favorite teacher was Mr. Fowler, because he taught us social studies.  And he taught--he was a patient man, but I, I had a favorite teacher, Mr. Rattler, who was our choir director and the music teacher.  And all, all of these black schools had choirs, and we had competitions, and our rivals were--was Oak Park High School in Laurel.  And the music teacher at Oak Park, Ms. Ms. Mack, was Leontyne Price's [HM], had been Leontyne Price's music teacher.  And you know, they, they were--and then there's Ms. Chapman, who was head of, of the--she taught home economics, but she was head of, of the facul--student advisors for New Homemakers of America.  And I became region--I mean--yeah, district president of New Homemakers.  I went to the national New Homemakers' convention at A and T College when I was in tenth grade.  Then I was fourteen.  I graduated from high school when I was sixteen, and then I was statewide president of the Tri-Hi-Y, which was the black counterpart of Y-Teens for whites; and NHA [New Homemakers of America], it's white counterpart was the FHA, Future Homemakers of America.  We were New Homemakers of America, like the ABA [American Bar Association] and NBA [National Bar Association], National Bar and American Bar kind of thing, the same with medicine, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: So, I liked--I mean Ms. Fowler--Ms., Ms. Chapman gave me an arena in which to develop leadership skills because she'd take us to these conventions, then I'd, I'd run for office.  I ran for district office, and then I, next time I ran for statewide office.  And that was, and that was kids for all over Mississippi, you know.  And we went to the national convention for that as well at, at Miami University in Oxford, Ohio.
Speaker 2: That's odd that, that, you know, Oxford, Ohio, that was the place SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] worked as a trainer for some (unclear)--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, exactly.
Speaker 2: West, Western College [for Women, Oxford, Ohio] in mind--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --right, right across from there.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, that's where--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Donna Shalala went.
Speaker 2: --before, way, way before then?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was, and I did, I had gone off to graduate school that summer for '64' [1964], even though I went back every two weeks or so when I was in St. Louis [Missouri].  My sister [Dorie Ladner Churnet, HM] was at Oxford for the training.
Story_ID: 90196
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Those were--I mean, well, I'm sure I've forgotten some of them, but, but our teachers--I remember once when Dorie [Ladner Churnet, HM] was-mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] had a hard time as more--she had six children under me and my stepfather, and you know, she had a--that, that was a hard, tough life.  So she kept--mean if, if she had a young baby, then she kept, sometimes both of us would stay home from school to help her, and I used to hate having to miss school.  And then Dorie, I remember one time Dorie stayed out so long till Ms. Jackson came by the house to ask, to find out what was going on.  And they, the teachers were, they were so--I mean, it's a cliche now, but they were really were deeply personally invested in our learning.  And they were in our, our church, in the same community, and they voluntarily went to your house, you know.  I remember also Ms. Travillion was my teacher.  This is the wife of the principal.  And she taught me third grade.  And again, I believe--was she my teacher in sixth grade as well?  I can't remember.  Ms. Carlyle was second grade teacher.  She was mean.  I didn't like her.  She used to stand at the door at the end of the day, and as each--no, in the morning she would tell us, I brought my strap today.  And she was a spinster, she'd never married, had a severe hairstyle, with her hair pulled back--
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: --the bun's in the back, very fair-skinned woman.  And at the end of the say, she stood at the door.  And she would hit us as we were going out.  When I think about that, (laughter) I mean, she must have been so frustrated over something.  I'm not sure what, but she got it--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --on us.
Speaker 1: --hit every kid on their way out the door?
Speaker 2: Those, those that had been bad, you know.  But most--but in--it covered most of the kids, you know, a good half of 'em.  She'd just hit you.  And we--there was corporal punishment, you know, in school and at home too.  I mean--
Speaker 1: Were you ever the victim of cultural--of corporal, of corporal punishment at school yourself?  Did you ever do anything to--
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  Did I ever get by a ruler?  Maybe with Ms. Chapman.  I don't think I did.  I don't think so, but I was so conforming to the rules, you know, 'cause I was, I was kind of scary, you know, scared.  And I, I didn't, I didn't, I didn't break rules, until I started getting like twelfth, eleventh, twelfth grade, you know, but not when I was younger, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was too scared my mother was gonna hear about it and beat me again at home, you know.
Speaker 1: Now--
Story_ID: 90197
Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in music?  Well, you were in the chorus, right--
Speaker 2: I was in the--
Speaker 1: --you sing?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Were you a good singer?
Speaker 2: I wasn't then, but I am now.  It's a strange thing.  My--I sing when I, I'm at church, I mean, people hear my voice and they--[William] Bill Raspberry, the columnist and I go to the same church, Trinity Episcopal.  Bill is a good friend.  He's from Mississippi too.  He, he--I told him I was thinking about I was interested in, in getting to know more about Episcopalian, 'cause I probably wanna join an Episcopal church.  I'd left the Unitarian Church.  But the church thing with me another story altogether too; that's a big story (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--I, I just wanna know what--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --grade school did you--what--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --were there any extra--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, any, anything that was--
Speaker 1: (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --available in grade school.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But generally the, the activities started--the organization started in seventh grade.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Like 4-H Club.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: When I graduated I got all the medals except two or three.  I still have them (laughter).  I don't know why, but I've got all of them.
Story_ID: 90198
Speaker 1: In grade school, okay, when I was in sixth grade, there was this girl in our class whose name was Hattie Mae Nailer.  And he had a brother who was younger.  And there were about seventeen, eighteen children in their family.  And her father was a, a dwarf in a way.  He was very small, but his wife was normal sized.  And she, Hattie Mae, didn't and her brother didn't get to school until maybe 10:00, 11:00 because they had to walk where the bus didn't go.  We walked from a block to school, but a lot of the other kids were brought by bus from different parts of the county, especially once they got to high school.  It was the only cap--black school in the whole county.  Now, I used to sit and cry--tears would come to my eyes when I saw her come to school.  And she was older than the rest of us.  And I was, I felt embarrassed for her, you know, because she--I mean she--they--we were poor.  All of us were poor, you know, but you didn't quite know it in a way, 'cause my father was a diesel engine mechanic, and he had a, he was a skilled laborer, you know.  And--but Hattie Mae came to school late because they had to walk so far to get there.  And I would go up in--some kids would laugh at her, but I always went over and asked, could I help you?  I mean I tried to see if she, she needed me, to see my notes, or wanted to find out what was going on in class, whatever.  And I wrote about that in an article in "Essence [Magazine]" back in the '70's [1970s] when I went back to the first SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] reunion.  And she read it and was very upset, 'cause she's not poor like that anymore.  Okay. And I felt bad about having written it about her.  It--because it might have been a good story for me to tell, but she didn't think that her story was one that other people should know.  Maybe she felt it was her own story with which to do whatever, and may have even have felt that I was telling it at, at her expense, you know.
Story_ID: 90199
Speaker 1: But I--whatev--when we got to seventh grade, high school, then we were in all these activities.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, now where did you go to high school?
Speaker 1: Earl Travillion High School [Hattiesburg, Mississippi].
Speaker 2: It was named after the principal of the--?
Speaker 1: Mr. Travallion, yeah, yeah.  They built a--after the '54' [1954] Supreme Court decision, "Brown v. Board of Education," the, a lot of the Southern states rushed to build new schools for black people to stave off integration.
Speaker 2: So they could claim they were equal--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --to the white schools?
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.  So they built a new school a few yards away from my elementary and DePriest School was.  DePriest had gone through eighth grade, and--or did it go further?  No, it went to twelfth grade.  And--so they built a school--once it was, it was a very nice school, but only one for the whole county.  So there were kids who came from one, two other schools in the county who came also to, to Travallion.  And it was an ultra-modern school, for those times especially, big, round shaped kind of gym, and classrooms that were like open air; there were--it was all on one level--one set of classrooms, another set of classrooms, and long between.  And it was, it was a nice, very nice school.  But we still didn't, didn't have, you know, the, the equipment that we needed.  I remember in--when I was in maybe seventh grade, we--I was still at DePriest School, and we had a science lab.  And it may have had two pieces of equipment in it.  And what we did was we read from the book or the teacher did.  It's best to explain what we would have seen if there were--you'd say look at--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: --this is a Brunson burner, you know.  This is what it looks like, you know.  They taught with enormous hear, I mean, limitations on, but--so they had to be creative and inventive.
Speaker 2: Okay, now in high school, well, you know, what were some of the highlights of high school?
Speaker 1: A lot of 'em.  I had a good time.  That's when I began to started to get, coming into my own I think, when I got to high school.  As I was--I was always interested in--I mean there were things I could, interests I could really explore then, so I got at least--we all joined to the New Homemakers of America because we took, took home ec., home economics, and the boys took industrial arts, like shop.  And so we, therefore, joined the New Homemakers of America.  And we'd get on the school bus and go to the regional conference in Laurel [Mississippi] or someplace else.  And we'd have programs and, and I, you know--I felt, I, I always felt I was, I was hemmed in, that I was oppressed, that there were too many restrictions around me, because my mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] was very, very strict.  And so, any opportunity to go someplace else, you know, with these teachers was great.  But I also had--there were also, now that I think back on it, avenues of opportunity for me to, to--I didn't, I never thought of it this way, but what, what was happening to me was that I was honing or demonstrating leadership skills, developing them.
Story_ID: 88303
Speaker 1: You're in high school [Earl Travillion High School, Hattiesburg, Mississippi], and you're preparing yourself for leadership roles basically.
Speaker 2: Yes, because I, I enjoyed the activities.  It seemed as though--now that I think back on it, I think the clubs in high school gave me opportunities for social interaction.  You know, I could run for office.  And, and I think I liked it because I, I wasn't thinking at the time that I have something here that I can develop, but that, but the feeling must have been there, because there were some kids who didn't get in the clubs.  But I was in everything; I was very, very active, and, and, and therefore a standout, you know, in terms of what the teachers' expectations.  They expected me to succeed.  I've talked to--I, I went back, you know, over time, after college, and I used to go home.  I used to go to see my teachers and the principals, and they would say things like oh, we always expected you to do good.  I said you did, really?  Of course.
Story_ID: 88304
Speaker 1: My algebra teacher, Mr.--he's dead now--he--I'll, I'll never forget the time he found an error in a textbook.  And he says this can't be right, and he just kept working the problem over and over and over.  And I was so impressed when he got a letter back from the publisher acknowledging that--their mistake.  I said wow!  Because we always said that Mr. Harris, Phillip Harris was his name, was just a genius, and he was so smart.  And then when he did this--he, he was very, very brilliant.  But when he found this error in the textbook, I said this is amazing (laughter).  But you know, here we are--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --in Palmer's Crossing [Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: This is a textbook
Speaker 2: For a child, it must have been an amazing thing to see--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It was. That they made mistakes even, you know.
Speaker 2: I guess it was validation of the, of the--
Speaker 1: Of how--
Speaker 2: --the ability to use your own mind to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --right, it was wrong.
Speaker 1: And to show me that, that our teachers were really good.  I didn't have anyone that--others to compare them to, but I never, ever considered that they were inferior.  And what I'm, what, what--I've given a lot of thought to this too, and I think the reason that, that, that--there were several reasons that they--I felt, felt then and I feel now they were really good.  But one is that, this personal commitment was even stronger to compensate for the absence of the Bunsen burner, for example.  When they didn't have the adequate facilities or the books, you know, they, they used some other create--creative, creative ways to teach.  They also saw us as the next generation, as their legacies.  We--they prepared us to be the next generation to take over their spots very consciously.  And they would talk about it and said we're not going to be, we're not gonna be around all the time.  What you gonna do when you become a teacher?  You know.
Story_ID: 88305
Speaker 1: And so, so our--and I was also not a fast girl.  You know, we had fast girls at school, some you knew who would punch out with a baby before graduation, 'cause they were real fast, and then others who were fast who were gonna go to college. You know, but our mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] had us on such a tight leash that I couldn't have become a fast girl if I wanted to.  It would have been very, very hard.  And I used to tell her, mother, I'm not a bad girl.  I'm not gonna go out there and do anything wrong, 'cause she, you know, preached to us about these boys will take advantage of you, now don't bring no baby into this house.  Just like I tell my son and my nephew, I don't visit prisons.  I'll do anything for you to keep you from going, but if you go I'm not visiting.  (Laughter) My nephew in Mississippi was telling me the other night, he said you sure told me, and I straightened up.  I said well, I don't do prisons, you know.  And don't say that somebody's gonna lock you up, and you weren't guilty.  You shouldn't have been wherever you were to get locked up, so.
Story_ID: 88306
Speaker 1: But, but I, I--you know, social--we, we were, we're all so well rounded pretty much.  Our church was a block from us, as was the school.  The school was across the street from the church.  And I was very, very active in the Baptist church.  They used to have a, a contest.  I went to Sunday school, went to 11:00 service, then I went to, again, at 5:00 to BTU, Baptist Training Union or Baptist Young People's Union, and then to Sunday service at night, and I enjoyed it.  And they used to have this, this activity every Sunday morning, who--a contest to see who could find a Bible verse quickest.  So if you said Mark 14:5, I always got it.  I was--nobody else ever won that.  You know, it was just--same, you know, thing that kept me running to the store, you know.  It was, it was what allowed me to find the Bible verse first, and I liked that.  And I also used to go with a lady--another mentor was Mrs. Fairley.  She was missionary, and she used to go out to do her mission work at these various small country churches deep in the woods.  And she took me with her on Sunday afternoons.  And I was supposed to be the young, young missionary in training, and she was the missionary so she would, you know, give these uplifting talks, and work with the women, and then she had me get up there and say whatever--I don't know what I said now--to, to the kids, to the young people.  And it's, it's-Dorie [Ladner Churnet, HM] once told me you would volunteer to do anything, won't you?  Yeah, I mean why not?  I mean I had a--and it took, also took care of a lot of that excess energy.  Even now you can see (unclear)--and, and it was something that allowed my brain to focus on, 'cause it was, if it was gonna be moving around all the time, I needed to place it somewhere.  But when I say we were well rounded, we had boy--I had boyfriends.  I mean I, I had a different boyfriend--my mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] didn't allow to--we--us to "court," C-O-U-R-T, until we were sixteen.  So, at sixteen I was a senior.  I was getting ready to graduate from high school.  And then all my friends are a couple of years older, you know.  And they were dating and mostly--you're not going anywhere.  I don't care what other people, children are doing.  That's their mama.  Their mama said they could it.  They are not--they don't have the same mama that you got.  And I--and then I remember when we got to be seniors in high school, one day we just told--see, my mother also took me out of my church.  She, she and my father [Eunice Stafford Ladner] didn't go to church 'cause they used to say all preachers are crooks, you know.
Story_ID: 88307
Speaker 1: And, and, and--
Speaker 2: So who was responsible for you going to church?  I mean initially, did you--
Speaker 1: I went on my own.
Speaker 2: --grand, grandparents?
Speaker 1: My grand, my grandparents--my grandmother, not my grandfather.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: My grandmother went and my Aunt Icie, Uncle Archie's wife, Aunt Icie--
Speaker 2: Icie?
Speaker 1: I-C-I-E.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She went to the funerals; took me to every funeral they had at (unclear) Creek or St. John's Methodist Church, just--and if she didn't feel like going, she sent me to come back to tell her what, what was going on.  And if they buried someone who didn't have any family, then she took me by hand and we went up and sat on the front row to be the family for the deceased person.  And we cried, and we did everything deceased supposed to do (laughter).  Why are you laughing.  It is funny now.  I mean it's really funny because I've written about this in my memoir, because it--she used to sit there and say it's somebody's child, yes, Lord, somebody's child here, you know.  And remember I was married and living in Manhattan [New York City, New York] in 1974.  I was walking across Third Avenue, 72nd Street.  There is the Liberty Travel Agency on that corner.  I saw this black man walking, then he fell down on the sidewalk.  And I ran over to him to see what was wrong, and he didn't respond.  And they had plexi--they had glass on the window of the travel agency.  And I knocked on it, and I was trying to point to them there's a man on the ground.  They sat there, no, didn't do anything.  Then I ran inside and asked them if I could use their telephone because this man had fallen.  They said no, you--there's a pay phone out there.  So I--then along came an elderly black woman who was going to somebody's apartment to be a maid that day.  And she--I told her that I needed--I said he fell.  She said what's wrong with him?  I said he fell down and, and I, I need to make a phone call, but I don't wanna leave him.  She said okay, I'll watch him while you go do--the pay phone.  I say they wouldn't let me make the call in there.  And she, and she said he's somebody's child.  I thought about my great aunt.  And that's the way they were reared, you know, that everyone belongs to someone.  And so that's why when Icie, you know, sent me to church or she would take me to the revival and--oh, the other things, I-Dorie [sister, Dorie Ladner Churnet, HM] used to get so embarrassed and, and upset, Dot did, because she'd come at night and said mother, Joyce joined church again (laughter).  She's gonna get baptized the third time (laughter).
Speaker 2: Did you do that?  Did you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I did, every time they'd call for, you know--I don't why did it.  But it was like a reaffirmation of faith, you know, why not (laughter)?
Story_ID: 88308
Speaker 1: I remember the first time I wore high heeled shoes.  I bought them--mine, and Dorie [sister, Dorie Ladner Churnet, HM] bought hers, and we hid them underneath the bed.  We were going the church revival that night.
Speaker 2: Did you hid them from your mother [Annie Ruth Woullard]?
Speaker 1: Mm-hm, we were too young to wear them, she said so.  And these were spike heels, mine were, and Dorie's were shorter heels.  And I put them--I had my regular shoes on, and I had snuck them out back.  Or, or maybe--oh, over Aunt Icie's house, that's where they were.  Yeah, 'cause she would help us out, you know, with the strictness.  And she said Annie leave these gals alone.  You're just keeping 'em locked up in this house.  They can't grow up to be normal.  And Mother's--what's this old woman telling me how to raise my children, but she would never say it openly.  But I went over to Aunt Icie's and I got my high heel shoes on.  I'll tell you, the next morning, I can't even wake up before mother comes back to the bedroom and said what are you doing with white high heel shoes on at church last night?  I said who told you that?  And there's Ms. Katie, Ms. Katie who lived right behind us, next door to Aunt Icie, and she was the gossip.  And she came over to our house at 7:00 in the morning to tell mother that I--do you know anything about those girls wearing them high heel shoes?
Speaker 2: She couldn't wait.
Speaker 1: She couldn't wait, no, she couldn't.  And mother said where are they?  And I went and got them from underneath the bed, and I showed them to her.  She didn't say anything.  She said well, okay, since you bought them already, go on and wear them, but don't think you're grown now.  And I said okay, mother.
Story_ID: 88309
Speaker 1: So, so we--and the church would--sun--like Sunday nights was the time you socialized.  After you go and pay the collect money in the collection, then you can just--kids just kept on and went out the front.  And some of them would go behind bushes and kiss and stuff, you know.  I never did that 'cause I would think Aunt Icie or Ms. Kate--no, Ms. Katie espec--no, she was in the choir, and she would tell mother [Annie Ruth Woullard].  She said--heard about it, but it was--mean there weren't places to socialize so we created them, you know.  So after church or in the middle church service, you go--Sunday afternoons we were very much like in Africa I've lived, where Sunday afternoons when people visit family and friends, we do the same thing.  We could go play with someone.  One time mother--I begged mother, can we go up on the hill to see--I forgot the girls name--to play?  And mother finally said okay, now, don't you eat her mama's cooking 'cause you know she's nasty.  And, and we got there and the lady had said I just baked this nice cake.  I wanna give you all a piece.  And I said no, ma'am; I said I'm not hungry.  She--no, she said why not?  I said I'm not hungry.  She said come on, it's, it, it, it's a good cake.  And then she asked her daughter, isn't it good?  And her daughter said yes, ma'am, it's good.  Joyce, you'll like it.  And then she kept on.  I said no, ma'am.  She said well, why not?  I said mama said we shouldn't eat your cookin' 'cause you nasty (laughter), oh God.  And I told--mama said I didn't tell you to be no damn fool.  You're crazy.  Now what am I gonna say to, to Betsy or whatever her name was.  She said I'll be ashamed to see her (laughter) next time.  My mother was also, had, also had a tremendous sense of humor and great wit.  I think I have a lot of her wit.  And she imitated voices, and I, I can do that.  I can, I love to do imitations.  And it's a matter of hearing, you know, the, the sound (laughter), but--and on Sundays we--you know, by the time I got a boyfriend, we, we always went to the--all the kids would meet at the--I forgot--a restaurant, Smith's Drug Store, literally to get milkshakes and so on.  You stand there and talk, and, and they sold--I remember they sold "Pittsburgh Courier" and "Chicago Defender."  And next door was a restaurant, and we hung out there.  And I had a boyfriend who was at--there was a high--a black high school in the city Roett--Royal Street High School.  Later they changed it to Roanne.  And I remember that I was--his name was, we called him Junior Massey.  He--his brother, Walt [Walter] Massey [HM], is president of Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: And Junior, Almore--Junior lives in Chicago.  I've not seen him since high--since he graduated.  But he was a running back on Roanne football team.  And the big thing was that you walked with your boyfriend off the field after the game.  That was like a ritual to his girlfriend--and he told, had told me to come out on the field, walk him off the field.  I went out there.  I never saw him, and no one--my friends with me didn't see him.  My sister [Dorie Ladner Churnet, HM] didn't see him.  And later when I saw him, I went over to where the (unclear) dressing room and waited outside, and he didn't show up then.  Then we all went on to the nightclub, 'cause we--by twelfth grade, we just--all of us told our parents we were going.  Dorie and I just broke loose and became lib--we liberated ourselves, and mother didn't say anything.  I said we could--shoot, if we had known she wasn't gonna say anything--we just went--we should have done it years ago.  But we went to this--the, the High Hat.  The old Embassy Club where BB King [HM] used to play was called the High Hat.  You know, they were still playing in 1960.  And so, and Junior Massey comes over to me in this club and say where were you?  And I said I was out there looking for you.  I found out that he had had--because this other girl, Annie Mae Brown, he was messing around with was also there waiting to walk him off the field.  He had two guys he was like--they had the--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) and kind of--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah--well, put--
Speaker 2: Kind of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --put something around them, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: And he was in the middle underneath so he could get away from both of us (laughter).
Story_ID: 88310
Speaker 1: Well, with, as a professional sociologist looking back on that, it seems to me that you--I mean, well, you had the village, but what did--what was the rest of like, 'cause it, I know there was racism around you.  And how did that touch you in that sense?
Speaker 2: Very, very deeply.  It, it, it affected the fabric of my being.  I mean I--it was--I took racism on as a burden.  It became my burden.  It became my burden when I was very, very young and saw the white kids sitting at the soda fountain the five and dime store called Kresge, K-R-E-S-G-E, Kresge.
Speaker 1: Kresge's, yeah, down in Detroit.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: It's now Kmart.
Speaker 2: You're kidding.
Speaker 1: Same company, yeah.
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: S.S. Kresge Company.
Speaker 2: Kmart.  When I saw them stop my father [Eunice Stafford Ladner] on the highway late at night.  We were driving back from my grandparents' house, and cops in Laurel, Mississippi, Leontyne Price's [HM] hometown.  It was only thirty miles from Hattiesburg [Mississippi].  They were known to be bad cops, you know. They said, Laurel police, don't ever get hooked up with them because they will kill you.  So what happened is that they stopped my father, and we were young, but there were children under us.  And they asked--I mean they started messing with him, and mother--I could--you know, they wanted to see his driver's license I think, or what--they, then they asked where are you going?  And, and I noticed my father had reached in his pocket to get his identification out.  They could--I was sitting back there thinking that they were gonna shoot him, in the backseat--(unclear).  And my mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] interjected herself into the conversation and started talking.  And we had just, we were going home to Palmer's [Crossing].  We just came back from my mama, my folks' house you know.  And, and you know, she had a, a very good way of dealing with white people, by putting them, pushing them back, but staying, maintaining her dignity and not putting herself at risk.  She, she didn't take any stuff from white people.  No white man made passes at Annie Ruth Paraman (ph.), ever.  Now if they didn't know her and said something to her, she and my aunts would have just cussed them out.  She didn't, she didn't play that.  And they never came into our house, 'cause the insurance collectors would knock on the front door.  I'd go see who was there, or she went to the door, and she'd say you wait right here, and she didn't let him in the house.  And so I was learning how to--she dealt with white people, but I, I didn't feel inferior.  I felt hurt.  It was very painful for me to see that the white kids had things that we should have been able to have.  And people who really got to me were those very poor white people who--there was a group of them who lived down the street from my aunt and on Royal Street, or Martin Luther King Street now.  And they were so poor.  I mean they were, and they were dirty little children (unclear).  They looked like they were in the back of Appalachia, you know, just--and they had the nerve to--one of 'em called me a nigger one day.  And my Aunt Ledresta (ph.), she's dead now, she go--went over there and cussed them all out.  She didn't take anything at all.  She, she--and they had the nerve to ask me or my sister if we would work for them.  And ma said you don't have any food.  You'd better take that money you gon' pay somebody to work for you and buy some food for these children.
Story_ID: 88311
Speaker 1: But I, I worked for white people on Saturdays cleaning their houses to get spending money.  Had there been, been McDonald's then I would have worked for one, 'cause my parents were poor.  I mean they didn't have any money.  My mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] was a homemaker.  My father [Eunice Stafford Ladner] told her that she--she wanted to go to work once in a dentist's office, cleaning a dentist's office.  And she said it'll only be a few hours a day.  He said you have your own work here at home.  You're not gonna--and then one time he told mother that I spent too many years looking at my own mother [Della McCloud Ladner] slave at those white people's house, and I will not see you do that.  And my, my grandmother, you know, worked for the same family for thirty years or more.  And she saved enough money for my cousin, who was her niece, they raised their niece to go to Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana] to, to study nursing from her $3 dollars a day plus carfare.  And my crazy cousin didn't wanna go, ended up marrying some man coming through town laying down the oil pipe, I mean the gas pipelines.  And you know, she, she never amounted to much, but I--and my grandmother was so hurt.  I was so painful to her.  But she--the one thing about her, I will never forget it when she went to--now, when the daughter of this white family she worked for, the Baldwin's daughter got married, my grandmother was invited to this wedding at Court Street Methodist Church, white church.  She bought a new outfit, hat, suit, shoes, bag, gloves, and sat in the balcony by herself.  Now this is a girl she had raised.  And I--and she was just so happy, talking about what she was gonna wear to JoAnn's wedding.  I was so upset that they would do that to my grandmother.  I said why did they invite her?  They should have not have, have invited her.  And then I was upset with her.  Why is she acting like an Uncle Tom, going to these white people's church?  And they're gonna put her up in the balcony when she's diapered this woman, this girl, who's now grown, you know?  You see, I always looked at the contradictions of racism.  That's the absurdities.  And that, they would make me very mad because my mind would always, you know, I'm analyzing stuff, and you're just running smack on.
Story_ID: 88312
Speaker 1: Like, I remember one Saturday I was working for this woman and her--I don't remember her name, last name, but she was a legal secretary to a lawyer.  And her mother--I mean she had a daughter, one child.  She was divorced, and this daughter's name was Jo Lee, and she was my age.  And Jo Lee asked me to--I had, on a Saturday for $3 dollars I had to clean the whole house and then iron the clothes.  And, and Jo Lee was in bed one day when I got there, and she told me to bake her some pancakes, and I told her I was busy trying to clean that big house.  And she said well, I'mma ca--nigger, I'm gonna tell mama when you come home.  And do you know, I went in the kitchen and I took some water out of this sink with the dirty dishes, and I poured it into the pancake mix.  And they were dirty people, dirty enough to have grease around the edge of the sink.  So I took that and put it in the skillet and used it like greased--fry these pancakes.  And then I took them into her with, with the syrup over them.  And she said oh, these are so good.  And I just stood there and looked, and I felt like a million dollars because felt I had dealt a blow to her that she didn't even know about.
Story_ID: 89035
Speaker 1: I'm saying that, that black people got information about what was going on in the white community from the, the white people for whom they worked--
Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --because they considered them a nonentity.  So you cook the food, and then they're sitting at lunch or dinner table, and they're serving the food, and they just keep talking like you're not a person, like you're not there.  So black people cultivated this skill, a fine art of actually just listening and keeping a straight face, yes ma'am, no ma'am, yes sir, here's more food; you want more iced tea, ma'am, here.  And as they keep talking, and you, you aren't there so, you know.  And in the movement [Civil Rights Movement], you know, they would come back and tell you--I mean, you'd get a lot of information from--and other people who had information on white people, what white people were doing, were some of these white women who went with the white men--black women who went with the white men.  They would find out.  And, and say, for example, some of the Klan members would go to their white--black--girlfriend's house, have sex with them just before they go out to a lynching.  And I'll be damned if I understand that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, talk about schizophrenia many times over (laughter).  You got, got to have a personality that split many, many times to keep these different lives in check (laughter).  That's written up someplace.  I saw that.
Speaker 2: That's very odd, and (unclear)--the fear that they seem to have was of the black man doing the same thing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but, but--
Speaker 2: --major reason for the lynchings seem because of that fear.
Story_ID: 89036
Speaker 1: Well, the, the community, Palmer's Crossing [Hattiesburg, Mississippi], which we lived, was really started around World War II because Camp Shelby, that's south of Hattiesburg, a lot of black, black soldiers there, and there was no place for recreation for them.  So they allowed Palmer's to become the, the hands-off place for the nightclubs, for example they could sell liquor, even though Mississippi was a dry state.  They just turned their--and extensively it was because they wanted these black soldiers to have someplace to go.  I mean white soldiers could go any place they wanted to.  But what are, what were they gonna do with all these black soldiers in this, in this camp?  So, recreation, they would go to nightclubs in Palmer's.  And there was a lot of illegal activity going on.  But one--you know, and this, the principal of the school might live next to a juke joint or one down the street or across the street.  So there's no single--even in Hattiesburg at the time, there was no defined middle-class community, I mean 'cause there weren't enough people who were middle class to be in their own subdivision.  But I remember the--I'm sorry, I forgot the point I was going to make.
Speaker 2: The soldiers at the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the soldiers, right.  I've met some people in my years in my profession traveling around who say they were stationed at Camp Shelby, and they used to go to Palmer's Crossing.  That, that, that was--and then there was a fellow at Brookings who's an economist who was stationed at Camp Shelby, and he said he used to go to--a white guy--used to go to Hattiesburg, you know, for his recreation.  So Palmer's [Crossing] was viewed as a kinda out, outlaw place, you know.  And I think that was also part of the reason our mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] kept us close at hand, because she, she--on Friday afternoon, dinner, my mother would send us up the street to one of the goat, to the goats' little juke joint.  I used to think this is a big place where all these men.  I saw it when I, after I got grown.  It was about as big as, half as large as my dining room here.  And we would go there to buy sodas.  You know, they had like Coca-Colas in the bottle, strawberry, Nehi strawberry, orange sodas and so.  And the goats would say--these men would say, who are these pretty little girls?  The goat would say leave these little girls alone because they're gonna be somebody when they grow up.  And they used to give, also give us a dime for--or was it--it was dime for every "A" we made on our report card.  We'd come home, David said (unclear) our report cards--little, come in here, let me see that report card, 'cause they were sitting on that porch.  And child, Mae Lou, come and look.  Look at little Joyce.  She got all "A"s.  Baby, here's a dime for this "A," another one for this "A," and you know, that was motivation for me to keep getting "A"s, but they, but--and they would tell the men in, in--on Friday when went in there to buy sodas for the family, don't bother these little girls.  They gon' be somebody.  Don't you even look at 'em.  Not only are they too young for you, but they are gon', they gon' leave Palmer's.  These girls are smart.  And, and so there, there was this recognition that, in the community, that certain kids were gonna succeed and, and you helped them to succeed, you know, instead of trying to pull them away.  And then others may not succeed, and then there were some that were on the borderline.
Story_ID: 89037
Speaker 1: But there was one--Ms. Bama (ph.) was a black woman who had a, a, a nightclub across the street from us.  And every Monday afternoon around 4:00--I know it was after I came home from school--the sheriff came to Ms. Bama's house, blew his horn, and she would come out of the house and get in the front seat of the car with him.  And she would pay him, give him this money.  You could see her giving him money.  And then they'd sit there and talk for a while, and then he would go in, in side with her.  And I, I was maybe twelve years old, but I knew what was going on.  I mean, he was going with her, so.  And she'd pull down the front, the, the shade in the front bedroom.  Then, I'll tell you want went through my mind as a very, as a young kid, I mean.  I said now, why is he treating her like this?  She's gotta pay him money in order to be able to have these girls work--she had, she had a white prostitute working for her, several black girls, but there was a white girl who worked for her.  And we--I mean I was just, just astonished.  I said mama, there's a white girl over there.  Mama [Annie Ruth Woullard] said they're not gon' do anything to Bama 'cause, you know, she pays that man off.  And she's with him too, or she's going with him, she said.  But the she'd go and--and I said now she is paying him twice, how terrible.  I just thought it was just--and I, I mean I looked at racism in crevices, you know, like that, not just somebody calling you nigger, you know.  But just the inequalities that permeated everything.
Story_ID: 89038
Speaker 1: You know and I remember one time--see, mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] always told us to stand up for, for ourselves, and don't let anybody mess over you now.  And she didn't say don't, don't beat up white people or whatever, but she just said if anybody is about to mess with you, she said always look them straight in the eye and don't blink.  She said because if you blink, they'll think you're scared.  And if you don't look at them in their eye, like, then (laughter), then they're gonna think they can take advantage of you.  And she, and she said--and she even told us how to walk, and white men--I mean don't be switching around here, you know.  You walk like this, and she was just--what she meant was walk dignified, walk like you're a lady.  But one time we were in Hudson's Grocery Store.  We were looking at, Dorie [Dorie Ladner Churnet, HM] and I, we're looking at magazines.  And there was this white cashier there.  His name was Mr. Patton, and he didn't have any fingers on one of his hands; they were cut off here.  And Dorie had bought some donuts, and then we went over to look at the magazines.  And he came up from behind her, and she was maybe twelve years old.  And he said--felt her little developing breast.  She turned around and took her bag and beat him over the head, and then we ran home.  And he was just like astonished.  She--we ran home and said mother, mother, Mr. Patton felt Dorie's tit, tits, breasts--we didn't say tits, their breasts--and she hit him; she hit him over the head.  Mother said she, you should have killed him.  I'll never forget that.  She, she was washing dishes or cooking or something.  She had her back to us.  You should have killed him, and she just kept on.  There were no repercussions.
Story_ID: 89039
Speaker 1: Now when you're on the verge of graduation from high school [Travillion High School, Hattiesburg, Mississippi], did you know what you wanted to do career wise?  Did you have any idea?
Speaker 2: I knew I wanted to--growing up, you know, throughout high school, I always--someone asked me what, what do you wanna be when you grow up?  I said I want to go to college and learn how to help poor people.  I didn't know what it was called, you know, but I assumed I was talking about social work, 'cause I, 'cause I was always volunteering, you know, doing good, my good deeds, and so--and I knew that when I went to college--we, we first went to Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] for a year.  And I knew that I wanted to major in--they didn't have a sociology major at the time.  I wanted to major in social science because I was drawn, I always had this interest in human interaction with people and so.
Speaker 1: Now, where, where, where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: The first year in 1960, fall of '60' [1960] we went to Jackson State College.  It's now Jackson State University in Jackson [Mississippi].  And we were in a civil rights demonstration, and Dorie [Ladner Churnet, HM] and I were expelled from Jackson State at the end of the school year.  And it was the best thing that ever happened to us because we went to Tougaloo College, and we said that that's when our lives began 'cause it was a, it was a great ride.  The best time of my life was at that college.
Story_ID: 89040
Speaker 1: Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi] was--I forget his name, but the president of Tougaloo was a white man then I think, right, was that--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Up until '63' [1963]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Dr. Dan [Adam Daniel] Beittel was the president.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, he was--he made the, he made the campus susceptible to all the civil rights, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was open to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dan Beittel.
Speaker 2: It was the only place I the state where civil right--white civil rights workers could--where, where, actually where blacks and whites could, could be together anyway, I mean legally, because it was a private school started by the American Missionary Association, about 1869, following slavery.  It was a school for children of ex-slaves.  And it was one of those American Missionary Association, AMA, schools, like Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama], and Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], and others. And it was just a wonderful place to be at that time in my life.  Because to be on that campus meant that I got a chance to see Ralph Bunche, who came to campus to, to speak on United Nations Day.  And I was mentored by Ernst Borinski, who was a Holocaust survivor, and he was the, the lone sociology professor.  And he had a social science forum where he would invite people like Eudora Welty, the local rabbi, Rabbi--what's his name--the head of the Commission on Human Rights--the Council on Human Rights--Human Relations, rather, in Mississippi, and professors from Old Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi], Mississippi State [University, Starkville, Mississippi], from Millsaps Colleges [Jackson, Mississippi].  You know, he invited--and what Dr. Borinski did was he would tell us students to sit in every other chair.  And then the whites had to sit beside you.  They would come, you know, they would sit in the--and therefore--his idea was that maybe you just might have a conversation with the person sitting beside you.  And the white professors from these other schools did not allow, you know, the people at their school said Old Miss--you know, they were going to Tougaloo to hear James Baldwin for--no, James Baldwin spoke in the chapel. [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], you know--I have a picture that ran in "Jet" that I took with King when he came to speak in chapel one Wednesday.  And--but everybody came to Tougaloo.  I remember when Pauline Frederick, who was probably one of the--may have been the first prominent woman in, in telecasting, television news because she--her assigned--she worked for NBC News, and she was assigned to the United Nations.  She also came on one United Nations Day.  And, and you know, to have these speakers like Ralph Bunche come in on and to celebrate United Nations Day in a place that didn't even believe in being a part of the Union was really something (laughter).
Story_ID: 89041
Speaker 1: But Dr. [Ernst] Borinski had, had an African study group.  And I joined the African study group, and you know, it was pre--it was still, many of the countries I mean were still a neocolonial status, you know, for many of the countries.  So we were studying Tanika, you know, and Southern Rhodesia, and then we just saw the map changing, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the era when we're all the--a lot of the African countries were becoming independent, about fifty of 'em in about ten years--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --(unclear) to the country.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and we studied, you know, different parts of Africa.  We studied the maps very, very carefully as we went through country after country.  We, we went to--on Operation Crossroads Africa.  I know I applied, and I was an alternate.  And I was so upset that I didn't get chosen to go, but some students did go.  Dr. Borinski sent me on my first plane ride to Chapel Hill [North Carolina], you know, to a conference.  And when I finished writing my--defending my dissertation, he was the first person I called.  And he, he was so ecstatic, he sent me a letter, and a check, and told me to enjoy--take this little check and enjoy yourself.  And I told the story about him--when I, when I to apply to graduate school I didn't have money to pay for the application fees, and he wrote the checks.  And I told this story at a conference they had on his life--two years ago I went down to Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi]--only to hear all kinds of other people who had been mentored by him say that he'd wrote the checks for them too.
Speaker 2: That's something.
Story_ID: 89042
Speaker 1: Let me go back to Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] a moment.  Tougaloo, you got involved with Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was--we had a--I got--Dorie [sister, Dorie Ladner Churnet, HM] got involved with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] in, in 1961 when, when--'61' [1961] or '62' [1961] rather--when Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] had come.  And she went and spent the summer working with Bob.  We went home after the semester ended, and I remember the day.  It was an afternoon--we'd been there a day or two.  And Dorie went in the kitchen and told mother [Annie Ruth Woullard]: mother, I'm leaving.  I'm going to Jackson to work with, with, with Bob Moses and the movement [Civil Rights Movement], and ran out of the house with a small suitcase, and ran up the street, and got on the bus and went downtown.  She knew what--did it just that the time the bus was coming.  And mother didn't--mother turned: Bob Moses?  What is that girl talking about?  And she looked for Dorie--
Speaker 1: She's gone.
Speaker 2: --she's gone, right (laughter).  And that was the summer she went and--up to Cleveland and, and, and--
Speaker 1: You're talking about Cleveland, Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, Cleveland and, and Ruleville, and got to know Ms. [Fannie Lou] Hamer.  And Ms. Hamer got thrown off the plantation, and Dorie was a group that went to pick her things up that were--the owner of the plantation had set her furniture alongside of the road--
Speaker 1: And SNCC had just been formed I guess then because they had a conference--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was formed at--
Speaker 1: --in North Carolina, right?
Speaker 2: --in Easter weekend in, in 1960.
Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Six--yeah, sixty--
Speaker 1: --Ms. Ella Baker.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had the fortieth anniversary about three years ago at, at, at Shaw.  We went back to Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Ella Baker was, was first organizing for SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: They had--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --try to make her secretary, but she--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --really wasn't organizing--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: She brought--Bob Moses when he came down, he worked with her and then they--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bob sought, sought Ms. Baker out.  And, and he was teaching high school in, in New York at the time.  And first he went to Atlanta to the SNCC office and you know, just asked what can I do, and you know, okay, memer--mimeograph whatever; everyone did everything, you know.  And then he--some people were going down to McComb [Mississippi], Marion Barry [HM] went, Reggie Robinson, Dion Diamond, Chuck [Charles] McDew, and Bob went as well.  And Bob--this--there's a movie, a film called "Freedom Song"--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --about it.  And so--
Speaker 1: Introducing Danny Glover--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Dannie starred in it.  But that summer I went to Chicago to work--was that--yeah, that's what I did, because I was very close to my Uncle Fontaine and my Aunt Lonnie.  And I worked--no, no, no, our freshmen--into, into my freshmen year, we went to Chicago to work at Spiegel's.  Dorie went.  The second year she didn't go because she went to work with Bob Moses.
Story_ID: 89043
Speaker 1: And I went back to the campus to, to work for the summer at the library, and I did.  And on weekends, off days, we'd do, did voter registration work.  And I always managed to stay in school and do my activist work, keep my career going, and do my organizational stuff, 'cause I've been a civ--civically involved in all kinds of, of, in my adult years, in all kinds of commissions and boards and so on, you know.  And that's an extension of the Tri-Hi-Y and the NHA [National Homemakers of America], and the--being the first one to find the Bible verse in, in church, you know.  And Dorie [Ladner Churnet, HM] was never active like that, but she, she was the one who--we both, you know, remembered--we cried, and we kept scrapbook of Emmett Till's, the articles on Emmett Till's lynching.  And there was one person in our lives, lives who, another mentor who was very instrumental in getting information to us about what was going on outside Mississippi, and his name--he was an herbal doctor, herbalist.  And we called him Dr. Mc--they called him Dr. McCloud.  We called him "cuz," 'cause he was related to some of our relative.  And he used to stop by and just talk to my mom [Annie Ruth Woullard], sit on the porch, talk, but when he found out--you know, I--we could just tell by his conversations the thing he, things he would talk about, what's going on up North, and they don't treat people right down here and so.  And we started asking him questions, so he began bringing us his--after you read his copies of "Jet" and "Ebony," "Chicago Defender," and the "Pittsburg Courier."  We read them, and it opened up a world to us, to know what was going on.  Me and Dorie wrote a, a letter to the editor of the "Pittsburgh Courier" about how oppressive it was and how frightened she felt as a child in Mississippi, and she wrote about the atrocities, the lynchings and so.  And every week we'd look for it, the letter, but they never published it.
Story_ID: 89044
Speaker 1: Now did you all have television down there at that point?
Speaker 2: TV came--oh, our only news we got from outside on television was Huntley-Brinkley [Report], NBC News.  We got our TV station in Hattiesburg [Mississippi] in about '57' [1957], '58' [1958], '59' [1959], somewhere around then, black and white TV.
Speaker 1: And it was only NBC?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the only channel, only station rather, I mean and, and the only, only affiliate.  There was another one on the Coast.  And at that time you didn't have satellite dishes and so on, so you just looked at whatever channel was available to you locally.
Speaker 1: You'd listen to the radio a lot in those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but they, they--it was so--there was so much censorship in radio.  I mean, you could hear Paul Harvey, now that I recall.  And on TV they, there were--I always wondered, how did they find a white man from Washington State or Oregon--I think it was Washington State--to come in and be an anchor for the local news who was a racist.  Oh--I forgot it--what was his name?  But he was an anchor of the news, and he was as racist as he could be on the news.  And I wonder, how did they find somebody like this?  I mean as a kid, I mean.  I was--
Speaker 1: What kinds of things would he say on the news?
Speaker 2: He would say things like niggra.  It was no pretense on his part.  For example, when there's a man who owned a big supermarket, McCaffrey, white man.  And he had a show once a week to promote his store.  But then he had his children and grandchildren on, and they would--and someone would come on and play, and a group would come play the fiddle, and they'd sing, and, and then they'd give away prizes.  And I--he was just a devout racist, and they had said that when Mack Charles Parker was lynched in Poplarville [Mississippi], just, you know, thirty minutes from where we lived, and the woman who accused him lived in our town [Hattiesburg, Mississippi], they said that McCaffrey had, had recruited men who did the lynching and paid them money, you know, to do it.  And that was--I used to look at this.  So, so, the announcer was saying now we got Mr. McCaffrey here and who does all this good work-and they'd say and knows how to keep the niggras in their place and all that stuff.
Speaker 1: He would say that on the news?
Speaker 2: They were awful.
Story_ID: 89045
Speaker 1: But we, we were very fortunate. I, I always tell young people when they say they don't have any mentors that, that mentorship goes two ways.  They--an adult or an older person will seek out someone younger and, and mentor them, but you have to actively go out and find people yourself.  And we must have had some kind of antennas up, because it was Dr. McCloud, and then we--mother's [Annie Ruth Woullard] best friend was Arlene Beardan.  She was--Beard--Sister Beard--we went, we all went to the same church.  She used to--she and her husband--she was the sister of Vernon Dahmer.  And so Sister Beard and Brother Beard, and Kenneth and Eileen Beard, and Ellie and Vernon Dahmer, and Clyde Kennard would take Dorie and me with them to Jackson to the statewide NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] meetings of all the branches at the Masonic Temple.  That was the first time I'd laid eyes on Medgar Evers, when I was about in the eighth, ninth grade.  And there would be--I later saw in college at Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] and at Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], some of the kids who were from youth branches, you know, who would be at those meetings.  And the--in 1958, Clyde Kennard and Mr. Dahmer was our advisor I believe; Clyde was our president.  You've heard of Clyde Kennard?  Oh, okay, there's another martyr, because he was--he tried to enroll at the University of--at Mississippi Southern College; now it's University of Southern Mississippi [Hattiesburg, Mississippi].  And because he had been a student with University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], been in the military, when his father became ill he came home to help his mother run the farm.  He wanted to continue his education.  And without any fanfare 'cause he was very low key, very quiet, easygoing, never talked, he wanted to go to the school locally to finish.  (Unclear)--and he tried two or three times, and the last time they planted chicken feed in the back of his car, a truck, and then arrested him and said that he had stolen it.  And for three dollars and fifty cents, they--he sent him to--him to the city jail and, and to Parchman State Penitentiary, where he stayed about three years.  And I lun--launched a national campaign when I was at Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] to get him released, and then "Jet" picked it up, and it became well known.
Story_ID: 91298
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about the Kennard case.
Speaker 2: Clyde Kennard.
Speaker 1: Clyde.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, Clyde was--because a lot--Clyde became ill while he was in Parchman State Penitentiary.  He--we had a campaign to try to get the governor to give him a pardon to release him.  He had cancer, and he was out doing this heavy labor at the penitentiary on the farm.  And eventually he was near death.  Governor Ross Barnett pardoned him.  And as soon as he got out of the hosp--out of the prison he went to Billings Hospital at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And that's where he died about a month after he got out of prison.  And I have pictures where Dorie [Ladner Churnet, HM] went to Chicago to see him.  She was sitting there talking to him.  But he was, he was president our NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Youth chapter.  And so I was mentored by Clyde--I also had a crush on him, but he was like a thirty-year-old older man--and, and Mr. [Vernon] Dahmer, and by Medgar [Evers].  And I said I'm going to write something, maybe a chapter in this memoir on the three martyrs I know who mentored me, or it may come out in one of my paintings.  I keep getting close to it, but it's not ready to come out yet--
Story_ID: 91299
Speaker 1: Vernon Dahmer's home was bombed (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes, firebombed, and he got his wife out, Ellie, and his daughter.  Then he went back to get his shotgun and--'cause he fired at them.  He got--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --third degree burns, and he died later that morning.  I remember my mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] calling me in St. Louis when I was in grad school early one morning.  And she said Mr. Dahmer is dead--was killed, and I was stunned.  I said how, what happened?  She said they killed him.  They burned up his house, and he got caught in there.  Oh, my heart sunk, because he was a survivor.  He had gotten past-Medgar [Evers] was killed in '63' [1963]--all the lynchings around him.  And he--now Mr. Dahmer looked like a white man.  You, you--a lot of his people are white, I mean.  They went north and they just lived white lives, some of his brothers or so.  But he was never fearful of the white people.  He, he owned a store and a farm near the store.  He had a--he, he took--he had applications or voter registration, and he would take the poll tax.  You could pay him your poll tax and he--then he took them downtown to the courthouse to the voting registrar.  And as it turned out, I mean it--they still wouldn't register anyone, but he, you know, he was fearless.  He, he was independent because he owned his own farm, and he owned a store.  And so there was a real difference between the people who were independent of white people for their independent and those who were not.  Now, for example, a lot of the teachers joined the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], but their membership cards were kept in the, the vault or, or the safe of a man who owned a store, 'cause his daughter was telling me a few years ago after school when she would leave our school, she'd go to the store to work.  And one of her jobs was logging in NAACP memberships or letting some--calling someone, tell him your letter arrived.  We have it here, you know.  They couldn't hold them I think.  It was truly amazing because in those years, in the deep Southern states, (unclear) Mississippi, Louisiana, probably Alabama, yeah, Alabama, it was NAACP by law was outlawed, you know.  And so you had instead a Montgomery Improvement Association, which essentially was the aegis under which they operated.
Story_ID: 91300
Speaker 1: Now do you remember where you were when Medgar Evers was killed?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I remember very well.  I was at, in outside--north of Chicago at--what's the name of that college, a girls college?  It's gotta be Leak Girl's College.
Speaker 1: North of Chicago?
Speaker 2: Un-huh.  It'll come to me 'cause I often think about that.  I was there when I heard it.  And Ruby Doris [Smith] Robinson, who was the, the heart and soul of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] in Atlanta's national SNCC office, had sent me to this college.  They were having a conference, and she went--had me go there to talk--as a SNCC representative to talk to the students from these various colleges about what was going on in the South, try to recruit them to come South, and so on.  And that's where I was, and I called her and told her I wanted to go home; I need--'cause Medgar was killed.  I said I wanna go to Jackson [Mississippi], and she said stay there because this is the best time you can get the message out, what it's really like.  And, and I did what I was told, but I really felt forlorn.  You know, I felt here's a man I've known since I was a kid, you know.  I mean, I--and you see, it was not just having met him there and when he came down to--when we launched our NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Youth chapter, and me going up, you know, to those meetings with the Dahmers and the Beards and so on, but also when we were, Dorie [Churnet Ladner, HM] and I were freshmen, first person we went to see, you know, was Medgar Evers.  We--ever Wednesday afternoon, they were so strict, but they allowed you just to go off campus.  Everybody signed out to go shopping, and Dorie and I would go up to Medgar's office to sit there and talk to him about what was going on in civil rights around the state and so on.
Story_ID: 91301
Speaker 1: And I remember one day I was walking across campus and there was Medgar [Evers].  He was--said I've been looking for you, and I said really, Mr. Evers?  And he said yeah.  He said I was in Hattiesburg yesterday, and I was in the grocery store, and I saw--met your mother [Annie Ruth Woullard], and she gave me this money to give to you.  I said you're kidding (laughter).  And he gave it to me. And mother didn't know him.  I mean he must have walked up and introduced himself to her.  She knew who he was, you know, I guess, but that was really remarkable, and especially since one of our teachers went around and talked to all of our parents and destroyed our NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] chapter, a young chapter; told them that we were gonna get killed; we were going--their homes were gonna be bombed, and I don't know why she did that.  She was like in her twenties.  I mean there was just no reason for her to do it.  And after that I called her--in class I would call her Aunt Tomasina.  And, and I would do anything she said.  I mean it's--I said you can't tell me what to do.  I've never been like that before, but I had no respect for her.  Oh, I just, I hated her.
Speaker 2: She was a teacher (unclear)--
Speaker 1: At--no, this was in high school [Travillion High School, Hattiesburg, Mississippi].
Speaker 2: In high, high school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, when she broke up our NAACP chapter, 'cause some of the parents said well, if--we didn't know it was gonna be that bad, you know.  You mean they could burn up our house for it?  You mean the Ku Klux Klan could come around and march around here?  And she was a single woman.  She married, was going with a, a little boy who was a grade behind me, you know.  He was like fifteen years old.
Speaker 2: She'd go with high school students in--
Speaker 1: Yeah, she married him, got pregnant, had a baby by him.  And so I told her, you're just no good.  You should go keep up with that boy you're going with.  I would just tell her off all the time.  I was so angry.
Story_ID: 91302
Speaker 1: But I remember one day we were, we were in Medgar's [Evers] office, and he introduced us to Tom Gaither.  And said I want y'all to meet the gentleman here, Tom Gaither.  We said hi, and he said Tom has come down here to help Negroes get their freedom.  And I--oh, that's nice you know.  But you--
Speaker 2: A white man?
Speaker 1: No, he was black.
Speaker 2: Black, okay.
Speaker 1: But Tom was the advance person for CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] for the Freedom Rides, and the way Medgar put it, it was to get the your freedom.  I mean you never ask questions.  I just knew he was another kindred spirit, soul, you'd know.  And then I remember one of our teachers, and she didn't teach us, but she was a music professor at Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi], Aurelia Young.  Her husband was one--Jack Young was one of the four black lawyers in the state.  And she took us out to Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] after--what happened is that, that the Tougaloo students staged a sit-in at the public library, Hines County Public Library.
Speaker 2: In Jackson?
Speaker 1: In '61' [1961], mm-hm, it's the Jackson library.  And Medgar told us that there was going to be a sit-in at the public library.  He said you gotta keep it a secret.  I said oh yeah, we don't tell anybody.  He said--and we said can we be in it?  Can we join it?  And he said--'cause he had told us it was be the Tougaloo students from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] chapter, college chapter.  And I--we both were anxious.  Yeah, we'd like to be in it.  And he said yeah, you can.  That'd be good.  And then he said hm, let me think for a moment.  He said no.  He said I would never know how to explain to your mother why you got expelled from Jackson State.  He said because just on a technicality alone they can expel you.  You can't sign out to go off campus to a public--white public library.  He said so all they gotta say is well, you, you lied on where you were going to.  He said when in fact, I mean--but, so, and we asked him what, well, what can we do to help?  And he said why don't you just try to organize some support on the campus for it when it happens?
Story_ID: 91303
Speaker 1: And the day of the sit-in, I didn't go to class.  I stayed in my room listening to the radio that morning.  And I listened, I listened, I listened (laughter), and finally the breaking news came through, that eight--no, nine Tougaloo students, eight or nine had been arrested for trying to enter the Hines County Public Library, Jackson Public Library.  And we got started.  We got some--at, at lunchtime we--or was it dinner?  No, we started a rumor.  We got with a few other kids that we knew and said tell everybody we heard that there was going to be a prayer vigil protest in front of the library.  And the girls--guys are gonna be there any, and we'll see a group of people stopped there.  You get there early, and then we signed out to go the library, so we'll stop and we can have the prayer, prayer service, and then break up and go on to the library.  And we kept it going like, we heard this and then somebody else would say they heard it to.  And talk about tapping a well of oil of golden riches, everybody was out there.  And you know, you didn't--it was, it was the most amazing thing because it was like pregnant with possibilities that you'd never would have known was there unless there had been an event.  I didn't know some of those kids were in the least bit political or cared about what--racism who were out there, but they were there, hundreds; hundreds of people were there.  So what happened is that, that one of the guys im--we said okay, Emmett, get Emmett (unclear)--who is--oh, he's a minister.  Get him to pray, and we'll just stop there and pray.  And I know he was Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, and he was in the middle of his prayer, and heard this voice: Stop this!  What is this going on?  Stop it, don't--so we stopped and turned around and looked, and there was the president of the college [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], Jacob Reddix, flinging his arms.  He was like a mad man going everywhere.  And he just kept telling us to stop it.  And for the first time in his life, we didn't--people didn't stop.  We just kept going, and we turned on him.  Because he came up to me.  I was with my two roommates, Eunice and Margaret, and Margaret had grown up on East, Senator Easton's plantation.  So he grabbed Eunice, just out of the blue.  He didn't know who he was--he was like berserk and grabbed her by the shoulder, and pulled her back, and then knocked her down to the ground.  And that's when everybody got mad.  They started--we started chasing him, you know, and--
Speaker 2: He actually ran out of the--
Speaker 1: He didn't run away.  He just, you know--what happened--at, at that moment, the dogs, police dogs came on the campus.  They, the police came with the dogs, and that chased us away.  We ran then.  Those dogs--and that's what they cha--the, they would put those darn dogs out there, and they, you know, they were frightening.
Story_ID: 91304
Speaker 1: So, but we were angry, so the next morning--I mean that night I mean the guys sent, sent a message to someone over to the dorm to give us a message.  And we did it back and forth, you know, on the telephone, that we were gonna all meet at breakfast.  Wear black or white.  And that next morning at 7:00 when the dining room opened, thousands--hundreds, just a whole lot of students were there, and they all wore black or white if they'd gotten the message.  And we said we were also boycotting class, and we were going to go to the gym.  We didn't know what we were gonna do.  I mean it was playing, playing out in real time, you know.  So after breakfast, we went to the gym to have a program.  And I remember going around to the classrooms, 'cause--to see if there were any students still in the class, and knocking on the door, telling the professor we wanna speak to the student.  And we tell him y'all gotta come out of here.  You can't be in class today, and we got them out.  And everybody came out.  It was, it was really--the movement [Civil Rights Movement] was successful, in part, because people were, were ready.  No, nobody knew that the, that--they were ready for mass activity.  I mean you didn't know it until--because there had been no mass activity in Mississippi.  It was the only state that didn't have a sit-in, a lunch counter sit-in.  Alabama didn't either I don't think.  But, but Mississippi didn't have it.  So, the--then we, we decided to march down to the arraignment of the students.  And we got several blocks, and we we're at the corner of Rose Street and Pearl, West Pearl, one--we met a roadblock, and the police were there with the dogs again.  And they--I heard these sounds, and I said oh, Lord, they're killing us 'cause they were like gun, gunshots.  As it turned out it was teargas, and we scattered.  My sister got a teargas pellet that hit her in her back, and then her hair came out.  She has scars on her back now for it.  And I went, I ran down the street, and I knocked on this door, and I knocked on it.  It was, it was like a screen door, and I could hear this radio had some gospel music on in the background.  And I was saying help, help!  You know, and there was a hole in the screen.  I put my hand in to open it, and I went inside.  I saw this black woman who was coming toward me, and I told her what they were doing.  And she said well, you sit down here.  They're not gonna bother you.  They're not coming in my house.  And she had the radio on, and they were--she changed the station and heard what, what they were talking about, the demonstration.  And, and as she ironed, she said low down dirty shame, low down dirty white folks.  And she just kept ironing, and I was sitting there watching her while she kept saying that.  I was just thinking--trying to kill these young children, you know.  And I'm always intrigued by how people say things, you know, but she was just ironing and ironing and was like deep, you know, coming from someplace deep, deep inside her.  And we'd--I'd been there, and then another girl had, another girl and I had run down--we said let's go here to this house together.  And then about an hour later there was a knock on the door, and--the back door, and there as another girl back there.  She had hidden by, behind the refrigerator on the porch (laughter), and the lady told her to come on in too.  So we stayed in that house.  Everybody--we were the last ones to get back to the campus.  (Laughter) Dorie said we've been looking for y'all.  Where have you been?  I said we were at this lady's house.  We thought they--cops were still arresting--she said no.  We thought y'all had been kidnapped--oh, no, no, no.  Anyway, they closed the college the next day.  Spring break came two weeks early, and it expelled the student council president, Walter Washington--he's in Chicago as a lawyer--at that time.  And when we came back after the spring break everything was quiet.  And then the dean of students called us in, Dorie and me in, and told us he knew that we had been going to Medgar Evers' office and that we had organized a lot of this mess on the campus.  And he went on and on and told us that we were expelled.  We could not come back next year.  And I was-- said I don't wanna come back here anyway.  I hate this school.  And then Dor--Dorie said, and we're going to Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi].
Story_ID: 91305
Speaker 1: (Laughter) We had--not-Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] costs twice Jackson--what Jackson State costs.
Speaker 2: Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] was a state institution--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Was it administrated by black administrators at that time?
Speaker 1: All of 'em were.  All the state schools were, black state schools, Alcorn--
Speaker 2: I just wanted to make--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Mississippi Valley--
Speaker 2: --Tougaloo is different because it's a private supported by--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --the white church in the East, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: A missionary--I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Gotta charge higher tuition.  And it had been the school for--well, for people who could pay, doctors' children and the--they were the house negroes I guess, but also very smart kids who got scholarships because they were smart.  But it was, it was the most idyllic environment, you can imagine.  But see, that same--
Speaker 2: Did you get in on a scholarship or how did you, how were, how were you able to afford to go?
Speaker 1: Well, once we said we were going, we just--and I remember it was Dr. Young, Aurelia Young took us out to file out applications.  Then my uncle and aunt in Chicago, who were sending me to college, said they would pay my fees.  And my father [Eunice Stafford Ladner] in California paid Dorie's [Ladner Churnet, HM].  And, and Dorie dropped out, so they didn't have to pay much for her (laughter), but she eventually finished in Atlanta.  She only had just half a semes--one semester to finish, and she did that at, at Clark College [currently Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].
Story_ID: 91306
Speaker 1: But it was--I remember one time we--oh, before the, the sit-in occurred, the first thing we did was, Dorie [Ladner Churnet, HM] was president of the dormitory council, and one--and she told me to, to pray, be the one you know, you have invocation and everything, so I, I did this prayer.  And I said God, there's gonna be hard, a hard road for us to follow, and it's gonna be touch, hard times are coming.  Guide us, Lord, as these challenges and--I wrote it down somewhere.  I have a lot of the words in there somewhere.  And the next day, this dean of students called us in--no, called me in to ask me about my prayer that I had prayed the night before.  And I looked at him, and I said Dr. Rogers, as a man of God, you're a minister.  You know that you have no right to ask me about my private conversations with my God (laughter).  And he said yeah, your right.  'Cause he had graduated from Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], and he was dean of students and a Baptist minister.  He went on to become president of Clemson--not Clemson College, Claflin [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] in South Carolina--Clafin, C-L-A-F-I-N [sic].  And I said how dare you ask me about my prayer.  Oh, I just got so--I mean I was something.  And especially I get real pumped up if I was with my sister [Dorie Ladner Churnet, HM].  I think she might have been there too.  But the dean--the, the--you know, one of the jobs--these people's jobs, like the house mother's job, you know, she went and told him and then he went--he--let me get on this and ask, find out what she's talking about, you know.  Because they, they, their employment depended on them being able to keep peace, make sure there's no unrest because, you know, they, they were plantation heads, and that's an analogy we always used.  And if you can't keep the natives from being restless, then you have to get somebody else to, another straw boss to do your job, you know.  But that's how we ended up at Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi].
Story_ID: 91307
Speaker 1: And it was just the most wonderful experience of my life.
Speaker 2: Now we talked some about Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] I guess on the last reel, and so let's kind of fast forward to, I guess we were talking about your involvement in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], that you, you also were, you, you majored basically in socio--wait--
Speaker 1: Sociology.
Speaker 2: Sociology.  You only had one professor?
Speaker 1: One professor, Ernst Borinski.  He taught me thirty credit hours of sociology.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now what was--where were in this, that famous summer of 1964--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964] I was in, in--oh, let me go back to '63' [1963], 'cause summer of '63' [1963] I--after Medgar [Evers] died and I went to that conference, then I went to Albany, Georgia, and worked with SNCC for a while.  Then the March on Washington organizers said they need each civil rights organization to send some staff.  So Courtland Cox and I went and worked most of the summer on the march, organizing it.  And our job to fundraise to try to get as many black people from the South to the march as possible.  And every time I went out to speak, we'd bring back some thou--several thousand dollars.  It was, it was very effective.  And Dorie [Ladner Churnet, HM] was there that summer after, after Medgar died, and so and she, she came.  They sent her to the New York SNCC office to do fundraising as well.  And we both stayed in Eleanor Holmes [Norton], who was a Yale Law School at the time, Eleanor Holmes Norton.  The three of us stayed in a one-bedroom apartment with Rachelle Horowitz and we, and we'd come from--all three of us were working up at, at the march headquarters.  And then they'd come home at night tired, wanna go to bed, on the sofa, there's Bobby [Bob] Dylan sitting around, sitting on the floor playing his guitar.  And I said I wish that boy would leave.  I'm so tired.  I wanna go to sleep.  But he and Dorie were very close, and they--she goes to see him whenever he comes to town.
Speaker 2: Bob Dylan.
Speaker 1: He recorded two songs for her--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --about her.  And then one night when we were I the dormitory at Tougaloo someone called her, told her she had a visitor.  And I ran downstairs to see who was there visiting with her, and there was Bobby standing in the lobby.  This is when he was doing that High 66 Tour.  Yeah, he stayed around a couple of days.
Story_ID: 89056
Speaker 1: Oh, we're rolling, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah Courtland Cox and I were the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --staff representatives who went to New York to work to help to organize the march.  And our job specifically was to do fundraising to get as many--be able to bring as many black people from the South to the march [March on Washington] as possible.
Speaker 1: In that last reel you talked about the exhilaration of being able to raise thousands of dollars like that.
Speaker 2: Right, we would go out and speak at a church in New Jersey, and come back with money.  And I think Rachelle [Horowitz] always said that I was particularly effective because I could talk about what--you know, people could ask me what was it like growing up in, in Mississippi.  And Courtland was Trinidadian, but you know, reared in New York and went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and I was from the South.  So, I mean I, I could express myself very well because it was what I knew, it was my life, the life I'd lived.  And we, we all went down to the march I guess the day before we came down here.  And I remember how we were staying in the old Washington Hilton Hotel, and it was downtown.  It's now called the Capitol Hilton.  And we--I saw Malcolm X standing in the lobby, ah, just about all afternoon with a crowd of people gathered around him, reporters, you know, and other people.  And he called it, he said I call this the farce on Washington.  It is not a March on Washington.  It is the farce.  And oh, he was so eloquent.  And I had seen him on the, you know, speaking on street corners in Harlem [New York City, New York] that summer and all kinds of other folks too, 'cause I mean I was taking this in.  It was like just, ooh, it was like a veritable feast for me to be in New York, you know.
Story_ID: 89057
Speaker 1: Now how did you feel?  Now, now here is a--well, let me, let me just go over what Malcolm X's--as I recall, he, his, he would tell the story about how the President [Lyndon B. Johnson] called the big six in to ask 'em to stop the March on Washington: Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], Roy Wilkins, you know, James Farmer.  They, they were saying well, we can't stop it 'cause we didn't start it (laughter).  (Unclear)--they said well, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] is--
Speaker 2: I don't think I ever heard of that.
Speaker 1: --students are doing that.  We ain't got nothing to do with this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Haven't heard that.
Speaker 1: So then the president says, in Malcolm X's scenario in his speeches, he says, he says then, the president said well, I gotta get in it then (laughter).  I better get in the march.  I can determine where go--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) be a part, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and get--I mean the administration got to get involved in it.
Speaker 2: Well, the only way they were--I mean they, these leaders did go to the White House to meet with him afterwards.  That was probably what we call today a photo-op.  You know, I, I know it was one of those meetings of no substance.  I mean it was just probably some broad commitments of I'm gonna do everything I can.  I, I really don't know what was said at that meeting.  In fact, James Farmer was in jail in Louisiana, and he wasn't at the March at all.  But I, I had--because I was on the staff, I was on, on--had a pass.  So I was on stage and was there when the cardinal said that he would not participate if John Lewis [HM] delivered the speech.  And the lines were we will march if freedom does not come soon or if we don't get--he was expressing the immediacy of the need for intervention and how violent the forces against civil rights demonstrations and civil rights workers had become that he said if we do not, you know, get some action, we will march through the South, burning ev--like Sherman did, like general Sherman did, burning everything in our wake.   And the cardinal saw I guess an advance copy or was told, you know, what was in John's speech, and he said he wouldn't participate if that--and we-Jim [James] Forman, Mildred Forman, John [Lewis], Courtland Cox and myself were the people backstage.  And would--you know, I just felt that this is wrong.  How can he tell you to stop your speech?  I mean, people--look, I mean, people just getting killed, and you, then you can (unclear) out for me (unclear)--Jimmy Travers got shot in the neck, and you just go down the list, you know.  They burned Mr. so and so's house.  And you know, me, for me it was these everyday occurrences, and here's someone who--and then John--we finally negotiated such that, okay, the word that was changed was that we would march through the South nonviolently, and that was it.  But, but the first, the for--the first speech captured how we felt because of being decimated literally.  I mean some towns you couldn't even hit the streets without cops picking you up and arresting you.  And then the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] would always seeing the, their roles as, you know, the, the wealthy uncle who was called on to bail us out of jail after we got in jail.  You know, they, they weren't interested in that, but I re--remember a lot about that day.
Story_ID: 89058
Speaker 1: I remember looking out over that crowd and seeing all those people.  I don't think any of us had seen 250,000 people or 200,000 at one time anywhere; take forty years ago, all in one place, it was extraordinary--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --just to stand on the stage and look out there.  And--
Speaker 2: It was held in front of the Lincoln Memorial with the Washington Monument as the backdrop, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was hot, very hot that day, so people were sitting there with their feet in the pool, reflecting pool and so on.  And it was a beautiful day.  It was, it was like the Million Man March in terms of every man at the March, you know, said excuse me, ma'am, you know (unclear).  I said oh, if we could just have this wonderful politeness, all these manners these guys' mothers and fathers taught them just take over, and the do it every day, wouldn't this be great.  But it was just, it was, there was so much love there in the Million Man March I mean.  And then I felt the same way--I felt that other people felt that what was going on was wrong too.  I didn't feel alone anymore.  I didn't feel as isolated.  And when, when, when I saw the movie stars--I'll tell who was there, Charlton Heston was there.  And when I saw Josephine Baker, who had flown in from Paris and a contingent of people who came from France.  And I, you know, I--this is interesting.  It doesn't happen to me very much when I got chills this now.  I used to get chills, you know, just thinking about, wow, this message has really gotten a long way from Palmer's Crossing [Hattiesburg, Mississippi].  And then I saw--I ran into Lena Horne, and she said--I had met her earlier that summer 'cause she was a big supporter.   She'd fly down to Mississippi, and she was a big supporter of Medgar's.  And I had spoken at--I'm a Delta Sigma Theta Sorority member.  I had spoken at the Delta meeting--convention in New York that summer too.  And as a result of our speech with Delta's established a social action commission and made it mandatory for all chapters to do social action.  And I learned for the first time that, that it's written now of the history that Joyce Ladner and a couple of other people who spoke at the convention, 1964--'63' [1963].  And it was then mandated, I mean by vote of body--but what--I saw Lena Horne at that convention, 'cause she was made an honorary--I mean Delta.  And she--when I saw her at the March, she said (unclear) come here.  No, there was a reporter, a CBS News reporter, Nancy Dickerson.  I was, standing her beside her and she said you don't wanna talk to me.  You don't wanna interview me.  You wanna interview this young girl here.  She lives in Mississippi.  And we went up on a scaffolding aba--far above the crowd, climbed up this thing, and Nancy Dickerson in--interviewed me about the March.  And she said since you're from Mississippi, how do you feel?  And then my mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] told me she saw--I saw you on TV.  That was the most miraculous thing in the world, my mother was watching the march.  And she hadn't always, you know, she never been a rah, rah, rah, I support you, but she also knew that we were doing what she had taught us to do.  You need to stand up; you're strong; and don't let anybody push you around, you know.  I just, I just felt that I connected with my mother's--in a spiritual way that when she told me that she saw me, I, I felt she, I said well, she understands what we're doing.  And I said outside this little context of Hattiesburg, you know, or a teacher breaking up, telling people, parents you should let your kids be in the NAACP Youth Chapter.  But it's, it's an international, global thing, and it's definitely international.  And I came home from the March.
Story_ID: 89059
Speaker 1: The other thing I remember so--well, was being imbued with so much hope and feeling that, that I really, really did believe that things were going to change.  I never imagined that it was going to be this way now.  I didn't think this far ahead, but, but I just felt that after the legislation's passed, then we'll be able to vote.  Black people will be able to vote.  Nobody's gonna stop them.  We can run for office and not a very naive understand--I mean understanding, but, but the understanding was, was fortified by a, an attitude I had that was--by a belief system.  I had a profound belief in nonviolence.  I continued to believe in nonviolence long after a lot of my colleagues had dropped it.  And some had never believed in it.  They'd do it as a tactic, you know.  Then, you know, years later my SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] male friends were telling me well, you know, when we went thus and so I had a shotgun in the truck of a car.  I said you did? (Laughter) Why didn't I know it?  Because you would have been scared, that's why you didn't know it; you didn't need to know it.
Story_ID: 89060
Speaker 1: But, but I, I, so I left the March [on Washington] the next day with John Lewis [HM].  He and I flew on a Delta airline back to Atlanta [Georgia] to the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] office.  And I was just making my way south.  I was going, you know, and my last stop was gonna be Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], go back to school in the fall, my senior year.  But I--and saw Washington SNCC office, I was gonna stay there and wait for a ride.  You know, that's what we did.  Somebody's gonna go to Mississippi, so I would get a ride with somebody going to Mississippi.  They could have been going to Jackson [Mississippi] or to the Delta, and then I'd get another ride to go to Hattiesburg [Mississippi] to get my suitca--my trunk.  But I, I walked, as I walked in to the SNCC office, I saw a guy, black guy, tall, thin, very nice looking.  He was sitting on a desk, and his feet were dangling off the desk, and he was sitting like this.  And he spoke to me, and I said hi.  And where are you from?  And then I told him that we, John and I were just coming back from Washington for the March on Washington.  And he was telling me that he had been in Upstate New York, what he'd been doing and so.  And he asked me where was I working, and I said well, I just spent the summer working on the March on Washington staff, but I'm going to Hattiesburg, that's my home, you know, to pick up some--my clothes.  And then I gotta go back to the school, to college in the fall.  And he said oh, I've been assigned to Hattiesburg.  Yeah, I got here yesterday, and they told me they, they're gonna send me to Hattiesburg.  And I said oh, that's interesting.  So, then he, he asked me if I wanted to go to dinner and we--so I showed him where Pascal's was, and we, we, we just talked I mean.  So several days we were waiting to get this ride.  And then I think it was John O'Neil who, who had a car and was driving back that way.  Make a long story short, he--about the last day I was home, he asked me to go downtown with him.  It was JC Penney, the store.  Now this is a great story.  And he bought me a silver wedding band for $15 dollar or $14 dollars.  And I said I can't marry you.  I'm going to college.  He said this is just not, not a wedding ring.  I said I don't know you well enough to even be engaged to you.  He said yeah, but just, just imagine that we're gonna be together.  I said okay! So I had a--it ended kind of tragic, quite tragically actually.  He stayed in Hattiesburg [Mississippi] and worked with the movement [Civil Rights Movement].  We saw each other every week.  I live--then he asked me if I would drop out of school and go to work with him full time, and that's when the registrar of Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Missippi] said he never dropped my name from the--when I said I was withdrawing from college.  And I had called my uncle and aunt and told them why I was gonna do it, and what I was gonna do, and I was gonna go back and finish my education.  And they reluctantly said okay, if you--my uncle would always: baby, is this what you really wanna do?  Okay, you know I'll support you.  And anyway, we set a wedding date I think for Novem--for November.  He had me talk to his mother and fa--his mother, rather, in Detroit.  And it was the most amazing thing in the world.  By the end--by Thanksgiving--oh, there was a SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] conference at, at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] at Thanksgiving.  And we all went up.  This was right after the Kennedy assassination.  And, and by then he went to New York.  He left Washington and went to New York to intern under Richard Avedon, the photographer.  He was a good photographer.  And he got rit--went back to substance use and abuse and had a very tragic life.  And I just reconnected with him this year.
Story_ID: 89061
Speaker 1: Last, last winter I looked up his, looked up one of his brother on the Internet, and I sent an email asking if he was the same brother of this, this man, fellow.  And he told me he was and he, what he was very curious about why--how did I know that--who he was.  And I told him that I had just remembered something about his music career and so.  And as a result of this--it's, it's a long story, but as a result, and I don't wanna say--talk about someone, but he has a son.  He, you know, he's okay.  I mean he can manage his life now on his own, but he has a son who is a film director.  And I'm in touch with his son, and with him too.  That's what all my adult life have--ever since the last time I saw him was in the fall of '63' [1963], Thanksgiving '63' [1963] at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], I had been haunted about could I have done more to have helped him 'cause he was one of the walking wounded that we talk about.  And I was, I was devastated when he, when he left and got, when he just made, zoom, and I felt so powerless, so helpless, and I kept--all these years I wondered, now what else could I have done?  Could I have called his parents?  Could I have done this?  Could I have done that?  And in the end I really couldn't have done any more than I did.  I didn't know what to do.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: We don't talk very often about the people who didn't survive the movement [Civil Rights Movement], you know, and the people who came into the movement already troubled, you know.  A lot of 'em were troubled already, a lot of 'em.
Speaker 2: And being black North or South was a troubling experience sometimes.
Speaker 1: In and of itself.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: A lot of people have complexes and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Story_ID: 89062
Speaker 1: It was a very deep emotional experience on many levels because I, I--it's, it's funny because I, I've had three conversations with him, and he has excellent recall now.  And he's living in New York, and, and he said--I asked why did you leave me?  Why did you break up with me?  Why did you get strung out like that?  And he said because you weren't listening to anything I said.  You were going on, and I wanted you to--you didn't seem like you wanted to be a part of my life, but you wanted me to be a part of your life.  I said what are you talking about?  He said you remember when I wanted you to be with me in the movement [Civil Rights Movement], and you came and then you went back to, to Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi]?  I said yeah, I do remember that.  I said but I told you too that I would finish my degree, and then I could go back to Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan] with you.  I, and I applied for graduate school at Michigan State, got accepted.  And you were gonna go back and finish your undergraduate degree at the same time.  He said yeah, but then when went to Mich--went back to Detroit, you didn't come with me.  I said you never asked me.  By then I mean the whole thing had--I mean it's, all those demonstrations, how we rewrite our own scripts, you know, and, and how dif--disparate the scripts are, you know.  Like one event, and two people see it completely different.  And it's tempered by time, and space, and all the other things you've lived up to the time you try to reinterpret what happened to you earlier.  But I, I, I, I think what I was searching for was how could I make peace with myself, by, by making contact with him and asking him.  And, and my sister, Dorie [Ladner Churnet, HM], and my--a couple of my friends who grew up with him kept telling me that I--well, you should go and--you should contact him.  'Cause (unclear)--years I said I, I wanna go to New York and fi--'cause I--once every several years I would talk to his parents by phone.  And I had met his parents, and, and I said--and then I was supposed to beat--met the--saw, saw, seen his parents again a couple of year ago when my girlfriend went back to Detroit to get married.  And they were at the wedding, and they came--they were looking for me there and I was sick and I couldn't go.  But it was like, you know, if you have a--I don't know if you have or not, but it's like people have a chapter in their lives that they haven't finished or a book that had no end to it, you know.  Well, it was, it was like bringing this loop back together, putting it, fin--finishing it.  And I feel at peace now.
Story_ID: 89063
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you, you went back to Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], and went back in school, and--
Speaker 2: I went back my--actually I was out a week, then I graduated in spring of '64' [1964], and had been very involved with--oh, when I left--after, after we left the March on Washington, I was back at Tougaloo and then the three girls--four girls were killed in the Birmingham church [16th Street Baptist Church].  And [Robert Parris] Bob Moses drove us in a school bus, and we were--'cause Bob was not a great driver at all, but he drove a school bus to--I don't where, where he got it from.  He drove it to Birmingham [Alabama].  We were all there; SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] members were there.  Some went in cars.  I know my friend and I went.  And it was--I don't have words to describe how--I was--typically, when I was younger I, I always felt hurt first and then I'd feel--I didn't get in touch with my feelings right away, so the pain came in small doses, and--but just standing in front of that church and seeing there's a famous picture of my sister [Doris Ladner Churnet, HM] standing in front of the church with Doris Derby and Donna Richards [Moses], and she's holding an American flag.  And I was standing--the next person beside them, and what's his name cut me off 'cause he, he always liked taking pictures of Dorie 'cause (laughter)--little photographer (unclear) Danny Lyon.  Danny liked Dorie very much.  And, and I always told him, I said you chopped me off that picture.  I said can you make a copy of me with me on it?  No, can't do that.  Okay, I was just joking with him.  But, but standing in front of that church was awful.  And I remember Dorie went back in a car, and the police stopped them that night and accused them of being the people who bombed the church.  It was just, it was awful.  And the bet--I mean, I remember us being very quiet on that bus.  I mean it, coming on the heels of this big celebration, the March on Washington.  I felt I was up in the clouds, and then I felt I was beneath the ground, falling in the, in a dungeon with those little girls murdered.
Story_ID: 89064
Speaker 1: Because--and I wrote a letter too, and an article.  I wrote an article, and I sent it to Tom--I don't think of his name.  He's a second--he wrote--he published a, a newspaper called "New America."  It was one of the socialist newspapers.
Speaker 2: Tom from California, the--
Speaker 1: Not Tom Hayden, I knew him--Tom Feldman.  He used to marry--be married to Sandy Feldman, who's head of the American Federation of Teachers.  Now Tom I had met over the summer because they were close friends of Bayard's [Rustin].  And so I, I wrote this article that's--mailed it to him, and I wrote a letter to him, and he called me and asked me if he could also publish the letter alongside the article because I described, you know, us, how we got there and how tense things were and so on.  And it was the most--I felt so impotent because it was like the segregationists said you can march all you want to.  You can bring people from France.  You--it doesn't matter.  You can bring the Hollywood movie stars.  You can bring poor people from the Delta.  We don't care.  We're gon' bomb you anyway, you know.  And, and it just showed us how ineffective we were, and these--we were dealing--this upped the ante of the movement [Civil Rights Movement] just by of, of, of the difficulty of the movement by manifold, rather.  Just the atmosphere then from then on was just, you know, going into--it was impossible not to have had a Mississippi summer.  That, because after that happened, the violence increased exponentially.  And every time, as I said every time, in some places, you stepped outside a movement office or a house where you're staying, cops arrested you; they harassed and harassed.  And we had these long discussions in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] meetings, COFO [Council of Federated Organizations] meetings, should there be--should we bring all these volunteers down for the summer?  I sided with Bob [Robert Parris Moses] and those who said we have no option but to do that.  But I also understood clearly the views of a lot of the--see, a lot of my fell--fellow Southerners, Mississippi SNCC members were opposed to it because we spent a lot of time building strong grassroots organizations in communities.  Now if you bring in this horde of people, we said what, what's gonna happen when they leave, you know?  Who's going to fill in the gulf?
Story_ID: 88343
Speaker 1: So you were saying local people were especially concerned that they have suffered and struggled so long, and here, and outsiders are gonna in and basically usurp the movement in some ways, I guess--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well I think some of the, the, the, the staff felt that way, the local staff who had been working in the movement and who came from those communities and had worked very hard and at great risk to build strong autonomous community organizations.  And their concern was, number one, how does--how and in what was will these highly educated volunteers displace local people who may be illiterate, but nevertheless have played very vital roles in, in building the community, a strong local civil rights groups?
Speaker 1: So they feared kind of a cultural clash as well as a--
Speaker 2: Very much so, a strong cultural clash and a strong class clash of middle, upper middle class, and some wealthy kids coming in who, through no fault of their own, you know, are just very competent, and they can type, and they can write press release.  They've, you know, they've done all these things that--
Speaker 1: Now these are the--just to be clear, now these--[Robert Parris] Bob Moses was calling for, and the idea was to bring down white students who wanted to volunteer and Northern black students too.  But these are mostly whites who just wanted to come down and volunteer and for that, for that summer--
Speaker 2: For that summer.
Speaker 1: --for registered voters in Mississippi--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Registered voters, to establish a freedom school.  'Cause Staughton Lynd was in charge of the schools.  And you know, we, were dealing with the fact that the schools were woefully under, under-educating the kids.  They were woefully inadequate, rather.  And, and in the Delta with the cotton planting on the cotton plantations, the, the academic school calendar year was built around when the cotton was to be picked and when it was to be chopped.  And so the, you know, the students were--any opportunity that we could provide for the students to get more education for that summer, you know, we felt would be important.  And we were also very concerned about what will happen when the vacuum occurs, when all these 500 volunteers pull out, where are they gonna go?  I mean what are the local people--will it decimate local organizations?  Will, will it leave a big hole that can't be filled?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Will it raise expectations?
Speaker 1: In organizing the work builds confidence, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: --if you can't work at the highest level that you--and stretch yourself, and somebody--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --else can already do what you're trying to do--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --then the people that, you know, could grow, don't grow.
Speaker 2: And there's a lot of concern about the danger.  I mean certainly the, the potential danger this will cause everyone, for a lot of white girls to be walking around in black communities, especially to be walking in the presence of another black man, of a black man.  And these were, I mean these were very sensitive issues, and they were rational issues.  But, you see, the alternative was to get picked off like flies and eventually, you know, have no movement at all.  And so there was a no-win situ--it was a no-win situation, it really was.  And I don't even want to think about evaluating it, you know, afterwards, you know, 'cause it's of no use.  I think it, I think it had an important purpose.  It, it certainly focused the--kept the spotlight on--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and exposed a lot of these things and pushed legis--people--I mean, I'll tell you when I began to lose my faith, was when we went to Atlantic City.
Story_ID: 88344
Speaker 1: Okay, now let's not get there yet.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the events of the summer [Mississippi Freedom Summer] first before we get to that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I was away in St. Louis most of the summer, and I went back three or four times.  And I went back in I guess the last time and stayed at the end of July.  A week before we went to Atlantic City I went back to Mississippi, and was involved I guess in the state democratic--Freedom Democratic Party Convention and so on.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's, let's maybe just go over some of the chronology.  The students were trained first at, in, in Oxford [Mississippi], right, the Western College [for Women, Oxford, Mississippi], before they went down.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But before they got there, [Andrew] Goodman, [Michael "Mickey"] Schwerner, and [James] Chaney were killed.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they got a--Mickey Schwerner, Mickey Schwerner and Rita Schwerner were people I knew very well, because they had come down I guess the--earlier, a year earlier to work with CORE [Congress on Racial Equality], and they worked out of Meridian [Mississippi].  And James Chaney I had knew as well.  He was a local guy from Meridian.  And when someone called to tell them--they were in, in Oxford [Mississippi]--that a church had been burned, Jim Chaney and Mickey Schwerner got in the car and then they had this new volunteer, Goodman, who was going to be a volunteer. And he got in the car with him and went with him.  And my sister [Dorie Lander Churnet, HM] said, you know, that just before they left everybody got together and sang and prayed, you know, to send them on for a safe journey, you know, 'cause they knew how dangerous this could be.  Then, I think that because of their death--first of all, I mean that there was more publicity because the death presaged the actual summer project [Mississippi Freedom Summer] itself, or at least occurred before the volunteers even got to Mississippi.  So, I mean it was, the spotlight was very, very high.  And I think it also brought another level of--it certainly brought a lot of scrutiny, but also more intensity in a way.
Speaker 1: I don't think before it was clear that they would kill like the white students from the North in the South, but--and, and they certain did.  They killed two before this, the rest of the students even arrived.
Speaker 2: I don't know that people, people in the movement [Civil Rights Movement] didn't consciously focus on that so much.
Speaker 1: No, but it actually happened though.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but we didn't--
Speaker 1: And, and they didn't think about it in Oxford before they came down.
Speaker 2: No, but I think the, the--they were aware that, they were definitely aware of how dangerous it, it is--it was, and could be could, but we hadn't had any SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] people killed in action either, no.  One time Jimmie Travis and [Robert Parris] Bob Moses were driving--I can't remember where they were, but they weren't in Jackson [Mississippi].  And Jimmie was shot in the neck.  There were a lot of arrests, some beatings, but the volunteers themselves weren't killed.  They were killed (unclear)--Reverend Lee, and they, they'd kill adults and the local adult community people.  This is a helluva conversation, to talk about who they killed and who they didn't, but you know, it's what happened.  I think that, that the--see, Goodman came from a family of activists.  His mother was very much an activist, and so he was not like the son of a congressman who, you know, heard about the movement at some great distance.  And Mickey Schwerner and Rita Schwerner were in CORE, and they were, you know, they were, they had been in Meridian awhile.  They were hardened.  And people in the movement [Civil Rights Movement], who, who, who were in the movement, didn't take unnecessary risks, I mean you knew not to.
Story_ID: 88345
Speaker 1: And I remember my roommate at Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] was white in my senior year, and we'd been friends for the three years I was there--three years she was there 'cause she, she was a Freedom Rider.  When she got out of Parchman Penitentiary she enrolled at Tougaloo.  Her name is Joan Trumpauer [Mulholland].  And Joan and I used to go into Jackson [Mississippi], and I always carried a, a black scarf in my pocket or in my bag.  And I made her put it on her head when we were going back to Tougaloo at night on a long stretch of black road.  Now they've built houses out there, but there were not lights, it was nothing.  And there were occasions when the white people would chase you along that stretch of the road and a cop would stop you.  And you know, you really--it's a frightening thing to be in--like this.  But the--I, I, I--we knew enough about risks, and I used to tell Joan that you're not going to get me killed.  I remember one time she and MacArthur Cotton, who was my classmate, and he was very active in the movement, and I were walking down the street in Jackson.  And all of a sudden she put her arm out around him, and I said you stop that.  I mean this is not an exhibition this time, at all.  I said you can act out all you want to by yourself, but you're not gonna get him killed and me either.  You know, but the--I--see a lot of the kids, white kids would, would want to sort of--should I call it--antagonize the local white people just to, to get under their skin.  But to get under their skin meant that you had to pay, somebody would have had to pay for it, and usually it was a black person who paid for it.
Story_ID: 88346
Speaker 1: Okay, well, so you got back to Mississippi after the people had been registered and they had the convention in Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party Convention.  You came back around that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I came back, back at the end--was it--about the end of the July.  And it was--let's see, the convention, the statewide convention I remember, and then I remember when--was it--wait, when we--they sent buses, busloads of people up to the convention.  We had two white people in it, Ed King from Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi], a, a chaplain at Tougaloo, and a white guy, a local white guy.  I don't know where he is now, or where he came from, or where he went, but he was (laughter) stranger.  I think he was from the Gulf Coast.  And they tend to be a little different.  Or we used to think they were a little different on the Coast.  He was, he, he was a delegate.  I stayed at the YWCA, and I remember Marian Wright [HM], later Edelman, gave me my assignment.  And it was to accompany Mr. and Mrs. Hartman Turnbow to meet with the Oregon delegates on the Credentials Committee to--they were already supporting us, but to shore up the support they were giving us.  And so we went to see Edith Green.  That was the first time I saw a penthouse suite in a hotel.  And the other was Wayne Morris, but I remember so well with Edith Green, who listened, just compelling descriptions that Mr. Turnbow gave of his house having been shot into.  And he would, he always shot back, you know.  And he was a, a farmer as well.  He owned his own property--and how dangerous it had been for his wife and, and daughter.  And she was very sympathetic, very, very sympathetic.  But in the end, when President [Lyndon B.] Johnson started calling in his favors, I mean, it was a--got down to a matter of whether or not her husband would get it--was it--I think it was her husband.  I'm not sure now--someone very close to her would get a judgeship or not, you know.
Speaker 1: Now the issue was would the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party be seated in the convention--
Speaker 2: And unseat the white--
Speaker 1: Unseat the white--
Speaker 2: --segregated--
Speaker 1: --the Dixiecrat regulars--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --who, according to the party--I mean new party policies shouldn't--it didn't represent all the percentage--
Speaker 2: Was not representative.
Speaker 1: Was not representative.  They represented--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they omitted almost half of--
Speaker 1: --racism--Mississippi--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --population.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  So that was the issue; that's what was at issue.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Oregon was gonna back the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And we--the other thing is that there were a lot of sympathetic individuals at that convention because they would loan us their passes so that some of the--we'd get the delegates down on the floor.  That's how I got in, you know (laughter).  And--
Speaker 1: Yeah some--this system of passing the badges back and forth too--(unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, no, you could do that--I mean you do it in, in, every convention.
Speaker 1: You, you get in and pass it out, and then somebody else coming in, and you pass it out (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, or you have a badge and you come out, and you give it to somebody, and they go in and then--(unclear)--they may back to the hotel, you know, and sleep or whatever, go get a shower, but it did help delegates get down on the floor.
Story_ID: 88347
Speaker 1: But Ms. [Fannie Lou] Hamer's eloquent statement was made before the Credentials Committee--someone told me this very recently--that her speech--as soon as she began speaking, that it was interrupted--
Speaker 2: Yeah, [Lyndon B.] Johnson called--
Speaker 1: --and Johnson called, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Johnson called a press conference--
Speaker 1: Got this--
Speaker 2: --to draw the media to him and away from her.  But CBS ran it later on that night.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's, that's when other people saw, including myself.
Speaker 1: I was--we, we also towed the car that [Michael] Mickey Schwerner and James Chaney and [Andrew] Andy Goodman were in up to Atlantic City [New Jersey] and put it on the Boardwalk.  And it was always someone standing there to explain to the people who inquired, you know, what the car was.  It had been burned, you know.  This is the car that three civil rights workers were in.  It was graphic testimony.  But, but after that convention I, I felt betrayed; I felt--I continued to believe in integration.  I had friends who had began with nationalism by then, but I, I didn't.  I still believe in nonviolence.  I still believe in integration.  But I--'cause I always sort of arrived at some of the positions later than other people, probably because I would go back and forth and so analytical 'cause I could detach myself mentally so easily, and didn't intend to, but it was very--'cause I try to look at these  things logically.  I remember one time Lawrence Guyot, who's--said, and he was at Tugaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] with us at well, he said Joyce, if you--if we listen to you, we would never do anything, 'cause you're gonna go back on this end, and then but if we do this, this will happen, and the back and forth and back forth.  And I said that's not true.  He said yeah, you think too much.  Just stop thinking and just do (laughter).  I said okay (laughter).  But at the end of--we, we drove up to--I, I road in a convoy of, of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] cars.  We, we had a--we called-Ruby Doris Robinson named the cars the Sojourner Fleet.  And we--Ivanhoe  [Donaldson] was driving in the car I was in I think, and Cleve [Cleveland] Sellers drove another car.  We stopped in South Carolina at Cleve's parents' house and changed clothes, bathed, and, and his mother cooked for us, and then we drove on to Atlantic City.  And I remember just feeling that, again, I felt that if we ex--show these people that this is, these kids were killed.  This is the car they were in, and they were taken out of this car, shot, and then they burned the car.  You know, and everybody knew about it.  And then--why can't--I mean Mrs. Hamer has told you what happened.  Then when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] backed out, we--I remember when we were in that church for the meeting that night.  And, and they started backtracking, and I was still twenty years old--was I twenty-one?  I was--I don't remember '64' [1964] I was twenty-one.  I'd just turned twenty-one, about to.
Speaker 2: You were twenty.
Speaker 1: Twenty, yeah born 4/43. But I was--I held on to my ne--naivety and my sort of my, my hope, optimism--I should just say it, optimism--that things could get better.  But then after the bombing of those four girls, and Atlantic City, it was very hard for me to figure out where the optimism was to come from.  I just didn't know.
Story_ID: 88348
Speaker 1: Now in Atlantic City [New Jersey] basically with the Democratic Party was faced with this decision to make, whether it would seek the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, which was the right thing to do according to their own rules, or to seat the Dixiecrats, Dixiecra--they tried to make a compromise and Dixiecrats, run solely by the compromise--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --walked out anyway, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Leaving the chairs open and--but the--
Speaker 2: So no one.
Speaker 1: --Democratic Party refused to seat, all but--I think one, they said they received two as guests--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --or something, didn't they, or something like that?
Speaker 2: Well, they were gonna offi--seat three people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's--
Speaker 2: That's what Mrs. [Fannie Lou] Hamer said, we didn't come here for no three seats because all of us is tired, you know.
Speaker 1: There's a lot of controversy over how there was a vote take in the delegations across the street, debating with--negotiating with Hubert Humphrey, right?
Speaker 2: Right, Humphrey--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --was dispatched to--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --take care of Atlantic City, and he called them in one by one, his chits in, and--I mean [Lyndon B.] Johnson told him this is your job, and even if it went against what Humphrey may have believed in his heart, I mean, it wasn't a matter--a time for hearts to feelings and people's to prevail, but rather hardball politics.  And I hadn't been accustom--I mean I was--we--very few of us had, had experiences with hardball politics.  I mean they had some very, very tough people in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], people who'd been to jail many, many times and, and had--was shot at.  I think about the guys who, who drove.  I mean the--there were certain people with different skills in SNCC.  And it was a skill to be a good driver.  And I remember Ed Brown, Rap's older brother, and Ivanhoe Donaldson, Cleve [Cleveland] Sellers were among the best drivers you could find, I mean--George Green.  And, and they always told us to sit in the back seat if, if we're in a dangerous area.  And see, white women interpret that as, as inequality.  No, seriously, haven't you heard it?  But for us, those of us who grew up in the South, that's what my father [Eunice Stafford Ladner] would have told--put us.  He would have said oh, you get in the back seat because if they start shooting you can duck, you know, easier than if you're sitting up here in the front.  And what they're really doing, what really saying was that if they're kill somebody, let 'em kill us.  It was, it's a different, it was a different cultural ethos Down South that Northerners didn't, didn't necessarily understand, unless they had been reared by Southern parents who still adhere to those things.
Story_ID: 88349
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Joyce Ladner, spelled J-O-Y-C-E, middle name is Ann, A-N-N, last name spells L-A-D-N-E-R.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a researcher, senior fellow at the Brookings Institute.
Speaker 1: All right, and--
Speaker 2: Educator.
Speaker 1: --and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June 11th.
Speaker 1: Two thousand--
Speaker 2: Two thousand three [2003].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay, and we were--this is a continuation of tape we started on June the 9th.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 88350
Speaker 1: Pick up after the Democratic Convention of 1964, your disappointment with that.  What happened next?
Speaker 2: Oh, what happened next is that I went back to graduate school that fall and immersed myself in a doctoral program.  And that took priority over everything else in my life.  So, 1966, after I finished my master's I went back to Mississippi for the summer to work with Dr. Alvin Poussaint [HM], who was medical director for the Medical Committee for Human Rights and the office, main office was located in Jackson [Mississippi].  I read an article in "Newsweek" about a paper he had presented at the American Psychiatric Association annual meetings.  And I was so intrigued by it that I gave--wrote him and asked if I could come down to work with him.  And he said yes, so I was his assistant for that summer.  Essentially what we did was to treat civil--provide medical care for civil rights workers.  The [James] Meredith march [March Against Fear] occurred at that time, and we--you know, Dr. Poussaint was on the march, you know, to provide medical assistance to Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], others as well, but you know, he marched right beside or right behind King.  The other things we did was to, we had established a--a clinic had been established in Mound Bayou--no, not in Mound Bayou.  It was in another town, can't remember--Tchula, Mississippi, T-C-H-U-L-A.  And so I accompanied him to the clinic.  Every week we went up once a week to provide health care for a day.  And it was--we were very busy, and I--it was a well spent summer.  It was the summer that Willie Ricks hollered Black Power on the Meredith March, and then Stokely Carmichael began to chant Black Power.  And it resonated so much that it became the focus of the movement [Civil Rights Movement].  And you were either for black power or you were against it.
Story_ID: 88351
Speaker 1: And so I spent, spent some time that summer doing research, because that's how I won a perfect opportunity to fulfill one of my doctoral requirements, which was that we had to, to do--make a colloquium presentation on a subject that was unrelated to our dissertations.  So I did a study of--I interviewed 15 people, local people.  I used the Merton, Robert K. Merton, the sociologist--(unclear)--(unclear)--cosmopolitans and locals.  So I interviewed about fifteen local people on what they--how they define black power, and then fifteen cosmopolitan people.  It was my first publication and transaction, now called "Society" magazine, a social science magazine that can, that could be read, read by, you know, a popular audience.  That was 1960--so I went back to school that fall and, and 19--I also presented in 19--the summer of 1967 in San Francisco, I presented a paper based on that research at the ASA [American Sociological Association] meetings, and I was the only presenter for that session.  And oh, gosh, what's his name?  He's dead now.  I'll come back to his name, at Harvard, but one of the most popular sociologists, actually been trained as a lawyer.  I'll, I'll remember his name in a second--David--oh, gosh.  Anyway, I won't dwell on it now.  But he was the discussant, and there was an article in the "San Francisco Chronicle" about the paper. And so by the time I graduated the following year, 1968, I was well on my way into my profession because I also had spent four years as a research assistant for my graduate stipend on the Pruitt-Igoe public housing project of study.  So I--
Speaker 2: St. Louis (unclear)--
Speaker 1: In St. Louis, Missouri, where I was a student at Washington University.  Now what I did was to--I studied the socialization of teenage black girls living in the housing project.  And it became the foundation for my first book called "Tomorrow's Tomorrow: The Black Woman" that was published in 1970.  I was also a civil rights activist in St. Louis, first working with the Friends of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] chapter on campus.  And you know, we sent--collected, you know, money and clothing, etc., and sent it South, but we also--I was also active in--and we went down, you know, back to the Selma, Montgomery March, and to Washington to peace demonstrations, and, and--oh, it was just after Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] died--Tent City--was it Tent City?
Speaker 2: Resurrection--
Speaker 1: Resur--
Speaker 2: --City, yeah.
Speaker 1: No, it wasn't Resurrection.  It was on the--
Speaker 2: Poor People's Campaign and--
Speaker 1: Poor People's Campaign and--yes, that's it.  And so a lot of people came to Washington, and I--you know, we organized buses from St. Louis to bring people to participate in it because Dr. King had intended to establish it.  And after his death, you know, it was people vowed to carry it on.
Story_ID: 88352
Speaker 1: But I, I took my first job.  You know, but getting back to the dissertation, I am pleased to say that, that my signature of all my work is my first book, "Tomorrow's Tomorrow."  It is a classic in the field, and it has, it's, it was re-released a second time by the University of Nebraska Press, but now it is no longer in print.  And it--the first two books I did, you know, were probably the best work I've done.  Oh, the third book was, was very good too, very good solid scholarship.  But I did my best work when I was in my twenties.
Speaker 2: What was the gist of "Tomorrow's Tomorrow?"
Speaker 1: That--I examined the impact of, of race and social class on the development of, of, of black adolescents.  And so I did ethnographic research, which meant that I spent-- you know, four years is a long time to, to, to stay with one group of people.  But I got to know them and all of their activities, and you know, even to the point of one time dressing, like having them dress me and, and passing me off as one of their, their friends.  And what they really did was to set me up (laughter) big time.
Speaker 2: What'd they set you up for?
Speaker 1: Well, they proved to me that even--that I wasn't, you know an adolescent, and I couldn't be hip like them.  They took me to this dance, and they started out by panhandling to get our--I told 'em I wanted to--I say you have a car so we ride in your car.  And I said no, I've got to experience everything.  I want to see how you get there.  So we walked down this main street, Franklin Street in St. Louis [Missouri], and they started panhandling and you know, try and get a ride rather--and a man stopped and picked up and dropped us off at, you know, at the place where the dance was.  Then we got there and the girls started--told me that we have to beg for money from other people so we could get in.  And they got their money very quickly.  One of 'em (unclear)--said how much do you have?  I said I don't have any.  They said ah, you don't even know anything.  So then we got inside, and they--so they panhandled for me, and then we got inside and the sent a little guy who probably came up to my shoulders over to dance with me.  And he was bumping and grinding, and I looked around and--at them, and they were sitting along the wall just laughing at me.  So anyway, that, that's an interest--a funny story because it showed me--it gave me a bit--a, quite a lot of humility.  And I was close to their age, so I think one of the reasons the book was so popular and made such an impact is because it, it--I put a lot of myself in it.  And I was one of the first scholars to begin a piece of scholarship with I.
Story_ID: 88353
Speaker 1: And I think the first line says something to the effect that I am not sure that the beginning of this book was when I was growing up in this poor and (unclear) segregated Mississippi, or if it began when I began to do the research four years ago with these teenage girls in St. Lou--public housing project in St. Louis.  And I talked--my paradigm was laid out in the introduction of the book.  I used a neocolonial concept and the--and I really showed clearly how what a tremendously negative effect race and poverty have on the development of, of, of, of girls.  So, it has been used a lot by feminist, that opening chapter, the introduction.  There are a lot of--there were several anthologies that it's reprinted in.  It's assigned and once in a while I'll log in the computer, do a search to--and, and it shows up on the syllabus of a lot of people.  And one sociologist around Boston area, Becky Scott, got in touch with me, and, and sent me a copy of a paper she had written on the book.  And it had been--I guess she--it, it was--I was very impressed that she had taken it upon herself--she found the book on her own, and then she wrote a very extensive paper on it.  And so when I--the second edition with a different publisher--first Doubleday published it, and then when the Nebraska Press said they wanted to republish it, I used Becky's piece on her, her paper as an afterword.
Story_ID: 88354
Speaker 1: So that--then I, you know, as soon as I finished that book [Tomorrow's Tomorrow], I got a contract with Random House Vintage Books to do this anthology on the death of white sociology.  I, I had organized this anthology and, and through just looking at the works that were coming out, some people were writing papers and--and I also did some filling in by asking people I knew to write on some specific area that would finish--I mean close it out.  And I didn't have--but I was going to call the book 'An Introduction to Black Sociological Perspective' or something very tentative like that.  And Charles Harris, who was a senior editor at, at Random House, said to me, no, you need a catchy title, something that everyone's going to stop and take a look at, think a second time.  And he said why don't you call it something like the death of white sociology?  And I said oh, okay, that sounds interesting, so I did.  And "Tomorrow's Tomorrow," you know, came from a poem written by Haki R. Madhubuti [HM] on black women. So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that--and both of those titles are significant, but Death of White Sociology is, you know, says a lot.  I mean it's the, the, the--what you're really offering in that book is an alternative to standard sociological beliefs of--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --white sociologist.
Speaker 1: Right, it did the same thing that a book called "Radical Sociology" did for a lot of Marxist in left, leftist professors and associate scholars.  And "This Bridge [Called] My Back" was the same kind of anthem for the women's movement, you know.
Speaker 2: "This Bridge Called My Back," right?
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, what in your--in those days, why did you think that white sociology had to die?  Why was that a good title for you?  I mean what would, what, what, what were the mistakes of white sociology?
Speaker 1: Well, I think the main thing is that I felt that they didn't get it, especially when they're--when describing black life and culture, and that's what I focused on.  I quoted from Norman Glazer and Daniel Patrick Moynihan's book called "Beyond the Melting Pot," and where they stated in the first edition of that book and subsequently took it, that unlike other minorities, black families have no values and culture to guard and protect.  And I was--that was, it was also during the era of my being righteously indignant over just about everything.  So, I took on the task.  You know that I never thought of--and when I, I was more concerned--I was less concerned about the omissions, but more concerned about developing a, a perspective you need to understanding black life and culture.  I wasn't I wasn't, I didn't focus, you know, burning white sociology.  I didn't care about them.  Just don't, don't go in messing up black--writing about black people and analyzing the data from a perspective that, you know, is anathema to, to, to black people, you know.  I, quite frankly, I had grown really tired and, and at times angry about the characterizations of black families as being disorganized, being patholog--socially pathological, female head of the household, you know, delinquent children, absent fathers, and so on, and that no good could come from such families.  And it actually was, was part of, part of this was the pieces of E. Franklin Frazier, the black sociologist at Howard University, University of Chicago graduate who was the first black to-be president of American Sociological Association, but he couldn't stay at the white hotels, you know, for the convention.  But I, I had read Andrew Billingsley's book, "Black Families in White America," the--it was published I guess in about 1968 or '69' [1969].  And I was, I just--and it was during, certainly during the time of the Black Power Movement, you know, and black consciousness, and I was deeply involved in that.  I went to the Black Power Convention in Newark [New Jersey] back in late '60's [1960s].  And, and all those were influences on me.   And I was, as I said, I was not interested in showing white people what the real deal was.  Because we had, you know, adopted this notion that we should turn our scholarship inward to the black community, and, and find ways that, to do research and to write in such a way and on such topics that would help to liberate black people.  That was my interest.
Story_ID: 88355
Speaker 1: So, around this time, when did the blacks--Association of Black Sociologists (unclear)--what's it called?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-one [1971] I believe--'70' [1970] or was it '71' [1971]?  I know we met in Boston, and see, we were among the last, I believe we were among the last socio--social science discipline to, you know, have some black presence recognized.  And sociologists are an odd breed in that regard.  They, beside the Association of Black Psychologists, you know, I guess from the beginning had their own convention every year separate and apart from--and not, not in the same town, you know, necessarily where the annual American Psychological Association met.  And you know, the economists are organizing, historians and, and sociologists some of us came along and younger people hollering black power, and then some of the older, older guys who had gone to the same--you know, been in grad at Chicago with some of the, you know, presidents or people who were leading the discipline, and had, you know, ended up having to teach in all-black colleges.  So, you know, it was--there were some people who didn't believe we should establish a separate organization, and what they felt was that we should present demands, you know, to the ASA [American Sociological Association].  I don't remember what they are now.  But they were much, they were solely interested in, in being recognized and be, being--getting a seat at the table.  But I was active in it for a while, you know, and then--I still--and I--I guess over the ten years or so when I was doing other kinds of work, I was not that active with my profession at all 'cause I didn't have the time.
Story_ID: 88356
Speaker 1: I was vice president of academic affairs at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  So I got away from my discipline 'cause I had taught, you know, at Hunter College in New York [City, New York] from--I was at Howard first, my first full-time teaching job--no, that's not true, started teaching in St. Louis.  I turned down job offers from Harvard, Yale, Berkeley, all of the bests (laughter) schools, in terms of their national stature, and decided that I was going to go to East St. Louis, Illinois to work in a program demons--a program called The Experiment in Higher Education.  We took young kids, I mean young people off the street who, I, I think the majority of them didn't have a diploma but they had, they got a GED perhaps, and they--we immersed in--we, we ran a program for two, two years for them.  And we seductively brought them--got their interest in reading certain materials, because you know, in sociology for example, you--I had them read "Invisible Man," and it was a matter of getting them interested.  And you know, that could pique their interest was something about what was happening or had happened to black people.  And so, I stayed there, there a year.  I was what was called a curriculum specialist.  This is where I worked with, what's his name out in California?  He's now the conservator, Shelby Stevens.
Speaker 2: Shelby Stevens.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 88357
Speaker 1: I left after a year and then went to Atlanta [Georgia] to work at the Institute of the Black World in fall of '69' [1969].  And that was the most--I had the most prodigious output, you know of--
Speaker 2: The Institute of the Black World, can you explain to people--
Speaker 1: The Institute of the Black World was the research arm of the Martin Luther King Center that's been organized by Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King.  The director was Vincent Harding, the historian, who was at the time a professor of history at Spelman College in Atlanta [Georgia].  And what Vincent did was to recruit--he, he wanted a, a gruesup--group of scholars who were cross-disciplined with a (unclear) from different disciplines.  So, he recruited myself, of course.  He recruited Leran--Lerone Bennett [HM], [P.] Sterling Stuckey, the historian, Bill Strickland, political scientist, Steven Henderson, who is now dead, who was the poet, was teaching at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] at the time, and another guy, Chet [Chester] Davis, who ended up teaching for most of his career at the University of Massachusetts, as did Bill Strickland, who is still there.  And I wrote "Tomorrow's Tomorrow" while I was there.
Story_ID: 88358
Speaker 1: I wrote half a dozen papers that were published from that year.  I mean I, I, I didn't rewrite my dissertation.  I put the dissertation aside and went back to the original data and wrote a very different book than I had written, than dissertation that I had written.  I went through my own personal anger and so on.  I'm not quite sure how to explain it, or that I want--you know, I don't really wanna dig that deep to try to explain.  But essentially, I developed a, a tremendous dislike for the way I had been taught.  I never spoke out when I was in graduate school, but there was a lot simmering beneath the surface.  And when my advisor, Lee Rainwater, asked me if I would be a co-author on the book he did on the Pruitt-Igoe housing study called "Behind Ghetto Walls," I sent him a letter back and told him I couldn't, and I couldn't explain.  I couldn't see him face to face, you know, 'cause I didn't want to because I was embarrassed.  He had been the best rabbi, i.e., mentor anyone could ever have had.  I mean I nev--I had no problems in graduate school that a lot of students--language because of poor advisor.  They are not advised properly and so.  I can't say that was the case with me.  I've tried to be the same kind of advisor to my students that he was to me.  He was excellent, always available, and gave me the room, you know, to, to do my work.  But I--and he was the one who--I was recruited wide, widely, you know, by different schools.  And he gave me a second chance to go to a large school and have a different kind of career when he asked me, after I'd spent that year at the Institute--I mean at that Experiment in Higher Education in East St. Louis [Illinois]--if I would--he was going to go to Harvard to take a chair there, asked me if I would want to go to Harvard with him.  And you know, I halfheartedly went on the interview, and, and I remember Talcott Parsons, you know, the preeminent sociological theorist, interviewed me.  And I remember telling him--he told me that, that typical sociologists my age at that place in my career would be grateful to get an opportunity as a lecturer.  And I said to him, Mr. Parsons, Harvard is not my reference group.  And I think back on it now (laughter), he asked me sit outside, you know, in his office for a while in the hallway.  And I kept looking around in his office to see what was--what he was doing.  He was just sitting there smoking, chain smoking.  And eventually, (laughter) he got--it was a funny story in a way, okay.
Story_ID: 88359
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: After I left East St. Louis [Illinois] in--after I left the Institute of the Black World--and that was a great experience too, because we developed curriculum for black studies programs.  And we had conferences, and we were the, the place in, in the country, you know, for people who were trying, trying to--who were grappling with making black, black studies a, you know, a bona fide discipline.  We also, you know, had invited people in to spend time with us.  Margaret Walker Alexander, for example, came.  At the same time we invited Horace Cayton, the sociologist who--when St. Clair Drake wrote "Black Metropolis."  And you know, just to, to be a fly on the wall to sit and listen to those two scholars, who were then up in age, talk, it was just a remarkable treat.
Story_ID: 88360
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about the Center for the Black World [sic, Institute of the Black World] and--
Speaker 2: The Institute of the Black World.
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--Black World, right.
Speaker 2: Right, well, I spent, as I said, I spent a year in residence there, and it was the most--the one year was by far the most productive in my entire life for a scholarship.  But at the same time, there were people I knew from, from SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] who had gone to Tanzania, and we began to, a lot of us began to look outside the country for other models that are proven successful.  And President Julius Nyerere, you know, was, was revered, you know, because of his very different emphasis on developing people locally, developing--well, the concept of the uja--ujamaa.  People say here ujamaa, but Tanzanians called ujamaa.
Speaker 1: They say ujamaa here sometimes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --ujamaa.
Speaker 2: Right.  Anyway, I was quite interested in seeing his experiment.  And, and people were going--this is what happened to a lot of the disillusionment here after the integrated Civil Rights Movement had waned, the COINTELPRO, you know was--
Speaker 1: And that's the FBI--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: FBI following people--
Speaker 1: --counterintelligence program to, you know--
Speaker 2: Right, to, to decimate the civil rights activism--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and the Black Panthers and so.  And also, the, the, the action shifted from the South to the North, and it was a different ball game.  And we--I, I always had my career throughout my life.  I mean I've always been very active, but I, I kept studying, you know.  I wrote the books (laughter).  So I got a grant from the Black Women's Community Development Foundation that no longer exists, and it was a $10,000 dollar grant, which at the time was a lot of money, to travel for a year in Africa and just to see the continent and soak up what I, you know, was learning.  But being the scholar, ever being the scholar, I decided I wanted to go to Tanzania to, to study the roles of women in nation building and community development.  I went and I--it was an extraordinary time.  I found Tanzania at that time for myself to be very difficult because, one, I was alone.  I didn't come with family.  I was staying in the dorm in the beginning, and then I moved in with the Rodneys (ph.), who had a house on campus, and that was a lot better.  But I, you know, I had to get around so I bought a used car and from an In--Indian car dealer.  And it was just so awful because they took my $1500 dollars from me for a trap that stopped working the same, the first day I got it.  Anyway, I had some bad experiences in Tanzania, and also I found that, that people on the Africa's East Coast are, not all of them, but they're not as--they're a little more remote--(unclear)--Kenyans in particular.  I mean they--the West Ugandans are--act like the West Coast Africans in terms of their outgoing, you know, strong spirit and so on.  And I spent time in East Africa.  I went to the University of Nairobi for a while.  I went to Makerere University [Kampala, Buganda, Uganda] and Uganda, where I had friends, a friend that was teaching at, at Makerere.  He had been a professor, a Jamaican guy, had been a professor at Washington University [St. Louis, Missouri] in the economics department.  And he was there on a, a Rockefeller Fellow Professorship.  And so I stayed with them, him and his wife and kids.  And, and then I got sick, so I, I came home short of the year, and I didn't, therefore didn't get to West Africa.
Speaker 1: And this is what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-one [1971].
Story_ID: 88361
Speaker 1: Then I--Andrew Billingsey by that time was vice president of academic affairs at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and he recruited me to come to Howard.  So I began teaching there in the fall of--semester of '71' [1971].  And that's when I started--I had gotten--I had published "Tomorrow's Tomorrow" while--mean, while I was--I had just come back in the country when it came out.  And then I--you know, for me, after a project was finished I never go back and even read it.  You know, you just move on to the--I move to the next thing.  So, at that point, my mind was racing ahead to, you know, what in the world is wrong with sociology?  That's when I did the anthology, "Death of White Sociology."  And I stayed at Howard for two years teaching sociology.  I very much enjoyed it.  And I, I got married in '73' [1973], and my husband-to-be [Walter Carrington, HM] was living in New York as executive vice president for the African-American Institute.  So I was seven--I, I met him  at a bar in Haiti, 'cause he was--I was there for spring break, and he was there for a weekend with some of his friends from New York who had gone up--down there.  And so, a year later we got married, and I moved to New York.
Story_ID: 88362
Speaker 1: The first year, '73' [1973], I had a, a, a grant that'll--and I, I was at the Kenneth Clark's Metropolitan Applied Research Center. And again I was working on the third book called "Mixed Families Adopting across Racial Boundaries [sic, Lines]."  That book was published in--I worked on it for quite a while.  I had just started getting interested in trans-racial adoption because of the, their out--aggressive, anti-black child, white parents adopting stance that they had taken.  And so I was--
Speaker 2: Who's that?
Speaker 1: The National Association of Black Social Workers took a very negative stand against it, so I became curious and I got one grant to do some work on it.  And I had got another grant, and so I, and I went around and traveled around the country interviewing people in five states.  And the I tracked down I guess about close to half a dozen adults who had been adopted when they were young kids.  I think that may have been the most well written, most scholarly book of all of my work.  I'm not sure, but the--I had--I've had a tendency to get interested in, in not popular so much as trends that, that, that if I research them, you know, sort of the windows to some much broader social phenomenon and trans-racial adoption had a lot to do with race and--
Speaker 2: Now that, that was a big around 1972, '73' [1973],or so.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I remember--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: First placements were made I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, it was in '71' [1971] when the Black Social Workers had their convention, opposed to--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Donahue even had--so the show didn't (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: There was a group of white, prospective white parents that met in Ohio to prepare themselves for this, you know--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --adopting these black children--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I did the most definitive study on it at the time, and it was, yes, it's, it's still a good scholar--good--it's been out of print for--it was, it's the only book I've written that once it went out of print, it never came back.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I, I mean it, it, there would not have--it shouldn't have been reprinted unless I was willing to go back and do some update of it, and I had no interest in doing that, tracking down people and--
Story_ID: 88363
Speaker 1: What did you discover, you know, in that research--(unclear)--do you think it's a good idea, a bad idea, and how did the black children do that were raised by white people?
Speaker 2: Well, the verdict was, the jury was still out because all the children were young in the '70's [1970s], except those individuals I found who were anomalies in a way.  I, I, I developed three categories of, of families.  And a first was, and the largest number of families were those that I said were, were realistic, that they had adopted--they were white.  They realized they adopted a black child, and they didn't feel they had to change the child in order to, you know, to say that this child has African-American blood, but he also has Native American, da, da, da, you know, all, all of which, you know, diminish the fact in their eyes that they had adopted, you know, they call it biracial, and they were.  Most of the children who were adopted were biracial rather than with two black parents.  Then another category were those, I would say, a smaller number of people who were really I think were, were going to have a lot of trouble raising their kids because they said race is not important, you know; my child is a human, human being, and the only thing that's important is, you know, developing his, his or her sense of humanity.  And then there was the other group of families, was a small group who had moved into black communities.  And I think they've gone overboard in the other direction.  And then I had what I called the many United Nations family.  You know, there are some people who adopt a black child, a Native American child, a Asian child, and so that it, you know, in structure and content, you know, each type of family had its own dy--dynamics.  I came down on the side of, of being for trans-racial adoption if all other efforts have failed.  And then I spelled out a criteria that I thought should guide such adoptions: number one--well, I can't remember, remember them all, but one--I started with the fact that they shouldn't adopt the child to prove a point, you know, that they were pro-black or they were integrationists, nor should this be their first experience with black people.  They shouldn't do it just to get back at their parents, and there were cases of that.  And they also should not adopt black children and then try to turn them into something akin to a little white child, like the people who said they adopted a human being and devoid of race, and the problem with this country is everybody is thinking about race.  And we're going to do it different.  We're just gonna--and I remember one woman, a couple in, in Minnesota, and the wife's father-in-law was a professor at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] I believe.  And she was a white woman, but she was an albino too.  And she had this strong, strong view that race--my child is not black.  My child is not white.  My child is a human being.  And I often thought about that over the years.  I wondered, you know, came--became of that child.  I also identified, or at least track down the social worker who'd made the first trans-racial adoptive placement, and it was a black woman and from Kentucky, but who moved to, in the 1950s, to Minneapolis [Minnesota].  Her name was Lair--Laura Gaskin (ph.), and she had worked in, she worked in adoptive services for Hennepin County, which is from Minneapolis.  And she placed a black, little black kid, boy, in a home of a white family when she--after she had surveyed and tried to find a black family for him.  She would not give me information to contact him, but she did, she kept in touch with him.  She said he was living in a rural area of Minnesota where he had grown up, and he, you know, was doing okay.
Story_ID: 88364
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, now you're, you're still at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] at this time?
Speaker 2: No, no--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)---
Speaker 2: --no, I'd, by then I had--when "The Death of White Sociology" came out I had left Howard.  I was then at the in, in New York.  I took a faculty position at the second year I was there in 1974, or '75' [1975]--at Hunter College [New York City, New York].  And I was brought on as a full professor because I had, had published two books and had another one in the making.  In fact, I had a full professorship long before I got tenure, because with tenure, you know, it's based on how many years you've been in, in the system.  And, and the promotions (unclear) from the assistant associate to full are based on how, how productive your work is.  But while I was at--also, I became a mother.  It was about 1975, and I was trying to think of where I was in my career at that time.  And I did--I didn't--I wasn't very productive you know, writing when I--the one book I got out when my son was very little, was the book "Mixed Families Adopting Across Racial Boundaries."  But I've quite deliberately spent as much time rearing my son as I could, and my husband [Walter Carrington, HM] traveled a lot extensively abroad for long periods of time to Africa.  So, we, we had a pact that one of us would always try to be home at the same time, you know, with, with our son, you know.  So, I think he's all the better for it.  I stayed at Hunter and I taught at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York in the doctoral program and advised student dissertations, taught courses on race and policy, on social movements.
Story_ID: 88365
Speaker 1: Then I--in 1980 my husband [Walter Carrington, HM] was nominated to be U.S. Ambassador to Senegal.  And it was the election year, so his hearings and confirmation, you know, were postponed extensively.  And eventually by September, he was sworn in, and we left Senegal on September--left New York on September 18th and arrived in Dakar [Senegal].  I remem--my son remembers having gotten a birthday on the plane because he turned six the day we got to Dakar.  That was in--a very interesting experience.  The first letter I wrote back to my sister, Dorie [Ladner Churnet, HM], was that I feel as though I'm sitting in the audience watching myself on stage because I had gone, you know, from, from SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] to being a representative of the U.S. government in an Africa country.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, that is--so he's a U.S. Ambassador for Senegal.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so you're the ambassador's wife and--
Speaker 1: Madam Ambassadress.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you have to perform all of the protocol--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh functions, social functions, you know.
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I was on sabbatical from Hunter [College, New York City, New York].  And so, you know, I was a full-time mom and, and wife.  I--but it, it--we didn't stay but six months because when President Reagan was elected, he recalled all the political appointees except one.  So my husband was very, very upset about it.  I was upset too, but for him, you know, this was--his entire career had been leading in this direction since he was an undergraduate of Harvard.  And so, it took me--and he had been Peace Corps director in Senegal, so the people he had known then, you know, by the time we got back, they were high level business people--men, or great writers, or--and he'd gone to a conference in Senegal in the 1950s, a student conference.  He--(unclear) they were at--you know, leaders in their government--I had wrote one letter to my sister and I told her I can get anything I want if I know what to ask for.  It was, it was a life of privilege, but I made it.
Story_ID: 88366
Speaker 1: I mean, my mind had to be occupied too, so I, I met an African-American girl from Chicago.  Her name was Carrie Daley--is Carrie Daley.  And she is, is married to Ousmane Sembene, the Africa's most well-known cinematographer and author as well.  Anyway, at the reception, she came up and introduced herself, and she said I know you're gonna be busy for the next month or so on the social whirlwind.  But when you settle down, give me a call and, and, and ask--and I'll take you anywhere you wanna go, but I'll--we can do things that you're not gonna do on this, these official, these official dinners and lunches and so on.  And I said great, so Carrie--you know, even though I was there six months, she--first thing, she, she said what do you wanna do?  And I said first I wanna see a polygamist marriage.  She said oh, that's not problem.  I'll take you to my sister-in-law's house (laughter).  Then I told her I--there were a lot of things, but I told her I wanted to experience life as local people do, meaning that I wanted to know about it.  (Unclear) my sociologist interest and my human curiosity.  So, you know, with Karen then I met an African-American girl named Joanne.  She was married to a Senegalese as well.  And through the two of them, especially with Carrie, who is still my friend, and she's now working for the state department as U.S. government as administrative officer in Cotonou, Benin now.  But they've been--she's married to another Senegalese guy now, and they always visit me when they're here.  They have three kids.  She adopted a little girl after she got divorced.  He had two children, and so the kids are growing up, and, and she, she, she's just a wonderful girl.  I think she did her dissertation on this Ousmane Sembene writings.  She got a doctorate in, in Afro-Amer--Francophone African literature I think.  We came back from Senegal, and we came back to Washington instead of New York because we had sublet our apartment for a couple of years I guess.  And--because most presidents come into office they don't withdraw, you know, ambassadors right away, just--unless you--I mean especially with countries that don't matter like Senegal.  But Reagan's Administration really wanted to prove a point going right in.  They were going to change everything.
Story_ID: 88367
Speaker 1: When I, when we came back here I was invited to teach in Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] School of Social Work, so that's what I did beginning in the fall.  And I, I was a full professor in--and I was granted tenure on going there.  So, I taught until 1990.  I guess I taught from 1981 to, to 1990.  And I got itchy feet.  I wanted to leave academia.  I was tired of the same old same, and I really wanted to go off to work, to direct a small foundation, you know.  And but once I got to Howard, it was--and I started building a, a life here in Washington my second time around, it, you know, it was good.  Through my teaching, you know, I--and I got divorced in 1984 or '85' [1985]; it was '84'[1984].  And I was raising my son even with my ex-husband's [Walter Carrington, HM] in the Washington area, and we have an informal shared custody arrangement.  I put everything aside.  My--I have always felt that the most important thing that I do in life was rearing my son because it's an ominous task to be responsible for shaping another person's life.  That's a--that's I--we always thought.  So we--and I was--I did PTA [Parent-Teacher Association] meetings, I went to classroom visits, and, and I did it all.  And after I was divorced, I--and I was--my life was revol--has always revolved around my child, to a great extent.  He's twenty-eight.  He'll be twenty-nine this year, but, but he--and he's come back to the area after going to do the Hollywood movie star--lived for--what was it out there, two years or three years?  And he was in several films, but he didn't have the fire in the belly for, for it, the industry.  He didn't like it, so I hope he has fire in the belly for this graduates program he just started in Alabama.
Story_ID: 88368
Speaker 1: So it brings me up to this point.  Well, actually in 1990, one of my friends at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] suggest--who was a faculty member, suggested that I--we got a new president coming in, and she said why don't you--he had come in.  She said why don't you allow me to nominate you to be the vice president [of academic affairs].  I said you gotta be kidding, no way.  I said I have never been chair of a department or dean.  I've never--I've always run from those jobs.  I never wanted it.  And she kept saying it, so finally, and I have a lot of respect for her, finally one day I said okay, let's sit down and talk about this.  And why do you think I should consider it?  And then I looked at the positive and negatives, took my legal pad, and you know, one side, drew the line down the middle.  One side is he good; one--other side is the bad.  And it, it did make sense.  Let me say, said this is very strange for me because I'm trying to get out of this institution to go off to work in a foundation someplace, where I could see the impact of, of work, my work.  So, I ended up getting the job, and no one was more shocked than, than I was that I got it.  And--but I took it so quickly, and I had so many transferable skills as well that I'd acquired as being on the board of a--you know, just a host of organizations, chairing the board, or things like Trans-Africa forum and--there was a, a lot--and I was a quick study I mean, quick study.  And also I have--when it comes to doing business, I can separate my emotion self from a lot of decisions, not--well, let me say it differently if I can.  I could make tough decisions.  That's all I can say, I can make them, and not with any great joy at all because firing 400 people at Howard was not a, a joyful thing; In fact, it was awful.
Speaker 2: Now, you had to fire 400 people--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and you felt that you should do that?
Speaker 1: Ulti--
Speaker 2: What was the--
Speaker 1: I inherited a deficit of, of about $25 million dollars and--
Speaker 2: Say she had to lay off people rather than fire them.
Speaker 1: I fire them actually.  We restructured and re--and classified, developed job classifications.  The institution had always been overstaffed, but no one had done it before me.  And the only reason I did it was because, well, a lot of other things we did as well and sold off assets, you know, a lot of the property the university had, a whole campus in fact.  We closed and consolidated programs.  We froze traveling money, hiring, just a whole lot of things.  And then at the end of all of that we still didn't, you know, still hemorrhaging.  The budget was still hemorrhaging.  So, I ended up balancing the budget and leaving a surplus behind actually, a small surplus, $14 million dollars or so.  But what was at stake was the viability of the institution.
Story_ID: 88369
Speaker 1: Okay, at, at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] now, so, so, about 400 people lost--mean they had to be laid off or fired in the restructuring.  And so I wouldn't supposed that such a thing would make you very popular and--
Speaker 2: Interestingly, I remained very popular.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is when-well one, none of the faculty were fired so.  So we also spread the cuts in positions across the terrain of it and not just the little people.  They also understood how what a difficult position I had been placed in because they'd let these men, you know, form--prior presidents, you know, run, run in such a terrible way.  And then--because I, I was vice president, second in charge in the university, I had no idea that there was a deficit, had no idea.  The board had no idea.  And I had to fire the vice president for fis--Business and Fiscal Affairs before I could even get into the books to find out what, how, how, how serious the problem was.  'Cause he said that someone who told me that he would sit back me fall, you know.  He had no intention at all.  And when I fired him, he was shocked.  He went to board members, and I told them that I have the authority, and I have the reasons to fire him.  Because they, they called people like--no, I won't mention names--no, Earl Graves [HM].  I mean they, they were very upset with me, that I'd--but because--but anyway, it was a very difficult time for the university.  And what, you know, the other thing I did, I, I--you know, after thinking this through with my advisors, we held students in students services harmless, which meant that none of their services would be cut.  I also pledged to them there would--despite the serious financial crisis of the university, there would be no increase in tuition.  The board was very upset with me for doing it, but I told them I had made this promise to the students.
Story_ID: 88370
Speaker 1: Now the people who really went after me were the campus politicians who were in the, the university senate, because they wanted--they kept saying they wanted shared governance with the president, and they wanted to be involved in the decision-making process on everything at the university.  And I told him that that was un, an unworkable model because I reported to the Board of Trustees at the university.  And I certainly--'cause they wanted tripartite relationship with the president, themselves, and the board of trustees.  And I said well, you take it to the board and ask them for it.  But they were vicious.  They went after me, and they even got a group of students to follow them, I mean to, to do a lot of their bidding.  After I left Howard, a young man who had been very, very tough on me came down to the District of Columbia for National Control Board office.  And I was wondering why are you here, because he, when he got sick, he got very ill--(unclear)--we put him in the hospital.  And I was the person who went to see him every day, even though he had been out there attacking me.  He came--he Dr. Ladner, I just wanna tell you how sorry I am that I treated you the way I did.  I said oh, it's forgotten.  I said I know how young people are.  You get very excited and go overboard on me.  He said no, you don't understand what, what happened.  He said all of those attacks against you were orchestrated.  He said we used to sit in meetings at night with these faculty members thinking of ways in which we could destabilize you the next day, I mean just do something just to, you know, get at you.  And then when I was vice president, they were the same way, I mean.  There was one guy who wanted me to hire his wife, and when I didn't, it all went down (laughter)--that was awful.  And they would--I mean they never did this to the men who before--president before and afterwards.  So, I had some bitterness for a short time after and maybe while it was going on.  But then I decided I didn't have any place in my life to store bitterness against this people, so I began to treat them--(unclear)--what my later would say, with a long-handled spoon.  Just keep them at a distance.  And, and you know, they weren't productive either.  They weren't publishing articles; they weren't going to professional meetings.  You know, I looked at their grade--their course evaluations by the students.  They were terrible, you know.  And I, what I did was cultivate a productive faculty and all the others who were interested in their careers.  But they did something that was just downright vicious.
Story_ID: 88371
Speaker 1: When--and they lied too.  When I was vice president I was a candidate, one of the two finalists for the presidency of Hunter College in New York [City, New York].  And they found that out and hastily called a meeting.  Well, it wasn't hard to, to find out because it was in the "New York Times."  They hastily called a meeting of the senate, faculty senate, steering committee of the faculty senate.  And they took a vote of no confidence in me, and there five people at the meeting, you know.  They had a quorum of all the steering committee, not of the faculty center.  It was crazy--faxed it to that, you know--the next minute, as soon as they wrote the resolution, faxed it to the union representatives at Hunter faculty, who called me and asked me what was it all about.  I said I really wish I could tell you, but I can't.  I don't know why people do these things.  So then--I mean I explained.  When I went for the campus visit, I, I explained to them what, what this was all about.  But they said what, why would they do that to you?  I said you have to ask them.  I don't know.  And I told them, I said you know, if you had any sense, you would be trying to get someone else--if you want me out, you should, you know, give me a good send off by giving me a good recommendations, you know, so get her out of here, you know (laughter).  That's what--I guess that's asking for too much.  But those high level, demanding jobs are hard and they take a toll.  They take a heavy toll on you, but I enjoyed it while I was doing it.
Story_ID: 88372
Speaker 1: And once I finished it, I moved on to something else and like that until I--I, I left, when I left Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] I went on a two-year's leave, from '95' [1995] to '97' [1997], and wrote the book "The Tides that Bind" while I was on leave.  And I--'97' [1997] I went to, to Brookings [Institution], and then I wrote the book "New Urban Leaders."
Speaker 2: Now you're--at what point were you part of [Washington] D.C. control board?
Speaker 1: Ninety-five [1995] to ninety-eight [1998].
Speaker 2: Okay, and that was a board that was created to deal with the crisis and the governance--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --of the District [of Columbia] when Marion Barry's [HM] government basically failed right?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, I mean and the, the city was in about half a billion dollar debt, and it was--the systems had never been upgraded.  Workers were untrained.  Everything was--the contracting system was in, in shambles.  And it was like going into--I found Howard to have been a microcosm of the city government.  And all my friends said why are you jumping out of the frying pan into the fire, you know, from the Howard presidency to the control board?
Speaker 2: Now what categorizes this microcosm?  What kind of world is this?
Speaker 1: You mean Howard University?
Speaker 2: Well, the microcosm, D.C. and Howard.  I mean you said they were like--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --there--Howard was--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --a microcosm of D.C.
Speaker 1: Of, of D.C.
Speaker 2: What is this world that we're describing here?  What, what, what go--how does this world govern how you rule?
Speaker 1: I was thinking more--when I state that, and I stated it fairly often, (unclear)--if I look at, at it from a sys--systems approach, you know, things are broken.  People don't fix them.  And there's a vested interest on the part of many people that they stay broken because they work, they're accustomed to a dysfunctional system.  They know how to work this system.  They how--know how to get benefits from it.  And if you come in advocating change, you touch--stepping on a lot of people's feet, you know.  So when I went to Howard as vice president [of academic affairs] in 1990, I found myself in the office one night, 11:30 p.m., signing each faculty member's reappointment for the following year.  My first questions is what are these things here?  They put them on the conference table in my office.  Those are personnel recommendations.  Is said what am I--what are they doing in here?  You gotta sign them.  I said why do I have to sign all of these?  They said it's, it's mandatory because the vice president does it every year.  On very short order, I got a, you know, an autopen--(unclear)--and to buy me an autopen so that someone could sign 'em.  I said but I--what I don't understand--I said well, well staff sign them, you know, just under my na--I mean just sign them.  No, it has to be your signature.  I said this is absolute madness.  First of all I said they ought to be automated so that, you know, if you, you got a tenured person on your faculty or someone who has a long-term appointment, they've been there twenty years, and you're still each year signing their, their personnel rec can afford another year.  I said all you gotta do, why don't you just set up, set it up in the computer with a list, you know, that all of these--they said well, individuals, you know, are reappointed.  You can just send it over as an attachment, and I okay it and send it back, you know, or approve it or whatever.  But I don't understand this.  And--
Story_ID: 88373
Speaker 1: What I came to understand was that--and all, it was eight, eight copies of it too, not duplicate, not triplicate, but eight pieces of paper.
Speaker 2: For each faculty member you have to do--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and it's eight and a half by eleven, see.  So what I came to understand was that each of those pieces of paper represented some kind of benefit to people who have--a person who handled it in someone's office, that it was a little piece of power so that I could call you and ask you: do you have Dr. Jones's personnel rec in your office?  We're trying to track it.  I mean is it in your office?  And I said I don't know.  I'm not sure.  What about the one I asked you for a couple of days ago?  Then they getting through this (unclear), I mean it's very--it's subtle, but you--that's what it was all about.  So, the same is with the city [District of Columbia].  I mean, those are not--first of all, there's not a lot of, lot of not just forward thinking, but just basic good management, sound management would have--would mean that you have had automated systems in place in city government because how else do you govern this size of a city?  But it was institutionalized chaos.  And the, in both cases, the leader was endowed with a lot of superlative power.  That, that doesn't sound very good.  It's not a good fit, but endowed with almost--I mean power, I mean not power, but adoration.  You know, there's a lot of pomp and circumstance that goes with being president of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], you know.  The president of Howard is referred to as The President.  A friend of mine who, who came to Howard from Stanford [University, Stanford, California] I guess said when he first got here he was asking like the president--I says the president's gonna be on campus.  He said what are you talking about?  I said no, we're talking about the president of Howard, you know.  And it's, it's a kind of royalty in a way.  I mean and people--a lot of it's out of fear too.  People never know--make one--I broke the mold because I didn't act, did not act that way 'cause not my personality.  And I did not need to have a cook making lunch for me on the job, you know.  And I would go over and sit in the dining room and, and eat with the faculty.  And because the faculty and staff are so accustomed to this imperial kind of presidency, they're not quite sure what to make of it.  I was just over the, the campus today to take this art class and I saw two administrators that I had known for a long time, and these women--I heard them.  I had stopped and talked to them, and then I heard them say, doesn't she look happy and content?  And I turn around and say I am very happy and content (laughter).  See, she looks so different than when, than when she was president.  I said and I will never be president of anything again either.  I said I'm gonna remain happy and content looking.  But it's, it, it, it's been a good ride for me.  And I, I think that I've had--that I have surpassed whatever I may have envisioned for myself as a little girl in Palmer's Crossing [Hattiesburg, Mississippi] who was running to the store to make a dime because she could get there fast and get back fast.
Story_ID: 88374
Speaker 1: Now, what about the Brookings Institution?
Speaker 2: Brookings [Institution] is a, is a, is a very genteel environment, and it was very, it was a very productive place because you worked--was not a--there's some collaboration among scholars.  But routinely, people are working on their own book or the policy brief, or whatever.  And it's--there may be more cross, cross departmental collaboration now, but among programs now than there were, than there was when I first went there.  But I was in economic studies when I came in and then moved to governance study--governmental studies.  Now this it's called governance studies.  I enjoy Brookings.  I--because it--I mean you're left alone to do your work, you know.  And it was a good place for me to get depressurized, you know, from, from the Control Board.  I didn't know how tired I was from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] until after I left there and I slept for God knows how long, and all the fatigue came down, same with the Control Board.  I mean I, I--you know, that's a tendency people have.  Well, the, the mind takes over and just puts the fatigue at bay until it has time to take over.  But the rest is, you know.
Speaker 1: Now--
Story_ID: 88375
Speaker 1: In--after you left the presidency you wrote "The Ties that Bind," is that correct or was it (unclear)--yeah, go ahead.
Speaker 2: I, I wrote that while I was on leave.  After I left Howard's [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] presidency, I did not go back to my faculty position.  I took a two-year leave from it, and I left--I didn't leave with pay.  And I spent that time writing the book and being on the Control Board, you know.  The Control Board was not a full-time job.  You could--it could have been if you allowed it to, but it was unpaid as well.  I would never have done it if it had been paid.  But since we, we made some--we had the authority to create laws, to abolish laws, I mean to do anything literally.  We wanted to, but we used that power very judiciously, very judiciously.  But that was a good experience because it's very unusual, but all five of us liked each other, and we socialized together and just had a great time together, you know.  And if it--if we didn't like each other, had we not liked each other, it wouldn't have worked.  It would have been a disaster.
Story_ID: 88376
Speaker 1: The book "The Ties That Bind" is about values and, and culture.  And I know--where did you get the idea from for ti--well, you're, you've been a sociologist your whole life I guess would be axiomatic of you to think about these things.  But what gave you the specific impetus for that book?
Speaker 2: My mother's death.  I wanted to--before my mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] became very ill, I started interviewing her over time, asking her to flesh out some of these fragments of memories I had about things.  And I started with collecting her old sayings that she, as they were called.  And you know, she, she could summarize a major part of our lives by--with one sentence, you know.  She told me that no one, nobody ever got very far looking through a rearview mirror all the time, I mean things like that, you know.  And you lie down with dogs, you get up with fleas; that's a very common one.  But she had--and then I got them from my aunts, and they just expanded, you know.  I thought at first about writing while she was still living a little book of the sayings, because I had become deeply, deeply disenchanted, very concerned about the erosion of, of values as I saw it.  You know, those of us who came through the Civil Rights Movement, you know, brought old fashioned black folks' values with us 'cause our parents had taught them to us.  But what I saw that, that my generation was--the, the disconnect when once sense because we didn't pass on to our children what our--we're the generation that stopped it.  We didn't pass on to them in the same kind of singular fashion that our parents had passed them to us because it's a different world.  I mean we also spend a lot of time trying to give our kids what we didn't have, and it meant spending less time with them and more time working, you know.  Most of the mothers were homemakers when I was growing up.  All the mothers were, you know.  And, and our--what I said in the book was that in our haste, know to give them the things that we didn't get.  We forgot to give them the most important of all, and that was values. Because families don't sit and eat together.  I mean it's like eating on the fly, you know.  I won't say--not speaking up for everyone, but--at all, but, but you know, the working--two working parents mean two very exhausted people, and then there's a divi--high divorce rate in this country.  You know, white people are affected almost even more by it than black people.  And I, I've done, have done a lot of thinking about how I had gotten out there with the "Tomorrow's Tomorrow" (unclear)--sociology, and rarely as white people and their interpretation of what--who we are and what we do with our lives and, and then I realized that I would never have predicted--back in the '60's [1960s], I would never have predicted that twenty years later that there would be something called a permanent underclass.  And I was--it ate at me like--I mean, I was consumed by it, taught it in my classes.  And what I felt I was seeing was the, the destruction of a generation and into the next generation.  And that's why I wrote that book, but it was, it was, it became even more clear to me that I needed to write it because--after mother died because I wanted to have some, something to pass on to the children, to know what she and her generation stood for, and that it worked well for us.  And we certainly made conscientious choi-- conscientious choices to not raise a kid in this way, or you know, I said I would never be that strict, as strict on my kids as my mother was.  You know, but there are a lot of things that also have gone back to, you know, though I've never discarded, you know.  Chief among which is this, there's this very important sense of humanity and, and of helping others, and of building strong foundations, and trying to preserve them, and very high respect and regard for other people, and manners, you know, and just all kind--day to day--
Story_ID: 88377
Speaker 1: --This question and that's what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: That we can lift most of them or as many as possible out of this corrosive poverty, and that we can curb or stop all of the violence that has saturated our communities.  People--black people never--poverty is--I would say poverty is nothing new to black people, but what is new is this incursion of drugs and violence into poor communities and the sense of what--my, my hopes are that, that we can destroy those things or remove those things that cause our children and people of all ages, but especially our children, to grow up in places they're fearful, and where there's a lack of opportunity, and where that by the age they're of four or five years old, they--the bright optimism that was in their eyes when they were two and three, you know, is gone.  I mean that what you begin to see is sadness set in their, in their faces.  And you look at their eyes and the hope and despair set--lack of hope and despair is there.  I--my hope is to, is that we find ways to, to get that--I mean cut it back and keep fighting, joining forces with each other to say we're gonna turn this, this thing around, 'cause I really do fear for the outcomes of, of young people today.  They will, they will have to--my son's generation will have to find the cure for AIDS, figure out how to deal with the loss of, of, of social security benefits, how to make a living and build careers.  In part, what has become a permanent part-time workforce for millions of Americans, they will have--how, how will they solve the problem of addition and drug abuse and alcohol abuse?  And how can they, for God's sake, stop, you know--not how can the kids stop going to prison, but how can we tackle this criminal justice system that seems to be much more interested in finding ways to incarcerate, to lock up black men and increasing numbers of black women than to keep them in a society and help to find ways to help them be productive.  That's, those are the things that I worry about.  Who will our daughters marry?  The men--the women now go to the prisons to meet the men, you know.  They're the guys from their block.  They're locked up.  And the guys look for a woman on the outside who has some income or that's used to be a little AFDC check or if she's got social security or it's just a job or whatever, you know, because--anyway, these are great disappointments in my life.  And I worry, I personally worry about 'em a lot.
Story_ID: 88378
Speaker 1: Ma'am at this point, what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I'm in what I con--what I call my legacy phase of my career.  I's the twilight years.  I'll be sixty years old this year.  But I, I call it my legacy period because when I look back over the, over the books I've written, and I'm writing, and I'm very consciously passing on to whoever may be interested, whomever may be interested in it, what I've learned, what I can learn about this.  So the first book was, was "The Ties That Bind," that deals with the values, tried and true formulas for living that served many, many generations of black people quite well, generations before us, me, mine.  And the second book was--and I've always been interested in picking the brains of some of the best, best organizers, best leaders.  So "The New Urban Leaders" gave me an opportunity to interview Kent Amos [HM], someone I knew, but never knew what made him tick, and, and, and just all--and include all the people I interviewed in the book, but people who have not given up hope by any means, people who take on the challenges that are terribly daunting to, to others and daunting to them, but they don't run away from the problems, but they run toward it.  And they're flexible enough to say, 'cause this is not working.  They don't hold onto, you know, things and, and get defensive about them, but they tinker with it as often as it needs to be (unclear) with.  So there's a great deal of flexibility in their approach.  And they have some deep--I mean they don't art--off--then didn't always articulate what, what made--what motivated them.  And I asked all of 'em why, why were they doing it.  Most people did, but they were terribly humble about the way they--I mean one woman, Hattie Dorsey [HM] in Atlanta [Georgia] said it was because of her father.  He was a minister.  He is a minster and he was a civil rights leader, so (unclear) her legacy was determined by what her father had done.  I mean part of it--well, I mean she--that's what she was going to do, was what was expected of her.  But, so I wanted to, to find some of these people and, and tell their stories so that the next generation, upcoming leaders, could at least have some place that they could go and look.  And maybe they would learn some skills.  Maybe they could find some motivation, and especially--and some hope, you know, when they get beaten down, that other people--and then also network among themselves to discover each other.  'Cause I had several people who had gotten the MacArthur Prize, several who've gotten--two who had gotten the Heinz Prize, $300,000, $350,000 from the Heinz Foundation for community work.
Story_ID: 88379
Speaker 1: I have a book that will be released this month called "Launching Our Black Children for Success: A Parent's Guide for Children's Ages Three to Eighteen" [sic]. And the book starts with parents assessing themselves, taking a look at what they believe and what they, what they want, what--how, how they were reared, what they're going to hold onto as the raise their children, what they've given up.  You know, just it's a how-to book.  That's the intent, you know, that's the intent.  Then the next chapter is on assessing your child, you know, starting with the recognition that each of your children is different.  Jesse Jackson--I, I don't quote Jesse Jackson [HM], but he made one statement that I find to be very interesting.  He said I love of children differently.  And I think for me that means that each--parents are most effective when they see what those subtle differences are between their children and work with then instead of a one size fits all.  There are some, some things, something like values, I mean, you don't give them to one child and not give them to the others, and some things you, you pass on to all of your children.  But it is the ability to recognize the differences in what are children's needs are.  My son is dyslexic, and I have--I spent a lot of time of, of his, and he has spent a life time practically, you know, dealing with it. He's now an advocate you know, for children with learning disabilities.  And so, back to legacy.  So the book ["Launching Our Black Children for Success: A Guide for Parents of Kids from Three to Eighteen"], the third, you know, it's a kind of a trilogy; you know, it's on child rearing.  And start with the foundations of values books, "Ties That Bind."  Then I go on to, to capture what some of the best minds and doers, you know, the doers have to say about where we are, how do they do, and why do they do, and how do they hang into there with their own work?  And then I end it with raising your children because we end with--next to the last chapter of the book is about how to file financial aid.  You know, it's a very, very practical, very--and how to look at black colleges and, as well as other universities, you know, looking at where, where's your, where's your child interested in going to college?  And you start that process when they're little.  You don't wait until their juniors in high school, but you start them--I mean start talking to them about education when they are very, very young, and, and it is an expectation.  And see, we were expected to, to get an education.  Our parents always said we didn't have the opportunity, but you do.  I mean and that was a challenge.  But you have--and in that grows your own expectation of yourself, so this book is, is a how-to manual on, step wise, you know, as your child goes from three years old to four to five, you know, pre-K.  I mean if you--and then kindergarten.  And what the child needs to know at each stage and be doing and you know, I even have a section on taking--you know, for vacations, you know, people don't know where to go, turn it into a black history tour, you know.  And I put the Underground Railroad site in it, you know, web page, page address, and gave them the address of organizations that organized tours to black colleges.  And I didn't even know some of this stuff. And the advantage of going to a community college, you know, to a state university.  Where can you afford to go to?  And everyone does not, does not want it or need a high school--I mean a, a college degree.  I'm talking alternatives to college degrees and if, if you wanna be a good carpenter.  We should not stigmatize it because we feel that everybody should to college.  Everyone shouldn't, you know.  Some people have other aspirations in life.  But at the end of the book I hope that the reader will feel that, that they have done everything they can, you know, to, to raise a child in these difficult times.  And I talk about, you know, just the enormous challenges that parents frate--face--because of how difficult life is now.  So that's my legacy.
Story_ID: 88380
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my legacy--
Speaker 1: An active legacy.  You're active--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was going to say that--
Speaker 1: --(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I--the--I'm going into another phase of my life now, moving.  I'm, I got my first disability check today.  I am so excited because I didn't even know I was gonna get it, get disability or be certified.
Speaker 1: Now you had an accident, right, right--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: No, I had an accident a long time ago.  And it may have triggered it or started it.  It was back in 1993. But I don't really know the cause of fibromyalgia.  It's, it's in the same family with lupus and rheumatoid and so on.  But I'm, you can probably tell I'm not feeling well now.  I am just so sore and you know, pain literally on the soles of my feet, all over my body, so I'm very, moving very slowly.
Story_ID: 88381
Speaker 1: But the, the, but the, the--I leave the legacy of activism and of--and I'm hoping that my short stay on this earth as I pass through, I made some little bit of it, some little bit of difference, and that I did what I could with what I have.  And that I did make a difference and helping some people, you know, and that each of us come, come along, and we do what we can.  We move on out, then the next person comes along, and the next group of people.  And none of us ever should expect to solve all the problems.  But I--there, there's one theme that's run through my entire life, and that has been a professional, or a scholar, and an activist. I mean, from the Tri-Hi-Y and studying, you know, and the valedictorian to being in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], but never staying--dropping out of college for long, one foot in the community, and one in the higher education.
Story_ID: 88382
Speaker 1: I could write books.  But I'm now moving into becoming a painter.  A good painter too.  And I'm going to become a good painter because I'm going to work at it, learn the skills, and it feeds my soul.  But the biggest challenge I've had here of late has been that of making the tough decision to leave--I could--I mean a job that does mind work, you know, and just go off and be sick, you know, take care of the illness.  That was very, very hard, very depressing for several months.  And it'll--I felt a sense of loss as well, 'cause it took me a time to come to grips with--the key thing was being disabled, because I'd always been able to--except the time I had a concussion.  My, my, my was the thing that ran my body, and the body stopped.  It just shut down on me.  And eventually I had to hear it, you know, 'cause I kept going.  And then finally I felt a sense of relief when I started telling people that I'm ill because I could--got tired of making up a tale about why I didn't show up at something I was supposed to be at.  I forgot, got to go do--speak of the middle school graduation, because there's what's called in fibromyalgia, fibro, a brain fog, so you're cognitive skills are slow down considerably, and they don't make the connection.  I mean I may be sitting listening to a conversation, and you moved onto the third point, and I may be sitting there quietly, but still processing the first point you made.  Like for someone who's had just a--you know that the one thing in my whole self is just that God gave me a very sharp mind and for that to fail is quite something, yeah.  But I've come to terms with it.  I'm okay about it now.  Yeah, I'm okay because I've, I've had to, and I had--I've also come to see the advantages of not having a schedule every day where I've got to be here, I've gotta be there.  And I may nev--never said this before, but I think it's good, but I'm coming to understand, even in this conversation, is that I had been such a workaholic. That leisure time was for me you just--what am I gonna do with myself today?  I mean, do nothing?  How can I not?  I mean, you know, it's like I'm supposed to do something worthwhile today.  My, my son gave me a birth--a Mother's Day card this year, and it was very, very nice, especially nice because he had been acting out, doing some things I told him were not good for him.  But he said to a mother who, every single day, tries to do something good, and to have a purpose in her life.  And that was me, you know.  That is me.
Story_ID: 88383
Speaker 1: Is that how you'd like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as having had a purpose in life.  And when I was at the Aspen Institute Executive Seminar--(unclear) the first icebreaker cocktail party, our facilitator asked each of us the most impor--about the most important thing that happened to us in the last six months.  I talked about having been in a car accident and gotten a concussion and having all my systems just shut.  I couldn't use my mind, body either--did--got to the point where I'd two hours a day in the office, and then at, at that point [clap sound effect], the strangest feeling.  I can't even describe the feeling, it like comes over you, and you can't do anything except they would lead me to my car and drive me home.  But then the last day of the seminar at Aspen, the facilitator went around the room and asked each of us how do we want to be remembered.  And I said I wanted to be remembered as one who tried to do all she could to help other people.  I said one other thing too, but one guy, who was like number two or number three international in the rank at the Glaxo Pharmaceutical Company in England, cried and said that I'm finally my own person.  I don't have to have my daddy--the image of my daddy over my shoulder anymore to please him.  And there are guys like who were--one guy who was head of Allied Forces--not Allied For--U.S. Forces in, in Western Europe.  And to see these people really emote and to talk, you know, just so candidly, and it, and having gotten in touch with their inner selves, their spirit, (unclear) was just extraordinary.  But you know, the readings were, were from the classics, and it's Socrates, Aristotle, Martin Luther King, letter from the Birmingham Jail, humanistic works.  And so that, in discussing those every day, you know, I just, it, it was the one sort of post-graduate experience I've had that had the largest impact.  And it keeps on, you know, having an impact on--'cause you end up seeing the world in a very different way, you know, even if you go back to the same job.  For me it was just it helped me to get more and more insight and to slow down and reflect, you know, helped me reflect.  And I talked about how I wanted to be remembered in terms of we'd gone to a family reunion in North Carolina where my maternal grandmother had been born and reared--raised till she was twelve.  And I went out--there was church service in a little old church that went back well over a hundred years.  And dinner on the grounds at the church, that's a Southern very Southern rule.  You know, they would have Homecoming, and then there's the people--funny thing is people--somebody brought some Kentucky Fried Chicken, and I cracked up, because you know, you can always look for grandmamma's fried chicken, the pound cake, and you know, the--but then I went back, you know, grave--and looked at the graveyard in the back of the church.  And I, I saw the headstone of one of my ancestors, and it had her name, date of birth, date of death, and inscribed simply: "She did what she could."  And that's my epitaph, that's--those five words.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Story_ID: 88384
Speaker 1: Is this okay?
Speaker 2: Okay, this is a photograph of Wayman Smith [HM] at the left, on the left who was, was chair of the board of trustees at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  That's me in the middle.  To my right is Toni Morrison, the author, who had been invited back to receive an honorary doctorate.  That's interest.  Well, that's all I have to say.
Speaker 1: That's me taken two years ago on the beach in St. Martin.  I had my hair braided.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me on the left, and I can't remember the name of the girl on the right, except her name is--I can't remember her name.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Do you remember the occasion?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was a party that we had when--it was a summer program at Harvard for administrators in higher education.  I think it ran for three, three weeks.  And her name is Beverly.  I can't remember--and she's a provost at a school in Texas now.  But this was on a Friday night when we were out on, having a night out on the boat with beer and having a good time.
Speaker 1: Staff invited some social scientists down to the White House to have dinner with him and to dis--to discuss urban issues.  So from my left is President [William "Bill"] Clinton, that's me, the next person is--oh, she's at Princeton.  I can't--I just don't remember.  But he--what was interesting was that I sat just across the table from him, and it was a very small group, you know, ten people or so.  And he took his own notes.  And I said all these staff around, I wonder why he's taking his notes.  And what I realize was that that's the way he processes information.  You know--
Speaker 2: Hillary Clinton--(unclear)--Hillary Clinton on the left and me on the right.  The occasion was when, when she came to one of the Washington, D.C., elementary schools.  And I, when I was on the D.C. Financial Control Board, each of us had designated responsibilities, and mine was oversight for the public schools.  So I got to--I mean, to a point, over the years where both the Clintons would recognize me, but they also got out a lot more in the city than anyone else, any other president, you know, in modern history.  They hung out.
Speaker 1: This is a wonder--oh my, shouldn't call it wonderful.  This is a picture that I really love because when I was interim president of Howard University in 1994, '95' [1995], that picture was taken October '94' [1994] with President [Nelson] Mandela.  They came to the country--was coming to the country to learn about it and, and tried to get him through the em--South African Embassy to come to Howard to speak, was turned down by the ambassador.  And I said I am going to make this happen, so it was especially wonderful for me because there were 20,000 people on the Quadrangle at Howard.  And as he marched, we marched in.  This is afterwards, but as we marched up the steps into the convocation, he looked out at the crowd, and he was startled.  He said Madam President, I had no idea.  He was stunned.  I had no idea there was so many people.  And he was--to have seen him--(unclear)--people lining Georgia Avenue who couldn't even get onto the campus.  And that's after it was over, and he had taken his jacket off and he was headed out.
Speaker 2: And what year is this?
Speaker 1: This is 19--October 1994.
Speaker 2: Oh, at the top is my sister, Dorie Ladner Churnet [HM], her daughter, Yodit Churnet, Y-O-D-I-T, C-H-U-R-N-E-T.  That's me, and to my right is my son--my left rather--that's my son, Thomas Carrington, Thomas Ladner Carrington. This, the occasion here was a going away appreci--no, they call it appreciation party for me when I finished, finished my duties as interim president of Howard in 1995.  And that was taken, that was in May or June of '95' [1995].
Speaker 1: And below is my college roommate, Joan Trumpauer [Mulholland], who had been a Freedom Rider, and went to Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], and graduated there.  And that's me with Joan.  Joan lives here, the Virginia area now.
Speaker 2: That's my sister with the big hair, Dorie Ladner, and that's me.  We were in St. Louis at the wedding of a close friend of ours, who--and hot pants were en vogue then.  That was 1971.
Speaker 1: That's me giving my farewell speech at Howard graduation.  I knew by that time that I was also--well, I didn't get the presidency, and so I was speaking to the graduates and to the parents and visitors.  And after I spoke, I had requested that the choir sing the Negro spiritual, "Lord, I Done Done What You Told Me to Do."  And that was my--that was the caps--cap--that was the summary of what I felt, and the parents were shouting and they were, you know, thought it was all over, that they had gotten the kid and said thank you, Lord, I've gotten this kid through college.  So "I Done, Done was not only for me, for the graduates just stood up shaking hams and so on.  It resonated with everybody.
Speaker 2: The top picture is of me and my stepfather, my brothers and my sisters, and my nieces and nephews on the day of my mother's funeral.  That was in January of 1995.  And I left early the next morning at six a.m. to go back to Washington to a board of trustees meeting.  That was the most difficult period in my life because my mother was dying as I was in the presidency of Howard with a lot of headaches.  My mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] had been my advisor when I was vice president.  She would give me advice on any--I had a big crisis or problem, I'd call mother.  And here's a woman who went through thir--fourth grade in school and yet, she was, she was incredible because she would tell me how to handle these men, I mean.
Speaker 1: Below is a picture of me and other delegates who were--president delegate--gation of President Clinton.  When we went to take Father Er--or escort Father Erosteed (ph.) back to Haiti when he was sworn in, you know.  And that's a Blackhawk helicopter.  I was so taken with being in that helicopter.  And it landed on the palace grounds.  I had been to Haiti before and--but to see, be up--you know, dri--ride over these neighborhoods was incredible.
Speaker 2: And that's in '92' [1992]?
Speaker 1: Thereabout.
Story_ID: 88385
Speaker 1: The top one is of me after I'd come home from church one Sunday.  And I love hats, and I like to dress up.  So that's me in my, in my apartment in Washington.  It was taken three years ago, about year 2000.
Speaker 2: That's my ex-hub--my sister, Dorie [Ladner Churnet, HM], in the far background, and that's my ex-husband, Walter Carrington [HM], my son Thomas Carrington, and me here at my house in, when, on the occasion of Tom was graduating from Howard in 1999.  He--we had a big party for Thomas here and his dad came and so it was a great event for us.
Speaker 1: The one on the top is of me in 1960--fall of '63' [1963] or spring of '64' [1964] at Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi].  The Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity gave an award each year for the Citizen of the Year, and that was for the student who had been most active in civic affairs.  And I got it probably in great measure because of all my civil rights activities.  I was absolutely shocked when they told--called my name.  And the fellow who's standing there, his name is John Paige, and he was one of my classmates.
Speaker 2: The one on the bottom is of me and my sister, Dorie.  I'm on the left and Dorie's on the right.  And I would say that we were probably about 10 and 11 years old.  Mother frequently dressed us up in these clothes and had us take pictures to send to our father.
Speaker 1: The one on the top is the day of graduation.  I think it was May 11th, so maybe May 14th.  That's Ted Turner and Joan--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Jane.
Speaker 1: Jane Fonda.  Ted Turner was, Turner was receiving an honorary degr--doctorate at Howard's commencement that day.  On the bottom is, to the left is Charlayne Hunter-Gault [HM], who has been a good friend of mine since 1967 when she was at Washington University [St. Louis, Missouri], and I was also.
Speaker 2: And that's me, and Wayman Smith [HM] who is standing applauding is the chair of the--was the chair of board of trustees.  And the person down below is George Mason who was my special friend at that time.  It was someone I met in Uganda in 1970 I guess.
Speaker 1: To the left is me.  The middle is my half brother, Woodrow Charles Ladner.  He is the son of my father's first wife.  He lives in Orange, California.  And to the right is another guest.  The occasion was Alvin Poussaint, Dr. Alvin Poussaint [HM] marriage, wedding to Dr. Tina, now she's Poussaint.  I don't remember her, Tina's maiden name.  I met Tina on a trip to Israel.
Speaker 2: The bottom is me.  On one of my trips home to visit my, my folks, I walked up the street and took this picture, had someone take a picture of me in front of the Goat's Juke Joint.  And when I was a kid I said my mother used to send us there Friday evenings to buy sodas.  And I thought it as a big, big place and when I saw it, see it now, I see it--I think it's torn down now, but then I wanted to be sure.  Got a picture of it because I told all my friends about the goats.
Speaker 1: At the top is a return trip to Tougaloo.  That was in 1969.  I went back to Tougaloo to present, make  presentation at one of the social science forums that I described earlier given by my mentor, Dr. Ernst Borinski, who taught me all of the sociology courses.
Speaker 2: On the bottom is Dr. Borinski, Dean Branch, me and two other students.  This is when I was--I had, I had graduated, got my doctorate and gone back to Tougaloo.  Okay, the other people are the--first it's Ernst Borinski, A. A. Branch, Joyce Ladner, K. C. Morrison, who is a political scientist at University of Missouri, and Jeanetta Roach.  Jeanetta Roach, who was, was the librarian.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, could you describe who, who it was in this photo--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Dr. Ernst, this is Dr. Ernst Borinski.  The next person is Dr.--Dean A. A. Branch.  He was the dean of the college.  He lived until he was in his 90s.  And a few years ago he was going to come up to a meeting to see us.  And that's me.  This is K. C. Morrison, who is not professor of history at University of Missouri.  This is the Tougaloo librarian.  This is Jeanetta Roach.  I'd gone back to Tougaloo to give a, a talk or--
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in the summer of 1963 when in Greenwood, Mississippi, in the Delta.  And the occasion was that the civil rights-SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], SNCC sponsored a concert with the folk singer, Pete Sieger and with Bob Dylan.  And they performed on the back of a flatbed truck.  The people I recognize in this picture are three.  The first is Bernice Reagan on the lower left here with her arms around herself, who is the founder of the group Sweet Honey and the Rock.  Here is Freddy Green, who was a native of, of Greenwood, and she was very active in SNCC.  She lives here I Washington now.  And standing there to the right is my sister, Dorie Ladner.  She's wearing an overall coverall skirt, and this is what we wore when the--and the guys wore, wore the cover--cov--overall pants, you know.  And we did so in order to identify with sharecropper and poor people.  This is what they dressed and then we did too.
Speaker 2: The top picture was take here in my home in Washington.  That's me on the left, and that's my son, Thomas, on the right.  He jumped--we were sitting there talking about something and then he jumped over and kissed me, which was most unusual because he's not ordinarily like that.  He was teasing me.
Speaker 1: The bottom picture is the left--on the left is Dorie, my sister, me in the middle, and my mother [Annie Ruth Woullard] to the right.  This was taken in October 1994--no, no, nope, I'm sorry--yes, that's when it was taken.  It was the last time I would see my mother.  The next time I saw her, she'd had a stroke and could never talk again or given an indication that she--well, she think she comprehended some things.  But she'd just had a gall bladder operation and we brought her home that day.  And that's a special picture for me because it's the last time I interacted with her.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of a sit-in demonstration at the Toddle House in Atlanta.  And that was Christmas vacation in 1963.  To the left is Willie Ricks, who was the first person to shout black power on a demonstration.  He was in SNCC.  That's me in the middle, to my right is--the white guy is Pete--I just forgot.  He was a Freedom Rider too and he, he ended up going to Tougaloo College.  And he married a black woman in Jackson, and he owns a garage where he fixes cars.  And he has lived there since the 1960s.  And to the right is MacArthur Cotton, who was a student at Tougaloo as well and active with SNCC.  But we were all sitting in there.
Speaker 1: And that picture was taken in, in October, about October 14th, 1963.  I'm stand--that's me I'm standing at the podium in the famous Tougaloo chapel.  It's called Wood, Woodworth Chapel.  It--we had just gotten out of jail.  I was in jail for a week, and it--every time--I went to jail for trying to integrate a white Methodist--Galloway Methodist Church in Jackson.  And other students had gone to, to these churches before had been bailed out the first day, and then our lawyer, William Custlid (ph.) and others decided that we--they'd use us as, as a test case and got it in federal court, and they--and it--the, the tradition on Tougaloo's campus was that whenever someone got, came back to campus and had just gotten out of jail, they rang  the bell, and we all ran to the chapel, so.  I was there and trying to describe what the experience had been like.  And you see I'm wearing my movement uniform with the overall skirt.
Story_ID: 88386
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me taken when I was an undergraduate I think in 1963, Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], was on campus.
Speaker 2: This is called Thompson's tank.  Thompson as the mayor of Jackson, Mississippi, and he took a--he was a very active opponent of, of desegregation.  And he invested a lot of money in this tank with the purpose of being able to, when they arrested civil rights activist he could them all in--well, it's big and it was very strong.  I mean, you couldn't break out of it.  We always thought it was a rather strange investment of taxpayers' money.  He bought it--I think they got it when the Freedom Riders were coming.
Speaker 1: The top picture is one of me and one of my closest friends.  Deloris Clemmons is standing and I'm sitting with a blue dress and a pink hat.  And we were waiting in Metropolitan AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church for Winnie Mandela, who was--had just arrived in town, and he was coming over to speak.
Speaker 2: The one at the bottom was me in Saint Kitts, when they--went on a windjammer cruise with some girlfriends, and we stopped in Saint Kitts.  And that was one of the--in a rainforest so we--they had a--had a gift shop, so that's me coming out of it.  It shows my multifaceted--
Speaker 1: The one on the top is my uncle--I'm, I'm sorry, my grandfather, Thomas Ladner.  I don't know when it was taken.  It would have, would have to have been taken before he died in, in the 1950--early '50's [1950s].
Speaker 2: The one on the bottom is me.  I'm speaking at Politics and Pros Bookstore in Washington in the fall of, of 2001 with the launch--promotion of the book I wrote called "The New Urban Leaders."
Speaker 1: This is a picture that was taken in, in 1986.  To the far left is one of my former colleagues who's a professor at Howard School of Social Work, Clarice Walker.  That's me with the cap and the red sweater.  That's my son, Thomas, standing there.  And the others are my students.  Thomas had come by that night to tell me that we had an urgent, urgency, and I had to leave early.
Speaker 2: That's a photograph of, of my sisters, and one brother, and my stepfather, (unclear).  I'll take the back row--in the light blue, in the blue suit is my brother, Fred, Freddie Paraman.  He is next to me in the lineup of children, the my sister Willa Tate, my baby sister Hazel Mems, and my older sister, Dorie, she was the movement woman, and then on this--(unclear)--dressed in hat (unclear).  Then in the middle is my, my younger--next to the youngest sister, Billie Collins, and I'm to the right and to--in front with the dark suit is my stepfather, William C. Paraman.  The occasion was my niece's wedding and the--it was taken last summer, summer of 2002, June 2002 in Jackson Mississippi.
Speaker 1: This is a, a picture of I took at a reception with President Bill Clinton.  Oh, I can't remember what the date--I mean what the occasion was.
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: It was in the spring of 1995.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my son and me with Hillary Clinton.  That's Thomas Ladner Carrington to the left, Hillary Clinton in the middle, and me on the right.  It was taken in 1998.  And the occasion was a thank you reception she gave for those of us, the members of the [Washington] D.C. Financial Control Board.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother, my late mother, Annie Ruth Paraman.  And too, I'm in mother's arms.  And I would assume that I was a year old, maybe two.  And to my--I wouldn't have been two.  I was about a year old.  And to the left--sitting to, to mother's right is, is Dorie.  Dorie and I are 15 months and three weeks and three days apart in birth, year, our ages and--
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my family.  They all came--it was taken in St. Louis, Missouri, in June of 1998.  It was the day after I received my doctorate.  My, my whole family came up to St. Louis for the occasion.  And we're standing in front of the apartment building in which Dorie and I lived.  And this is the only picture--the only person who's not here is Dorie because she was at work.  Starting to my far left is my brother Tommy Paraman, he is deceased.  Next is to my left is Willa Paraman, the there is mother, and then my younger, youngest brother Archie Paraman, behind him is my stepfather William C. Paraman, and in front of him is my baby, the baby of the family, Hazel Mems, Hazel Paraman at the time, then my brother, Fred, me, and then to my left is my sister, Billie.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay, what was the year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety--I mean '68' [1968].
Speaker 1: The top picture was taken in the summer of 1994, and it is the, or it was this picture that hung in the administration building outside the president's office.  It was routine for them to put the picture of the president there.
Speaker 2: Underneath is the commencement day, May, May 1995.  I'm talking to Dr. LaSalle Leffall, a noted cancer surgeon.  And he was receiving an honorary degree, and he's worked at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] for 40 years I would think.  He went to Howard medical school.  He was a dear friend, and he was so pleased to be honored by his school.
Speaker 1: And this is a picture I don't know the person on the left.  That's me in the middle, and that's Dorie to the right.  It was at the Smithsonian Institution for Martin Luther King's birthday in February of 1995.  They--the occasion was the Smithsonian celebration of, of Black History Month.  And I was invited to, to be the speak and Dorie agreed to come with me.  That's in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: The Washington University alumni magazine did a feature on me and one of this common linkages--one of the linkages is that the Brookings Institution founder was also very important in the history of Washington University, so I believe Brookings may have been the first chancellor of the university.  I'm not sure, can't remember.
Speaker 1: That's me in St. Louis, the home of a friend, 1970, in the summer of 1970.  The occasion was that they hosted a book promotion event for my first book, "Tomorrow's Tomorrow: The Black Woman."
Speaker 2: Dorie [Ladner Churnet, HM] and me on the line.  We were pledging.  The top is taken at Tougaloo College on the campus in front of Beard Hall where I once stayed I guess during my senior year, in front of the Delta Sigma Theta sorority sign.  And the occasion, it was October 19--I'm sorry 2000, and the occasion was that I was inducted into the Tougaloo College Hall of Fame.
Speaker 1: The next picture is of me standing in the same place with Malachai, who is the son of, of a family friends.  His mother and grandmother, and he went to Tougaloo with us for the celebration.
