Story_ID: 526340
Speaker 1: Let's begin by slating, I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers today, our videographer is Scott Stearns.  We are at Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP] offices at 4 Times Square in New York City [New York, New York].  Today is October 24, 2016, and I would love for you to say and spell your name sir, and tell us what you do and your birth date.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm George Lewis [HistoryMaker George E. Lewis], G-E-O-R-G-E, L-E-W-I-S, I--born July 14, 1952, I'm a musicologist, composer and computer installation artist, and I'm a professor at Columbia University [New York, New York]--
Story_ID: 526341
Speaker 1: So I'd like to start with some People magazine type questions.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food, I have to think about that.  I kind of, boy, you know since my son [Tadashi Lewis] was born he only likes to eat salmon, and (laughter) chicken, so those two turn up quite frequently on the list of favorite foods.  But, there's a lot of them, there's sushi, when I went to Scotland I pigged out on haggis, you know, it's pretty diverse.
Speaker 1: What about, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I couldn't think of one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about season of the year?
Speaker 2: Depends on where you live, you know?  When I lived in California, spring was fantastic, now that I live here, it's, summer is fine, not much for the cold.
Speaker 1: And is there a favorite saying or quote that you have?
Speaker 2: Boy, that's difficult.  Let me see, saying, a quote, I tried to think of one too, but I couldn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, it probably will turn up at some point, but I couldn't think of any right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's okay--
Speaker 2: --offhand.
Story_ID: 526342
Speaker 1: We're gonna start with some family history, and we'll look at your mother's family history and your father's [George Lewis], let's start with your mother.  Can you tell me her name and when and where she was born?  Tell me about her.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Cornelia Lewis [Cornelia Griffith Lewis], she was born in 1930, and I, and she passed away in 1983.  She was born in Colbert, Georgia, which quite a rural environment, and I don't know how much further her history goes back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's her--
Speaker 2: --except--
Speaker 1: --name?
Speaker 2: --that everyone--Cornelia--
Speaker 1: Cornelia Lewis--
Speaker 2: Like, like C-O-R-N-E-L-I-A, Cornelia Griffith was her born, you know, given name at birth.
Speaker 1: So Colbert was a rural area?
Speaker 2: I went there once.  Yeah, Colbert is pretty rural, it was like a--just a little whistle stop and there's nothing around when you got off the train for miles around.  And then somehow we ended up in a rather ancient house, I would have been like seven or eight really, with no indoor plumbing.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So, yeah they--if you wanted to take a bath or anything, they heated up some water and put a tub in the middle of the room and you sort of did your thing there.  And it, you know, and the outhouse and all that, yeah--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --they had all that.
Speaker 1: And you grew up in that house (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no, no.  My mo--
Speaker 1: Was it your mother?
Speaker 2: I don't think she even grew up in it, I think it was a step up for her from where she originally grew up.
Speaker 1: That house was a step up from where she grew up?
Speaker 2: I think so, yeah, although I don't know.  By the time--there's some of the pictures that I've seen of her which I collected, it seemed like a pretty rural place.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And did she have siblings?
Speaker 2: Nine, eight siblings.  There were nine in all.
Speaker 1: And where did she fall in the order?
Speaker 2: She was number one.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And she was the one who came to Chicago [Illinois], the first.
Speaker 1: And did the family follow behind her?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one by one--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The classic kind of great migration thing.
Speaker 1: What about her parents?
Speaker 2: I don't know much about her parents [Jessie Griffith and Quiller Griffith], I met her grandmother, who I barely know, you know, there's grandmother, there was ma and she was big ma, so there you go, that's, I don't know much about big ma and I think it gets very difficult to locate.  I remember meeting her--one thing I remember was that she had a--one of those old style pump player pianos--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --which was really--I, so I was pretty amazed, I never saw anyone play the piano in my family but for some reason she had it.
Speaker 1: And, what did your mother's parents do?  What was their work?
Speaker 2: Probably farming.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Probably farming.
Speaker 1: But she didn't talk about it?
Speaker 2: Not much, no.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I mean I think she was pretty happy to get out of there, I don't think she wanted to be a rural farmer type.
Speaker 1: Did, did, she tell you any stories of growing up there at all?
Speaker 2: It's been a long time since I've heard those, remember those stories.  Not really, no.  Not really, not that I can think of, maybe she told Cheryl [Cheryl Lewis] some of those stories but, no, I don't remember any, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Did--can you trace your mother's family back to slavery?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 526343
Speaker 1: What was your mother's [Cornelia Griffith Lewis] work when she was--?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, she came to Chicago [Illinois].  How do you get work if you don't have a high school diploma, you never really went to school, but this was still the era where you could get a job doing that, so she got all kinds of jobs, sort of the types of jobs that computers do today like filling out forms and punching things in and all of that and some domestic work as well--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --which she wasn't too happy about, but it was very hard to find work and it got increasingly more difficult as you got older and realized that the nature of work was changing.  So, yeah she had a--god what was it?  Stencil roller, I mean what could that be?  I have no idea what that is, you know?
Speaker 1: But that was one of her jobs?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was one of the jobs, yeah.  And she worked at places like Spiegel [Spiegel Inc.], which I don't think exist anymore and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The catalog company--
Speaker 2: --and, yeah, I think that was the one I think she had the job for the longest time.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And they were full time jobs, I mean.
Speaker 1: Sure, with benefits?
Speaker 2: I hope so (laughter).
Speaker 1: What about--
Speaker 2: I mean I didn't, I don't--benefits, you mean like health insurance?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: God, I don't think she had that, no.  I mean, that we had it through, I think my dad [George Lewis]--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --but I don't think there was--I don't think that was that kind of job.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  You mentioned that the ancient house that you remember, the one with the outhouse and if you had to take a bath, they'd bring the tub into the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah--
Speaker 1: --the room--
Speaker 2: --they'd actually bring it to the room--
Speaker 1: --you said--
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: --that was a step up, from what you think your mother grew up in?  Right, is that what you said?
Speaker 2: That's what I, that's my belief.
Speaker 1: So, how did they get to that ancient house?  What?--
Speaker 2: Oh I don't know.
Speaker 1: That was, that was just part of the family ultimately?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't if they were renting it or whether they owned it, I don't know, but it was, it was where a fair percent of the family was living and, you know, probably more than one family, you know, one branch of the family.
Speaker 1: And that's where you would go to visit?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's where your grandmother [Jessie Griffith] was?
Speaker 2: No, but by the time I was of that age, most of them were in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: So there was a whole different set of people down south as I said.
Story_ID: 526344
Speaker 1: Please tell me about your father, his name, where's he from, when he was born?
Speaker 2: Apparently my dad was born as Gilbert Lewis, but he decided to change his name to George [George Lewis], he, he didn't like Gilbert, he said he didn't like the name Gilbert (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was born in 1924, and he passed away in 2008.  Yeah--
Speaker 1: Where was he from?
Speaker 2: He's from Tarboro, North Carolina, which I've also only been to once.  I went--I remember he even laughs about that, it was--now there are certain reason for that, which we'll go into as we continue.  But, it was a tough place to be from I think 'cause, you know, there's Tarboro, according to him and I think this is born out by the records, there's Tarboro, and there's the black part of Tarboro which was called Princeville [North Carolina], so I--so strictly speaking, he would be from Princeville.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And was this rural as well?
Speaker 2: Not so rural, no.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Then what was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, I mean, it's local like a village.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Like a village, yeah.
Speaker 1: And does your father have siblings?
Speaker 2: Let's see, he had a sister, he has two sisters, Jeanne [ph.] and Elaine [ph.].
Speaker 1: And what about his parents?  Do you--did you know his parents?
Speaker 2: Let's see, his dad I didn't know because he didn't know him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He said he met him in a bar once, that was what he said.  And his name is Russell Little [ph.], that's what we know.  And said he'd met him just one time and his mother Alberta [Alberta Ellis] passed away, I'm not sure of the year really but it was a while back.  But he didn't, in a way he was a bit estranged from that part of the fam- that family, you know?  So after he joined the [U.S.] Navy, I think he took that as the wherewithal, the means for getting away from those influences a little bit.
Speaker 1: And so what were the influences that he's getting away from?
Speaker 2: Well he didn't like them.  I'm not sure what they were (laughter).  I mean it was very difficult.  You know, I think he just wanted to have a normal life, and I think that he was maybe, I think he kind of felt that maybe some people in his family, not his sisters but some of the other people, weren't as eager to have a normal life as he was.  And so he felt the need to find stability, so for quite a few years he sort of took up with my mother's [Cornelia Griffith Lewis] family who would--and then later he slowly got back with his own sort of family, his mom who he didn't have the greatest relationship with.  I think, you know, it was a very unstable family, I think and he may have been either abandoned or left to himself by his mom and so--
Speaker 1: When he was young?
Speaker 2: Yeah so, a certain point mom was sort of hard to find so.  And his Aunt Lula [ph.] in North Carolina helped, I think bring him up more than anybody else.
Speaker 1: And where was he in the birth order with his siblings?
Speaker 2: He is the first one--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: First born.
Speaker 1: And how did he get to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Let's see, well how did he get to Chicago?  God, that's a good question, how'd he get there?  He joined the Navy and then he got out of the Navy and I don't quite know when he went, it would have been around 1948, I don't know if he took a train or bus or, I don't think he had a car, I'm sure he didn't drive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, chances are it was a bus or train or something like that.
Speaker 1: And in--
Speaker 2: And he lived there with, he started living, he found some friends there that he--yeah, who we grew up with as well, really these friends that, this group of people he got to know in Chicago became the family friends.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Before we leave his early days, how far back can you trace his family?
Speaker 2: I don't think I can go much further, well certainly there's a Russell Little side, I think that's sort of lost to us really.  If I say that Lula was his aunt, I don't think I knew either of his grandparents.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So it's not that far really (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 526345
Speaker 1: Your parents [Cornelia Griffith Lewis and George Lewis] met in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yep, sure did, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you know the story of their meeting?
Speaker 2: No.  But I have lots of pictures of them hanging out (laughter), no but I don't know the meeting story.
Speaker 1: And, and when did they get married?
Speaker 2: Well that's a bone of contention, isn't it?  Because, you know, I was kind of an earlier reader and so there was a copy of the Bible in house.  So I was reading 'cause it was the only book in the house, so I was reading it and so, I was maybe four or something like that, I was reading the book and then I saw where they had the date of the marriage, and the date of the marriage was 1952, but I was born in 1952.  So, and I didn't know what that meant, and so I went and asked them, I said, well, you know, they said, "Oh there's something wrong there."  (Laughter) So, I don't remember the, but it was pretty late in the day but, pretty late in the year, I imagine, maybe just before I was born or, who knows, maybe after.  But 1952, I think was the year.  And, you know, they wanted it to be 1951, which would have made it look good, but I don't think it was.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What was your parents', your father's work?
Speaker 2: He, most of his life and I knew him, until he retired he got a job in the post office, and a lot of what I know about that really in a way, not a lot of what I know, but somewhat I know about it of course is from the various ups and downs he had.  He worked in the post office for thirty-seven years and when he retired they gave him a party, nobody got any mail for a half an hour in the main post office in Chicago while they on the sixth floor, whatever it was, while they sang songs and my sister was there, and they, well they, it was like one of these where basically what they said was, "Welp, you know, you did everything you could, you raised two kids, you know, life wasn't perfect, your wife passed away but basically you got through the--you took the best, you took the worst the system could give you, and you came out alive and relatively sane, and now they have to pay you and you don't have to work."  That was what every speaker said, a variation on the same thing--
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: On the same theme.  Because it was like you--it, it wasn't like a scam but it was just, well, you beat the system by surviving.  And, you know, people sang, there was a gospel singer sang a song, all of these people, it was amazing, they gave a big portrait somebody had made of him, it was pretty incredible.  But he actually wrote about his own life for an adult education class and I took what--that narrative and created a piece out of it, so a lot of, so what I'm hearing his voice saying these things about being in the [U.S.] Navy and coming to Chicago and raising a family and all that.  But I'm also hearing the voice, the actor who I had playing him (laughter).  So it was really very odd, it's all mixed up there.  But yes, so that was his job for most of his life (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the post office, then and now is a good secure job.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a good job, yeah, yeah.  I mean the benefits, you know?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: It had real benefits, there was an actual union, unlike what today, they have today.  And, yeah, it was--
Speaker 1: Did your father remarry?
Speaker 2: No.  He never did.
Story_ID: 526346
Speaker 1: I want you to think back to when you were a child, and what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Let me think about that, early childhood memory?  Good question, maybe, I don't know, I guess I don't think it--'cause I'm sixty-four now, it's hard to remember what happened then, probably a lot of it is all made up, you know, maybe watching 'Howdy Doody' or something, but that was long after I, that was around probably around five or six, so I'm sure I had memories before then.  Maybe watching something on television or, it was very--all very vague I think--
Story_ID: 526347
Speaker 1: When you think about where you grew up, what are the sights, sounds and smells that you remember from being a child growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, well see Chicago's [Illinois] very cold right?  See it's always cold and--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: We lived in a kind of a, basically a two-room place, they had a, it had a stove in the middle of the kitchen, one of those things you had to light up with coal, and they had a bed that would let down, you know, from the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Like a Murphy bed?
Speaker 2: Murphy bed, yeah--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --that's what they call it, I guess, yeah, they had that out, and it was just me, my sister [Cheryl Lewis] hadn't been born yet, and then when she was born we moved somewhere else.  And then there were still, it was still kind of like not hyper-segregated, I mean there were few Puerto Rican families living there--
Speaker 1: What neighborhood did you grow up in?
Speaker 2: Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois].  63rd Place, yeah, so around there.  Ye--yeah, I mean there were some vacant lots, you know, those wonderful porches they have in Chicago, we lived on the third floor--
Speaker 1: Walk-up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, walk-up to be sure, yes.  And I think it was a dead end street, it was--and the Illinois Central [Illinois Central Railroad] tracks went by, it was a little bit, there was always a lot of broken glass on the streets (laughter).  And as things progressed, those wonderful, like the place across the street had this courtyard and there were these lawns and then somehow the lawn turned to dirt and--ours didn't have a courtyard.  So, it was--and you could--but then you play in the street.  And, you know later as you got older, mom [Cornelia Griffith Lewis] would send me out for milk, you know, whatever, but sometimes the kids would beat you up and take your milk money or whatever, or they tried to anyway.  Sometimes that didn't work, and, but sometimes it did, you know?
Speaker 1: Did you feel unsafe?
Speaker 2: Well not so much unsafe, but you had to watch out, you know?
Speaker 1: But you were born there, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, I grew up there, I was growing up there so, you know, you, you had to watch out, and you saw certain configurations of slightly older boys you knew, so you had to figure out how to make yourself invisible to those people (laughter), so you could, you know, go get the milk or whatever it was your mom--but the thing was I would never send Tadashi [Tadashi Lewis], out now to get some milk are you kidding?  You know, go out, go around the corner and get me some milk, unh-uh, no, no.
Speaker 1: Even though you're in a completely different area?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, maybe I wouldn't do it now even in that area or what's left of that area, it's all sort of torn down and everything anyway, but if--at that time you could, I walked to school, you know, by myself, I mean, never did that, you know?  He's never done that.
Story_ID: 526348
Speaker 1: Where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: I first went to Walter Scott School [Chicago, Illinois], named after the famous author, which was in the throes of, you know, hyper segregation and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, later they started building these, you know, it was the time--I mean I'm not, I'm just telling you the remembrance of it, but if you read about it later the whole thing surrounding Benjamin Willis [Benjamin C. Willis], the superintendent and how awful he was, and they're building these trailers that you had to go to class in, and then they said that the white schools nearby, you know, weren't--had empty classrooms and you had to go in these trailers.  And so, and I remember library class which was really very funny, library class was like, I guess it was, they would bring in these books on a cart and the books were like, I don't know, I don't know where they got these books, maybe they were cast off books from, you know, other classrooms or donated or whatever.  And a lot of them, you know, had, you know, big type and weren't about very much of anything, and you could only read one and then what seemed like an eternity later they would give you another one if you asked for it, that was around the second or third grade but by the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you were an avid reader by then right?
Speaker 2: Well I was an avid reader before I got to school--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --so the thing was that, you know, by the time I got there, I was getting in trouble 'cause the first thing they did was take all the books away, I brought 'em my books, they took--
Speaker 1: They took your books away?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they took the books so that they--I guess I don't know what they do with 'em, I guess that maybe they gave them back to my parents, or something like that.  But I wasn't allowed to have the books or read the books, and, you know, I was just a misfit in there, you know, nap time, okay, why can't I just read a book?  Why do I have to take a nap?  So anyway, there was all this stuff, it wasn't a good fit, and eventually I think I got in some kind of trouble, and yeah, they brought me in, my dad [George Lewis] tells this story and mom [Cornelia Griffith Lewis], they both tell this story, I got into this school psychologist, they said, and I was always acting up in class and doing this and doing that, and then later you'd read about it, I mean it's all very lucky because later you'd rea- you know, there are all those, remember the four-part books, Jawanza Kunjufu, you know, these books?  And how, what they were doing to these black kids, especially boys and so it was like, well that was me, and so like I was wondering like, he said, my dad said, well, the guy said, "He's not a bad kid, he's just bored, give him something to do, put him in a different class, bump him up, you know?"  So, they put me in first grade, and that wasn't much better, but at least you could read a book.
Speaker 1: So let's explore a little bit more.  What was Jawanza Kunjufu saying?  And--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, well this is later--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: When he wrote those books it was conse- you know, with this sort of lurid title, 'Conspiracy to Destroy Black Boys' ['Countering the Conspiracy to Destroy Black Boys,' Jawanza Kunjufu]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but, you know, I mean, even paranoids have real enemies, and I think that there was a sense in which they, you know, there wasn't anything to compare it with, I mean there were only black kids at the school by this time, you know, 1957, or something.
Speaker 1: So it, when it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So then I--
Speaker 1: --integrated it was with whites or with Puerto Ricans?
Speaker 2: Oh I don't know what it was--I don't know if it--
Speaker 1: Or it may not have been?
Speaker 2: --it was never integrated while I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I don't know what happened before (laughter)--
Speaker 1: But it was a black school?
Speaker 2: Totally.  Totally, and so you just had that to go on in terms of what they were trying to do or what they thought they their educational mission was.  I don't think it had very much to do with, maybe I didn't learn that much, and the issue was, if they were trying to teach you how to read, you know, it wasn't--I already knew how to read so it--
Speaker 1: Who taught you to read?
Speaker 2: Oh I don't know, just--they say it just happened, so it's, I have to take them at their word, they say it just happened.  One day, they said, "Oh he's reading something off the TV," so then it was like, "well let's give him this book," and they gave me the book and, said, "oh he's reading this book, oh?  How interesting."  So we didn't have any books, so my dad got some books, he said, well let's get some like, he got Reader's Digest condensed books, which were pretty okay, he got that, and so we had those and we had the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you were little?
Speaker 2: And we had the dictionary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was it, those were the books, the Bible, the dictionary and the Reader's Digest condensed books, and of course, there was, you know, the newspaper and all that.  So, there was a lot of reading you could do, but I don't know, it was, yeah, the thing was if you were like, a kid who does these things, you attract a lot of attention and some of it is not that welcome and not from, not necessarily from the kids, also from the teachers, some of the teachers are not interested in that, or whatever.
Story_ID: 526349
Speaker 1: Do any teachers stand out as either people who you really liked or people you didn't?
Speaker 2: I only remember one teacher, Miss Vining [ph.], and we all remember her because that was my means for getting out of that system.  I mean, I don't know what happened to her, an African American teacher, you know?  She went to, she apparently went to my parents' [Cornelia Griffith Lewis and George Lewis] house and said, "Well, you're gonna have to get him outta here and here's how you're gonna do it."  And soon as they heard her solution they said, "Oh we can't afford that," she said, "Well maybe they'll give you a scholarship, but you have to do something because this is not gonna work out, you know?"  I mean, it wasn't like being a behavior problem it was just that there was nothing really to do in this place.  And so they weren't trying to--they couldn't accommodate I guess what, they couldn't accommodate my kind of thing, they couldn't accommodate it.
Speaker 1: So what was her proposal?
Speaker 2: Send him to the University of Chicago Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois], which is not that far away, physically, but several million miles away in terms of what they had grown up with or what they were used to.
Speaker 1: 'Cause neither of your parents was educated?
Speaker 2: Not very much, no,  I mean my dad, you know, he got something through the, you know, the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] and so on, he went to radio school, he did that kind of thing, he knew how to fix TVs and technology stuff, you know?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So that was very important and it was something and, you know, but schools, it was very difficult they, it was a fraught relationship with that kind of education, and so the idea of sending me to some place where, you know, it's like going to an alien planet or something really, you know?  And they were, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But they did give you a scholarship?
Speaker 2: They did, yeah, they did.
Speaker 1: This was it, this was in 1960 what?
Speaker 2: Probably would have been '59 [1959], '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: Okay, and this was for?  Was this still elementary school?
Speaker 2: Yeah it was at, it was third grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They made me repeat the third grade, so I repeated the third grade so I'd be back with my original age group 'cause I had gone past the original age group.  So, I guess they had decided to step back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then--
Speaker 2: --a year--
Speaker 1: --was it rigorous enough for that to make sense?
Speaker 2: I think it was then as now, one of the best schools in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I was pretty lucky, you know?  I wouldn't mind sitting in there now, but I'd have to live in Chicago [Illinois] to do it, I don't think I can do that right now (laughter)--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --maybe I'd like it--
Speaker 1: --does it--
Speaker 2: --but my wife [Miya Masaoka] would say no (laughter).
Speaker 1: So Chicago Lab School is a private school?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And, you--so did they give you a full scholarship?
Speaker 2: You know I don't--I think we had to pay something 'cause we did get a bill, because I would get access to this bill and they'd show me every now and then, particularly if I was being a bad boy 'cause they, you know?  "You're acting pretty bad right now, we don't have to send you to this school, we can send you to a different school."  "No dad don't do that!"  (Laughter) So it was like a means of keeping me in line, yeah, they'd say, "We'll take you out of school," no, no please don't do that.
Speaker 1: And, who were your influences at that school?
Speaker 2: Good questions, well the first one was Louise Pliss, who is a--in addition to being a teacher she had published a number of children's books, she taught me for two years, third and fourth grade.  And her and her colleague, Mrs. Abrams [Fay Abrams], were extraordinary teachers, and again, that was the era when they'd go, she'd, they would call my parents in and, you know, my dad was used to the situation where--this was a unique opportunity and his idea of doing things was, he liked the idea of teachers as kind of authority figures, you know?  You trusted them, you put your trust in them, and it worked with these people because they weren't being authoritarian, they were just trustworthy.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so I remember when they were thinking, having doubts about, (laughter) this is a joke but, I hope people don't take it the wrong way.  But when they were having doubts about their fitting in in the school, because they weren't, I mean there were like African Americans there but, you know, they were kind of middle class and rich African Americans, they weren't people that came from their background, you know?  And, so there was that kind of dislocation and then there's the university people, it was socially a very difficult thing, they weren't really used to any of that and then a lot of the stuff.  So, you could--under those influences you could see your kid kind of changing in ways where you don't really know what's happening and maybe you sort of become estranged or you, from what, you know, the community values are.  So at one point it's, they expressed that to Ms. Pliss, she said, "Well that's what you people always do, you can't do this," and so on and so forth (laughter) and so, my dad he, he had a big laugh and said, "Oh she actually said, you people."
Speaker 1: (Laughter.)
Speaker 2: "But you can't do it, this kid needs this school and so do you."  So she was pretty zealous about it so, I guess they forgave the you people part 'cause it wasn't a big deal.  The thing was, she was just trying to, she was at her wit's end, she didn't know what to do, so--
Speaker 1: She wanted you to stay.
Speaker 2: She wanted me to stay and so she did, she got me to stay.  And, yeah she was an extraordinary individual really.
Story_ID: 526350
Speaker 1: When you were quite young you became interested in music, how did that happen?
Speaker 2: Music, let me tell you about some more of these teachers first.
Speaker 1: Okay sure.
Speaker 2: 'Cause there is--before we get to the music part--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --which is very important but, you know, I had a number of pretty good teachers there, another great teacher was Frau Margaret Seckel, S-E-C-K-E-L, who just passed away a few years ago, I think she lived to be a hundred years old--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: She came from Germany to the U.S. in the '40s [1940s], probably around the time of, you know, escaping the Nazis and all that, and she taught German at the school.  So, it was amazing right?  You're sitting in this big classroom and they say, "Well we have two choices, you can take French or German, who wants to take French?"  And immediately like three quarters of the class shoots their hand up.  Well I'd never heard of either one, so--but I thought well whatever they're doing, I think I'll do the other thing, what's the other choice?  They said German, I'll do German that turned out to be a lucky choice I think German, although I ended up learning French anyway.  But, the German thing was pretty good and she was a great teacher and I must have studied with her from third grade straight on through the end of grammar school, so third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, the five years of German studying and so that really helped out a lot.  So, because, you know, you got a sense for what the German language was, learning it very early on, you know?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So you sort of feel it in a certain way.  So that even now, you know, I'm pretty good at it, but I, it's because I feel it more than anything else, it's the next best thing having grown up with the language, so she was very influential.  So the German part really comes together with the music part as you can imagine, you know?  But in any event, yeah I think those are the, I think Ms. Pliss [Louise Pliss], and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then what about Frank Tirro?
Speaker 2: Oh we've got to talk to him, see but he's a critically important figure, that's right.  See that's the thing about him because he became kind of a family friend, you know?  My dad [George Lewis] revered him 'cause, you know?  And he's still around, he's a great musicologist, you know?  He was a saxophonist, he wrote this, a famous book on jazz, which everyone reads and, you know, studies and--but at the time he was a graduate student working at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], I forgot that he might have been doing either medieval music or music theory or something like that.  And he was teaching many, many instruments, I didn't know for years that he wasn't a trombone player (laughter), you know, but he taught.  But on the first day there was me and him and Ray Anderson, who is still, you know, an amazing trombone player, so living here in New York [New York] as well.  So, yeah, so Mr. Tirro is, yeah, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And was he at--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, this is at the Lab School--
Speaker 1: This is all at the Lab School, right?
Speaker 2: He was there too, he was there too.  Yeah, he was there too.
Story_ID: 526351
Speaker 1: Did he [Frank Tirro] introduce you to the trombone?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Why that instrument?
Speaker 2: I don't know, it looked like a good thing to do at the time.  I mean I didn't have any particular desire to some--there was no burning desire to play music or to become involved in that.  My parents [Cornelia Griffith Lewis and George Lewis] convinced me that it would be a good idea for like making friends and all this kind of thing that you hear them talking about it and I'd say well, okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) and the instrument?
Speaker 2: Yeah, play an instrument, it will be good for making friends and I said, "Okay that's great, well what instrument should I do?"  He said, "You can do any instrument you want except the trumpet."  I said, "What's wrong with the trumpet?  That's cool."  Then they showed me these pictures of Louis Armstrong, with you know, he had, you know, he played with the old stylus, his lips were all mashed in, he said, "You don't want your lips to look like that."  (Laughter) So no trumpet, that was out.  So there was a bunch of things out there, so they took--they went to the, we went to the music store and I looked around and I said, "Well that one looks pretty good, let's take that one."
Speaker 1: So your school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] taught everything, so you could just pick any instrument?
Speaker 2: Well they had a deal with our local music store so you could--they had a music fair so they were trying to establish a band and an orchestra, well not really an orchestra, I guess a concert band.  So, they, we went to the fair and looked around at the different instruments, you know?  And, but Mr. Tirro I'm sure taught many of them because he, if he taught--because of the saxophone, he could teach the clarinet and then the trombone, he could do a trumpet, he could probably do, you know, I only interacted with him as a trombonist but, you know, there were a lots of--I bet he was involved in all kinds of things.
Speaker 1: So from the time when you and your parents went and picked out this instrument, that was just it?  That was what you were gonna play?
Speaker 2: Well, it just seemed like there was only, I didn't really like doing it, and after a while I said, "Well this is," you know, I was being browbeaten about practicing and all that and then my dad said, "Well I can tell when you're not practicing because your lips, you know, your lips don't look like they're swollen enough so you're not practicing."  I said, "Well, I don't like this, I don't like doing this," he said, "Well look I can understand why you don't like it."  I said, "Well why?"  "'Cause well you don't sound very good," true, well, okay that's probably true, so I'll tell you what, once you start to sound good, it's okay you can quit after that, how would that be?
Speaker 1: And how old are you when, when this conversation was--
Speaker 2: Well I started at age nine so I could have been ten or something.
Speaker 1: You were still very young?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I said, "Oh sure, that sounds like a good idea, I'll just keep doing it."  So, and then, you know, not so much complaining it was, I mean the goal was to, you know, I guess to get good at it so I could quit, you know?  So, it turned out to be a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Reverse psychology.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah I still try it with my son [Tadashi Lewis] it doesn't work quite the same way--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: They're a lot smarter than they used to be, these kids (laughter).
Story_ID: 526352
Speaker 1: Is it primarily at school where you're playing and learning?  Or it, are you involved anywhere else (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pretty much, yeah, pretty much, yeah the school is the place where the music took place.
Speaker 1: And where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] thing goes straight through--
Speaker 1: Through--
Speaker 2: --high school--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay so you just were there until?
Speaker 2: I had this, I had Mr. Tirro [Frank Tirro] from third grade through high school basically.  And I had one other teacher, Dean Hey who is a, really was a trombone player and he came from the University of Illinois [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], I found out a very complex history with Dean, I didn't really know that about him that--yeah I found out later how he was trained in like, you know, real trombone playing, the technique of it, he studied with Emory Remington, who's the famous sort of pedagogue of the trombone.  And then he also studied with John Silber who is a great avant-garde trombone player who ended up being my colleague at UC San Diego [University of California, San Diego, San Diego, California], so it was very funny, I talked to John as a newly fledged assistant professor, and he said, "Did you really study with Dean Hey?"  I said, "Well yeah I did," well he said, "Well I was his teacher."  I said, "Well John, that, that makes you my musical grandfather (laughter)," and not only that, but the heritage going through both of them to like Emory Remington was pretty amazing.  So I felt being a trombone player, I used to feel like being an orphan but then, 'cause I didn't take lessons that long really except for this high school thing.  But then I realized that there was a kind of a pedigree there that kind of made sense.
Speaker 1: With your, the teachers starting?
Speaker 2: With the teachers, I found out later where--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --where they had been, and what they were doing, what they had done and, you know.
Speaker 1: And so how advanced did you become while you were in school?  Did--were you playing in an orchestra, band?  What?
Speaker 2: They had the band, I don't know if they had an orchestra, and they had the--but whatever it was in the school, I played in it.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: If they had a jazz band, if they had a combo band, if they had a brass quintet, if they had a concert band 'cause there were only a couple of trombone players, there were three, there was Ray Anderson and me and one other guy.  So and then, oh and there was [HistoryMaker] Roscoe Giles, so that makes four.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: So he's one of your people in this book?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), he was in there.
Speaker 1: The HistoryMaker--
Speaker 2: He was in there, he probably doesn't remember me but anyway that's how it goes (laughter).
Speaker 1: How often did you have performances at your school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember, but--
Speaker 1: Was--
Speaker 2: --it was often--
Speaker 1: --that--
Speaker 2: --it was often, yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It was often, you worked hard for those purposes, and you had to come to school early, you know, you had to come for--it was 7:30 or 8:00, you had to get there, so.
Speaker 1: And getting to the Lab School meant what?  Because it--you said it wasn't that far.
Speaker 2: Well, you had to walk about a mile.
Speaker 1: So it was a walk?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a walk, yeah.
Speaker 1: And walking with your trombone was that ever, did that ever put you in peril?
Speaker 2: No, nobody ever, people thought that was a good idea, the trombone thing.  I mean people in the community liked that.  They said it showed initiative, nobody ever bothered you.
Story_ID: 526353
Speaker 1: Your parents [Cornelia Griffith Lewis and George Lewis] thought it would be good for you to learn an instrument, you might make friends.  And you just--but you also described that when, as a trombonist that you felt you were an orphan.  When did you, or did you ever feel like you clicked in terms of being with a group of other kids?
Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, I think so, yeah, I think I had some pretty good friends back then, and not just the music people but other people too, I mean obviously orphan, I don't mean like I was just alone standing around by myself, I was thinking about the specific sort of pedigree and lineage of trombone playing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, got it.
Speaker 2: I wasn't talking about sort of not having friends or being a loner, I don't think I was that--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Although I did do some anonymous things like anonymous publications of writings and stuff like that and--
Speaker 1: While you were in high school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: In high school, yeah I did do that--
Speaker 1: What kinds of writings?
Speaker 2: Well just commentary, you know, like personal commentary on things, I mean today it would be somebody's blog or something.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But back then it would be like a typewritten sheet of paper that you would post anonymously on a bulletin board because they gave you, they had a scene where they wanted people to do that, so they had put up a bulletin board, so I started a paper, and so I put this in, it would come out every now and then, it would just be what, you know, anonymous and I don't think some people, maybe the people didn't know who did it.
Speaker 1: Well what kind of topics were you writing about?
Speaker 2: God, can I remember that?  Probably not, just probably political stuff or social stuff or whatever, the things that are affecting the school population or critiques of certain kinds of ways that people are living, I don't know why, it was it was just getting my opinion on things that's all.
Speaker 1: So then you went to this school through the '60s [1960s], right?
Speaker 2: I graduated in '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So I went from '59 [1959] to '69 [1969], basically, '60 [1960] to '69 [1969], yeah.
Speaker 1: So a lot of things were happening in our culture during that period.
Speaker 2: Well, that's true.
Speaker 1: How did your--do you remember your school reacting to, you know, like King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] passing?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Yeah, well by that time we was, I mean that was, we were in high school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I mean we star- you know, we started a magazine, like a real one--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --one that was really for attribution and was called Onyx [ph.], so a bunch of people started that and a there was a guy, a Prentiss Taylor, I don't know what happened to him, but he was kind of the leading light of it, and the other one was Brenda Williams whose dad was one of the Tuskegee Airmen, so she was in on it too, and there were some other people, Leslie Jones, she was in on it, you know, African American students.  So that might have been started in response to what was going on with the King assassination and, yeah so that was, yeah that was--a lot of things were, so probably chances are in my own kind of private writing I was probably confronting race in some way although I don't remember any of it.  Although I imagine that some of those things are still sitting in my parents' attic, so I could probably find them, but I don't remember that much, but probably chances are knowing what I was into then, I'd probably write about these things.
Speaker 1: And your school was integrated correct?
Speaker 2: Well, if you call integration, that's a very funny topic (laughter), I mean I went to a reunion a few years ago and there was a--it was part of a group of reunions, and I noticed that every class after ours got more and more mixed, our class was me--in our reunion it was me and let's see, Debbie Turner, and a Chinese woman, Paula Fan, whose, I think that she's in Arizona--
Speaker 1: Debbie Turner, the newscaster?
Speaker 2: I don't know if she's in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay--
Speaker 2: I don't think she's a--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think she's a newscaster. no--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but is there a--I don't know if she's a newscaster, but anyway, no it wasn't very integrated I would say--
Speaker 1: It was mostly--
Speaker 2: --and then it--
Speaker 1: --white?
Speaker 2: Sure, and then it ended up being more and more diverse and, and so by the time we started looking at classes in the '70s [1970s] and the '80s [1980s], it was like, wow, this is totally different kind of class than the one I experienced so you could say it was integrated in the sense that they thought integration was, you know, a safe kind of integration, keep the numbers down and you're okay.  And then what kept the numbers down also was just the money.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It cost so much money to do it.
Story_ID: 526354
Speaker 1: Having come from a primarily black neighborhood [Woodlawn, Chicago, Illinois] into the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois], was that a bit of a culture shock at first?
Speaker 2: When you're a kid no, no it wasn't but the thing is that you got used to going back and forth every day.  It wasn't like you just walked in there and you stayed there, it wasn't a boarding school so you--every day you would go back and forth, and as you got older it became clearer what the differences were because in high school people are much more aware of these kinds of things.  So if you weren't going to the standard high school that everyone else was going to, well, well it wasn't that bad, I managed to get through it, it wasn't such a big deal.  But, you know, when the gangs started and all that, you know, in a way the Lab School provided some insulation from that, but not total insulation, you know, the crazy people still came around, and caused trouble and, or you could go with them and get into trouble and, you know, kids I knew, you know, went too far and got shot or whatever happened to them and lost, you know, were paralyzed or--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But, or they would bring the guns into, you know, this kind of thing, so but, probably not like it is today.  But it was--and there were the two famous gangs right?  The Rangers [Blackstone Rangers; Almighty Black P. Stone Nation] and the Disciples [Gangster Disciples], so they'll both come around right, and they'd say, "You're gonna be a B, say you'll be a B," and then the--and then the Disciples come in, "Well you're gonna be a D," and so you were in---it was like rotating it was really pretty weird.  It looks like the whole idea was like to have the intimidation of being connected with that so--but if you were just a regular kid and you didn't wanna be involved in any of that, you still had to kind of know how to finesse it, you know, it wasn't something you, I mean you'd have to automatically be a member of it, like maybe it's much more rigid now--
Speaker 1: Um-hm--
Speaker 2: --if you were living there, but--
Speaker 1: How did you avoid it?
Speaker 2: Well, like I said, I mean, if you don't go to the same school, a lot of it goes, a lot of the activity seemed to take place on the school grounds, so if you weren't in that school, you weren't dealing with it.
Speaker 1: So the Lab School rescued you in more than one way?
Speaker 2: Oh in a bunch of ways I would say, yeah, yeah but that was one you, you didn't have to deal with that, not totally, I mean if--when you--when you got home you had to deal with it and then you went away and you didn't deal with it anymore.  So the lot of the focus of it was, you were like a visitor, you know, so and then you had to know when to go home, just quietly slip out.
Story_ID: 526355
Speaker 1: When it came time for you to go to college, how did you make your decision?
Speaker 2: I'll think about that for a minute--
Speaker 1: 'Cause had anyone else gone to college in your family?
Speaker 2: Not really, no, no.  So that was a new experience and my dad [George Lewis] was making the improbable claim that all colleges taught exactly the same thing and the curriculum was standardized and you could go anywhere you wanted, so why not go to the cheapest place and save money?  So, and that was running up against the college counselors who were saying that, you know, I was getting like, I don't know?  What seemed like hundreds of letters from different schools around the country, because--
Speaker 1: You were a good student?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I was a pretty good student, yeah, I was a pretty good student and they have the National Achievement Scholarships, so I got one of those.
Speaker 1: Which is an academic scholarship?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then there were different things connected with that so, and then the SAT scores and all that, so--
Speaker 1: So you were a good tester?
Speaker 2: I was good at testing yeah, so--
Speaker 1: And then why is that?  You know, starting from being (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Being the--
Speaker 1: --an early reader?  Did you?  It's, you know, the stereotype--
Speaker 2: Um-hm--
Speaker 1: --is that black people test poorly.
Speaker 2: Well you know, Claude Steele was my provost, you know, and he came to school, Claude read all about stereotypes then and it was very funny, in the, the faculty meeting, they said, "Oh, we're getting a new provost, Claude Steele," I said, "Oh yeah, the stereotype threat guy," everybody in the meeting says, "Who?  What?  What's that?"  (Laughter) Then he came to the School at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] and explained it to everybody was it was about.  But, yeah, I can see where a lot of that goes along with, you know, having a bifurcated neural processing, you know?  Having to worry about holding up the standards and saying, I'm gonna show out, I'm gonna show that we can do it and then all that and then that sort of taking time away from actually doing what you have to do.  You know, maybe I didn't experience that, maybe I didn't, wasn't worried about trying to show that black people could do it because I think from my standpoint, people in my family were doing it, maybe they weren't going to college, but it wasn't like they weren't doing anything, they were raising families and they knew a lot of stuff and, you know, it wasn't like people were feeling inferior or something there, I don't think there was any of that.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So there was not that kind of stereotype threat going on, and I don't think also that the absence, I mean there were very few African Americans in the school, but I think the ones that were there were operating on the same levels as everybody else--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so it wasn't like you--people weren't, people didn't try to lay that on us, you know?  I mean it wasn't something you could sustain, you know?  So I don't really know, other than it's kind of, that's kind of a probably not a great explanation but, for why that could have happened (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 526356
Speaker 1: When did you go to college? What was your--
Speaker 2: It was '69 [1969], to--started in '69 [1969], the place where I ended up going was with Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], they have a very strong sort of alumni recruitment thing going and so the guy came to our house, you know?  So, you know, he made a house call, he came to the, you know, the outskirts of the ghetto (laughter), met my parents [Cornelia Griffith Lewis and George Lewis] and then took me off to the Yale Club and so on and so forth and that was it, so that was a pretty good place to go in the end.  I look at these things as being, it's incredibly lucky in retrospect obviously, you know, you just not, there was no kind of mandate for any of this to happen, but it was a good thing that kind of happened, yeah.  One other thing you were talking about the--it was on--the Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination--
Speaker 1: Yes--
Speaker 2: --there was also the Democratic National Convention [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois], which, you know, my parents forbid me to go to, said, "You will not go down there."  And probably the reason we couldn't go down there 'cause like we were living on 56th Street and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what year is this now?
Speaker 2: Well it's the same year--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968].  So we were living on 56th and Cottage [Cottage Grove Avenue] right?  The same year, and 53rd [Street] and Cottage they had the armory [124th Field Artillery Armory, Chicago, Illinois], you know, it was like a real armory with tanks and all that.  So we saw the tanks come out of the armory and go down the street--
Speaker 1: And you'd never seen that before?
Speaker 2: Armored personal carriers and stuff and they said, they said well--you can't, I guess we don't need to go there, but people who did go there had a lot of problems they, you know, there's a lot of--they had been having these demonstrations all year in Chicago [Illinois] and people getting beaten up and, you know, it wasn't just one police riot, it was a year of police riots--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and it was just also, it--Martin Luther King, that wasn't his only, getting assassinated, hey look the--Martin Luther--that was the place where he got stoned back in Chicago, you know?  That cra- what was it called, Cragin [Belmont Cragin, Chicago, Illinois] all these con--Fagin or Cragin, all these communities which are now totally black, and then later I found out of course they had been basically had like a fifteen year race riot in one part of the city, it just, it was like guerilla warfare they said it would be--it would ebb and flow but it was always going on, you know?  So, and so you'd never, you know, in our neighborhood you never saw any white people, so if I wanted to see white people I'd have to go to the school (laughter) wouldn't see any, expect on TV maybe (laughter).  But yeah, I mean that was, yeah that's how much they used to say about that except the--
Speaker 1: Well that's--
Speaker 2: --people were aware of those--
Speaker 1: But so you're growing, you're maturing and coming of age in a Chicago that is, there's a lot of violence going on all over the country but, where you are, it's also going on?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 526357
Speaker 1: As you were making your choice about Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], did you have any sense of what it would be like going to New Haven [Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: Oh no, none I had no idea about it, no.
Speaker 1: Had you ever gone away?
Speaker 2: Not really no, no, not, not like that, no, with my pa- by myself, without my parents [Cornelia Griffith Lewis and George Lewis]?  No, no.
Speaker 1: Right, no.  So this is?
Speaker 2: Any of the trips to the South or whatever--
Speaker 1: Right--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that was about it, no.
Speaker 1: And so you go to Yale, what?  What is Yale?  What's happening on the campus when you arrive?
Speaker 2: Well you know, I was a pretty studious guy so I went into the English class, and I saw a guy there, had an African American teacher, English teacher, first thing, he said, "We're gonna be studying Chaucer [Geoffrey Chaucer]," we started with Chaucer, and then went to Milton [John Milton], it was Chaucer, Spenser [Edmund Spenser], Milton and, I think it was Eliot, yeah, Chaucer, Spencer--that was the whole year.  So, and I am, so I called my, called my parents, I said, "Dad [George Lewis] this great man, my English teacher looks like Malcolm X," he had the same Malcolm X glasses, you know, this was Houston Baker [Houston A. Baker, Jr.]--
Speaker 1: Ahhh--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Back in the day.  And, I thought I was a pretty good student, so I wrote my first paper for him, I get back this--it's got a sea of red ink, and he says, see me immediately (laughter) I said, oh no.  Basically he read me the riot act, he was the greatest, but he gave me right then a set of lessons for writing which I can still use today and I told him, I still use these things.  You know how he told me to write, he gave me these and, I didn't know what, I didn't know what it was, I can't even tell you what these rules are, but I follow them implicitly now, you know, but he made them explicit and said, "Now here's how you're gonna write, and there's no way you're getting away with this, and don't try to get away with anything like this in my class. " (Laughter) I said okay.
Speaker 1: Do you remember anything that you were doing?
Speaker 2: Well, whatever it is, I don't do it now, but I mean, I still, I think I got out of that class pretty well, I took a lot of good English classes, I had a lot of wonderful teachers.  But that first year, freshman English class which was like the standard class for that, you know?  I mean I was lucky to get him, you know, because maybe somebody else wouldn't have cared as much.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know?
Speaker 1: And what did you major in?
Speaker 2: Philosophy, yeah, but at first it was gonna be music, I thought well music, well no here's what really happened, I took the--I'm still playing, I took the trombone in with me and I was trying to play it and practice and all this kind of thing but it was, you know it was a lot of stuff going on at school, right?  Then, the thing breaks, like the slide falls off, it broke, I said, "Wow, I guess that's it, I don't have to play this anymore, I'm just done, you know?"  Never occurred to me that I could get another one or anything, you know?  So I said, well that's the end of that the trombone broke, so after about, it's right at the end of the school, first school year, so then, so round about the summer I started feeling a little, a little like well, I went to my mom [Cornelia Griffith Lewis] and I said, "Well you, you, you bought the last trombone, you think you can get another one?  Help me get another one?"  So, and then it was like well if I'm gonna get another one, I should probably be more serious about it, you know, just to have, first of all, having your mom do it in the first place and, you know, 'cause it was--she paid for it on time, $5 a month, it cost $150, so I mean like, and I--to go back to her again and say, well, you know?  Yeah, I could've been, it could've been embarrassing right?  Say, "Well you didn't play it, play it that much, the first one, right?"  But she didn't say that, she said, "Well, if you really wanna do it, you know, if you really, really wanna do it."
Story_ID: 526358
Speaker 1: You were saying about getting a second trombone?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For you, and that made you get serious?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well it was kind of a moral imperative I guess, you know, well if you're gonna do that.  But then there was also a practical reason for doing it because of having met Anthony Davis there, I met a lot of interesting people at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], but Anthony was--
Speaker 1: And who is--
Speaker 2: --probably the one--
Speaker 1: --Anthony Davis?
Speaker 2: Is he on your list by the way?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure, don't look now--
Speaker 2: I can't look?  Okay, well I, now I have to look, I--it's too exciting for me to not look.  Oh, I see Dwight Andrews [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Dwight Andrews] so, Anthony can't be far behind--no!
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Got to have Anthony man--Dwight is in two categories.  No, we were all together playing music.  But, Anthony, you know, had, you know, he was a pianist, and he was taking the music classes, and turned out his dad eventually was working, and I think he was working first in the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa], and then later in, or it's the other way around, maybe Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] I think, and then he came to Yale himself as the master of Calhoun College [Grace Hopper College] and I think the founding professor or maybe it was Blassingame [John Wesley Blassingame] who was the founding professor, but anyway he's director of Afro American (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) His father?
Speaker 2: --studies, yeah Charles Davis [Charles T. Davis]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --who was the teacher of Skip Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So anyway, but this is a whole different thing, so Anthony was playing, and I didn't really know about him, and then these musicians came to campus 'cause they had these concerts right there, we were going to a series of concerts, there was one, they were in Battell Chapel [New Haven, Connecticut] I think it was, that was the chapel, so they brought Sam Rivers in with Barry Altschul, and Dave Holland I think, and then they brought in Archie Shepp with Byard Lancaster and Alan Silva and Sunny Murray I think it was.  Then they advertised that they were gonna have a jam session, so I said, "Well, what do I know about jam sessions, but I should go anyway," so I'm gonna go, I'm just gonna show up and I just took my ancient trombone and brought it in there and I met Anthony Davis there and he was playing too.  So that's how we met, at the jam session.  Archie didn't show up, so it was just Sunny and Byron and Alan Silva, so it was very funny 'cause years later I was touring with Alan and I said, "Alan, now remember you guys that visited Yale and these dorks came and sat in?"  He said, "Yeah I do, you!"  (Laughter) So anyway, yeah so that was, that's how we met and it seemed like we, you know, Anthony's a leadership figure, a figure--he's a real leader type so he started a band and, you know, he had all these people playing and it was great, he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you were in his band?
Speaker 2: I, yeah, I became a member of the band, yeah, he had a great band.
Story_ID: 526359
Speaker 1: So at what point did you realize that music was possibly what you were gonna do with your life?
Speaker 2: Oh boy I, not right away, no, no, no (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not while you were in college?
Speaker 2: Sort of, but not really.  Let, so here's what kind of happened there.  I went back for another year of Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], it's my second year, I was, but then I wasn't doing that well and I was starting to like feel estranged and a little bit depressed and not really doing the work and so on.  So, you know, I don't what they have at these places, I know at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], if they have a student who is, you know, they ask you to report students who look like they're having difficulty, you sort of talked about the--to report them, not report them but, you know, you sort of--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you mention them, notify the dean that they're having trouble so, so I guess that's what happened to me, I was having a lot of trouble so I decided well there was a mutual decision that I would just take, take a year off which was not the best thing to do because that was the time that, you know, the Vietnam War was still going and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you--
Speaker 2: --all that--
Speaker 1: --could have been drafted?
Speaker 2: But I wasn't, but I have no idea why not, I mean that's the other thing about these places, you know, you notice that they're all these [U.S.] Congress people and all that, and none of them have been and they were all of draft age, what happened to them?  They couldn't have all gotten a high draft number, you know?  So I don't know what happened to them.
Speaker 1: But you didn't do anything in particular to not get drafted?
Speaker 2: No, I mean I know people who did extraordinary things, no I didn't do anything, and I never got a call, I never got a letter, I never got anything and I was basically, you know, eligible cannon fodder for the year.
Story_ID: 526360
Speaker 1: During that eligible cannon fodder year I met the AACM people.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Pretty much the--pretty much (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And what--
Speaker 1: --the same summer--
Speaker 2: --is the AACM?
Speaker 1: AACM stands for Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians, and--
Speaker 2: This was when you were nineteen, when you met them, right?
Speaker 1: Nineteen, which would have been end of the second year at school--
Speaker 2: So it is--
Speaker 1: --there--
Speaker 2: --nineteen seventy-one [1971]?
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: And so who are they?
Speaker 1: Who were they?
Speaker 2: Who were they then?
Speaker 1: I think they were a group of young, older than me, young artists, I didn't know any of this, I can tell you what I know from having written a book about them, or what I know from having interacted with them, or, they were a group of young artists trying to find new ways to think about themselves and their music and the environment in which their music was being presented.  So they were looking for ways to change the environment in which their music was presented, change aspects of the reception of their work to sort of expand their methodologies for their work.  And they're cosmopolitan and open-ended and sort of questing people who were trying to research as much as they could, as many kinds, many ways of think about new musical expressions as possible.  And that's what they started doing when they started 'cause they had started in '65 [1965], but by the time I was coming to them they had been going for a few years there, they're collective you pay dues, they're self-governing, they present their own concerts.  And so I was in co- they had a school [AACM School of Music, Chicago, Illinois], so I went to the school first.
Speaker 2: And where was the school?
Speaker 1: Well the school was not too far from my house as (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So this--
Speaker 1: --it happened--
Speaker 2: --year you're what they now call gap year?
Speaker 1: Gap year, yeah it was a gap year, that's what it was.
Speaker 2: You were at home?
Speaker 1: Living at home, parents' [Cornelia Griffith Lewis and George Lewis] basement, my family had moved, right?  They moved to the, what do they call it now?  Chatham [Chicago, Illinois] or something like that.  Anyway it was Stony Island [Avenue], eighty--in the 80s, around there, and yeah.
Speaker 2: And so you're at home, you discover them, give me a sense of the kind--well what music is popular at this time and what are they doing that's different?
Speaker 1: I could go there but, I don't have a strong sense of that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I could just tell you what they were doing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And what--
Speaker 1: --is it different--
Speaker 2: --attracted you?
Speaker 1: --that sounds--
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: I mean, I had been listening to a lot of unpopular music, you know, late Coltrane [John Coltrane], (laughter) you know, and, you know, I wasn't big on the American popular music, I never really resonated with it.  So, and that's a pretty strong sort of sense of dismissal and I regret the ignorance that that engendered, but on the other hand I learned a lot about a lot of other--I learned a lot about a lot of other things and so that was the compensating advantage.  So that music was sort of rolling around my-oops sorry about that, that music was kind of rolling around in my head and ears but they weren't really doing that, I mean they understood, and they're they had roots in it but they were doing something much different, it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They had--
Speaker 1: They had a--
Speaker 2: --roots in what?  In just--
Speaker 1: Well I think they had roots, well some of them had roots in jazz and pop, I mean it was a very diverse organization.  I mean, the thing is about this time, and I didn't know this at the time, but I guess I found out later, someone like Muhal Richard Abrams, and Charles Stepney, who is the guy who did The Dells and Minnie Riperton, were both studying from the same books, you know?  And they were both looking at this old Russian polymath, Joseph Schillinger, trying to figure out how that worked, and then Schillinger did some musical composition, and looking for ways to express in their own ways and just being very, very thorough about investigating new means of musical expression.  So a lot of the times, there would be people playing lots of small instruments or there would be someone in the corner doing some performance art related thing or sometimes there would be nothing happening, so then there would be a silence and there would for a long period of time or someone would start a chant or someone else would--I mean there were costumes, there were plays, there were all these things going on, and it was all related to, I think, models of post-cultural nationalism kinds of expression.
Story_ID: 526361
Speaker 1: But not only that, and that was I think the AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians] got into a little bit of trouble because it wasn't just about return to Africa, it was actually about trying to embrace a larger world than the one that it was felt that people were sort of confined to in Chicago [Illinois], and people felt the confines as being related to, you know, models of race.  In other words, we still find that today, where people sort of feel that well, if you're African American this is your reference set, so you--black music is already pretty heavily policed, you know, in fact it's probably the most heavily policed music in the world partly because it's so powerful, so the power of it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And when--
Speaker 1: --but--
Speaker 2: --you say heavily policed, what do you mean?
Speaker 1: Well I mean that everyone is telling you how it should it go, and, you know, that there's a corporate policing, there are actual, there, there are legal policings, how much noise, what's so called, what constitutes noise, which is often African American music, and where noise can take place, where sound can take place, what kinds of sounds are acceptable being at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], you could play The Rolling Stones out the window at top volume, but if you started playing conga drums, they'd call the police on you.  So I mean like, so those, that's what I mean by policing, it took all kinds of forms, so if you--and what that means if you accept that policing then you get channeled into certain areas.  Usually on the bases of well, you know, this is the area that's making money here, this is the popular area, this is whatever, when your job as an artist is basically to find people who like you, you know?  And to find out what your market is and not some prearranged thing--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I mean, so anyway, so they were doing that and they were paying the price for that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And (unclear) your motto was great black music ancient to the future--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --what does that mean?
Speaker 1: --it's funny because that was some people's motto and not--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --others.  The AACM was pretty diverse, a lot of people didn't like this love in great black music.  So, I don't think Muhal [Muhal Richard Abrams] was a big fan of it--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and he started the thing.  So, I mean like, ancient to the future?  That was I think--well their earliest slogan was, "Keep Jazz Alive," well they abandoned that, so they used to bring out posters and stickers, bumper stickers, they're red and they had AACM in big letters and it said keep jazz alive, that was before I came.  And they were publishing their own newsletters and magazines, it was all about a kind of self-determination connecting music with political and social critique and all that.  And so, keep jazz alive kind of went away in favor of someone, different people, we don't know who made up the term great black music, but somehow that seemed to resonate, people still, I mean now they're making like books and exhibitions based on that name great black music.  And so I, what I wrote, what I did in my book ['A Power Stronger Than Itself: The AACM and American Experimental Music,' George E. Lewis] I asked Roscoe Mitchell, "So, where does that come from?"  And he said, "Well, nobody was calling our music great."  Well that makes perfect sense right?  Well I said okay, it's not the black part, it's the great part, nobody was looking at that and the great black music didn't exist, it was all great performances existed, but that was classical music at symphony hall, you know?  But great black music, that's unheard of.  And then the ancient, the future part, I don't know, that might have been Malachi Favors, or Don Moye [HistoryMaker Famoudou Don Moye] or somebody, the idea there was like spanning a very wide--looking at, you know people are reading all those Afrocentric books, you know, before this is--
Speaker 2: So this is in the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 1: Well it was the early '70s [1970s], late '60s [1960s] people are already doing it, they did--people are already, you had a lot of home grown stuff, you had Jacob Carruthers [HistoryMaker Jacob H. Carruthers, Jr.], you know, people are reading John Henrik Clarke I imagine, there were--Willis Huggins [Willis Nathaniel Huggins] before any of those people.  When I got to the AACM in '71 [1971], '72 [1972] people were reading Chancellor Williams, there was another, the other homegrown guy, Neely Fuller [Neely Fuller, Jr.], there was, who was it, Frances Welsing [Frances Cress Welsing], there are all these people so--
Speaker 2: Who were writing about, who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) who were writing--
Speaker 2: --the history?
Speaker 1: --for historical and critical contextualizations of the status and future and past of black people.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and people didn't know much about what was going on, you know, the Frankel Fountain [ph.] stuff, but that was going on too, so you could look at all that--
Speaker 2: There was a wealth of scholarly writing about the African and the African American experience.
Speaker 1: Well some of it wasn't even scholarly, some of it was kind of like quasi-scholarly.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Like, I mean Dr. Ben [HistoryMaker Yosef ben-Jochannan] was scholarly but, you know, he served, he, you know, he published it himself and, and you know it was all typed out and everything, so, I mean it was very scholarly, I mean it was very, you know, but by the standard kind of scholarly things, it wasn't going on, but and it was a kind of samizdat that was very hard to get, people would pass it around from hand to hand it was--but that informed a lot of the discourses and discussions that people were having about music.  So you began to see that it wasn't just about jazz and how jazz started in New Orleans [Louisiana], it was in, it was about going back to potential, you know, a primordial African past and people were, people were looking at, you know, Cheikh Anta Diop, you know, people have those books, so you could see, he's talking about African origin and civilization, well that's pretty far back and so (laughter) then you look at, then you get--go ahead, what does the future hold?  And the future could take you anywhere.  So it's an open ended kind of very hopeful I thought view of history.
Story_ID: 526362
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when you were there, you're age nineteen, what are you learning?
Speaker 2: Learning about what?
Speaker 1: You joined the Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians [AACM], what did you do as a member?
Speaker 2: Well, first I went to this, it was sort of lucky that I got there in the first place, because there was no reason that I didn't, how does one seek out this association, I had no idea such a thing existed, I came across it by accident, I was walking down the street and I saw these musicians, they were in the basement of a school they were practicing and so one guy, he had like a dashiki on, so I said, "Well let me see what this is about."  So I went down there and watched them for a while and they looked at me and said, "What are you doing here?"  (Laughter) And I said the funniest thing, I said, "Do you know I'm a trombone player?"  Which is, you know, like that wasn't part of my identify matrix but somehow I became that that day.  And nobody believed that I was actually a trombone player.  So, (laughter) but then one person said, "Well let's at least invite him to the rehearsal."  So they didn't have rehearsal, so they just invited me to where they were playing, which is this place called The Pumpkin Room [Chicago, Illinois] which was on 71st [Street] and something.  And so I went in, I brought my trombone, and I went in to the backroom and there was, I was like there wasn't, I'd never seen any of this kind of thing going in the backroom of the club and, you know, I'd never seen any of this.  And so I'm looking at these things, and Muhal [Muhal Richard Abrams], who I later found out, Muhal he said, "Well give him the charts Jackson [ph.], is he ready to play?"  He says, "Sure, yeah I'm ready play, yeah why not?"  I'm ready to play, yeah, I said, "Oh you mean right now?"  He said, "Yes, here you are," and so--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So I went out on stage with them and read the music with them--
Speaker 1: This is at a place with an audience?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it had an actual audience yeah, it had an actual audience, I mean it's, the audience included all kinds of weird people, there was like a trans bouncer I think was one of the people there, so it was a pretty diverse audience.  So anyway there was a lot of people in there, and after that they sort of made me a member more or less, you had to apply, you had to--it was a formal thing, you had to fill out an application, you had to get recommenders, you had to go through the whole thing, you had to--I still have my application form, you know, it says what I did and what I was--you had to talk about your aspirations, the whole thing, it's pretty embarrassing now, I think about it but, I still have it.  Yeah so I, but what do you learn?  There are a lot of things you could learn, certainly you learned about the musical conceptions of the people who are doing it, which were very diverse, by performing with each person.  You also learned about self-reliance because you had to, you know, no one was putting on the concerts, you were putting on the concerts, so if the toilets needed to be cleaned or tickets needed to be taken or refreshments needed to be prepared, you had to do all that, so if the floor had to be swept you had to do all those things.  And then somebody would do it when it was your concert, somebody else would do it, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There were a range of concerts all the time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were a lot of concerts, I mean, more than, maybe one or two a week, it was very active, all self-produced.
Speaker 1: And it, what was the preparation for these concerts?  Did you have rehearsals?
Speaker 2: Yeah there were rehearsals--
Speaker 1: Where--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: And did you have a space?
Speaker 2: Well they have the, you know, this place where they were rehearsing was called Child City [Chicago, Illinois], it was a daycare center and it was run by the mother of Pete Cosey, the guitarist who later played with Miles Davis.  And, so Pete was a member of the AACM and so the AACM had a home and so through Pete and Pete's mom who helped, you know, they had a regular space to do rehearsals, and of course people rehearsed in their places.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But, still that was a prime site and they had a stage and people got used to coming out to 87th [Street] and hearing stuff.
Speaker 1: And, so you performed your first day?
Speaker 2: The first night I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The--
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: --first night.
Speaker 2: --yeah, somehow yeah they, they, they let me play right away, so.
Story_ID: 526363
Speaker 1: How did you end up playing with different members of the organization [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians (AACM)]?
Speaker 2: Well you were, I guess that was gonna happen because well I know people that asked me a lot, you know?  People asked me a lot, so I was pretty lucky, I mean many people liked what I did or whatever and so, that was good.
Speaker 1: And what style of music were you playing?
Speaker 2: You know I don't know, that's the funny part 'cause it probably was whatever people were doing at the time, you know?  I think these people were trying to like, and Muhal [Muhal Richard Abrams] would go to come to class and he'd say, "Okay, we're gonna have class and what I want you to remember is that style is to be avoided (laughter)."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we all remember that.  The people that took that class, Chico Freeman, you know, Ed Wilkerson [Edward Wilkerson], Douglas Ewart, all remember that style was to be avoided.  So I didn't know what that really meant but I guess I knew what it meant because style becomes the limiting factor that channels you, it's just another form of policing, only certain styles are available.  So, if you're not playing in a style that's the standard style then you're ostracized, you don't exist or whatever, so you have to kill style first and after you do that you can find the music again.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I think that's what they were thinking.  In fact, I know that's what they were thinking 'cause they said so in their meetings.
Speaker 1: Was that opposite of what you had been learning in school?
Speaker 2: Not really, no, no, I had some, I mean my teachers knew about the AACM.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the students did too, in fact Ray Anderson took me to the very first AACM concert I went to, which was Fred Anderson's concert.  I didn't understand a thing, I was sitting there, and he was playing the tenor saxophone, and he's going on and on and on and I think I passed out, it's like too much, what is this, you know?  (Laughter) So it was very quizzical being around all these people and later having very close musical associations with them.  I went to the Art Ensemble of Chicago was playing regularly at Ida Noyes Hall [Chicago, Illinois], which is right across the street from the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois], so I went to that concert, I passed out again, I didn't know what they were doing, they were playing for two hours, playing with no music in sight, every body's doing these incredible things, they're all painted up with these costumes and they've got two thousand instruments on the stage and, I mean nothing like this was going on any world that I was in, nah.
Speaker 1: And did they have a name for it?  What they were?  The genre of music, the--
Speaker 2: I don't think so, and I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is it experimental--
Speaker 2: --I, I--
Speaker 1: --music?
Speaker 2: --I don't think so, I think, you know, people leaned away from that, you know?  Everybody else had names for you, you know, I think the strategy of not naming the music or giving it a style was a strategy that was similar to why people took African or Arabic names, and why, you know, and even when they did that like, they would keep their sort of western kind of name, like you'd have Muhal Richard Abrams or Amina Claudine Myers or whatever, very few people abandoned their whole name and took on something else.  But the idea that naming and self-naming and when to name and when not to name and when to avoid the name that you've been given which is part of the thing of media and corporations where they say, well this is a--we're giving you a name and by giving you this name this is where you fit, this is where you fit.  And so, I don't think these people were trying to fit.  And so all the standard names, they weren't using them anymore.  I mean nobody wanted to be jazz for example because that went back to Duke Ellington and Max Roach and all the rest of 'em, nobody wanted to be that because that was--the problem with that was, that that was--that was the way in which you were--any kind of name like that brought with it a set of baggage about where you could play, what you could play, how you could play, what methodologies you could use, everything, you know.  So it got to be, you know, people couldn't do things and aren't using those names anymore.
Story_ID: 526364
Speaker 1: And for you as a young musician growing into your own, how did this liberal way of looking at not naming music affect your experience of growing your art?
Speaker 2: I think that what it does is it, it causes you to look outside of--you think about new experiences without trying to fit them into some box that you, you or was constructed for you.  And that's how you could find out things about people that you didn't know, you know, I'd go to Muhal's [Muhal Richard Abrams] house and he would have like a--he had like all these scores, I never really thought about what it meant to have scores, you know, but there--what Muhal was trying to do was, they were trying to create composers, they didn't, they, you know, they didn't have jam sessions, they'd all been through the jam sessions the jazz, the jazzy bebop jam sessions, they didn't have those, they'd either do a concert or not, but they didn't have any like jam sessions, they rehearsed their music and everybody was writing music, it was very important to engage notation in the AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians], that first generation--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --they all were doing it.  And so in the school that's what they taught you to do, to engage notation as a composer, you know, they didn't give any classes in how to play, at least when I was there, they did that maybe earlier.  But, you know--
Speaker 1: And you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) they--
Speaker 1: --learned how to write music?
Speaker 2: Yeah I think I did learn the fundamentals of writing music and the main fundamental of writing music is if you write music then you just start writing something (laughter), you know?  And they give you a kind of a basic set of tools, very basic and then from that you construct, you start to construct your worlds and then other people are supporting you in that and then you can then maybe construct enough of a world to construct a concert because the other thing about the concert was, if you wanted to give a concert you had to write all your own music, you couldn't play anybody else's music on the concert, they didn't allow that.
Story_ID: 526365
Speaker 1: In the course of this year that you are not at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and you are engaged with them, are you going--is the school such that you're going to school [AACM School of Music, Chicago, Illinois] all day long?  Is it formal?
Speaker 2: You go in the, you go on Saturdays from like nine to twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what are you doing the rest of the time?
Speaker 2: Oh probably working at the slag plant (laughter).
Speaker 1: The what?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the slag, you know there's steelworkers?  I was a member of the steelworkers' union, my uncle got me a job working where he was working.  So and then there was a--they had a band called--they had one of these, one of these Afrocentric juice bars called Transitions East [Transitions East Studio, Chicago, Illinois], and it was on Cottage Grove [Avenue], right?  83rd Street, and they had a night, they had a band on Tuesdays which played until like three o'clock in the morning and then I had to go work at seven so it was pretty tight.  But yeah so I would do that, I played with a lot of people, I did a lot of performing and playing and writing and trying to learn how to do things.
Speaker 1: And, and so did--the next year you go back to Yale, is that right?
Speaker 2: I went back, yeah.
Story_ID: 526366
Speaker 1: You go back to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], this is though, I guess your third year that you're in Yale, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, third year, yeah, I didn't--finished it in four, I ended up finishing in four years, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, while you're there, since you've had the AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians] experience, what are you doing at Yale with music at this reentry point?
Speaker 2: Well it's very interesting.  I was disappointed with, you know, becoming a music major, you know, I was having a hard time with that for a number of reasons, I have no idea why I sort of, I sort of squeaked by like, you know, total harmony and things like that, did okay in that, but it wasn't that great.  But I had some, I had some pretty good teachers.  Lazarus Ekwueme was freshman, you know, he's a great Nigerian musicologist and theorist, he was teaching there then, so I had some pretty cool people there, Mr. Tirro [Frank Tirro] wasn't there at the time but he later came later--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --became the, yeah, he became the dean of the school of music.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) After you left?
Speaker 2: Well after I left.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But I got back, but I said, "Well I don't know if I wanna major in music again, you know?"  He said, "Okay well you don't have to major in music, but you should go back," this is when Muhal [Muhal Richard Abrams] and these people were telling me, you should, you should go back.  So, have you thought about anything else you might wanna major in?  I said "Well, that, that book you gave me, 'Genealogy of Morals' ['On the Genealogy of Morality,' Friedrich Nietzsche], that looked like a pretty good book, I could probably--maybe if that's a kind of philosophy, right?  Maybe I could do that."  He said, "I think that would be a good idea," you know, they'd all been reading, like him and Phil Cohran [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran], they'd all been reading Nietzsche [Friedrich Nietzsche].  So, so I went back as a philosophy major and that's how I finished.
Speaker 1: And how has philosophy affected your art, your music?
Speaker 2: Well I fell in with a good crowd there when I got to--I started doing the philosophical work, the guy who almost flunked me in total harmony became interested in phenomenology, and he wrote a kind of what's now a famous book called, 'Music as Heard' [Music As Heard: A Study in Applied Phenomenology'], Thomas Clifton.  So, and he was doing a seminar, he hadn't written the book yet, but he was interested in this, he was interested in exploring the phenomenology of music, so I took the course, I just said, "Well let's see what happens here, you know?  I'll take this course, I don't wanna do that much music but, you know, this sounds like my kind of thing."
Speaker 1: So the phenomenology of music, what does that mean?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, phenomenology being this branch of philosophy that deals with experience, and rather than being, you know, there's the being thing and there's the ontology and there's the experience there, what people are actually experiencing and how they experience it and describing that.  So there's this phenomenal logic, the description of phenomena, so they don't make any claim that the phenomena are real, it's just like that's what you're experiencing so you describe that and you kind of try to figure out what that or how that gets grounded.  So, there's a famous book by one of the founders of that field, Edmund Husserl, a German phenomenologist who, the book is called 'Phenomenology of Internal Time-Consciousness' ['The Phenomenology of Internal Time-Consciousness'], where he's trying to think, get people to think about how people understand and experience time, so he uses music as an example, so.  And that's what these guys were doing, these two professors, David Carr and Thomas Clifton, team teaching this class, we were reading Husserl, we're reading all this stuff, they had a lot of phenomenologists at Yale at the time, later they all got fired but they're all still in wonderful places now.  So that was, that actually wa- I was able to work on music and phenomenology at the same time and to work on improvisation, which is something I had become interested in and sort of fi--it could have been Tom or David or it could have been Ed Casey [Edward S. Casey], but somehow I found myself writing about improvisation and the phenomenon, the experience of improvisation, the temporal experience of it and all that, so that's something I still do.
Speaker 1: Did you feel like AACM prepared you for that, like their opening the door to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah--
Speaker 1: --to no style--
Speaker 2: --well because they were, it's a research, it's like a think tank, the AACM is like a self-funded think tank--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --with no money really, the think tank is in your head, you have to kind of use your head as a think tank, you can talk about anything with anyone, you know?  It was very intellectually broad minded, open ended, cosmopolitan, all that stuff, you know?
Story_ID: 526367
Speaker 1: I'll tell you a funny thing though, you, this--I don't wanna leave Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] because something happened to me at Yale that affected what I know about the AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians], you know, I'm a member of the Skull and Bones society, the Skull and Bones society in many ways was a--also prepared for this kind of thing because the AACM was a very diverse organization, there's no boss, you have to learn how to really assimilate really radically different points of view, you know, then what you might normally think of as being, you know, normative societal stuff, you, the AACM is going well beyond that.  Now, Skull and Bones was like that, you've only got fifteen people, you're in there for a year, there's nothing to do, you have to create what you're going to do, which is what the AACM was doing, basically we're here to do this, well how do we get--how did we--how did--who gave us this task to perform?  Well we brought ourselves here, we gave ourselves this task, so then, there's only two things you have to do in Skull and Bones, well it's several, well several, you have debates, you have no reason why, there's no reason why you have debates, it's just tradition, you do it--
Speaker 2: Then, debating about whatever?
Speaker 1: Well yeah, you make a debate topic and you debate about it, and they debate every week, you eat dinner twice a week and you--
Speaker 2: And this is in the privacy of the Skull and Bones?
Speaker 1: They have their own kind of tomb they call it, you know?
Speaker 2: So the debates are private in the tomb?
Speaker 1: Yeah, no one else can go in there.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: No one else can go in there.  I took my aunt and uncle in when we graduated (laughter)--
Speaker 2: You did?
Speaker 1: Yeah she, oh my aunt got really spooked man, "You got to get me out of here," my mom [Cornelia Griffith Lewis] was okay with it, dad [George Lewis], but my aunt was like, "Get me outta here," and, you know--
Speaker 2: And how did you come to be part of the Skull and Bones?
Speaker 1: I don't know, I have no idea--I was what you call a big man on campus, one day these guys came to my house, came to my dorm room, I was living in the--see when I'd gotten back to school, things had changed a little bit, they were having dormitories based on like ethnicity.  So, they had a combination black and Puerto Rican dormitory, so, and they asked when I came back, they said, "Do you want to live in the black and Puerto Rican dormitory?"  I said, "I don't care, I don't know anybody there, sure, why not?  It's fine with me, you know?"  So I lived there for a year with these nice people and we had a great time and everything else, that was a great thing really, yep, Cruz Ramos, Eduardo Pardo and one other guy, really very nice people, very cool.  Anyway, so I got to know them, and, but I was still doing my weird music and then one day I'm sitting in the dorm and these guys barge in they say, "Where's George Lewis [HistoryMaker George E. Lewis]?"  Fellow also says, "Okay Skull and Bones, accept or reject?"  "Accept or reject what?"  He said, "Skull and Bones, accept or reject?"  "Okay, I accept, what is it?"  I didn't know what it was, so I went the next day and saw some of my friends and I said, "Well, you know, these guys came to my dorm last night and they said, you know, 'Skull and Bones, accept or reject,' I didn't know what to do so I just accepted it, I still have no idea what it is."  They stand out and they said, "Be at the appointed place at the appointed time," I said, "Are you kidding?"  I said, "What do you mean?"  "No you're kidding," he said, "this is Skull and Bones man, don't you know what that is?"  No, so I didn't know what it was.  So I found out what it was, but I didn't know what it was, it turned, you know, there was a whole, I guess, you know, it was an interesting place, I mean but I didn't know what it was.  But you learn from that--
Speaker 2: But, so, what is it?
Speaker 1: What is it?  Well, there's a pretty good description of it in The New Yorker, Alexandra Kerry [sic. Alexandra Robbins] wrote about it, it was pretty good, I thought it was a good description, she, you know, it's mostly the so-called secrets, who's the long devil and all the junk, she talked about it.  But as I see it, it was a kind of a rite of passage through which you learned to assimilate diverse points of view to create your own sort of task.  And in a way it could be 'Lord of the Flies' [William Golding], you know, because they give you nothing, you get a little talk at the beginning, there's a sort of a little thread of tradition they give you, you have to do this, you have to do that, it's kind of, you know, if you were, you--it's like if you were in a situation where you were told that there were some obscure spiritual rite that you had to do every day, and you have no idea why you did it, or as my son [Tadashi Lewis] says, it's a tradition, you just do it, you know?
Story_ID: 526368
Speaker 1: And that's what it was, they gave you a little bit of tradition and then at the, and then midway through the year you seem to be functioning well and having a good time with this tradition learning to live with it and getting to know these people, you know, and doing the things they tell you to do, and they say, "Well, your class is ending soon and you're only here for a year, and you have to spend the rest of your time picking the next group."  So the first thing you think, why should I pick anyone for this?  What were we doing?  What was so important about what we were doing that we need to pick anyone, you know?  What, by what criteria do we choose someone to do something that we don't really know what it is we're doing (laughter).  And so, you learn a li- it turns introspection, and got very argumentative, all kinds of things happened, but in the end, I think the AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians] prepared me for that 'cause we'd already been through and then after that was over, and then going to those AACM meetings and having people say, "We can't get people to do any work here, I move that we have corporal punishment for anyone who doesn't do their work (laughter)."  You know, I went to Vietnam and I saw how it was, you know?  So when you're in the room with people like that, you know?
Speaker 2: You've already been through it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, I felt, you know, that somehow you learn, that's what I learned, that was the--different people learn different things but for me it was about--
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: --diversity.
Speaker 2: And, at what point do you learn about these, you know, famous names that have been a part of it like, George W. Bush [President George Walker Bush], [President] George Herbert Walker Bush (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well I met, oh, I met George Herbert Walker Bush.
Speaker 2: It, through Skull and Bones?
Speaker 1: Oh absolutely, we sang a song together, that was nice, it turned out that he was the--they have this special office for the music person in the class, well there are two music people but they made me the music person, which they call the cragus [ph.], they made me the music person, so I was the music person in my class.  So they have these conventions, they take you on field trips--
Speaker 2: Skull and Bones?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we went to William F. Buckley's house, we went to the Standard Club in New York [New York] and had dinner with some bank president.  William Bundy, came to visit and, you know, a lot of it is like 'The Good Shepherd,' you know, this thing of you--can you be recruited into their secret services?  (Laughter) You know, all these people who were involved with the OSS [Office of Strategic Services], and all that, they all come.  So one of these things, they had a big convention, all the old pat--the patriarchs they called them, they come by, and they say we're gonna sing the Skull and Bones song now, all right, sing the Skull and Bones song and, "Who's the cragus in this class?"  Says, "Well I am," says, "Oh, what's your name?"  "George [HistoryMaker George E. Lewis]," oh George, "Hey, George, you were the cragus in your class right?"  George Herbert Walker Bush says, "Yes I was," he said, "Well you two craguses, you should sing (unclear) because you're both named George."  So, we sang the Skull and Bones song, that was it we were the, we led our assembled multitudes in the song, so that's my song with, my gig with George H.W. Bush.
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: In 1974.  I never met the other Bush but they're all these people are coming through and then there are scrapbooks where they leave their materials so you find out you can read about, they have records going back to 1837, or something, you know, there is all this kind of stuff, yeah.
Speaker 2: So how do you feel that Skull and Bones prepared you for your music?  Or did it?
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: So is there an influence that that experience built upon the AACM experience had?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, it, I, you know, other than the sort of truism that everything is connected, what, that's a hard one to answer because I'm not really sure of a direct quantifiable or categorizable [ph.] influence.  But I do believe that if you're thinking about situations in which you have to, well I'll put it another way.  Skull and Bones, being in Skull and Bones was like having your nose against the glass and seeing what was on the other side.  And, you know, you get a chance to watch, you're not really in it, but you do get a chance to watch, and that's okay, you sort of see, so you sort of know what's there.  So knowing what's there can help you in all kinds of career situations where you kind of know that someone's trying to sell you a bill of goods, that this is not really how things go and you, because of, you know, this is not, something's happening that's beyond what other people are experiencing, you know?  A lot of times this is how, you know, like how basic discrimination works, people don't know what to expect, you know, so I don't know if that had anything to do with music per se, but I will say that it did kind of maybe open a lot of doors including my own, my own psychological door, it made me able to--gave me a way to analyze things that I hadn't known about before.
Story_ID: 526369
Speaker 1: In '73 [1973] is when you started looking into computer technology, correct?  Was it around then?
Speaker 2: No, this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That--
Speaker 2: --would have--
Speaker 1: --was (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --well, we were talking about it but we weren't actually doing anything--
Speaker 1: --okay--
Speaker 2: --yeah we were--
Speaker 1: That's early.
Speaker 2: Actually, we weren't actually doing anything.  I mean I started actually doing computers round about '77 [1977], '78 [1978], but we'd been talking about it, you know, but we didn't have any computers, nobody knew how to do anything, and weren't in an environment where anyone could help us, we weren't in an environment where people were are talking about--and that's one of the most important things.  And in 1973, is really early 'cause they didn't have the, they didn't have the single board computers then, I think--'cause microcomputers, what was a microcomputer in '73 [1973], a 4004 [Intel 4004]?  I mean there was hardly anything, I mean by '76 [1976], '77 [1977], there was a lot of stuff.  So that was when I would really get involved with it around that time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--
Story_ID: 526370
Speaker 1: When did you graduate from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974].
Speaker 1: And what did you do when you graduated?
Speaker 2: My uncle got me a job at the CNA [Continental National American Group; CNA Financial Corporation] insurance company, which--that big red building, you know?  The one in Chicago [Illinois] there, which I'm sure Chicagoans would know.  Then I worked there for a year, then I got laid off, then I joined the Count Basie Orchestra, that's what happened to me, that was it and that was my Cliff's Notes version (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So you joined the Count Basie Orchestra, how did that come up?
Speaker 2: You know, being a musician in Chicago, I was becoming like a musician, I wasn't really a professional musician, I was more like a, I was more like someone who was known to be able to function in a professional environment, and because of having gotten to know all these musicians and actually having them be sort of mentors and the supporters and--see 'cause the thing is a lot of the AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians] people, they had such strong roots in the older jazz communities--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --so a lot of those people they would network with that, they weren't networking the same way as let's say the classical music community, although they kind of were but not in the same way, but certainly the jazz communities and the communities that produced that.  So, I started doing like club date concerts or gigs or whatever with people, and--
Speaker 1: While you had your job at CNA?
Speaker 2: Yeah I would do it, yeah, we were playing, you know, we're still doing the juice bar thing, there was a, the club date thing there were maybe some out of town things or something.  And one of things was--it was funny it was like [HistoryMaker] Cissy Houston, she, you know, they had a, we had a show, right?  There was a show, I played in the show, and all I remember about the show was--see I didn't even know how to dress for these things so I wore the, I think we were supposed to wear black and, you know I wore brown so people (laughter).  And so I thought they were like, really got mad at me, but then the band leader recommended me to the Count Basie Orchestra 'cause they were--
Speaker 1: Cissy Houston's bandleader?
Speaker 2: Well it was actually, you know, how these things work, Cissy Houston comes in, but the real bandleader is local.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So the bandleader is Morris Ellis, who had a Count Basie like band and so, and he was a person that knew Basie and they were, it was like a, if they found someone interesting as they were passing through they would.  So as it turned out somehow they had a tour and they were, they asked Morris, Morris said, "Maybe we should get this guy," and all I'd done was like wear the wrong the suit in the band.  (Laughter) So I'm still amazed at how that happened, what I said, the reward for messing up the, the gig.  I didn't, I played their music but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So did--
Speaker 2: --wore the wrong suit--
Speaker 1: --you audition for Count Basie?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You just were recommended and then you were in?
Speaker 2: That's it.  No, they, I got on a plane and went to New York [New York] and I took part in one rehearsal, maybe that was the audition, if, you know, 'cause I was in New York, I mean certainly if I hadn't worked out they could just call on the phone, you know, this is New York.  So why fly a kid in from Chicago for that, but they did.
Speaker 1: And then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the next thing I knew we were on the road, boom, two months of road tripping.
Story_ID: 526371
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where did you go?
Speaker 2: Japan was the greatest part.  That was very cool, that was what was fun about it, going to Japan for a month basically.
Speaker 1: And had you been out of the country before that?
Speaker 2: No.  No, no, no.
Speaker 1: So there was getting the passport, the whole, the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had to get a passport (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A whole new experience?
Speaker 2: Yeah, getting a passport.
Speaker 1: Well the visa I guess because you were performing.
Speaker 2: Well if you're in--they take care of that, you know, they get you what you need.  You just get the passport.
Speaker 1: What was it like to perform with Count Basie?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's--let me think about that, Count Basie, first of all Basie was still playing with the band, you know, late like a lot of these groups, the bandleader doesn't really interact with the band that much, well Basie was riding the bus with the band, they rode these Greyhound buses.  So they had a special Greyhound bus, it was always the same, so you got on the bus and everybody had their seat there was like, you know, there was, your seat was never right across from somebody else's seat, they were always staggered, so you had some extra privacy for these long trips.  And, you know, there was a lot of horseplay on the bus, there was pretty--people were just trying to live and do their work, and people would get together and practice, you know, that was nice.  And the concerts the music was the same every day and, you know, so you learned very well, after a while, you could just memorize it basically.
Speaker 1: So he was very disciplined?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was very disciplined, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, it wasn't disciplined like you hear those stories about Ray Charles, where they fine you or, you know?  I mean nobody seemed to need that, you know?  You knew what you were there to do, you just did it, you know, there was never any tension about people not doing it or whatever or so I thought.  Then I read later, I read in a--'cause I did one thing that, I did a couple of things that caused me to be looked at in an unusual way, I was reading in a jazz magazine they interviewed a trombone player in the band, Bill Hughes, they interviewed him and they asked him if I had actually done like a silent John Cage type solo with the Basie band?  And I could, yeah and he said, and I can hear Bill's voice, "Oh yes I believe George [HistoryMaker George E. Lewis] did do something like that," (laughter) yeah and I did do this, or something like that.  And, you know, it was kind of interesting to just see, you know, it's best if you don't tell anyone you're gonna do it, you just do it.  And either you're fired the next day or not, so not only did I not get fired, but Basie actually talked to me about what I had done.  And he said, "I like that experimenting you're doing up there, new boy,"" 'cause that was the name I had, new boy, "so can I have more of that kind of experiment?  I'd like to see more people thinking about and doing more of these experiments," and everybody said, "Oh really?  We have to do what he did?"  (Laughter) But you got to think of it like this, I mean this is what really what these guys were doing we, you know, all that talk about, that came later about how we have to uphold the tradition of this and that and play just like this one and that one and, you know, but back then, they were experimenting.  They were young people trying new things, it was very obvious.  So he was saying that what we were doing was experimental music, that made perfect sense, you know?  But I hadn't thought of it until that moment because we were taught to believe because of it, that whole business about styles and genres, that it was all fixed stuff and that you, instead of being a dynamic forum that they people created, like they created this, it wasn't--we were playing in the tradition that he had created.  So it wasn't fixed, it was the pa- there was still a possibility for change, we, you know, he played the piano with his elbows on one gig like Henry Cowell, I mean the guy would do anything right?  I mean he was like, you know, he was thought of as being like oh avuncular and all that, we--a little nuts (laughter).
Story_ID: 526372
Speaker 1: When you were doing the same sets every night, having come from a very free form of creating and performing music, was there ever any conflict for you in having to do the same thing over and over, or was that possibly why you did your free form when you did?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you're always free, you know, you play your solo and you're free, and you figure out how to use that freedom in the environment, it's not like the, having to play the twelve-bar blues, it's some sort of, you know, slave setup, you know, you work with the environment.  That's what you do as an improviser, so it's nothing unfree about it at all.  And, you know, it's a different sort of freedom and you're dealing with a different relationship to materials and methods, but also when you get up there and play, you can do whatever you wanna do.  And I thought th- you know the quasi-Cage [John Cage] thing was the ultimate sort of expression of that and it was like, you know, people thought it was okay, I mean maybe, one person didn't, Al Grey didn't think it was okay.  But I mean (laughter)--
Speaker 1: And what did he say?
Speaker 2: Well Bill [Bill Hughes] said he went to Basie [Count Basie] and complained, he said, "Well this guy is," says, "he might not be taking care of the music, you know?"  But, you know, and then Bill said, "No, no, he's taking care of the music," and that was all Basie really cared about, is he playing the music?  If he plays the music, if he can't play the music he's got to go.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But, if he's playing the music, well I didn't know any of this was going on, so I didn't know about it.  But I don't look at it as being a real contrast, I mean maybe for myself, I wouldn't choose that kind of way of expressing, but then I'm me and not Count Basie.  But, other than that, he was a figure of real leadership, you know, he, people revered him and the band, and I went to see the band later after I just, I wasn't there that long.
Speaker 1: What year were you there?
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: April to, yeah probably March and April, something like that, but the name new boy stuck, I guess, so after that, whoever came in they started calling him the new boy and so, so I met this guy on the train and he said, "Aren't you the original new boy?"  I said, "What?"  Said, "Well I played with the band too but, you know, you were the original new boy, we heard about you."  I said, "Wait a minute now, this is like twenty years later what do you mean the new boy?"  And so, I guess whatever it was, that name new boy stuck, so it was kind of a nice name I guess or whatever they were doing, I didn't know, I couldn't doubt I was the original new boy that's probably just something they made up.
Story_ID: 526373
Speaker 1: Going back later with those same people, and we went backstage to see Basie [Count Basie], the chief as they called him, we went back to see the chief, and the chief--I say, "Well how are you doing?"  He says, "There's been a few changes," I said, well okay, but I'd heard, I'd seen the part about how he was writing or has a little--it seems he's having trouble walking and he's getting older and he's riding in the motorized chair and everything he'd ride up to the, said he'd ride up to piano and, you know, and start playing.  And I'd say, well, you know, "Sorry about the chair," he said, "Oh no, well, you'll see," so they, they kick off the first thing we're sitting right there in the front we can see him, so they're playing, everything's going pretty well, I know the tune I've played it often enough, so I'm sitting there and all of a sudden they get to the part, you know, the famous part when they go, where he does the famous cadence, dah-dah-dah-dahhh, you know, except he didn't play the right notes on the cadence, so that's, you can't make that kind--he looked at us after he did it, so you can't, he can't make a mistake like that.  So, you know, he died of what is it, Gehrig's disease [sic.] right?  ALS [amyotrophic lateral sclerosis], you know, so that's what happens with ALS you can't control your muscles.  So he couldn't make his, he couldn't make his hands play those notes anymore--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He couldn't guarantee that, and that's the worst part, you can't guarantee it.  And I have a friend Derek Bailey who died of a similar thing, he was a great guitarist, motor and neuron disease and it's, you know, the end is not good--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so, and it's not just because you can't play 'cause you can't control any of your muscles.  There are a lot of muscles that help you get through the day, you can't control any of them.  So after a while, you, you have to consider, you know, you have to consider alternative measures to end your life so, I don't know if that's what happened with him, but, Basie, but, I mean they were supporting him--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in wonderful ways and they would, they were conducting the band but more than that, they were playing the music in such a way that it would cause him to be supported, like they were directing the sound of him.  That's something musicians can do, you don't hear a lot about, you can do it, you know, if someone's not feeling well you can direct the music to them and you can, you know, they always talk about, you know, healing vibrations or whatever but, I think there's something to it, I don't think it's just, you know, new age sort of whatever, people do it and when you do it they feel it.  So that's what they were doing for him, so yeah that's what it was like playing in that group.  They did a lot of crazy things too, like, we played for dances that took hours and hours, they, yeah, there was a lot of stories, I mean, some of them are pretty boring but, there's a movie actually, Gary Keys made a movie in which they take reminiscences, once you get to a certain age, you're an old fart and I guess I'd reached that age.  So they invited me to be one of them up there, you know?  And so, at a certain point Frank Foster turns to me and says, "What's that new record you had with Basie, didn't you make a record with him?"  I said, "No, I had never made a record with him," you know, John, Count Basie meets John Cage (laughter), so I know you heard about that?  (Laughter) So you never know what happens with that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But it does, I felt like it brought me close to a community that I've, maybe some of the younger people who have, even at my age, and who were in the AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians] with--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --didn't get a chance to experience in the same way, you know, I was very lucky because of experiencing with those people, you know?  And then later because of that experience, other people who were more or less in that generation or maybe a little younger felt that they could take a chance on getting me to do something because--
Speaker 2: Of your--
Speaker 1: --because I had done this and they know that, you know, Basie is not gonna keep you in the band if you're not doing anything.  So it became a kind of a mark of a certain kind of quality for the certain generation, like a Gil Evans or somebody like that, you know?
