Story_ID: 243311
Speaker 1: --Good morning.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: My name is Regennia Williams, and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: Very pleased to meet you, ma'am.
Speaker 1: Would you please help us get started by stating in just a minute--after I introduce the other folks who are here.  Our videographer, first of all, is Scott Stearns, and we have one observer today, officially, for the record, and her name is Antonitia Harris.  So, now we can get started.  If you would please state your name, first, middle and last and please spell all three for us?
Speaker 2: I got to spell it, too?
Speaker 1: If you would, please.
Speaker 2: Okay, [HistoryMaker] Robert Lockwood, Jr., R-O-B-E-R-T, L-O-C-K-W-O-O-D, Jr.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  And, Mr. Lockwood, would you please tell us the date of your birth and the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: The location of my birth is Turkey Scratch [Arkansas].  The date of my birth is March 27, 1915.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what state is Turkey Scratch in?
Speaker 2: Arkansas.
Story_ID: 243312
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Robert] Lockwood [Jr.], could you please tell us for the record, what today's date is?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  What is today's date?  What is it?
Speaker 1: January--
Speaker 2: January--
Speaker 1: Fourteenth.
Speaker 2: Fourteenth.  Okay.
Speaker 1: And the year?
Speaker 2: Two thousand and five [2005].
Speaker 1: Yes, thank you.  Now--and the location of this interview, with the address?
Speaker 2: 7203 Lawnview [Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you for allowing us to come into your home.  Mr. Lockwood, would you also state your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation is music: guitar player and vocalist.
Story_ID: 243313
Speaker 1: We'd like to begin the interview by talking about your childhood in Arkansas.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Would you please tell me your parents' names?
Speaker 2: My daddy was named Robert Lockwood.  My mother was named Estelle [Starns] Lockwood.  She was Starns first, yeah.
Speaker 1: Maiden name was Stearns?
Speaker 2: Starns, S-T-A-R-N-S.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  And you said earlier that you were born in Turkey Scratch, Arkansas?
Speaker 2: That's what they call it.
Speaker 1: All right.  Were both your parents natives of Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were.
Speaker 1: Were they also natives to Turkey Scratch or from some other part of Arkansas?
Speaker 2: I think they both were about the same place, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about the geography of Arkansas?  Are there other towns whose names we might recognize if we were headed to Turkey Scratch?
Speaker 2: Marvell [Arkansas], Aubrey [Arkansas], Helena [Arkansas].
Speaker 1: So, all of those are in the same general vicinity?
Speaker 2: They're close.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Marianna [Arkansas].
Speaker 1: All right, so that'll help us locate Turkey Scratch on the map.  All right, I also wanted to ask about growing up in Turkey Scratch.  Is that a farming community or a big city?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was a bunch of little farms.
Speaker 1: So did your parents own their own farm or--
Speaker 2: All of 'em owned their own farms.
Speaker 1: And as a child were you expected to work on the farm along with the adults?
Speaker 2: I did work on the farm.  I worked on the farm 'til I was about--I'd say about nine.
Speaker 1: So what was that like?  What kind of work did you do as a child?
Speaker 2: I plowed and chopped cotton, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have other brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Had one sister.  No brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was your sister's name?
Speaker 2: My sister was named Omega [ph.]--and Freddie Mae [ph.].  She named herself Freddie Mae, but she was named Omega.
Story_ID: 243314
Speaker 1: I read in some of the information I used to prepare for today that you began to study music as a child in Arkansas.  What was the first instrument you played?
Speaker 2: The old organ, the pump organ.
Speaker 1: Was that an instrument that was in your home?
Speaker 2: That was in my grandfather's home.
Speaker 1: Now, was he also a musician or--who had the love for music?
Speaker 2: No, no, he was not a musician.
Speaker 1: What kind of work did your grandfather do and what was his name?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was named John; John Westley Starns [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's your mother's [Estelle Starns Lockwood] father?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what kind of work did he do?
Speaker 2: My grandfather, he had a farm.  He was a farmer.
Speaker 1: Okay, so both sides of the family--
Speaker 2: He was a farmer and a preacher.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.  Any particular church or non-denominational?  What church did he preach in?
Speaker 2: I think it was Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he had this organ in his home.  And who taught you to play it?  Was that his teaching?
Speaker 2: I had a couple of second cousins who could play that was older than I was.  I picked it up from them.
Speaker 1: So was it from the cousins also that you acquired this love for blues music?
Speaker 2: Well, that's the only thing that they knew.  So that's the only thing that I was taught.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, did your grandfather ever object to the blues being played in a preacher's house?
Speaker 2: Well, we--he never did know we was playing the blues.  I'm glad he didn't (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 243315
Speaker 1: What was schooling like?  Was there music training in the schools as well?
Speaker 2: No, nah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No music in school.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember your first school in Turkey Scratch [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: My first school was just a little three-room school for seven months.
Speaker 1: Was that so--seven months through the year?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And they're just off in the summers or--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Sometimes I read about farming communities in the South where the children, as they got older, were expected to spend more time working on the farm.  But you had the opportunity to go to school throughout the school year?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: See, I went to school in two places.  I went to school in Helena [Arkansas] and Marvell [Arkansas]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause my mother [Estelle Starns Lockwood] was living in Helena, and my uncle was living Marvell, and I was living with my uncle for a long time, for about three or four years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you started school in which community?
Speaker 2: Started school in Marvell and--well, actually I was going to school both places, 'cause one place was nine months, and one was seven.  So when I come out the seven-month school, I'd go to Helena and go to the--get them other two months.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  All right, so was that throughout the elementary school grades?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so grades one through eight?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And do you remember the names of either of those schools, or were they named for the towns?
Speaker 2: Well, the school that I went to in the country was called St. Luke [ph.], it was--which was a church.  The one in Helena was North End [Elementary] School [Helena, Arkansas] and, and [Eliza] Miller High School [Eliza Miller Junior High School, Helena, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Miller High School.
Speaker 2: That was the last one.
Speaker 1: Did you graduate from that school?
Speaker 2: Nah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nah, I only made seventh grade.
Story_ID: 243316
Speaker 1: When you left [Eliza Miller High] School [Eliza Miller Junior High School, Helena, Arkansas] in the seventh grade, was that to work on the farm or at something else?  Did you leave school to work?
Speaker 2: I was in Helena [Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and did you begin to work immediately after leaving school?
Speaker 2: I was start playing music--I was playing music from eight years old 'til now.
Speaker 1: Okay, now when did you make the switch from the keyboard, then, to the guitar 'cause that's what we know you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was thirteen.
Speaker 1: Thirteen years old.  Okay, so right about the time that you were leaving school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, where (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Soon as I learnt to play, I left school, period, 'cause I could play and make a living.
Speaker 1: Now, where does a thirteen year old play?  Are there clubs or--
Speaker 2: Well, I was playing with older people.  I was so far ahead of everybody that I was playing with people who were old enough for my grandparents, my daddy and all that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 243317
Speaker 1: Now, it's my understanding that you were taught early on to play blues guitar by Robert Johnson (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Robert Johnson, that's right.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me how you came to meet him?
Speaker 2: Well, he followed my mama [Estelle Starns Lockwood] home, and she couldn't get rid of him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She really tried, and she couldn't.
Speaker 1: So you're growing up in the household where blues legend Robert Johnson lives?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And after I seen how he played the guitar, I didn't pay the organ no more attention.
Speaker 1: All right, so how long then did you study or work with Robert Johnson?
Speaker 2: I never really worked with him.  I played with Robert about three times in my life, but he taught me.
Speaker 1: So about how old were you then when you started to study with him?
Speaker 2: From thirteen to about seventeen to eighteen, something like that, about eighteen.
Speaker 1: Did you play gigs with him?
Speaker 2: I played with him only three times.
Speaker 1: Really.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, and for those who don't know, what eventually happened to Mr. Johnson?
Speaker 2: What happened to him?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He got poisoned to death.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: We both got poisoned the same year, and he was in Arkansas--I was in Arkansas, and he was in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Pretty close to the same time.  It's funny.
Speaker 1: Now, what year was that?
Speaker 2: Nineteen--1938.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's in Mississippi then about the time--
Speaker 2: He was in Mississippi, and I was in Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Now, how did that happen that you both having these unfortunate activities (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I had a lady, a girlfriend, and it was something like an old lady.  She poisoned me.  I don't know who poisoned Robert.  And I made it, but he didn't, 'cause mine didn't stay in my stomach.  I throwed it right up.  So the guy who healed me said that it was about nine drops left in my stomach.
Story_ID: 243318
Speaker 1: In addition to Robert Johnson, who are some of the other musicians that you're working with in the early part of your career?
Speaker 2: Guys who I worked with way back that time, don't nobody know nothing about 'em.  It was two brothers, named W.V. Britt [ph.] and Jim Britt [ph.].  It was another, another bunch of guys who was musicians, was named Nelson [ph.] that was out in the country.  And from that to Helena [Arkansas].  And I come there, and I was on 'King Biscuit [Time]' in 1940.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when you're making those kinds of adult decisions as a teenager, do you pretty much have the support of your family to go out and work with the older musicians?
Speaker 2: Ah, yeah, yeah.  Yeah, my mother [Estelle Starns Lockwood], she trusted me.
Speaker 1: And the grandfather [John Westley Starns (ph.)] who's the preacher, at that point, is he supportive?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean I wasn't with my grandfather then.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: No, no, after I started playing music, my grandfather passed, just when I was really trying to play, he passed.
Story_ID: 243319
Speaker 1: Now, you've mentioned your mother's father [John Westley Starns (ph.)], but I wonder is your father's [Robert Lockwood, Sr.] side of the family involved at all in your teenage years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father's brother raised me, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what's his name, please?
Speaker 2: His name was Emmitt, Emmitt Reese [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, so for a time, you're living with him?
Speaker 2: I was living with him just about all my first growing up.  Finally, I went to my mother [Estelle Starns Lockwood] 'til I got about ten or eleven.  She wasn't there.  She was living in Memphis [Tennessee] and St. Louis [Missouri], and she finally moved to Helena [Arkansas], and that's when I went there.
Story_ID: 243320
Speaker 1: So early on then when you're just going out and beginning to play with the other musicians, that's mostly in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we hear a lot about the birth of the blues and the birth of jazz, but as far as your love for the music is concerned, where would you trace the roots of blues music?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Was it Mississippi, is it Tennessee?  Or some other place in the South?
Speaker 2: Well, see, the blues is all over the South.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I mean, now, most people say it come from New Orleans [Louisiana], but that's a lie, you know, 'cause I'm not from New Orleans.  But the blues was in, it was just in the South, blues and Dixieland.
Speaker 1: Think about the early 20th century for black music, a lot of the histories will give the names of places and they talk about Clarksdale in Mississippi or they talk about Memphis in Tennessee--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And after World War II [WWII], we talk a whole lot more about Chicago [Illinois].  But what's the center of blues-making in Arkansas?  Is it Turkey Scratch [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Nah, it ain't Turkey Scratch.  There's another guy from Turkey Scratch.  We got a little old school that we went to, and they keeps that school together.  They keeps it together.  Ain't nobody going to it no more, but they keeps it done, you know.  I don't know who this other guy is.  I ain't never had a chance to meet him.  But he's got a pretty good career, about like mine, I guess, you know.
Speaker 1: So another blue artist--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --from your hometown area?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what's the big blues center?  Is it Helena [Arkansas]?  Would--blues artists want to go where there's a lot of work.
Speaker 2: Well hold on, Helena was the first place where there was black people broadcasting every day.  Me and Sonny Boy [Williamson II] was the first on the air, yeah.
Story_ID: 243321
Speaker 1: Well, there's two Sonny Boys.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And both of them is Williams.  One is Williams [sic. Sonny Boy Williamson I] and the other one [Sonny Boy] Williamson [II].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I was with the one they called Williamson.  I was with the last one.
Speaker 2: All right.  And are you traveling a lot outside of the State of Arkansas in your early career?
Speaker 1: When Sonny Boy and me was on 'King Biscuit [Time]' down--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --we was going all over Arkansas, all over Mississippi, all over Tennessee.
Speaker 2: And for those engagements--I hear a lot about this idea of a juke joint, house-party kind of atmosphere when you're--
Speaker 1: That's what we was playing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's exactly what we were playing, house parties.
Speaker 2: Do they pay--or did they pay very well?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and every once in a while, there would be a school or something like that, yeah.  Well, they was charging so much to come in.
Speaker 2: So you could make a good living?
Speaker 1: A dollar and a half, two and a half, and all like that, yeah.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, could you make a good living as a blues musician?
Speaker 1: Yeah, me and Sonny Boy was making almost a hundred dollars a day every time we play somewhere.
Speaker 2: Well, you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We was on the air too, you know.  So it was being broadcast every day.  We went all over Mississippi and Arkansas and a whole lot of Tennessee and a whole lot of Louisiana.
Story_ID: 243322
Speaker 1: From time to time, I come across stories referring to the blues as the devil's music.  Was the music pretty much well received in your day?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know nothing about the devil, that devil thing.  The white folks done that.
Speaker 1: Did they?
Speaker 2: You know, yeah.  They didn't allow the white boys to play no music.  The white boys start to playing--after they passed eighteen, they started doing what they want to do.  James Brown went on 'The Ed Sullivan Show' and tore it up, and Ed Sullivan didn't know nothing about that.  But James Brown was so popular 'til they finally had him come up there, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so not necessarily the devil's music?  Good music.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: For some folks.
Speaker 2: --I don't know where the devil thing come from (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, no--but seriously, have you heard some of these stories about Robert Johnson, and him having made a deal with the devil at the crossroads?
Speaker 2: I heard all that.  Yeah, I heard about that.  I heard about that way before you did.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what do you make of that?
Speaker 2: What I make of it is B.S., that's what it is.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Say he went to the crossroads and learned how to play and all that, study, that's stupid.  But it's working.
Speaker 1: It's out there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We're here to get rid of some of the myths.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Try to get at the truth.
Story_ID: 243323
Speaker 1: If you're about eight years old when you start with this pump organ, so that's around 1923?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then coming out of [Eliza Miller High] School [Eliza Miller Junior High School; Helena, Arkansas] when you're a young teenager, from thirteen or fourteen, starting to play gigs.  So that's gonna maybe '28 [1928], '29 [1929].  That's [Great] Depression era.  But you say even in the Depression era, blues musicians--
Speaker 2: I was making a good living.
Speaker 1: Made a good living.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, you didn't feel the pinch at all of the Depression?
Speaker 2: Well, nah, we--I never, I never could a felt that anyway.  We--all my people had their own farms.
Speaker 1: And they didn't lose them?
Speaker 2: They ain't never had no hard times.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I read about the farm security, the FSA [Farm Security Administration; Resettlement Administration], and some folks were losing their land during the Depression, but you didn't experience any of that?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Is that land still in the family?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that land's still in the family.  I got some people down there on it right now.
Story_ID: 243324
Speaker 1: In the early 1930s, as you become a young adult, do you move out of Arkansas or when do you make a move to another community, to establish a permanent home?
Speaker 2: I never left Arkansas until--well, my people was in St. Louis [Missouri] and Helena [Arkansas] and Memphis [Tennessee].  And when I left Arkansas, I left Arkansas myself in 1936 and went out in Wyoming.  And I stayed out there until 1939, and I came back home and in 1940, I come to Chicago [Illinois].  In 1941, I went back to Helena and got on the 'King Biscuit Time' and stayed down there about three years and come back to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, so 1941 then, very important year, it sounds like in your career with the King Biscuit connection and also for the country with the start of World War II [WWII].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the family or other folks in the community being especially anxious about the war starting and what that meant for the country?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember when it was going on, but I mean, I never was in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: So no [U.S.] military service?
Speaker 2: Nah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got a ruptured eardrum from boxing.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And that stopped me from going to the service.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, can we talk a little bit about the boxing 'cause I didn't know that was part of your history.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: But I'm sure somebody wants to hear that story.  When were you a boxer?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was seventeen and eighteen, nineteen, and I lost a eardrum, and then my family start saying, "You gonna lose the other one and you ain't gonna be able to play no music."  So I backed away from it.  I ain't heard nothing outta this ear since I was seventeen years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But it hasn't hurt your career.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 243325
Speaker 1: King Biscuit [Flour], that name comes up a lot.  Can you tell me what that company was about and why they're interested in the blues?
Speaker 2: It was a flour company, it was a flour company--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --King Biscuit Flour.  It's ['King Biscuit Time'] still on the air.
Speaker 1: Um-hum, and they're headquartered in what state?
Speaker 2: Helena, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's still on the air.
Speaker 1: All right.  So they sponsored this blues--
Speaker 2: My band is playing the theme song right now, every day, yeah.
Speaker 1: So 1941, you start with them.  Okay.
Speaker 2: It's been on the air a long time.
Speaker 1: Now, is this a live broadcast then when you're playing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a live--
Speaker 1: --for them?
Speaker 2: Well, it's a disc jockey now.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: There's not a--there's not any bands playing now.  It's a disc jockey, but he--they plays my music and Sonny Boy [Williamson II]'s all the time, every day.
Speaker 1: All right, but still basically, a blues format?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, King Biscuit is a white-owned company, right?
Speaker 2: Ah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And I quit King Biscuit and I went to 'Mother's Best,' and I was with Mother's Best for about a year and a half.  And they started drafting the guys in the [U.S.] Army and all that, so I left there and come on back to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: All right.  What do you think the attraction was for these businesses?  Why are they sponsoring a blues show?
Speaker 2: Ah, well, I really can't answer that, but--because I was, I worked for two different companies.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, well, I guess I'm wondering, primarily, has the appeal grown to the point where it's not just in the black community anymore, that there's broad base support for blues music in the 1940s?
Speaker 2: Well, now, the blues is everywhere.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, by 1940?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I bet you, I bet you it's a hundred blues bands here right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And 90 percent of 'em is white.
Speaker 1: Was that the case as early as the '40s [1940s] though?
Speaker 2: Nah.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: White boys wasn't--they couldn't play no--they wouldn't, didn't allow them playing no blues.  Ask him.  He know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Didn't allow 'em to play no blues.
Speaker 1: Okay, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If they played the blues, they got their butt whupped.
Speaker 1: But they heard it.
Speaker 2: Nah, they waited until they got eighteen, and they started doing what they want to do.  You understand what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: Okay, after listening to it on the radio?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so this is before television?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yes, in the same era that we got [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt in the White House [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and he's--the fireside chats, I think they called it.  He's reassuring the American people in a time of war.  They're also listening to the blues.
Story_ID: 243326
Speaker 1: When I broadcasted from Little Rock [Arkansas] for about a year and a half, and there was a hillbilly band coming on in front of me that was well-read musicians.  And what they was doing, they were listening to my program today, and they was playing my same program I played the next day.
Speaker 2: So there was that opportunity for musicians to learn from each other--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --or steal material or whatever.
Speaker 1: --they was coming on behind me, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They'd listen to what I play today, and they'd play it tomorrow.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then when I--finally, we found out--when I found out they was doing that, the two bands joined each other (laughter).
Speaker 2: So there's no segregation in the blues?
Speaker 1: I had six pieces and they had, I think they had six or seven.
Story_ID: 243327
Speaker 1: There's no segregation in the blues?
Speaker 2: Ain't no segregation in music.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: If it don't be for musicians, people wouldn't be coming together like they are.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So even in the days of Jim Crow, the musicians worked together?
Speaker 2: The musicians been together all, ever since they started playing music.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I've heard those things about jazz in New Orleans [Louisiana].  This is the first I've heard about it in the blues.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know too much about--I was in New Orleans with the World's Fair [1984 Louisiana World Exposition, New Orleans, Louisiana] for six months.  And I played different little cities down there, and New Orleans is a terrible town for music.  I mean it's too many musicians in New Orleans, yeah.  They're ten cents a dozen down there.  When I was down there with the World's Fair, they begged me to come to stay.
Speaker 1: Now, approximately when was that, the six months that you spent?
Speaker 2: I think that, I think that World's Fair was 1980, eighty-something, 1980 [sic.].  It was first in Knoxville, Tennessee [as International Energy Exposition], and then it moved to, down there in Mississippi--in New Orleans.
Story_ID: 243328
Speaker 1: You said in '41 [1941], you're doing the 'King Biscuit [Time]' program?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, can I ask you about some of the other musicians who were getting their start in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: James Cotton, Pinetop Perkins, the other Sonny Boy [Williamson I], Little Sonny Boy [Williamson II], Jimmy Rogers, a guy named Willie Love and a guy named Robert [Dudlow] Taylor, which was to be the nickname of Dudlow.  I think Louis Jordan was down there for a minute, Roosevelt Sykes.
Speaker 1: That's a pretty long list, an impressive list.  But, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Robert] Lockwood [Jr.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Otis Spann--
Story_ID: 243329
Speaker 1: I want to ask in this segment about some of that music and some of those musicians coming north as part of the Great Migration that brings so many people from Mississippi--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and the farming communities down there to big, urban areas like Chicago [Illinois] in the era of World War II [WWII].  Okay, were you a part of that migration?  Do you know others who took advantage of that?
Speaker 2: Yeah me and--yeah, I guess maybe I was, but I was kind of early.  Eddie Boyd, Memphis Slim--Memphis Slim whose name was Peter Chatman.  You remember him?
Speaker 1: No, but I'd like to hear more about him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Memphis Slim, Willie Dixon, Roosevelt Sykes, James ["St. Louis Jimmy"] Oden, Muddy Waters, Howlin' Wolf.  I have to think (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, that's a pretty impressive list (laughter), just like the other one.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But can you tell me for a minute about Muddy Waters because his name is kinda like yours in Cleveland [Ohio].  We think we know something about blues and Muddy Waters.
Speaker 2: Well, when Muddy Waters moved to Chicago and Muddy Waters was working as a construction person.  And he finally recorded something for Leonard Chess.  And Leonard Chess stopped him from working.
Speaker 1: In the construction?
Speaker 2: Everybody left, every left Chess' label but Muddy Waters.  And he didn't have nobody on his label to push his label but Muddy Waters.  And he made a giant out of Muddy Waters 'cause he was playing his stuff every day.
Speaker 1: So with Chess Records, was that the obvious choice for blues musicians or did they record (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's the biggest label that ever been in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, headquarters in Chicago.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Chess Records.  So the folks in Chicago will recognize this.
Speaker 2: Well, it was other, other labels there, but Chess got bigger than anybody else.
Speaker 1: Now, are they recording primarily blues artists, or just black artists, or just a variety of different styles of music?
Speaker 2: Well, at that particular time, it was just about all black, at that particular time.
Speaker 1: Is that a black-owned company?
Speaker 2: Nah, nah, nah.  That's--the, Leonard was a Jew.  Leonard and Phil [Chess], two brothers.
Speaker 1: In the 1940s then, I also understand that as the music moved from the South (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) See, in nineteen--in 1940s--pardon me--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --in 1940s, Chess [Records] wasn't there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, Chess come after 1940, about 1944 or something like '45 [1945] or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was RCA Victor [RCA Records].  It was, oh, I can't think of it.  It was another label down there, Vee-Jay [Records], Vee-Jay label, and--
Speaker 1: You know, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Robert] Lockwood [Jr.], I read a little bit about this idea of race records in the first half of the 20th century where people like, say Bessie Smith, for example--
Speaker 2: Like who?
Speaker 1: Bessie Smith.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Early, or Mamie Smith--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --but there'd be a certain category of recordings that were marketed primarily to blacks.  They called 'em race records.  Were they calling them race records in the 1930s or is that something we applied after the fact?  Do you recall hearing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, race records, well, it means--was meaning black, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, that's what it, that's what they was--that was what--that's what they was implying to, the artists being black, yeah.
Speaker 1: So it was understood that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the artists are black?
Speaker 2: See, the race, if it was a race record, it was a black artist.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and primarily blacks are buying the records, but also whites, I suppose if they're hearing the songs on the radio?
Speaker 2: Well, the white people been buying 'em all anyway.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And, you know, here lately I--the white people know mo' about the blues than you do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 243330
Speaker 1: I understand that there was a young man by the name of Elvis Presley who loved the blues also.  Okay, do you remember when his career is just coming to the attention (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah, I remember all of his, yes.
Speaker 1: I see.  So what's the talk then, in the North and the South, about Presley?
Speaker 2: Well, he was, Elvis learned from the black people, but what the--about the music.  And he made a hell of a career out of it, yeah.
Speaker 1: I've seen early pictures of him with [HistoryMaker] B.B. King, but known, of course, primarily as the King of Rock n' Roll.  Okay, was there ever a time that you recall where he's really respected as a blues musician in the South or outside of it?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that rock n' roll came along in Elvis' time.  But he wasn't doing nothin' but singing the blues.  I don't know why they named it rock n' roll, but (laughter).
Story_ID: 243331
Speaker 1: How do we know the blues when we hear it?  I hear a lot about the twelve-bar blues, the Delta blues.  How will I know that when I hear it, that it's twelve bars (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, twelve-bar blues is the blues with three changes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what signals the change?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: What signals the change, I mean?
Speaker 2: Well, you'd have to know a little something about music to understand what I'm--what it's about.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, maybe people watching the tape will know more than I do, so could you tell us?
Speaker 2: See, twelve--see, there's twelve bars, and there's eight bars, and there's a, well, eight bars is, I guess maybe you could call it turning into jazz, you know.  But the twelve bar blues, the blues is--jazz come from blues, you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, I've been told that.
Speaker 2: Did you know that?  You didn't know that?
Speaker 1: Well, I read that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I heard that.
Speaker 2: Well, jazz come from blues.  But music is kind of disturbing if you don't know, you know.  It makes you think it--it makes you think it's kinda phony, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard some recordings by Billie Holiday, for example.
Speaker 2: Billie Holiday.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and one in particular, 'Billie's Blues,' and tell me if this is truly a blues format.  'Billie's Blues,' I think it says, "My man don't love me, treats me awful mean."
Speaker 2: That, that's twelve bar blues.
Speaker 1: Okay, then the second one, yeah--see, I recognize the three lines of text, that second line that repeats the first one, "My, my man don't love me and treats me awful mean," and then the third one, they tell me usually answers a question that's raised in the first two lines or it finishes a thought.  "He's the lowest man I've ever seen."  That's 'Billie's Blues.'
Speaker 2: Ah, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's how I remember it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I can understand the three lines, okay, in the twelve bar blues, but musically, what's the chord progression that we're listening for to signal those changes?
Speaker 2: Well, now that--now, that varies because, see, there's seven keys you can play in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Whatever key, whatever key that you choose, you can still do twelve bars.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's try this.  In the Baptist church, the musicians told me that the preacher's key is B-flat, okay (laughter).  So is there--
Speaker 2: The preacher's key?
Speaker 1: Is B-flat, you know, when the Baptist preachers, in the high way of preaching, that's B-flat.
Speaker 2: Well, they told you a lie.
Speaker 1: Did they?  I'll have to correct them on that.
Speaker 2: Because, I mean nobody has the same key.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: You understand what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Now, everybody's got different keys, you know.  I would say my best, my best key for singing would be maybe G, maybe G.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And, but I sing in a whole lot of different keys, but I'm more comfortable in G or A than I am the other keys.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So they, they can't come up with that name about everything is all in B-flat (laughter).  That's wrong (laughter).
Story_ID: 243332
Speaker 1: But I do want to ask about (laughter) the technology and what that does to the sound of the blues, especially in some of those clubs on the South side of Chicago [Illinois].  It's--we talked a little bit over the break about the amplified sound and the--of the electric guitar that a lot of us associate with the music that Muddy Waters is making, increasingly in Chicago, as we get towards the middle of the 20th century.
Speaker 2: Well, Muddy Waters' style is considered as the bottom line in the blues, complete bottom 'cause Muddy Waters didn't sing.  He preached anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You understand what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: I think I'm beginning to understand, yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: You know, is there a signature piece, a song that anybody who knows anything about Muddy Waters would recognize?  I know a title because I played--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Rolling Stone' ['Rollin' Stone'].
Speaker 1: 'Rolling Stone.'  What about this 'Hoochie Coochie Man,' I heard of that one.
Speaker 2: 'Hoochie Coochie Man.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, can you sing a little bit of that one?
Speaker 2: Can I sing a little bit of it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean in case there are people watching the tape who haven't heard 'Hoochie Coochie Man,' so we can get a sample of the blues.
Speaker 2: Let me see can I think of (unclear).  "My mama told my daddy, when I was born, he's got a boy child comin', he's gon' a rolling stone".  That's about as much as I know (laughter).  I never paid, I never paid Muddy Waters stuff no attention.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So was his style that different from your own style?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah, everybody's style different from mine, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 243333
Speaker 1: Well, I hear musicians say, a lot of jazz and blues musicians say, that's what they like about black music.  You know, it gives you the freedom to improvise and play music the way that you feel it.  Do you find that kind of freedom in performing here locally or touring nationally and internationally?
Speaker 2: Well, like I say, I'm--a lot of things that I write has gotten a whole lot of changes.  I got one song that's got seventeen changes.  That's why I got all this shit.  They got--Cleveland State's [Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio] got me as a--perfecting American music, because I do things that other musicians wasn't doing.
Speaker 1: Well, as the leader of a group, how do you communicate that to the other musicians in the band, in the blues band?
Speaker 2: Well, I only have to do that to the guys who work with me, yeah.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the guys who work with me have to learn what I'm doing.  I don't teach nobody else.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's primarily through the practice sessions then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 243334
Speaker 1: We have you in Chicago [Illinois] in the 1940s, and so I wanna talk a little bit about your work there.  Did you have a good career?  Were you a full-time musician in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well, I--you know, we got a musicians' union [American Federation of Musicians].  Well, I was--I've been the musicians' union ever since 1939.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I played with almost everybody.  I played with Muddy Waters.  I played Roosevelt Sykes.  I played with Eddie Boyd, I played with Willie Mabon, I played with Little Walter, and I played--I played with almost everybody Chess [Records] had.  And they all was different.  So I guess maybe that's the reason my thing is so wide, because I played with everybody.
Speaker 1: So are you primarily playing in Chicago as a studio musician?
Speaker 2: At that time, yeah.  I was with Chess with about, about twelve, thirteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so is that full-time employment then?
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: Oh, all right.
Speaker 2: I was recording with somebody almost, I would say seven months out of the year, I was steady recording with somebody all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, what are some of your most memorable experiences about the days with Chess, some of the work that you enjoyed most?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you would be surprised.  I think the Chess brothers [Leonard Chess and Phil Chess] wanted to be black, and they used a lot of profanity, like, "Good morning, mother--," and you know what that would mean.  "Good morning, son."  You know what that mean, behind "son," right?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And that's the way they lived, and that's the way they was all the time.  They always was--if you listened, just listened to one of 'em, you'd swear they was black anyway.
Speaker 1: So, very comfortable then with blues culture?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And obviously, the music repaid them very well (laughter) through their promotional activities.
Speaker 2: Chess had the biggest company ever been in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when do you decide that you no longer wanna be a studio musician, and perhaps you wanna be out front, have your own group, rather than being a part of someone else's?  When do you make that decision?
Speaker 2: Well, I really didn't make that.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: What happened was, I just got--well, when Chess went out of business, what you gon' do?
Speaker 1: And when did that happen?
Speaker 2: When he died.
Speaker 1: In what year?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I can't think of what, what year [1969] it was.  It ain't been--it's been a good while ago, 'cause right now the--his family can get that money.
Speaker 1: So was that before you came to Cleveland [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: He passed since I been in Cleveland.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I been here forty-four years.
Story_ID: 243335
Speaker 1: That would mean that you're coming to Cleveland [Ohio] around 1960?
Speaker 2: I come here in 1960, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was the attraction for you to come to Cleveland?
Speaker 2: I--Sonny Boy [Williamson II] was living here at that time.  So I came here with Sonny Boy on my way to New York, and didn't get no further.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, that's Sonny Boy Williamson.
Speaker 2: That's the big--that last one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sonny Boy Williamson.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you established a permanent home in Cleveland?
Speaker 2: And I acted a fool and bought a house.
Speaker 1: You bought a house.  Was the blues scene in Cleveland that lively that you could--
Speaker 2: Nah.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so what were you doing to pay the house note?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was running all over the world like I always do.
Speaker 1: So still doing the music?
Speaker 2: I wasn't just playing, I wasn't just playing in Cleveland.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I been running all over the world, all ever since 1940.
Speaker 1: All right, well, during the time that you had your permanent mailing address, at least, in the City of Cleveland, where are you going in the 1960s?  Where are you touring at that time?  Who are you performing with?
Speaker 2: You mean where was I going to play?
Speaker 1: Well, in the '60s [1960s], yeah, is that your group or you're sort of side man with other performers?
Speaker 2: Well, I was going all over in Europe.  I was going to Australia, New Zealand, Canada and Japan.  I've been going to all them places, to and from, every year.  I just slacked up here lately.
Speaker 1: And did you find the--even in the '60s [1960s], that the music was well received in other countries?
Speaker 2: Ah, yeah, I been knowing that for years.
Speaker 1: Why you think that is?
Speaker 2: Well, blues is the biggest, one of the biggest things that's ever been born in music.  And they're everywhere now, all over the world.
Story_ID: 243336
Speaker 1: I heard a man say once that if it had not been for blues, there would be no gospel music, because Thomas [A.] Dorsey was such a popular blues musician before he became the Father of Gospel.  Would you agree with that or what do you think about that?
Speaker 2: No, gospel was before the blues.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: That's--he got that a little backwards.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought so, but I didn't want to embarrass him publicly.
Speaker 2: That was somebody who don't know what he talking about.  Well, he don't know what to say.  Gospel was first.
Speaker 1: Well, I think part of what he said was related to the fact that Dorsey's sort of there in Chicago [Illinois] on the South Side, and that he's really promoting himself as a gospel artist in the 1930s after his experiences with Ma Rainey.  But I suppose, I would argue that (laughter) the church sort of precedes the blues clubs on the South Side of Chicago, so.  But in any case, that was his contention, that the Father of Gospel was also a great blues musician.
Speaker 2: You know, now, I remember when there was ring plays in the country.
Speaker 1: Now, what's that?
Speaker 2: Like, patting your hands, (unclear) Seymour (unclear), satisfied and all that kind of thing.  And right behind, behind that, the blues came.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this ring play, it's sort of popular entertainment?
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) among blacks or--
Speaker 2: --you know, they used to have a dance, and I can't think of the name of it.  But it was, it'd be a ring of people, and they're singing and, "Catch your partner by the hand," and that kind of thing.  And they're choosing each other.  That's way before your time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I barely remember it, part of it, you know.
Speaker 1: So it's a popular social dance?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: A popular social dance among black people.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, this was with the white people too.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Not just square dancing, but--
Speaker 2: That's, that's one of 'em.  That's it, that's one of 'em, square dancing.  That's--you come up with it (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, they still do some of that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, so those kinds of cultural forms are coexisting with blues?
Speaker 2: That was before the blues.
Speaker 1: Oh, really, okay.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was before the blues.
Speaker 1: So, you know, if you had to come up with a birth date for the blues or at least a decade, where would place that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I don't know what, I don't know what dates you would say.  That's a little bit too, a little bit too strong for me.  That's, that's back there with Charley Patton and Son House and Willie Brown and them people.  That was before my time.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: That's where Robert Johnson come from.
Speaker 1: So we could say, perhaps, that blues certainly born before 1915, 'cause that's your time.
Speaker 2: Blues before 1950?
Speaker 1: Fifteen [1915].
Speaker 2: Fifteen [1915]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, before you were born.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I'm a say they started, I would say they come a lot, come along 'bout time I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen [1915] is a pretty good date.
Speaker 1: All right, so in the ear of World War I [WWI], blues, as an art form, has really made its presence now, right around the time of World War I.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 243337
Speaker 1: With this house--getting back to Cleveland [Ohio]--that you bought in Cleveland.  Is there a family in the house with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, by 1960?  Do you have a family in Cleveland with you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I've got a family, got four kids then.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But they don't--don't none of 'em stay with me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They all got they own thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, in the 19--in 1960, when you have that household, who's a member of the family?  Do you wanna mentioned your children's names (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I got--
Speaker 1: --just for the record?
Speaker 2: --Roy [ph.], Charles [ph.] and Larry [ph.] and Debra [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, one girl, and three sons.  All right.
Speaker 2: And they all right here.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And are you married at the time?  Is your wife here too?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Are you married at that time in 1960?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty, 1960?  No, we got married--we was together.  We got married about '65 [1965], I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, would you like to mention her name for the record?
Speaker 2: Her name is Annie, Annie Lockwood.
Speaker 1: Annie Lockwood, okay.
Speaker 2: That's her picture up there on corner.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, maybe we can get a shot of her picture before we finish up.  But do you remember her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Wait a minute.  Let me think.  I think it was Roberts, Annie Roberts, I think that's right.
Story_ID: 243338
Speaker 1: You're buying a home, and then having your family here in Cleveland [Ohio] with you in the 1960s.  Okay.  So why didn't you make it to New York?  What caused you to decide to stay here?
Speaker 2: Well, one thing, we was working at a place called Bob Lovings, Loving's Grill.  It's up there on Hough [Avenue].  And we was working six days a week until Sonny Boy [Williamson II] finally left, and wanted to move to Detroit [Michigan], and left then and went overseas.  So when he left here, me and my family had, was staying on Corey [Avenue] when he left.  And we bought this house right after he left.  But my wife [Annie Roberts Lockwood] wanted a house so we had kids, so we bought this house.
Speaker 1: And you had no desire to move to New York after that, decided to stay here?
Speaker 2: See, what I'm--I've always been a traveling musician all my life.  So I've been known all over the world all my life.  So it don't make no difference where I live, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  So were you able then to support the family just doing the music or were there other things that you did?
Speaker 2: Oh, I--for a while, I worked here.  I worked here for a while.  I worked for Sherwood Drugs [ph.] for a while.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I ran The 79[er Cafe, Cleveland, Ohio] up there, at 79th [Street] and Hough for a while.  I was kinda in semi-retirement at that particular time.
Story_ID: 243339
Speaker 1: Do you remember the Hough riots?
Speaker 2: Hough rights?
Speaker 1: Riots in the 1960s, the riot in Hough [Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Oh, the riot?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, it started where I was working.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell me what happened there to spark that riot?
Speaker 2: It was, I was working in a club called The 79er [Cafe, Cleveland, Ohio].  And The 79er was a corner for prostitutes and pimps.  So one of the girls died; one of the girls, working girls died.  And the guys was--and the girls--the dudes and the men and the girls was trying to take up money to bury her.  And the guys who had owned The 79er didn't want 'em trying to take up money in there.  And that's how come the riot started.
Speaker 1: And what happened beyond that?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: I read--well, there're different accounts and some of them sound more like gossip than history.  And the one that suggests a woman--someone asked for a drink of water--
Speaker 2: Nah.
Speaker 1: --and the white owner of the bar said, no.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: That's not how it happened?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It was about the money.  Okay, we're getting it from a resident of Hough.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Didn't want 'em, didn't want 'em taking up no money in there for to bury nobody.
Speaker 1: And asked them to leave?
Speaker 2: And it went from that to a riot.
Speaker 1: And you're in the middle of that?
Speaker 2: Me and my wife [Annie Roberts Lockwood] had went somewhere.  I think we had went down to see her mother or something like that.  When we come back, we was told, "Don't come to work."
Speaker 1: So you're basically not in the city during the rioting itself?
Speaker 2: I had--
Speaker 1: When there was so much looting and burning and everything else that's associated with the Hough riots, you missed most of that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were out of town or just out of the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was out of town--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --when it started.  When we come back, we just never, never went back to work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the boys put it back together and begged us to run it for a year, and they'd give it to us.  And we just said, "No."
Speaker 1: Was there a lot of property destruction on this street or was Lawnview [Avenue] pretty much spared?
Speaker 2: Well, I was living on Corey [Avenue] at that time.
Speaker 1: Oh, Corey, okay, but still in the Hough community?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did Batch Street [ph.] escape a--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: --a lot of the burning and rioting?  Was that street involved in the rioting at all?
Speaker 2: It was some, every side--I think it was only Hough, yeah.
Story_ID: 243340
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Robert] Lockwood [Jr.], we had just finished talking about the 1960s, you know, the period of the Hough riots [Cleveland, Ohio] and you're establishing a permanent home in Cleveland [Ohio] and raising a family, along with your wife [Annie Roberts Lockwood].  But I wanna talk now about some of the things that you're doing in the 1970s, because I read a note that said your solo recording career, exclusive of the 1941 Bluebird [Records] sessions, began in 1970 with Delmark's [Delmark Records] 'Steady Rollin' Man'?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, what can you tell me about that recording session?  Was that pretty special coming back to solo recording?
Speaker 2: Well, what I done, what I done the 'Steady Rollin' Man' was not a solo recording.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I done that with four pieces.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Who were the other musicians working with you?
Speaker 2: They all--they dead now.
Speaker 1: Okay, but would you mention their names?
Speaker 2: Fred Belo, David Myers and Louis Myers--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that would be guitar (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and myself.
Speaker 1: Lead, bass--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --drums and what's the fourth instrument?
Speaker 2: Had, I had two guitars, bass and drums.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was that an LP?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Was that an LP, or how many songs were on that recording?
Speaker 2: I think it was about nine [sic. twelve].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Nine or ten.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there other albums that you're recording in the 1970s and other musicians that you're working with?
Speaker 2: The one that, Pete Lowry [Peter B. Lowry] got.  (Unclear) it was done right here in this living--in my living room.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, who is this Pete Lowry?  Is he--
Speaker 2: Peter Lowry is the Jewish fellow, just now, and he--I'm not the only one he got.  He got another, a couple of more people, he got their material and mine.  Well, he sends me birthday cards.  He makes a joke out of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was this original music that you wrote and then he recorded here in your home?  He's just collecting the blues for another project or what was that supposed to be?
Speaker 2: He had a label.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: He had a label called Trix [Records], Trix label.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I done it on his label, and he moved to Australia and carried me with him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he's got your music.  All right.
Speaker 2: And he releases it every time I release a record, he releases that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and sells it here--
Speaker 1: Okay, and are you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in America.
Speaker 1: All right, and are you compensated for those sales?
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: Are you compensated?  Do you get royalties or anything from the sale of those records?
Speaker 2: He ain't never gave me nothing.
Speaker 1: Oh.  Okay.  Does that happen often in the blues world?
Speaker 2: It happen often, often in the music world, period.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know whether they been as successful as he have been, but it happens very regular.  Somebody's always trying to rip somebody off, all the time.
Speaker 1: Well, Mr. Lockwood, that's not a very positive experience, but are there other recordings that are more successful in the '70s [1970s] or the '80s [1980s], other recordings that you made in that period where you were able to see some of the profit from the sales?
Speaker 2: Well, all the others I done.  I've, I got royalties from it.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what are some of the other albums then that your group [Robert Lockwood & the Aces] was responsible for producing?
Speaker 2: I done 'Hangin' On' for Rounder Records.  I done a solo album ['Delta Crossroads'] for Telarc this year (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 243341
Speaker 1: Now, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Robert] Lockwood [Jr.], when did you decide that you needed your own label?  Was that a recent decision?
Speaker 2: Nah, I been having my own label now for about fifteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I ain't never, I had never--I never did do nothing on it.  I only got one album on it now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the rest of the things I do is gonna--I'm a put 'em on my own label, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what's the name of your label?
Speaker 2: Name of my company?
Speaker 1: Your label, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Lockwood Records.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's the, the one album that you recorded on that label?
Speaker 2: 'Hanging On'--not 'Hangin' On,' 'What's the Score?'.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was that recently or has that been a while?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: About what year?
Speaker 2: Well, 'What's the Score?' now is about ten years old.  It's about ten years old.
Speaker 1: All right, now, is there some place blues lovers can go and get the whole discography, find out everything that you've recorded throughout your career?
Speaker 2: Oh, you can go to the Copyright Concern, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.  Are you on the Internet?  Because most people like to surf the web and find things.
Speaker 2: Well, I think my wife got mine on the Internet.  I think she have.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the label has its own website?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 243342
Speaker 1: You know, all the record labels consolidated and went into, what you call that, when you don't wanna pay folks?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Bankruptcy.
Speaker 1: Where you don't pay folks?  I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: I know what it is, but I can't call it.
Speaker 1: Is it bankruptcy?  Is that what you're referring to?
Speaker 2: That's it bankruptcy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Telarc's not bankrupt, are they?
Speaker 2: They ain't?
Speaker 1: They are.  Oh.
Speaker 2: Not only Telarc, all of 'em.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Telarc's not bankrupt.
Speaker 2: I've got some mechanical rights from Telarc.  Telarc ain't never paid me not, nothing like he supposed to pay me.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Not--they ain't done it yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that 'Delta Crossroads' who I recorded for him.  You ain't got that on there?
Speaker 1: I think I do remember reading something about that, but I just wanted to hear from you what you make of the--made of the various experiences that you've had here in Cleveland [Ohio].  But I, I also wanted to ask about your membership in the musicians' union [American Federation of Musicians], okay.  Has that been able to help deal with some of these problems and, with contracts and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What you mean with the--
Speaker 1: --and royalties, being in the union?
Speaker 2: You mean--no.
Speaker 1: Okay, that hasn't provided--
Speaker 2: That's something I ain't never been able to come to no conclusion about either, nah.
Speaker 1: So being in the union doesn't help or--
Speaker 2: Now, what is--what good is the union?
Speaker 1: Well, I would hope (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the same thing I say.
Speaker 1: --the union would want its members to be paid fairly and to receive fair compensation for the work that they do.  But they haven't been able to protect, obviously, from some abuses.
Speaker 2: Well, I ain't, I don't, I ain't never confronted the headquarters about that yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess, maybe I'll try it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Headquarters in New York [New York], you know, [Local] 802.
Story_ID: 243343
Speaker 1: And there're a number of honors that you've received, certainly in recent years and perhaps they're long overdue.  But would you like to tell us about some of the honors that you feel especially good about, having received those, either in Cleveland [Ohio] or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm trying to understand what you're asking me?
Speaker 1: Some of the honors and awards that you've received in recent years, in recognition of your work?
Speaker 2: Well, all these things that you see around here--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --yeah, I got ten thousand dollars from President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton's wife [Hillary Rodham Clinton].
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think I saw that note, the National Heritage Fellowship, is that the one?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, presented by Hillary Clinton.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you go to the White House [Washington, D.C.] for that?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that must have been--see, the Clinton years, in the '90s [1990s] perhaps?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So how'd you feel about being in the White House?  Was that your first time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the first time in the White House.  I've--they had it some place else all the other times.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: But I got, I guess--she gave me that in the White House, yeah.
Speaker 1: And that's just a ten thousand dollar cash award?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Heritage Award.
Speaker 1: Yes, the Heritage Award.  Well, congratulations on that.  And then I see that in 1996, Cleveland Mayor, Michael [R.] White, Cleveland's second black mayor, proclaimed February 3rd as Robert Lockwood, Jr. Day.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was there a special concert on that day?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Well, I see--it's in Black History Month so I thought perhaps, it might--
Speaker 2: I know it, I know it.
Speaker 1: Quite an honor too.
Speaker 2: And I also got a day in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The 18th of August.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And now I got a street [Robert Lockwood Jr. Way] downtown.
Speaker 1: In Cleveland?
Speaker 2: You didn't know that?
Speaker 1: No.  I'm learning all kinds of things today.
Speaker 2: Right down the hill.  You know, you go down to Superior [Avenue].  When you get to--instead of going across the ridge, you down the hill.
Speaker 1: Well, here's one thing I do know.  In 2001, you earned your first doctorate.
Speaker 2: My first doctorate?
Speaker 1: That's right, 2001.  Would you like to tell us about that, graduation day, 2001?
Speaker 2: Which one was that?
Speaker 1: I think that was Case Western Reserve University [Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Yeah, Case, yeah, Case Western Reserve.  Then I got Cleveland State [University, Cleveland, Ohio] the next year.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you have two honorary doctorates.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, in recognition of your work as a blues artist.  Okay, well, do you think now that--
Speaker 2: And they had me a wheelchair.
Speaker 1: At graduation?
Speaker 2: They had me a wheelchair.
Speaker 1: Oh.  All right.  Well, you don't use those often, do you?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Do you--you don't use wheelchairs often, do you?
Speaker 2: I don't use wheelchairs, period.
Speaker 1: Oh, so why would they have the wheelchair?
Speaker 2: Well, they had one for me, 'cause they didn't know.  Well, I'll be ninety years old my next birthday.
Speaker 1: But you don't seem to have any problems getting around (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, just, they just assumed that I needed one.  They didn't know, you know.
Story_ID: 243344
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Robert] Lockwood [Jr.], what's the answer then, to helping people to gain a better understanding of the blues?  I know you've done some work at Cleveland State [University, Cleveland, Ohio].  You've lectured in classrooms.  Do you do a lot of that to help people understand more about blues?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah.  I've been to most of the schools here, yeah.
Speaker 1: I know one public gathering that you attended, was at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum here in Cleveland [Ohio], during the Robert Lockwood--I'm sorry, the Robert Johnson tribute, you were there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I didn't do nothing--too much of nothing.  I mean I had a--they had a display on me there.  I had about--my display was about as big as anybody else's, but they ain't put me in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame yet.
Speaker 1: Not yet, but they still have time to get that right.
Speaker 2: Well, really, I don't need it.
Speaker 1: You don't need it, but I think you've earned it.
Speaker 2: I've earned it, yeah.  Yeah, I've earned it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I know educators, historians especially, consult you a lot because of your experiences in playing with, learning from Robert Johnson.  And that was the occasion--well, one of the questions that people asked when you were at the Rock Hall that night--it was during the screening of a film about Robert Johnson.  There was some black and white footage of someone playing guitar.  And they wanted to know if that was him?  And you said, no.
Speaker 2: Ah, yeah, yeah.  They had--yeah, they had a film on somebody who was--that film was, that was done in 1941.
Speaker 1: So it couldn't have been him because he dies in the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 2: That's--he died in 1938.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, that was interesting.  I remember your response.
Speaker 2: And you see how he look up there?  When all the times that I known him, he was dressed just like that.
Speaker 1: And the image on the screen that night was of a man in shirt sleeves.
Speaker 2: That's right.  The man had on a old flop-down hat, and I don't know what he didn't--and looked like a Mickey Mouse guitar.  And that's a Gibson he's got.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Now, well, we don't have a lot of images of Robert Johnson.  I've only seen two, the one of him in the full suit--
Speaker 2: That's the only two.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and then the one of him with the cigarette.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Now, I thought that was interesting when the post office decided to honor him with a stamp--
Speaker 2: And they took the cigarette outta his mouth.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So playing with history.  He smoked.  That's a matter of fact, part of the historical record.  But it didn't go on the stamp.  What do you--how do you feel about that, we go back and fix history so that it makes us feel good.  Did that bother you when they took the cigarette out?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No, it don't--it didn't bother me about them taking it out because the cigarette is--does damages to your health today.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And they just didn't want him to have the cigarette in his mouth.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but he smoked.  It bothers me--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he smoked.
Speaker 1: --as a student of history.
Speaker 2: He smoked, yeah.
Speaker 1: I think there are other lessons that people could have learned just from knowing that he was a smoker.  But when you go back and change things, you know, to suit--
Speaker 2: You know, back in 1938, people wasn't thinking about quitting smoking.
Story_ID: 243345
Speaker 1: I want to ask, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Robert] Lockwood [Jr.], again about the teaching, because I'm trying to see if there's a way that we can bridge the gap from the blues club to the, at least the university campuses, so people won't assume that the blues musicians can't walk, that they need wheelchairs, that we know you, and we know more about blues music.  So I know you used to lecture in Curtis Wilson's classes at Cleveland State [University, Cleveland, Ohio] when he was director of black studies [program].  Are there other academic types who invite you into the classroom to do similar kinds of activities?  If so, do you wanna mention any of their names?
Speaker 2: Well, I've been just about in all these schools.
Speaker 1: Public schools too?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: The public schools in Cleveland [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean the, you know, the high schools--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and the colleges.  Yeah, I've been, just about been in all of 'em.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And it's an experience.  I mean I--a lot of music teachers I found in the schools, they don't teach rhythm changes and all the first jazz is rhythm, is rhythm changes.  And I was wondering why.  Why did they stop teaching that?  They just don't teach it.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you find that students are receptive to the blues, to the lessons that you offer them about the music?
Speaker 2: The new musicians don't even know, they don't even know what these rhythm changes are.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: I done had a couple come right here to this house and sit down, and we fool with the guitars, and I ask 'em about it, and they don't know what it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that means that the new teachers don't, wasn't taught.  The new teachers just wasn't taught rhythm changes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, really, you know who was playing rhythm changes, back, Louis Jordan, all them guys back there, Count Basie, all them people were playing rhythm--Duke Ellington, all of 'em.
Speaker 1: Well, what's the solution to that, I mean so that people can master the art of blues music making (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  I don't know.  I don't know, but I mean, I think it's wrong.  I mean, how you gonna teach something and miss the foundation?  You supposed to start at the foundation, and then change as the times change, you know.
Story_ID: 243346
Speaker 1: Well, do you find that the master musicians today are as generous with their time as maybe Robert Johnson was in sharing his knowledge of guitar playing with you?  Do you find master musicians doing that now with the younger musicians?
Speaker 2: Ah, yeah, they trying, they trying to make a, really trying to make a thing out of it.  I see Buddy Guy and different guys putting, putting their stuff on tape and giving it to the people.  I ain't gonna do that.  I'm not gonna do that.
Speaker 1: You're not giving away the knowledge?
Speaker 2: No, indeed.  No, indeed.
Speaker 1: And if people pay to study with you?
Speaker 2: If they pay, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're willing to share.
Speaker 2: I'm willing to share it.  I'm willing to sell it, yeah.
Speaker 1: No more freebies?
Speaker 2: Nah.
Speaker 1: You know, there's one young blues musician who, again, I met through that Robert Johnson tribute here in Cleveland [Ohio].  His name is Keb' Mo'.  I think his given name is Kevin Moore.
Speaker 2: Kent, Keb' Mo'.
Speaker 1: Keb'--yeah, but Keb' Mo--
Speaker 2: Keb' Mo'.
Speaker 1: --M-O, yeah, something like that.  But anyway, he's a blues guitarist.  What do you think of his work?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm sorry you asked me that.
Speaker 1: Oh, well, should I apologize for asking?
Speaker 2: Nah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But Keb' don't come close to Robert.  He done a film on him at--he was impersonating Robert.  He can't play like Robert Johnson.
Speaker 1: Well, in all fairness to him, there is only (laughter), was only one Robert Johnson, just like there's only one [HistoryMaker] Robert Lockwood, Jr.  And, but I thought it was interesting that he was selected to play that role, and that he tried to interpret the music as best he could.
Speaker 2: What I had been wondering all these years is, if it don't be for me playing his material, people wouldn't know nothing about him.  And these people when they get ready to do that shit, and nobody never said nothing about me.  I can play his stuff.  That's another reason I won't teach nobody nothing.
Speaker 1: Unless they ask?
Speaker 2: The statistics said over fifty years ago that I was the most underestimated good musician in the world; a long time ago.  So I don't know nobody else got doctor's degrees like I got that didn't go to school.  So that means my shit is very rare.
Speaker 1: Well, Mr. Lockwood, I know there're a number of people in Cleveland who are trying to do something about that, to help the world have a better understanding of the life and the work of Robert Lockwood, Jr.  And one of those people is your granddaughter. You want to talk about her work and-- Antonitia Harris and the project she's working on?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I mean, I--now, I know what she's done, and I know why she done it.  And the first thing was, she was trying to get her own doctor's degree, and she asked me could she take my career down there.  And she took it down there.  If she hadn't took it down there, it wouldn't be here because I never would a pulled my record up.  You understand what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, is this a book project that she's working on or just a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She's working on a book for me, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when should we expect to see that book published?  Is that almost completed or just getting started with this?
Speaker 2: We just getting started with it.  Ain't gonna be--ain't gonna take us no long time to do it.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: We should be, we should be finished in the next--by the end of next year, by the end of next year.
Speaker 1: So, by 2006?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, we might see that book.  Okay, so we'll look for that with the author, Antonitia.  Am I pronouncing that correctly, Harris, biographer of Robert Lockwood, Jr.
Speaker 2: Thank you so much.
Speaker 1: Is there any new music on the horizon?
Speaker 2: New music?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, I got--I'm always writing stuff, always.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mind don't work like other folks' (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so we'll just have to keep visiting the website (laughter), and see what new titles are listed there?  Is that a good place to go?
Speaker 2: Yes, you can do that, yeah.
Story_ID: 243347
Speaker 1: See, I got a lot of--I got quite a few records out that, my material don't sound like nobody else's, yeah.
Speaker 2: Who handles the distribution?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Who handles the distribution of your records?  Do you handle that here yourself?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we handle it.
Speaker 2: Okay, so the family works with you--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in getting the music out?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, I don't know that our, the viewers of the video will know, but that's actually a piano in the background, and I see guitar cases, several of them.  How many guitars do you have?
Speaker 1: Ah, I got about, I don't know.  I got about six, six or seven.
Speaker 2: Well, now, if you move, you won't be on camera anymore.
Speaker 1: I done give away two.
Speaker 2: Okay, and if I asked you to play something, would you?
Speaker 1: What you want me to play?
Speaker 2: Well, I want to hear you say, yes, first.  And then I'll give you a song (laughter).
Speaker 1: And I might not know the song, 'cause--
Speaker 2: What if I asked you to play 'Betty Mae' [sic. 'Honeymoon Blues']?
Speaker 1: 'Betty Mae'?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that the blues?
Speaker 2: Yes, the Robert Johnson tune.
Speaker 1: No, that ain't--
Speaker 2: "Betty Mae, Betty Mae," yeah, "you'll be my wife someday."  I heard that.
Speaker 1: Oh, well, I ain't--I don't know that one.
Speaker 2: No, you don't know that one?  Okay, well, I won't sing it.  Let me see if I can think of (laughter)--
Speaker 1: I know 'Love in Vain' and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and quite a few others.
Speaker 2: That's a good one.  Would you sing that one, play that one for us?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'll get the guitar--
Speaker 2: Okay, well, just one moment.  Let's see how we have to do this.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (Singing and playing guitar) I followed her to the station with a suitcase in my hand.  I followed her down to the station with a suitcase in her hand.  You know I was so blue, and I was so lonely, with all my love in vain, with all my love in vain.
Speaker 1: When the train pulled into the station, I looked her in the eye.  When the train pulled into the station, I looked her in the eye.  You know I was so blue, and I was so lonely, I could not help but cry, was my love in vain?
Speaker 2: Hey, hey, whew, Miss Betty Mae, hey, hey, ooh, Miss Betty Mae, hey, hey, hey, whew, Miss Betty Mae, was all my love in vain?  When the train left the station, with two lights on behind, when the train pulled away from the station, with two lights on behind, the blue light was my blues and the red one was my mind, all my love (guitar).
Speaker 1: I'd like to hear how that sound if you got a chance.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Sure.
Speaker 1: I'm kind of hoarse.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Nah, you sound fine--
Story_ID: 243348
Speaker 1: We did mention the name of one family member who's here with us today as an observer, Antonitia Harris, the biographer who's gonna help you finish that book.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But there's, there are some other special people in your life too.  Are you still married?  Are you married at this point?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Are you married?
Speaker 2: Am I married?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what's your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Mary [Lockwood], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, is she from Arkansas also?  Did you meet her here?
Speaker 2: Yes, she's from Arkansas too.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And I know we said that Antonitia is your granddaughter.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But do you have other grandchildren?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I got--yeah.  I got so many, I feel like the old lady lived in the shoe.
Speaker 1: So I shouldn't ask how many?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Have you lost count?  Okay, but just--
Speaker 2: I ain't never knew.
Story_ID: 243349
Speaker 1: You've made a lot of history here in Cleveland [Ohio], and I know you've seen a lot too, you know, having been here during the Hough riots [Cleveland, Ohio].  And they got national attention.  But I wonder now, in 2005, are there any things that concern you greatly about being black in America?  Do you have any special concerns for the race in 2005?
Speaker 2: I really don't think so.
Speaker 1: You think we're gonna be all right as a people?  I like your optimism (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I'm okay.
Speaker 1: All right.  (Laughter) Is there anything else that you, you'd like to say about music or history?
Speaker 2: Well, I wish I could get paid for what I--some of the things I've done that I should get paid for.  I can't say that I don't want that.  Little guy [Peter B. Lowry] got my material in Australia and don't want to--won't nobody go at him.  But I'm, I have to keep trying and probably find out, probably find an organization that will go at him, 'cause ain't no one lawyer gonna get it.
Speaker 1: Well, Mr.--
Speaker 2: I know, I know that there's--there have been some lawyers who have confronted him about that, and they got paid.  I know that.
Speaker 1: Well, I hope that situation gets resolved (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Willie Dixon got a--Willie Dixon died.  He got a foundation in Chicago [Illinois], called Blues Heaven [Foundation] that's supposed to do that kind of work.  And I had one guy looking into that, and he ain't never said nothing.  So I know he been paid.
Story_ID: 243350
Speaker 1: You know, I wanted to ask also, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Robert] Lockwood [Jr.], about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pardon?
Speaker 1: Wanted to ask about some ongoing relationships with folks in the South, since blues music is rooted in the South.  I heard a little while ago that there was some special project in Cleveland, Mississippi trying to make a stronger tie with musicians who were in Cleveland, Ohio.  Are you involved in that at all?  Any of the efforts to--
Speaker 2: I don't know nothing about it.
Speaker 1: No?  Okay.  I think this was something that was initiated by the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum [Cleveland, Ohio].  Okay, but there seemed to be a lot of interests or growing interests in the blues, at least in some of the institutions around town.  Okay.  But you're not involved in that?
Speaker 2: I don't know nothing about that.
Speaker 1: All right, do you tour the South very often, going to Clarksdale [Mississippi] and other places, or you're mostly playing in northeast Ohio?
Speaker 2: No, I go all over the world like I always do.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do a thing down in Arkansas, called the King Biscuit [Blues Festival] (unclear).  I been doing that ever since--I'm the cause of that being there.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, so there's an annual (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's the biggest festival in the world.
Speaker 1: Okay, when is that one?
Speaker 2: The second weekend in October, every year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Four days.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And we have two and three hundred thousand people down there.
Speaker 1: Isn't there a big blues festival in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: That's the biggest one in the world.
Speaker 1: Oh, Arkansas--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --is the biggest one.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: For the record.  Okay.  Are there others that you look to each year?
Speaker 2: All, all of the festivals that they have is okay, but Helena [Arkansas], all them casinos is in Mississippi.  You understand what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And people come down there to them casinos, period.  And the next thing about it, the 'King Biscuit Time' festival is free.  Most of the other festivals, you have to pay to go inside of it.  They have to pay to come in the gate.
Speaker 1: And you said that's in October.
Speaker 2: That's in October.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Every year.
Speaker 1: And you plan to be a part of that this year?
Speaker 2: I have to be there every year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have to be there every year.
Speaker 1: Well, Mr. Lockwood (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If I'm living, I have to be there.
Speaker 1: This is your ninetieth--
Speaker 2: They give me six or seven thousand dollars to come down there, period. Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 243351
Speaker 1: Well, this is your ninetieth year on the planet, and I'm just wondering, are you planning any special birthday celebration to celebrate that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: There's a party in the works?
Speaker 2: You know, all my life I ain't never really counted on no holiday.  And like I say, I ain't never had a vacation.  I ain't never had one.  Everywhere I ever went I was working.  I ain't never went nowhere for a vacation.  To tell you the truth, I wouldn't even go for a vacation.  The plane might fall, and I'm going to have fun, uh-uh, nah.
Speaker 1: So it's all about work?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Is it all about work?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean it's supposed to be; you're supposed to have a purpose.  And I ain't got no purpose to die trying to get somewhere for nothing.  I don't have that purpose, 'cause if I got to fly, I hate flying.  Now, I might drive somewhere, but I ain't gonna fly nowhere for no fun.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, about that ninetieth birthday, are you planning to have some fun or will you be working--ninetieth birthday (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I will be working three days.  I have three birthdays every year--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --three.  And I'm working on all three of 'em.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And where are those birthday activities taking place in 2005?
Speaker 2: One's at Fat Fish [Blue, Cleveland, Ohio], and one's at Peabody's [Concert Club, Cleveland, Ohio], Peabody's at 22nd [Street] and Euclid [Avenue], and one is at the Savannah [Bar & Grille] club [Cleveland, Ohio], way over there on Detroit [Road], 200 and something out--it's way out there, come off at Crocker Road.
Speaker 1: Well, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Robert] Lockwood [Jr.], it sounds like working then is one of your favorite things to do?
Speaker 2: Well, not really, but I just don't--I just don't have no vacations.  I ain't never had one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know what I would do on a vacation (laughter).
Story_ID: 243352
Speaker 1: There are four short questions that I do want to ask you now, before we wrap things up--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because maybe your warning scared me, I don't know, but I didn't ask them at the beginning.  And I do want them to be a part of the interview.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color.  I have favorite colors.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not color.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I like brown, I like black, I like gray and I like blue.
Speaker 1: How about favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food?  Meatballs and spaghetti is one.  Turkey and dressing and chicken and dressing is two.  Shrimps is three.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Time of year?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Nah.
Speaker 1: You like the whole year?
Speaker 2: I don't have that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and my last question, do you have a favorite saying?
Speaker 2: Day?
Speaker 1: Saying, favorite saying or a motto.
Speaker 2: Oh, I like a few games, and I like checkers.  I like pool--
Speaker 1: Oh, so that's a favorite pass time?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I play pool, and I play checkers.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you have a favorite saying or words of wisdom, something that's inspired you over the years?  Proverbs, words of advice?
Speaker 2: I really don't think so.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, it was good talking with you.  Thank you so much for allowing us to come into your home.
Speaker 2: Well, listen, I hope you can do something with it that--
Speaker 1: I'm sure we will.
Story_ID: 243353
Speaker 1: That's [HistoryMaker] Robert Lockwood [Jr.].
Speaker 2: Do you remember when that was taken?
Speaker 1: No, I don't.
Speaker 2: Nineteen nineties [1990s] maybe, more recent photo?
Speaker 1: Aye, aye.
Speaker 2: Good guess?
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety [1990].
Speaker 2: Ninety--'90 [1990], somewhere around in there?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: Oh, Lord, I don't know when that was taken.  That's a old one there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Say 1960.
Speaker 1: You think that's 1960?
Speaker 2: Something, 1962 or something like that.  I kinda remember that suit.
Speaker 1: That was about in the, in the late--early '80s [1980s], maybe '81 [1981] or '82 [1982].
Speaker 2: And who is that with you?
Speaker 1: He gone.  That's Johnny Sands [ph.].  He gone, too--he was the same age.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That is, I called his name, and I can't call it no more, Jimmy Witherspoon.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Jimmy Witherspoon, he dead too.  That was in California.  He used to be with Muddy Waters.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, and an unidentified drummer.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's the lady that laid the golden egg.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: And who is that in the picture with you?
Speaker 2: That's Mary Lockwood.
Speaker 1: Okay, is this a recent photo?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's recent.
Speaker 1: Okay, maybe 2004?
Speaker 2: Be about four years, three years--three or four years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's Case Western Reserve [University, Cleveland, Ohio], right?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Let's see, is that your first doctorate?
Speaker 2: That's my first doctorate, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, it has a date: May 20, 2001.
Speaker 2: Is all that, all that's Cleveland State [University, Cleveland, Ohio], right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead, sir.  Give us a quick description for this one.
Speaker 2: Okay, you ready, Mr. Lockwood?  You wanna tell us what's going on here?
Speaker 1: Oh, that's [National] Heritage [Fellowship] award.
Speaker 2: Okay, and that was, I think, 1995, was it?
Speaker 1: Something like that.
Speaker 2: And who's that in the picture with you?
Speaker 1: Mrs. Clinton, Hillary [Rodham] Clinton.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Description for this photo here, the one in the upper right.  Just tell us something about this photo on the tape.
Speaker 2: What about it?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know none of those people.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  What's happening here?  Is this--
Speaker 2: That's, doctor's degree.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  From?
Speaker 2: That's from Cleveland State.
