Story_ID: 10016
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: John Levy, J-O-H-N, L-E-V-Y.
Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Nah.
Speaker 1: A nickname?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April the 11th, 1912.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where were you born?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) In New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm called a personal manager for, more or less, manage entertainment, entertainment, people in the entertainment industry.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you had a long career of that, right, when you--?
Speaker 2: I've had a long career of that, yes.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I have to pause.  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: Right, okay.  Sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 1: Today's date is October 7, 2004.
Speaker 2: Right, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: At the present time, you are seated in my living room, my home in Altadena, California.
Story_ID: 10017
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Red beans and rice.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question of this series is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying, that's a tough one 'cause I don't really recall having any particular phrase that I can recall that I use at, you know,--.
Speaker 1: Okay, well--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) No, don't have one.
Story_ID: 10018
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name, full name is Laura, L-A-U-R-A, Hagan, H-A-G-E-N, H-A-G-A-N, sorry, Levy, L-E-V-Y.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I really don't know.  She was born in New Orleans [Louisiana].  The date of birth, I don't know.  I don't--.
Speaker 1: What would you guess--about how old was she when she had you?  Do you know or have any idea?
Speaker 2: Well, she--let's see.  She died in '49 [1949], I think it was--no, she died long before that.  Oh, wow, I would say--she died when she was forty-nine years old.  I remember that, and I was eighteen I think, so you figure it from that, the difference.  Go back and do a little arithmetic (laughter), and you come close to it.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, she was in the 1880s maybe, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it'd have to be somewhere around there, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she was born in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: In New Orleans, yes.
Speaker 1: All right, now, tell me what do you know about her side of the family?  How, I mean how far back, first of all, can you trace the ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: I can only go back to her mother and father.  I didn't know about anybody else past them.  And I knew them, which is, was my grandmother and my grandfather.
Speaker 1: What were their names?
Speaker 2: Caroline was my grandmother's name, Caroline Hagan, and my grandfather was Thomas Hagan, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did they talk about growing up in the South or in Louisiana or New Orleans?
Speaker 2: Not--.
Speaker 1: Were they from New Orleans themselves?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they were from New Orleans, right.  No, but I don't think they were born in, in New Orleans.  I think my grandfather was born some place down in the islands.  I, I don't even recall where it was.  So, and the, you know, the time span has been so long ago, you know, from the time when, when, you know, they died when I was very young, teenager, in fact, I wasn't even a teenager when my grandfather and grandmother died.  So, it's, you know, it's--history goes back so far, and I never bothered to, to do much tracing about it at all, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, did they talk about, you know, they never talked about what life was like when they grew up or anything or tell stories about New Orleans in the nineteenth century or did she--did they talk about the Civil War or the Reconstruction or the riots down there?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) The only thing, the only thing I remember my grandfather talking about was, was the Spanish and American War and because his son, one of his sons, his oldest son was in that war.  But other than that, that's about the only thing.  They didn't talk about slavery, and it was never any discussion about--cause they actually weren't slaves, they weren't--they didn't have the slavery, experience of being slaves.  Their, their parents did, but they didn't.  And other than that, that's--they'd talk about their children, families, and, you know, which were my aunts and uncles and so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's about it.
Speaker 1: All right, what did you mother's side of the family do in New Orleans for a living?
Speaker 2: My mother was a midwife and trained nurse.
Story_ID: 10019
Speaker 1: My father worked as a, for the railroad.  In other words, he worked as what was known as a stoker.  In other words, he went to the roundhouse where the engines are kept, and he would start a fire for the engineers to run the steam engines.  That was his job.
Speaker 2: Now, what was your father's full name?
Speaker 1: What was my father's what?
Speaker 2: Full name?
Speaker 1: John Levy.
Speaker 2: John, okay, same as--so you're John Levy, Jr. or?
Speaker 1: Yeah, at one time I was, but (unclear) dropped the junior a long time ago.
Speaker 2: And do you know his birth date and place of birth?
Speaker 1: No, he was born in New Orleans, but I don't know his date of birth.
Speaker 2: Okay, do you know much about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 1: Very little, very little.  I know that my grandfather on my father's side was Paul, Paul Levy.  And he had a brother, Nelson.  My grandmother, I, I can't even remember her name.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, in your book, now, I read that, that the name Levy came from--.
Speaker 1: Slave--.
Speaker 2: Yes, a Jewish slaver master.
Speaker 1: A slave owner, Jewish slave owner, that's correct.
Speaker 2: So that's some history.  Can you tell us about that?  Is there any more about that to tell?
Speaker 1: Well, that, I did hear my father talk about that, that his father had been, you know, work--a slave.  His father had been, been in--but all of the, all of the slaves on that plantation pretty much went by the name Levy.  And I never bothered to trace any of that, you know, during my lifetime.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, do you have any idea where that, the Levy plantation was?
Speaker 1: Yes, in Plaquemines Parish, Louisiana.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think that you might find out how it's spelled and everything in the book, in my book ['Men, Women, and Girl Singers'].  I think I named that.
Speaker 2: Right, I've heard of that before, Plaquemines Parish.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Louisiana, that's, that's where.
Speaker 2: All right, okay, so are there any stories that your father's people tell about those days?
Speaker 1: Not really, nah.
Speaker 2: Did you know your grandparents on your father's side?
Speaker 1: No, no more than my--I remember my grandfather and my grandmother.  In fact, my grandmother, who was, spoke pâté [sic, patois].  In other words it's a, it's a--not French, it's, it's an offspring of that language.  And I, I didn't understand what she said most of the time.  I can't, I can't recall a conversation with her as a child that, that I could, you know, relate to or talk about because I didn't understand her, what she was saying.
Speaker 2: Would she be considered a Creole?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes, exactly, yeah, exactly.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Now, were any of your relatives musicians?
Speaker 1: My uncle wasn't a musician, but he was, he sang in a choir, you know, and he was a singer.  And then he went off in a group at one time, a singing group, quartet, something like the, you know, like you have the groups now, you know, of going out to churches and singing in different churches across the country like that.  He did that.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--?
Speaker 1: That was the only actual music person that I, was connected to my family.
Speaker 2: And he traveled around the country singing?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he traveled around the country with a group, for a period of time.  He didn't do that basically as a living and stayed with it.  This was like an extra curricula activity of his, during his lifetime.
Speaker 2: Okay, do you remember the kind of music they--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was religious music.  It wasn't what we call--what do you call this music now, that the churches have?  It's--I don't know, you know, it wasn't that kind of music (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, so--.
Speaker 1: But they sang hymns, you know, and they had quartets.  And it was a quartet that sang hymns and stuff like that, but it was pretty much the legitimate hymn score.  It wasn't the type of thing that finally evolved in the church.
Story_ID: 10020
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your--or do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did--.
Speaker 2: I can explain something that makes it difficult for me to know anything about them because, first place, my father [John Levy] was not an educated person, yet my mother [Laura Hagan Levy] was pretty well educated.  But I guess the shortage of, of males in the, in, you know, black males at that time, and the few that had--were able to have an education on the same level say as, as my mother, and most of her family had, didn't exist from his side of the family.  So I, I don't know how--I often thought about it, how they ever met, how it was compatible that they would be married because he was very, a very quiet man.  I, the only relationship I had with him was like he would take me to baseball games.  He loved baseball, and that, in those days, it was the black baseball league.  And he used to take me to the White Sox Park [Comiskey Park] in New--in Chicago [Illinois] to see these different black baseball players.  Like that's where I first saw 'Satchel' Paige and those kind of people that evolved during that era.  So it was, it was a, kind of a--it never was like a discussion, a family discussion about the family or where they came from or what they did together as kids or anything like that.
Story_ID: 10021
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: None.
Speaker 1: None, okay.  So was your mother [Laura Hagan Levy] at home most of the time or did she work too?
Speaker 2: She worked out of the house to a great degree, when I was very young, you know, in, in New Orleans [Louisiana].  But when we moved to Chicago [Illinois], she worked with a couple of doctors.  She never was able to get her license for some reason.  I never knew the reason why, to per--to actually become registered nurse, for whatever reasons.  I didn't, I really don't know, but she still practiced working with certain doctors as a midwife, basically, and which is mostly with, delivering babies or abortions or whatever, you know.
Speaker 1: I know one of the famous baby doctors in Chicago is a Dr. [Edward W.] Beasley.  Did she--?
Speaker 2: I remember him, I remember that name, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: There's a school named after him [Beasley Academic Center, Chicago, Illinois].  He was a black doctor--.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.  He was very popular, very prominent.
Speaker 1: Did she ever work with Dr. Beasley?
Speaker 2: Nah, nah, she worked with a Dr. Mason.  I remember his name because he was like the family too, right to the end, you know, our family doctor.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, there were certain doctors that she would work with, and she knew that she--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, because she was doing it, you know, without her being licensed to do it.  So--in fact, later on in her life, there were several problems, which I didn't--at the time, I didn't know why we were moving from place to place, and certain things.  But it was because of certain problems like that, you know, yeah.
Story_ID: 10022
Speaker 1: Now, you spent the first five years or five and--maybe seven--.
Speaker 2: Maybe five or six years [1912-1917] in New Orleans [Louisiana]--.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --then went to Chicago [Illinois], then went back to New Orleans when I was about eleven or twelve years old and spent a couple of years [1923-1925] in New Orleans at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you--they went back around eleven or twelve?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and stay too, with my grandparents because it was a while before they finally all moved to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they, but everybody else had moved, father [John Levy], mother [Laura Hagan Levy], brothers, all of them except one--well, nah, they didn't really.  It was only two of the brothers of my father's bro--of my mother's brother that moved to Chicago.  That was the youngest one who was the singer, and the other bro--the other brother was--well, nah, it's only one.  Nat was the only one.  He was the only one.  None, none of the rest of her brothers ever moved completely to Chicago.  So there was only the one brother.  The rest of them stayed in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?  What's your first memory of childhood?
Speaker 2: Well, my only childhood memories were basically what you do when you go to church, you know, and you listen to the church choirs.  And I loved to watch the parades were almost every day because the form of advertising at the time I was a child in New Orleans was through music.  In other words, there would be floats.  And they'd have maybe five or six piece band on the float.  And they would play, you know, the popular music of the day which was Dixieland more or less kind of, type of music.  And I would--they'd pass through the block and stop on every corner and play maybe one or two songs.  And they had big signs on the side of these floats telling about a fish fry on the weekend or about, even movie, even the movies had floats.  They had big floats with, with the pictures of the movie that was gonna be shown at the local theater.  And these floats would pass through your neighborhood, and they'd, they'd have somebody playing some music so it would bring you out.  And maybe somebody would announcing through a bullhorn, you know, that so and so and so will be appearing at such and such a movie house.  And then I, at that--used to, I used to follow that.  In fact, I used to, I got in trouble for going further than one block which I--in other words, I went past the block.  I had a very strict childhood.  You know, you don't go past the block.  You'd, if you're outside playing, you come home before it gets dark.  And you have to tell them where you're going, where you went, who you saw (laughter).  It was kind of a rigid thing.  I, I always--I guess it was a protection because I was the only child.
Speaker 1: You know, now, I, I've never heard that before that they floats advertising--and that was a, so that was another way for musicians to make money, to earn a living, I guess that--.
Speaker 2: I guess so, yeah.  I, I didn't know how they got paid 'cause I was too young to know anything about how they got paid or what was payment for them, but, yeah, that, that was a form of, of the mu--just like music is a form of the advertising today, the background music for commercials, for films, you know, and everything.  So this is the same way.  But I remember that very well, yeah.
Story_ID: 10023
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in, well, in New Orleans [Louisiana], and you could add some Chicago [Illinois] too if you want to.
Speaker 2: Well, the, the sight, the sounds and smells, the smell in New Orleans was strictly food.  You know, I mean, all that type of really great seafood, gumbo and, and fish, seafood--in fact, it was almost a popular thing for people to have fish frys to raise money.  They'd have a fish fry on the weekend and, and churches had those kind of affairs.  And that, that was pretty much it, you know, and the music and the smells and sound--of food.  As far as sight, sight things, as I say, was those signs, parades and everything.  I learned to read very young because I used to try to read signs, and, and by my mother [Laura Hagan Levy] being very well educated and my--we lived, where I was born, it's called a half a house.  In other words, it's a house made where it's split right down the middle.  And it's such--we could hear people next door talking, and they could hear us in our, in our place.  And that home is still there.  I went, and I shot pictures of the house.  I was never able to go back in and see how it looked because every time I was in New Orleans and went by, there was nobody home at this place.  But I shot pictures of it and everything which are in my book ['Men, Women, and Girl Singers'].  And other than that, other than that, for sights, I don't recall anything particular that I noticed.  The riverboats, street cars, and, you know, just things, the visceral things that you normally see.  We went to the movie houses and had to sit way up in the buzzards roost as we used to call it, all the way up top somewhere, you know.  If you're black, you had to sit up there.
Speaker 1: And so everything is pretty much segregated?
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely, definitely, yet we lived in a neighborhood where next door to me, when I was a kid, was an Italian family.  And we'd go to their house, and they'd come to our house.  And I didn't really realize the really prejudices, the difference really until I started to going to school, really.  And then when I found out--because I lived right near a school, but I couldn't go to that school.  And I used to see all the white kids going there, you know.  I didn't know that was the white school.  You couldn't go there.  You had to go to a black school.  And another experience I had is on the streetcars, you had to sit behind a screen.  And my godfather was a Creole, a very fair-skinned, just like they mistake you for a Arab or something, they mistook him, he was white.  In other words, he was a Creole, he looked like a white man.  And he used to take me shopping.  And he'd come and get me, but I'd have to stay in the back, and he used to tease me about it, in fact, which was terrible as you look at it later on because it put an insecurity into a very young child, that you can't go, you've got to stay back here.  And he'd go up front all the way up to where the motorman was on the trolley.  They had a motorman there, the conductor on the back end.  And we had to sit behind a screen.  The screen had--each sheet had a little hole in it where this screen could be moved up and back, depending on the number of people in the streetcar, but you couldn't go past that screen if you were black, you couldn't--that was it.  You sat behind the screen, and you stood behind the screen.  You never walked up and stood, when the streetcar was loaded or--that's, that's the way it worked.
Speaker 1: Now, that, yeah, I've heard of those kind of stories before, but--.
Speaker 2: Oh, I've lived them, all kinds of ways (laughter), oh, yeah.  I've had that experience in person.
Story_ID: 10024
Speaker 1: And in terms of sights and sounds, did you ever see Mardi Gras in New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, every year, when I was a child, yeah, Mardi Gras, it comes around February.  You remember that.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, it doesn't come around for the rest of us so (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, it comes around every year.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Yeah, it's something that you take for granted, but, you know, it doesn't come around--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) If you live in New Orleans, we were at Mardi Gras every year 'cause it was there (laughter).
Speaker 1: What was it like?
Speaker 2: Well, you just went down, watched the parades, and, you know, tried to get whatever they threw out to you, little beads and stuff, you know, and all of that.
Speaker 1: Did you participate at any time--?
Speaker 2: Not as a child I didn't.  Later on in life, I, I, I--when I went back down there, I was in the parade at one time, one of the parades when I was a teenagers, when I went back there.  But other than that, no, I never participated in the parades, just watched it.  And since I've been grown, of course, I've been there several times during Mardi Gras, most recent a few years ago, my wife [Devra Hall] and I went.  And we were invited down and were really--that's when I really learned a lot more about Mardi Gras than I ever did the whole period of time that I lived there because I saw the inside thing of how they, how they, you know, all of the fest--festive things that happen before the actual parades.  And we attended, a friend of mine down there, you know, that I met through going down there to do concerts with different artists managed.  And I got to know him because he used to take everybody around for me, like you know, they'd pick them up at the airport and take--when [Julian] 'Cannonball' [Adderley] or Nancy [Wilson] or Joe Williams or anybody went to New Orleans, he always picked them up.  So he got to be a close friend of mine that way.  And whenever I went to down, he always picked me up, and take me around to all the best restaurants that, you know, that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 10025
Speaker 1: You were about five years old when you all moved, right, back to--I mean moved to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: To Chicago, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, and that was about, oh, we're talking about near the close of World War I?
Speaker 2: In 1917.
Speaker 1: Now, did, was anybody--did anyone in your family serve--?
Speaker 2: The race riot, I got to, yeah, I was in Chicago in the 1919 race riot.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell, did you, had you just arrived in Chicago when it happened?
Speaker 2: We had arrived in Chicago a little before the race, the race riots, yeah.  I guess it was really around 1917--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and eighteen [1918], you know, around that time, 1917, 1918 when I came to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Now, where did your family live?  Did you live in the black belt?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we lived in a, you know, area that was strictly black.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and about, whereabouts?
Speaker 2: 31st Street in Chicago, 31st was the first place I stayed, the first place we lived when we came to Chicago.
Speaker 1: 31st and?
Speaker 2: And it was like an apartment building, but it had a, kind of a lobby for a cabaret.  And in this cabaret was King Oliver, Jerry's trumpet player.  And they had signs in the lobby of this place, I remember, and that's the first time I saw a picture of Louis Armstrong, and he was coming there to play with King Oliver at this nightclub.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the club?
Speaker 2: I think it's in my book.  I don't remember it off of my head now.  I don't think I remember the name of it now.
Speaker 1: And just for the record, we have your book, and your, the name of your books is 'Men, Women, and Girl Singers'.
Speaker 2: That's correct, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that was just recently published [2001].  So.
Speaker 2: Yeah, within the last four or five years, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you were at 31st and what?  Now, we, see--?
Speaker 2: 31st, and, and would be Calumet [Avenue].  That was practically the location.
Speaker 1: So that was near what was then called Grand Boulevard, right, on the other side of--?
Speaker 2: Not too far, but it was no Grand Boulevard then.  It was, you know, I don't know what the streets were around there.  The only major street I remember, 31st Street, the cross streets, 31st, 35th [Street], 43rd [Street] 47th [Street].  These were the big cross streets.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Then there's Cottage Grove [Avenue], which was a street that run--I guess it ran north and south, I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, north and south.  And that was a big street.  And that was the second place we moved after we were there, when we moved to a bigger place when some of the other parts--and my uncle and all of them, some of the family mem--when, when our family members really came in, the rest of the family that did follow us, that's where we moved.  That's where my grandfather and grandmother and all--we lived in that house on Cottage Grove.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause here and change tapes.
Speaker 2: Twenty-nine thirty four, [2934] I think it was.
Speaker 1: 2934 Cottage?
Speaker 2: Uh.
Speaker 1: 2934 Cottage Grove?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, which is now where a big hospital is located, Michael Reese has got all of that area, that whole area is Michael Reese Hospital [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 10026
Speaker 1: We were talking about ice delivery, and how did--explain how the ice was delivered again?
Speaker 2: Well, ice was delivered, it was an alley--in Chicago [Illinois] almost every street had an alley that split between the two streets.  And all of the deliveries were done through these alleys.  All the peddlers went through these alleys, whatever you were selling; like you're selling vegetables and whatever, and delivering ice, delivering any of the products that was necessary, you'd go through the alleys with it.  And in the case of ice in those days--cause it was no other refrigeration, you had to buy ice every day or, yeah, every other day, however your refrigerator, how big your refrigerator was.  And there was a yellow sign from the ice company.  And it had four different sizes of ice that you could buy.  And you put your sign out to let the iceman know, when he comes down the alley, he'd know which size, piece of ice you wanted, the twenty-five, the fifty or the seventy-five or very rarely, a hundred because nobody had refrigerators to hold a hundred pounds of ice, you know, a hundred pound piece of ice.  But that, that was, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you say in those days a person could make money delivering things like ice?
Speaker 2: That was the way that, a lot of people had made their living that way.  Even, even junk dealers made their living that way.  They'd drive down the--Oscar Brown, Jr. did a thing where he did a song about the, the, about the different peddlers and how they had their little--we could hear them for blocks.  They had a little sing-song, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you remember how they went?  I mean how, can you remember one of them?
Speaker 2: No, I, I, I beg to remember it, but I can't, I can't really sing it like they did.
Speaker 1: I know when I was a kid, when I was a kid even, and I'm much younger than you, they had, we used to have a guy that would sell watermelons or sing there in Dayton, Ohio.  He'd sing, you know, watermelon, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had a little song with, with, with whatever they did.  And you'd hear them, and you'd go out and, run out and get whatever you wanted, you know, go down to the wagon and get the vegetables or you'd go to the wagon and you'd get--even bread deliveries.  Later on, when I got married, the first job I had was working for a bakery, and, and that's what I did.  It was like a bakery delivery.  And you delivered bread to, to people.  But he didn't have a very good route, and, and it didn't last long, you know, that job didn't last long for me.  But that was, I--that was the only peddlers' job I had, ever had, yeah.
Story_ID: 10027
Speaker 1: Your family was in Chicago [Illinois] a couple of years before, and 1919, you said the race riot hit?
Speaker 2: That was Chicago, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you remember about the race riot of 1919?
Speaker 2: Oh, I remember how it started.  I remember knowing that it started on a beach right, right near where I lived.  I lived at 29th Street, and it started at a beach at 31st Street and the lake [Lake Michigan].  And it was like a, you know, racial thing where it got to--then it just spread like wildfire all over the city.  And I remember most black men who had jobs outside of their neighborhood was afraid to go to work, you know, go, go to, say the other side of town.  Like my father [John Levy] had to go to the stockyards, and they were afraid to go, to actually go to work, you know, because of, of the, of the race riots.  And it, it didn't last that long, but it was, I remember it being very violent times.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, you know, when most people these days think of a riot, they think of black people tearing up the black community and, but most of the stories--.
Speaker 2: No, that, that didn't happen.
Speaker 1: That wasn't the same kind of riot?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, they didn't tear up the (chuckle)--.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the difference in this one?
Speaker 2: The difference in this one was that, that they--they went outside of their neighborhood, they ran into problems.  And the whites didn't come in, into the black neighborhood looking for you or nothing like that.  But when you had to go outside of your own neighborhood, that's when you had to fight your way outside of it, in order to--so they formed gangs and everything to try to protect themselves whenever they went anywhere.  And then finally it was, they broke the thing up, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you see, did you witness any of this violence?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I was too young to be allowed to go out in it and everything, but I'd hear--there's, the only time I heard conversations and, and in the newspapers, it was out about it, and, you know, and people reading and all that.  And I heard things and discuss it, you know, at the dinner table.  Like at the dinner table, that was the discussion.  This is like we turn on the television for the 6 o'clock [P.M.] news.  Well, that was like the 6 o'clock, was to sit at the dinner table and talk about everything that happened at work and what you did that day, and so that's how you got a lot of the news.  Of course, there were newspapers, and my parents [John Levy and Laura Hagan Levy] read every--except my father.  He was a very, very, very slow reader cause he didn't have the education to read very well, you know.  So he'd--but he still sort of spelled his way around, 'cause I remember him with the paper trying to read it, you know.  And, and when they would talk about things and everything.
Speaker 1: Okay, did anybody in your family get hurt in the riot at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 10028
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little boy?  What kind of a little fellow were you?  What were you thinking about and what were you like?
Speaker 2: Well, I think just sort of enjoyed the family thing, being the only child, I was kind of spoiled, and I pretty well had my way to do what, you know, except there were certain rules, strict rules, as I mentioned earlier; that I couldn't go out of that block, and I couldn't go anywhere without them knowing where I was and what had happened.  And I used to run--every day I had an uncle who drove a wagon that delivered candy.  He worked for a candy store.  And he'd stop, stop by home for lunch.  And when I wasn't in--while, I wasn't in school, so I was always home.  And at that age, I got teaching from, from my parents [John Levy and Laura Hagan Levy] and from a kindergarten-type school that, that the woman in the half house lived.  She had a, classes, and I'd go sit in classes with kids that were like seven, eight, nine, ten years old, but just go over there and sit.  And that's how I learned to read and write before a lot of children had a chance to do that.  But to the other story is, I'd delight in always running down the block around noon to meet my uncle, watch for him.  I'd get out there and watch for him.  And when I saw that, down the block, a mule coming along, the wagon and mule, I'd run down.  He'd stop and let me come up on the wagon in the seat and then drive the mule up to the corner of the house where, where, where we lived.  And then you'd get out and put the--it was like a little iron piece, a piece of iron that had a strap on it, that it would, that the strap went to the bridle of the horse--mule.  And he put that on the ground so the mule wouldn't move or go away.  And then he put the bag of feed on, put that over his head so he could have his lunch.  And then he'd come on in the house and eat.  And then he'd get a bucket of water and bring it out there for the mule.  And that I always--I thought that was just, you know, I enjoyed doing that (laughs).  I was thought that was very fascinating.
Speaker 1: So in those days, were there more animals on the street or cars?
Speaker 2: Oh, animals, mule, wagons, yeah, or, and they had streetcars.  Yeah, nah, there wasn't many cars on the street at all.  None of my parents owned any cars or anything during the--when I was a child, nah.
Story_ID: 10029
Speaker 1: Tell me about school.  Now, where did you first go to grade school?
Speaker 2: I went to grade school first in, in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And what was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: I think it's in the book ['Men, Women, and Girl Singers'].  I can't remember now off the top of my head.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But there was two schools.  I went to one first, then I went to [John B.] Drake [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  I remember Drake, but, but you asked me the first.  So the first--Douglas, Douglas [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] is the name of the school.
Speaker 1: That's right, I was trying to think of it.
Speaker 2: I was at Douglas, and then the next school I went to was Drake.  When I moved on Cottage Grove [Avenue], I went to Drake.  And I had to cross the street--after you cross State Street, which is going west, and then came Wentworth [Avenue], the school was right there.  We'd almost have to fight our way from State Street to Wentworth and back with the kids.
Speaker 1: With the kids on that block?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: Now, was the--.
Speaker 2: --to get to the school that you went to.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, in those days, were there, was there any gang issues or anything?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, there was gangs.  I didn't really get tied up into any kind of gang thing, but there was a group of us that stayed together to protect each other, and--when we went to school.  You know, we'd all meet and, and go that way, you know.  And, and when the school was out, we'd meet or come, because we had run the, run our little block or two (laughter).  But it wasn't, you know, believe it or not, it wasn't, it wasn't like people were violent.  There wasn't no knives, there wasn't no--naturally, there wasn't no guns, nothing like that.  But you had, they might take a stick and hit you with it or something or, or just, just--hit you or chase you more than anything else, throw rocks at you (chuckle), and you'd stop and throw rocks back (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That kind of a thing (laughter).
Speaker 1: So they're kind of defending their territory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, exactly.
Speaker 1: And did these gangs have names or were they just the name of the street that they lived on?
Speaker 2: I guess it was, most of the cases, the street that they lived on.  But I didn't have any gang, gang names or anything to--during my whole career, you know, as a youngster, and didn't have, people I hang out with.  No, but I didn't have any gangs, name, you know, in particular. But there were gang names, but they were, they were really the rough ones, you know, the guys out there taking your money, and they'd be hanging out at the theater, and you go on Saturday to the theater, they'd be hanging there waiting for you, you know, and you'd have to--they want to take your money and all that.  Sometimes your parents might go with you and say, you know, make sure you got in all right.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the names of any of those gangs that would hang out, that had names?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was one gang, Shakespeare, I remember Shakespeare's gang.  And then there was another name of a gang and all that.  And Shakespeare was an individual, you know, he was the leader of this thing; got, got to be, well, you know, it popularized his name, Shakespeare and his gang (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is a black person Shakespeare?  He had--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was that his real name or was that just a name--?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I don't know.
Story_ID: 10030
Speaker 1: So what did you like in school?  Did you like--well, you learned how to read at an early age, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I learned how to read very early.  So I liked history.  I liked history, and I liked science, and when, later on in school, of course, was music.  But we did have, we did have to sing even when, you know, in school.  And I liked those classes.  So music was like a kind of a thing with me all my life, you know, 'cause in church, I loved to hear them sing.  And I just liked the sound of it, you know, the whole thing.
Speaker 1: Now, you--.
Speaker 2: And I took violin lessons when I was very young too.  But that's when I came back, after being in, in New Orleans [Louisiana], when I came back.  That second period, they, they bought a violin for me.  I never really cared for the instrument, but I--it gave me a background.  And what I finally did take up was the string bass because it's, it's strung opposite--a violin is strung opposite to a string bass.  In other words, your strings are the same, but they just, opposite ways, like and different cleft, you know.  It's bass cleft and, and the other cleft.  Those are things I remember pretty much in that--those are the things I enjoyed, music things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Listening to music, and we listened to all types of music in my house.  We had this Victrola [phonograph] that you wound up.  And we had records for [Enrico] Caruso, who was a opera singer.  We had records of, of all the, the name people who had recorded up until that time, and back in the days of Bessie Smith, and those, when the few records that were out with black people.  We had those.  But all kinds of different music was played in the home.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I heard that if you bought a Victrola, you would get a free Caruso record to come with it?
Speaker 2: That might have been true, and it probably was, is the reason why we had it (laughter), reason why we had a Caruso record.  But I remember his name and remember hearing him and everything and the opera.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that was on an 'Antiques Road Show' [television program].  Somebody had an old Victrola and had a Caruso record and said, how much is this record worth?  They said, well, it's a lot of them 'cause they were given away with the Victrola.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, that's, I think that's where I heard that.
Speaker 2: And it's probably right, yeah, yeah, probably right, yeah.
Speaker 1: But, now, I was reading in the book ['Men, Women, and Girl Singers: My Life as a Musician Turned Talent Manager'] that you always had a piano in the home in New Orleans, but when you moved to Chicago, you didn't have one, and your mother wanted one.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we didn't have one when we got to Chicago [Illinois].  So my mother [Laura Hagan Levy] had to have my uncle go down and act as my father [John Levy] to sign cause he couldn't sign anything, to sign for the paper--for them to get the first piano we had.  And we carried that piano around, oh gosh--it was a player piano and a regular piano.  And we had piano rolls and we had all of the different--we used to listen to a lot of that type of music too.  That's when I first heard [Thomas] 'Fats' Waller on the piano rolls.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it just the music?  I guess, just his piano music?
Speaker 2: Piano playing, yeah, he played piano and, and that was it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you'd have to--if you wanted to sing, you'd have to sing along yourself?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, if you wanted to sing along.  It was no singing, no voice, no vocal things on those things, just music, yeah, a piano roll of music.  It was all piano music, nothing else.  And the rolls came, and there were little holes in them.  And it goes over that roller, and that's how the music was transcribed, I guess you would call it, from the roll to the sound that you, you know, piano sound.
Speaker 1: Now, how did it work?  Did you have to wind it up or something or what?
Speaker 2: Wind it up?  Wind it up?  Yeah, I think so, yeah, I think it, I think we did have to wind up that--I know we had to wind up the Victrola, but--no, no, piano, you pumped with your feet.
Speaker 1: Okay, so somebody would have to sit there and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and they had a, pumps, and you'd sit there and you'd use it, almost like an organ had, you know, use your feet for the thing.
Speaker 1: And that would spin the piano, spin the roll and make it--.?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 10031
Speaker 1: Can you remember any of your teachers at Douglas [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at Willard School, I remember a teacher.  And that's in my book ['Men, Women, and Girl Singers: My Life as a Musician Turned Talent Manager'].  Her name, I've forgotten right now, but it's in the book, Tur--an Irish woman, big, big--I remember a big Irish woman.  You know, we didn't have any black teachers when I was coming along in the school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is like the heart of the black community--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --basically, there's no black teachers?
Speaker 2: No, no, there was only white teachers.  Ms. McDonald I think was her name.  I think that was her name, but anyway, she told me, you know, about--she says, "Here's what you do."  She says, "You know, when you graduate from grammar school," which was eighth grade in those days, she says, "I wouldn't waste time going anywhere, you know, for you to get any further education, you know, spend any time, time."  She says, "Just try to get yourself a good job."  And she says, "At the post office, something like that for the government where you would be able to get a pension to take care of you and your family when you get older."  But she thought that was an encouraging thing to tell me, but I didn't have any eyes at all for thinking in terms of, of going into the post office.  I eventually did, but not because of her advice.  I just, for some reason, and I can't tell you where I, how it came to me, how I saw it or anywhere--it might have been in the movies or something.  I don't know, but I could see myself sitting behind a desk.  That's it.  Now, doing what?  I don't know.  But that was my ambition, you know, my whole thing.  Well, I got to, and so, that was the only thing that stayed with me through of my life, even after I started playing music, it was still about the business of music and about how you had to do to get there.  And that was my entire interest, and that is the reason why I ended up where I am now, into the managerial end and the business end of the music business.
Speaker 1: Now, sir, did--were there any teachers who encouraged you at that point?
Speaker 2: No, not at, not--oh, she called herself encouraging me.  She liked me, she'd encourage me.  And she, you know, gave me all kind of assignments that were great.
Speaker 1: So she was, she called herself trying to help you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, not for me to get involved in, in stuff--because I would talk a lot of stuff about what I'd like to do--I'm sorry.  I touched the microphone--you know involved in, in what, in what I really want to do.  And she thought that was like, you know, don't think about that kind of stuff.  Think about what you will be able to do in this country the way, you know, the way it was segregated and everything, and the history of everything.
Speaker 1: So she's trying to let you down easy, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, because I had all these grandiose ideas.  I'm gonna do this, I'm gonna be this, I'm want to do this, 'cause I--anything I saw anybody else do, you know, that I liked, I was gonna do that.  I can do that.
Speaker 1: Now, we hear this story so much about these counselors telling black children that they should aim low and--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --you can't do it, and, you know, there's no sense in trying and all that sort of thing, you hear a lot of those kind of stories.  And I think it's the first time it's been spun as, as that she was trying to help you by (laughter)--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and she was sincere, dead sincere.  I remember her so well, you know, a sincere person.
Story_ID: 10032
Speaker 1: Now, you attended a Methodist church, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I know in New Orleans [Louisiana]--.
Speaker 2: In New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Chicago [Illinois] too?
Speaker 2: Methodist church in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Which one did you attend in Chicago?
Speaker 2: In Chicago, it was, where my uncle sang in the choir, and that was at 50th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue].  The name of the church, I can't recall right now.
Speaker 1: I know the church.  Now, it's the African Orthodox Church, it is now.  But it was something in those days.
Speaker 2: It was something else when I was there, yeah.
Speaker 1: I know exactly where that is.  So was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, big part of my life and--right up until, you know, later on, 'til I really got, got into the music business and got into, you know, got married and making a living.  Well, I'd done--got away me.  I stopped really attending church.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--.
Speaker 2: But I was married, my first wife [Gladys Levy], I was married at her house.  And my pastor from my church was the ceremony.  I didn't get married in church.  I got married in a home, and he came and, and married us, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Same thing happened to my last marriage [to Devra Hall], which was right here (laughter), after all these years.
Story_ID: 10033
Speaker 1: Is there outstanding that happened in grade school that you can share with us, that you can think of?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I can't recall any events.  I wasn't that athletic, you know.  I wasn't that good at any of those things, baseball or any of that, you know, I tried a little bit of all of that stuff; tried, even tried football for one day, and that took care of that after I got hit one time.  And other than that, that's, you know, pretty quiet, simple life; didn't--as I say, I liked music.  So anything that had to do with music, I was involved with, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: Pretty good student in school, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--oh, you said, you went back to New Orleans [Louisiana] when you were about, about eleven or twelve?
Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that, right.
Speaker 1: Well, why did you go back, and was there a reason?
Speaker 2: I don't even know why that was.  I, I don't know; just decided to go back and stay with my grandparents, who were still there, and uncles--.
Speaker 1: So your parents decided to send you down there--.
Speaker 2: --but my parents and everything were, were in Chicago [Illinois].  And then later on, after I stayed a period of time, later on, then I came back.  And then my grandparents moved to Chicago.  But they stayed in New Orleans, they just didn't--you know, it's hard to make those people make a move like that, you know, give up all their friends and relationships and everything and travel to a great big city like Chicago and everything.  And, as I said, my uncles, they nev--a lot of them wouldn't even budge.  They didn't leave, just my father [John Levy] and my uncle, the youngest one, came to Chicago to live.  Now, they visited us later on, different ones could come to visit, but nobody came to stay anyway, you know.  I remember an uncle come to visit--your uncle is visiting here from New Orleans, and, you know, something like that.  But--and that was rare, you know, it was rare occasions.
Speaker 1: Now, were you glad to get back to Chicago when your family went back?
Speaker 2: I think so, pretty much, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 10034
Speaker 1: Tell me about high school?  Where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to, I went to Hyde Park [High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to three, three of them there.  In fact, for the short period of time I stayed in high school cause I never finished.  Originally, to begin with, I went to Englewood [High School, Chicago, Illinois], and I liked Englewood High School.  And then I transferred to Hyde Park, which was really in my district.  Englewood was not my district.  I had to take the, the train everyday, the 'L' [elevated] train to go to Englewood High School.
Speaker 1: Now, why did you move from Englewood to Hyde Park?
Speaker 2: I think because of the district.  I think they--there was a ruling later on that you, if you lived in a certain district, you have to go to high school in that district.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I went to Hyde Park, and I didn't like it at all.  I didn't like the school, and, you know, it was a--.
Speaker 1: Now, Hyde Park in those days, that was mostly white.
Speaker 2: It was a class school.
Speaker 1: Both of them were, Englewood and--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, class school.
Speaker 1: And Hyde Park--.
Speaker 2: And it was integrated, you know, it wasn't a segregated school either, yeah, white and black.
Speaker 1: And if I may, I--from what I've read, they had an issue of 'Chicago' magazine about ten years ago that compared Hyde Park and Englewood High schools. They said that they, when they would play football, it was the biggest game in the city.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And both of those schools were mostly white--.
Speaker 2: Mostly white--
Speaker 1: They were the two--.
Speaker 2: --both of those schools were mostly white.  There wasn't many black kids in either of those schools.  So, my final analysis was I ended up going to Wendell Phillips [High School, Chicago, Illinois] where it was practically all black, and for the reason that there was a, Major [N. Clark] Smith was the teacher, music teacher.  And under him, came all the different people that I knew, [Milton] Milt Hinton, who played with Cab Calloway and everything, and, and the boy. [Charles Valdez] 'Truck' Parham, who helped teach me at the beginning, and all the different people that were there, you know.  I--and I only went one semester.  And, well, I just dropped out altogether, cause I'd gotten married, and I had to try to take care of family and everything.
Speaker 1: Now, by that time, were you playing the bass by that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, when did you start playing the bass?
Speaker 2: I think it was around 1938 or '39 [1939], some, somewhere around that time.  I, I got a bass and picked up and started.  Then I took a few lessons on it, and then I had people like Milt Hinton and, and Truck Parham teach me.  And from then on, I could read fairly well because of the violin; not as well as, as I should have been able to read at the time, read music, you know, the bass line, but I, I could read--.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let me go back to that.  Now, you were playing bass in high school or, or did it--was it some time after high school?
Speaker 2: After high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I thought cause you said '38 [1938], you'd have been twenty five then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '38 [1938], after that.
Speaker 1: So you weren't--did you take any music in high school at all?
Speaker 2: I, I took music, but they didn't have any instruments left for me to take up.  So I didn't ever get an instrument to play on, and then, so I didn't, didn't really--just went to class, you know, and studied music classes.  And that's about it.
Speaker 1: Now, you met your first wife in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Gladys [Levy].
Speaker 1: Okay, now--.
Speaker 2: And she had graduated from, from Wendell Phillips.  She was athletic, my first wife, Gladys.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, did she play sports, formal sports?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was very good in sports and everything, yeah.  She should have became a gym, gym teacher, but then after getting married, and getting away from school and all that, she just didn't follow up on it.  But she should have cause she would have made a really--you know, she would have done very well at that, but then she had a family, she started out, and that was--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that was it pretty much.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're talking about, let's see, around 1932 or '33 [1933]--?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 10035
Speaker 1: When your family to Chicago [Illinois], it was the beginning of Prohibition, right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And, and about the time you were getting out of high school, it was like the beginning of the [Great] Depression?
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember it very well.
Speaker 1: All right, yeah, okay--.
Speaker 2: We used to have to go down and meet the truck to get potatoes and vegetables and fruit that came around, to feed you.  You know, we had little tickets and everything, yeah.  And I was married at that--later on at that time, and my wife [Gladys Levy] and I lived with my aunt who had an apartment, and she was a spiritualist.  She, she, you know, have these séances and all that sort, sort of thing, which I used to make fun of and never believed in (laugher), but she was, she was my mother [Laura Hagan Levy]'s sister.  And it was the same house that my grandfather and grandmother lived in, you know, you know, the whole family had lived in this particular house--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Chicago.
Story_ID: 10036
Speaker 1: So, where we'll pick up is that you're married now. You're, you probably should be graduating from high school, but you decided to--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --trying to take care of your family and get a job.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: So what kind of work did you do?
Speaker 2: There was nothing out there.  So I, you know, did, as I said, tried--did a little bit of everything; tried to play a piano.  I even wrote--tried to write policy, you know, write, you'd go around and things like that, you know, did anything to make a living--anything but stealing or holding up somebody, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever get in trouble with dealing with--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got in trouble, but that, I--that was before I got married, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, with the policy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, with the policy thing.  I think that comes in before.
Speaker 1: Now, did you work, I guess, down the line for the Jones brothers [gangsters Edward Jones, George Jones, McKissack Jones] or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, and my wife [Gladys Levy] worked for the Jones brothers.  She worked in the racehorse betting room for the Jones brothers.  And I didn't actually work for them.  It was like, you know, in New Or--in, in Chicago [Illinois], there were precincts, and the precinct captain got you jobs, certain kind of job.  You went to a precinct captain, and they helped you get jobs.  That's how my wife got a job in, in the, as a race horse bookies, writing tickets.
Speaker 1: Really, by the precinct captain, you found that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, cause they paid off, the Jones brothers paid off everybody, yeah, (laughter), oh, yeah, at that time--.
Speaker 1: And so the politicians really were--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, yeah, the politicians, the police, everybody.  And about once a month, they'd make a raid.  Everybody'd go out and put in jail, and they'd get out the next day or the next--not the next day.  They got out the same day.  Even when I got picked up, if, if I had of notified the, the people, you know, instead of trying to act like I hadn't done nothing, and, and they didn't find anything on me, you know, or bookie, or booking slip or anything.  So they just held me over, and, and I had to wait until my--you know, fined me for two or three days.  But, until they finally found out where I was.  They just moved you around from one station to the other.  But if I had of just said I was writing policy, you know, or had a book with me, they'd a just taken me down, and I'd a been out when the, when the guy who I was working for came along and paid them ten dollars and fifteen dollars, and I'd a been out, back on the street.  And that's the way that thing went down.  You just pay off the police.  Oh, the same thing it went, oh, later on in my career, as a musician, working with Billie Holiday, the same used to happen.  And you'd get a ticket for driving, and you pay off the cops, you know, you, you know, you wouldn't get the ticket.  In other words, you're speeding, and then the guy comes up, pulls you over.  And you lay a five on him and forget it, you know.  And it's two guys, and you (laughter)--graft was heavy in, in Chicago during those days.
Story_ID: 10037
Speaker 1: Okay, in the years of, the year that you dropped out of high to the year you started playing bass when you were about twenty-five years old, you just did a lot of different things, huh?
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, had--?
Speaker 2: I worked in the, I worked at, as a, as a house boy in, in the hotel and, and aunt worked at.  My mother [Laura Hagan Levy], because of this not being able to be licensed, for a period of time, she worked as a maid along with my aunt at the East Gate Hotel in Chicago [Illinois].  And they got me a job there as a house boy.
Speaker 1: Now, where was the East Gate?
Speaker 2: East Gate's on the, on the, on the, Ohio [Street]--on the near east side, right after you, you--right after the lake, right after the Chicago River and, and all that or--.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's like downtown, down--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's near east side of Chicago.  And it's still there, I think they, they changed--they might have changed the name to it or changed it into something else or built something else there cause it's old, old hotel, even when I was there.  But I worked as a, as really, not, not even a regular.  It was like a rotating job.  Two days, I think I was a house boy--I took care of the bartend, the bar and serviced the bar and cleaned it and everything, refill liquors, you know, I brought liquor up and everything, cases of beer.  Then I had a period as a, as a houseman, which is moving furniture around, setting up rooms and everything, hanging curtains and drapes, vacuuming, doing the heavy work.  Then doorman, certain days of the week, I was the doorman, which I got in trouble for (laughs).
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: It's a story, there's a story about that.  As a doorman, you--you know, they dressed me all up in the monkey suit, which was a drag.  I was pissed about that anyway.  You know, I didn't like that at all.  But you stood out there.  In this particular instance, it's raining like hell, you know.  And a guy drove up in a cab, and I went out with the umbrella and opened the door, and said, "Sir, can I help you?"  And he said, "No, close the door."  He was still talking to the woman, here's this woman, you know, a woman in the car.  So I walked back to the curb.  And so when he was ready, he opened the door and beckoned for me, and I just stood there looking at him (laughter).  And he kept beckoning, and I didn't pay him any attention.  So he had to walk in the rain.  So he went and told the people, and they said, "Why didn't you go to get him?"  I said, "When I went out there to open the door, he waved me away.  He refused, so I figured he didn't want me."  They said, "You can't do that.  You're a servant, you're supposed to go back and take care of the man (laughter)."  But I, that wasn't my cup of tea.
Speaker 1: You weren't cut out for that.
Speaker 2: I was arrogant, man, I was, when I was a teenager, at that age I was arrogant.
Speaker 1: And you said you were spoiled when you were a kid so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, I didn't take nothing from nobody, you know, I was just, had those kind attitudes.  I, they had trouble with me the whole time I worked there.  But I worked in the post office, and same problem, same kind of thing.  You know, I took the test, and all the tests and passed them and couldn't understand why I wasn't promoted.  And they started giving me a song and dance and everything, and I, come on, you know, I don't want to know about that.  I passed these tests, you know, and why don't I get promoted.  And they never did promote me.
Story_ID: 10038
Speaker 1: I finally quit [the post office job] when, when I first, got the first real job playing in a club with [Le Roy] 'Stuff' Smith, jazz violinist.  And that was much later on.  That was almost the '40s [1940s], beginning of the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: Now, Stuff Smith, now, he's, this is the second time he's come up in the--the third time he's come up in the last two weeks now.  We've--.
Speaker 1: I know Johnnie Pate probably talked about Stuff Smith.
Speaker 2: He played with Stuff Smith.
Speaker 1: Stuff Smith, yeah, he played with Stuff Smith, well, before I did, really.  And Stuff had came through Chicago [Illinois], and he played with him before I did.  And Johnnie and I both came from Chicago.  That's where we, we were both bass players in Chicago and knew the same, a lot of the same people and everything.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you played with Stuff.  Now, Stuff was, was self taught jazz violin--?
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Jazz, yeah, Stuff, self-taught jazz violin player, the greatest jazz violin player there ever was, and still is, in my estimation, yeah.  Now, Eddie South was a more learned and classical styled jazz violin player, but, but Stuff Smith was the real McCoy.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, I heard they didn't like each other very much?
Speaker 1: No, they couldn't care less for each other (laughter).  That's true.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, so who taught you how to play the bass, and how did you start, you--?
Speaker 1: As I was saying earlier, people like [Milton] Milt Hinton and [Charles Valdez] 'Truck' Parham and, you know, and I just studied.  I had the books, and I studied and all that.  That's how I did.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you had a pretty good job with Stuff Smith, but he was a--?
Speaker 1: A very good job because that's--also gave me the experience of management and how to handle, taking care of the business and contracts and, and, you know, handling the money and dealing with the unions and all that sort of thing.  And the head of the union is the one that gave me the job with Stuff Smith because he wouldn't allow Stuff to come into town and work without him having the personnel that was gonna work with him, cause Stuff was a, he was a drinker, you know.  He'd get drunk every night, and he was, difficult person to deal with, you know, in that sense, although everything was against his own self.  He didn't do anything to harm anybody else, but, you know, he wasn't reliable.  You had to go pick him up and make sure he was on the job, all kinds of things, baby sit him at times, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, so you travel.  You went to New York with Stuff Smith, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 2: And did you go any place with him or did you--?
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: Just New York.
Speaker 1: No, it was a Chicago to New York, and then I didn't play with him anymore after that.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, who did you play with next?  Did you have any other gigs with--?
Speaker 1: When I left him?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, I played with a lot of different people.  Erroll Garner, Ben Webster or, oh, geez, you name them.  I played with [Eli] Lucky Thompson, I played--I never played with Art Tatum, but I used to sit in with him and I had some playing then.  And then Don Byas all in my book ['Men, Women, and Girl Singers: My Life as a Musician Turned Talent Manager'], you can see--like the guys I played with, recorded with.
Speaker 2: So how many years did you record and travel with different musicians?
Speaker 1: Oh, and from, from the '40s [1940s] until I took over the actual road management of George Shearing.
Story_ID: 10039
Speaker 1: George Shearing was a very important figure in your life, and--.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: How did you happen to manage George Shearing--cause this is just--let me just point out to you, it seems just the opposite of what usually happens.  You usually have a white manager managing a black musician, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: Now, here's George Shearing from England, right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And you end up managing George Shearing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, there's a piano player who was with me with, with [Le Roy] 'Stuff' Smith in Chicago [Illinois], that came, that we came to Chicago, from Chicago together to New York, Jimmy Jones, who was a pianist, and he, he was a writer of song--arranger, writer, arranger and really brilliant arranger and voicing of, of instruments and that sort of thing.  And you know he had to great when Duke Ellington hired him to do certain things for him, so--later on in his career.  But anyway, we went to New York together with Stuff Smith and opened at the Onyx Club [New York, New York].  And when I left Stuff, Jimmy stayed on for a period with Stuff, and I went on to do other things.  Like, for example, I went to, to, as I say, play with different, different people, and, and to play with Billie Holiday and went on the road with her, and, and got experience and everything.  But I quit Billie Holiday's thing because of things which were, in my book ['Men, Women, and Girl Singers: My Life as a Musician Turned Talent Manager'], you, the whole history of that.  And Jimmy and I lived across the street from each other in Brooklyn [New York].  We remained friends until he died, you know, right--that was our, we were just like personal friends.  He later on joined Sarah Vaughan and became, Ella Fitzgerald, he played for Ella.  He became the pianist for singers.  They loved him because of his accompaniment style.  We lived right across the street from each other.  George Shearing was working in Birdland in New York, opposite Buddy Rich, the drummer.  Buddy Rich had a big band.  One night, the first or second week--the second week that they were together in Birdland, Buddy Rich's bass player couldn't work with him, finish the week with him.  So Bud needed a bass player right away.  So Jimmy, being there in Birdland working with Sarah Vaughan called me, and, you know, he told Buddy to call me and, and I would join.  So he did, and I came right down and joined Buddy Rich's band, playing for Buddy Rich.  Every night for the five days--I only worked five nights with him, George Shearing, when he got through with his set would come and sit down right beside where the bass was and listen to me play, although I had a hard time hearing myself because Buddy Rich was a loud, heavy-footed drummer, brilliant drummer, great drummer.  And George, at the end of the week, at the end of my stay with him, and I was getting ready to--you know, that was it.  I was through.  I wasn't going on the road with Buddy Rich because they didn't pay enough money, and wasn't, I wasn't interested in a big band.  George asked me would I join him the following week to play with his group because his bass player's mother had died, and the guy was gonna take off for a while.  And I said, "Yeah, so fine."  That's how I joined George.  After I worked a week or so with George, the bass player never came.  I never knew why he never came back.  George just said, you know, he, he never, he, he didn't come back to join him so would I stay on?  Yeah, yeah.  I got a job, a gig, and, and I liked working with George.  George was an excellent musician, you know, and we were compatible and everything was fine.  Denzil Best was the drummer, and Buddy DeFranco and everything.  So the next step was George was, had a, an offer to record for MGM [Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Records].  And Buddy Rich had a--not Buddy DeFranco, who was working with George in his group, the clarinet player, had a chance to have his own group and work for Capitol [Records] and record for Capitol.  So they couldn't record together.  So George decided to put together a vibe harp player and a guitar player to add to the rhythm section, himself, Denzil Best and me.  So that's how the George Shearing Quintet started, and Leonard Feather, who was from England and a close friend of George who had helped to bring George over to his country, suggested these people and also suggested the idea of the George Shearing group.  George Shearing had the idea of how, the sound of it, and the arrangements, and that's how the George Shearing Quintet was started.  And when we recorded our first records, and we did 'September in the Rain' and those things, all of a sudden we were the hottest thing going, just out of left field, you know.  This record just, just took off.  So that was how it became--I became a very important cog in this wheel because George Shearing's wife didn't know anything about the business, and I had had that experience, all the way back from Chicago, with Stuff Smith and, and all the years, and handling unions and working with the Chicago musicians' union and all of that.  So I fit right in to act as a road manager and bass player at the time.  But by, by him being so popular and there was so much work and things happening so fast, he needed to have someone as a manager.  So a couple of people were recommended to him, and he tried them out, but it didn't work.  They either didn't want to go on the road as manager, you know.  They didn't feel like they wanted that job.  So he asked me would I do it.  And I said, "Yeah, but you have to get somebody else to play bass."  And he got [Alfred] Al McKibbon, who I recommended to play bass.  And Al McKibbon joined us, and that's when I became complete road manager.  And then from road manager, later on to manager, and, you know, and then into this end of the business of managing other people.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--.
Speaker 2: But you can get all the details and exactly how the transition came about in that book.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, tell me what year did you start managing George Shearing?
Speaker 2: I think it's around 1940--'51 [1951], I think.  '50 [1950] or '51 [1951], somewhere around that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, you had the presence of mind to know that it was gonna be a full-time job too, and not just something you could do and play bass too, you know?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did they, did George Shearing ever suggest that you could them both, you know, why don't you just do them both?
Speaker 2: Well, he suggested that in the first place, you know, when we first--when I first did it, yeah, I could do them both.  Road manager, but when it came to manager, that was a whole 'nother cup of tea.
Speaker 1: That was more in depth--.
Speaker 2: That's different, 'cause there's more depth to that, that was--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --dealing with agents, dealing with buyers, dealing with a lot of different things, you know, publicity, promotional people, making decisions, you know, about the, the engagements that were offered.  What's the best way to do this and the best way to do that for this group and all that?  Transportation arrangements, you know, so it was, you know, quite a different thing, and it was nothing that I planned.  It just happened.
Speaker 1: Well, okay.
Speaker 2: There at the right time, at the right place, with the right thing for what I--then I finally found out what I'd been thinking about all the time, sitting behind that desk (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't mind not being, not playing the bass in the group anymore, and then you didn't--?
Speaker 2: Didn't mind it a day, no, cause I was doing what I think I was cut out to do originally, but I couldn't get into it before that.  He is the one that opened the door for me because the same agent that booked Stuff Smith, I got to know very well, that he was the, one of the biggest agents in the business.  And I asked him for a job, and he told me he'd give me a job playing bass with Louis Armstrong or with some other act that he was booking, but, no, no agent, no black agent working then, no such thing, you know.  And he'd give me anything I wanted, you know, he'd do anything for me.  I mean he bitched me out because the first house I bought in Teaneck, New Jersey, I didn't come to him to get the--borrow the money for the down payment, (laughter), you know.  So, you know, he always was in my corner, but that wasn't part of it, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this is about nineteen--where are we, nineteen--?
Speaker 2: You mean this time period, I'm with George?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, George, with George Shearing.
Speaker 2: I guess it's, I guess you got to say '50 [1950], '51 [1951], is that, would that fit?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that seems like it makes sense, yeah.
Story_ID: 10040
Speaker 1: Now, when did you add on additional talent to your, to management?
Speaker 2: The first was a singer that George Shearing knew by the name of--and I wasn't interested in singers or anything, but because he liked her, Tedi King, T-E-D-I, King, Tedi King [sic, Teddi King].  It's in the book ['Men, Women, and Girl Singers: My Life as a Musician Turned Talent Manager'].  But the first people that I actually managed other than that was Ahmad Jamal and Ramsey Lewis, instrumental thing, 'cause that's what I was interested in more than singers.  I didn't, didn't know that much about singers.
Speaker 1: Now, so during the '50s [1950s], you mostly managed George Shearing, is that it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: So you could make a living just managing him, without going--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, so, Ramsey Lewis is about six--1960, well, maybe a little before that, when he really first started playing?  He was playing outta high school in something.
Speaker 2: No, he'd been, he'd been playing a while.  He and Ahmad Jamal [formerly Frederick Russell Jones] had been playing a while before I got involved in their careers.  They both had been playing.  They both had record contracts.  I had nothing to do with their, original, they had record contracts when, when all of this came up.  It was just that the business had gotten to a point where, for both of them it's such a--there was a need for somebody to be on top of it, and, and this new thing, personal manager, was kind of a new thing to everybody.  You know, it wasn't a thing that everybody personal managers and all that, you know.  And I was, I guess the first in the music business to be thinking in terms of instrumentalist, you know, and, and especially in jazz, and especially black.  So, that's it.
Speaker 1: So, Ramsey Lewis, I know he--they were playing for a few years before '[The] In Crowd' came out, I guess.  'In Crowd' was, they told the story of how they created that, and they heard Dobie Gray's version, and cut--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, all of Ramsey's success was of material that was either, in that day, was either rhythm and blues or was in some other category.  And he'd take a hit song, and, and Eldee [Young]. and [Isaac] 'Redd' [Holt], and they'd get together, and they'd do their thing on it, and put it into the jazz category.  And that's how--all the songs that he did, all his albums and other things, even the Christmas songs and everything, the way they did them.
Speaker 1: I remember he had a version of the 'Love Theme from "Spartacus"' [motion picture] on one of his albums.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: So you started managing Ramsey Lewis and Ahmad Jamal.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And then--but it's also in the book, and part of the title of the book, is the fact that you've managed a lot of girl singers.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's when it all kind of started.  It started, really, it started with, the first one I think was, was Dakota Staton [later Aliyah Rabia], and then, you know--was it Dakota?  I'm thinking if, if--I think it was Dakota.  And then, of course, Nancy--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Nancy Wilson was probably the most, I guess, successful one or the one that endured the longest, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the longest, yeah.
Speaker 1: But Dakota Staton, now this--.
Speaker 2: But she didn't come in first, I don't think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think Dakota Staton was, you, you--.
Speaker 2: Dakota Staton, I think was first, and I think, also on top of that was Betty, Betty, Betty--'Bebop' Betty Carter, Betty Carter.
Speaker 1: Betty Carter, okay.  She had a wonderful voice, yeah.
Speaker 2: Betty Carter, and then there was, for a short period of time--what was her name, was in 'Raisin in the Sun', was the mother.  She was a singer, and I managed the singing part of her career for a while.
Speaker 1: Oh, 'Raisin in the Sun', [actress] Claudia McNeil?
Speaker 2: Claudia McNeil.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 10041
Speaker 1: I learned a lot about the stage (laughter) from [actress] Claudia McNeil.  I learned a lot about the acting and how it operated.  I got a lesson from her.  Please believe me.
Speaker 2: What did she tell you?
Speaker 1: No, she just came on to me and said, you know, for me to go and talk to these people that--the agents and the producers of the Broadway [neighborhood in New York, New York] shows and everything.  And that was a whole different world to me.  I didn't have any experience in it, you know, and I went talking in terms of the part of show business I knew.  And I find out these people had all these names and all that, but they weren't making the kind of money that my people were making (laughter), you know.  And I didn't realize that, so I went talking to them, like, well, she--Claudia McNeil had a big name, you know, and Broadway, and, and everything.  They, they shot me down, said, "Look.  We're keeping this theater open so we don't close a theater.  In show business, in, in the show business world, we try to keep a theater open.  So we're giving away tickets for people to come to this show every night, until the next show is ready to come in, move into this theater.  And you're coming here asking us to give Claudia McNeil a raise, more money than what she's getting," which I thought was ridiculous, $400 a week, I thought that was pittance, you know, (laughter) compared to how much money these other people were making.
Speaker 2: And in perspective, in those days, I guess, a man working for General Motors [Corporation] or something can make about $100 a week, right?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that'd be a good take-home pay for a family.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: But, you know, $400 a week makes you--you're living pretty good, you know, you're better than average, you know, much better than average, but--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I guess so, but it didn't compare to show business, to the things that I was talking about.
Speaker 2: Well, what would a show biz person get?
Speaker 1: No, hey, it would be, I was thinking it could be more than $1,000 a week like, or $1500 a week or something like that, yeah.  But four or $500?  That's, that's what I came on to 52nd for--Street--for, you know, (laughter) that kind of money as a sideman, you know.  So, I, I didn't realize it was a whole different world.  But I learned, you know, learned the hard way; experience, great teacher.
Story_ID: 10042
Speaker 1: There's a long sequence in there about Dakota Staton [later Aliyah Rabia] in your book ['Men, Women, and Girl Singers: My Life as a Musician Turned Talent Manager'], about some of the struggles that she had, once she got married.  She seemed to be pretty easy to deal with until she married a fellow who was a Muslim who--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --became, he became--.
Speaker 2: Talib Dawud, he called himself, Talib--Talib Dawud.
Speaker 1: And he tried to convert, while she was a girl singer on the stage in clubs, which seems like conflict of interest, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.  He, he destroyed her.  She, she was, she had it made, yeah, biggest thing going, had it made.  I was with her when 'The Late, Late Show' was recorded.  And the reason why I ended up being her manager is through [David] Dave Cavanaugh of Capitol Records, who told her, "You got to have somebody in the business."  And, and he was, you know, he was my mentor for that management deal and everything.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, and her big hit was 'The Late, Late Show'--?
Speaker 2: That's right, that was her big hit.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is about nineteen, what, fifty--?
Speaker 2: I don't remember exactly off the top of my head--I don't remember the exact time period.
Speaker 1: Late '50s [1950s], I guess.
Speaker 2: Late '50s [1950s], yeah, it had to be in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Now, can you tell us some of the things that, that this gentleman did to, that were actually conflictual with her being a--?
Speaker 2: Well, for example, after--go back in the studio to record.  By the time we got ready to go back in the studio to record, we had worked out deals with Benny Carter to produce and record an album for them, the next album for her.  And we went into the studio in New York to record it, and, and Benny Carter and I were in the booth.  And Talib was out there on the floor telling the musicians how he wanted them to play this music.  And Benny Carter said to me, "If you don't go out there and get him out of the studio, I am gonna go out there and break his neck."  And Benny Carter was capable, strong enough and had the temperament enough to do just that.  So I had to go out and talk to this fool and tell him to get out of the studio because we weren't gonna cope--we weren't gonna be able to record her.  And he went off, on about it, and when she traveled, he wouldn't use the regular musicians.  You, they'd have to be Muslims in order to play for her.  So it just put a whole damper on the whole thing, and we couldn't have the quality of musicians that we had had to record with her, and that we'd have to play for her before, that I had, you know, worked out with her.  So everything started to fall apart, you know.
Story_ID: 10043
Speaker 1: We were talking about Dakota Staton [later Aliyah Rabia], and so her husband [Talib Dawud] had, you said he another family too, as well.
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.
Speaker 1: And so, and they were basically all living off of her.
Speaker 2: That's what they were doing.  They were all living off of her.
Speaker 1: In the same house?
Speaker 2: In the same house.
Speaker 1: and bought a big house and--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, big house, he was living off her.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so, gee, what happened to her career as a result that?
Speaker 2: Well, her career went out the window because nobody could deal with him or control--you know, or tell her, do anything for her career cause he was the boss.  He was running everything.  And so after I was out of the picture and no agent, they didn't want to deal with an agent or anything.  They didn't want to deal with anybody, and they refused to pay income tax, is where they really got in trouble, because he said it was a church.  He was a pastor, and it, and their religion [Black Muslims].  And so the money that she made and everything as his wife was, you know, that was--.
Speaker 1: Part of her offering, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he (laughter), and they said, "You got to be kidding!" (laughter)  So they just strung her out, took everything from them.  They had to sell all the property and stuff that they had been buying up property and everything.  They had to get rid of that.  And I don't know the whole story about that, after that because I had no connection with her or anything.
Speaker 1: So she formally had to stop dealing with you as a manager because--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, all together, stop dealing with me on any level.
Story_ID: 10044
Speaker 1: I've heard young people trying to get involved in managing entertainers in the hip hop industry, get--are concerned about this.  And I guess that anybody that's gonna, going to manage an act or entertainers are concerned with the relatives of the entertainers, not just--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Mothers and--.
Speaker 2: Because they have so much, they have so much influence over them.  They're destroyers in most cases of their careers, of the careers of the artists.  And they have their so-called friends, who have no knowledge of what it's all about.  Yeah, I've run into all kind of them that way, you know, yeah.  And it seems to, you know, I mean when you could step back from it, it just seems so obvious that it's gonna, not gonna work when the family get involved in a career, but--.
Speaker 1: But it never occurs to the people involved in it that they're gonna mess up the person's career?
Speaker 2: Nah, nah.
Speaker 1: They see this person as making a lot of money and everybody, you know--.
Speaker 2: Trying to get some of it, and they, and they're protecting, so they think, you know.  But they taking the money and, and, and messing it up, yeah, for whatever reasons, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, that's, that's quite a--so, but, you know, on the other hand though, you have these stories, there are many stories, I know in Chicago [Illinois]--I don't know if you ever heard of Jackie Taylor Black Ensemble Company Theater in Chicago.  They do plays, they do a lot of biographical plays about musicians.  And they did the [Thomas] 'Fats' Waller story, Muddy Waters story ['Muddy Waters (The Hoochie Coochie Man)'], the Sammy Davis, Jr. story ['Sammy'], and a lot of different stories, and a lot of stories have a similar script where the artist is, ends up getting fleeced by the record company and the managers and everybody, you know, the artists and, you know, even if they're successful, they, somehow they, they're losing.  They're not as successful as they could be cause they're getting, you know, beat.
Speaker 2: But how does--what do you do as a manager to protect an actor to make sure they don't get fleeced by the family or the--?
Speaker 1: Well, in a sense you don't have any protection against it because even if you have a contract, most states, and most states don't recognize a personal manager's contract agreement.  Now, there's a case that I think just finished this past week here in California that has been brought up and fought through for the last five or six years, but a group of managers got together because they have no control.  They'd have a contract.  An artist could, at any time, go to the state and say, these people don't have a license to be employers, and they--in the original starting of their career, they helped, they gave them jobs or helped, got jobs for them without being a booking agent.  So they have no protection against this.  And so at any time, an artist gets to a certain level, and they'll say, "Well, look, you know, we want to get rid of you now.  We making all this money.  We really don't need you," because most of them think that after they get past the initial stage, and when they become big and everybody is telling them how great they are, they don't need you, because they don't take advice.  They have other people coming in, lawyers and other business people, entities, coming in to them, telling them how they should do their, you know, how they should handle their business and their career.  And you got business managers who get involved in their investments and their careers, and if you were just a manager like I am, strictly dealing from the artistic level of a--not a, not a business manager of a, of, you know, accounting, and taking care of envi, in--you know, investments and all of that sort of thing, a broker and that, that style of person.  And, you're outside of the picture and they figure, why am I paying this guy, you know, or this person?  I don't need him, you know.  And in a sense, they don't need you, but if they have been listening to you, and you have been making the decisions of their career, they can make some pretty bad career decisions after you're gone, listening to these other people, which in the long run, hurts their career, for them trying to save whatever little money they save because all of them are very wealthy people that they're talking about, when you get to that stage, you're making that kind of money, you know, that, you know, what they would be paying a manager is, is--unless a manager had some ridiculous agreement, which a lot of them did have, some sort of 50 percent or 40 percent, that kind of a char--no manager should have that kind of a agreement because you can't do 40 or 50 percent (laughter) for, for an artist--talent. Nah, they out there working every day, and you gonna take 40 or 50 percent.  That's ridiculous, and wouldn't stand up in any court for any reason, you know.
Story_ID: 10045
Speaker 1: What is your ethical code as a personal manager with someone that you manage and then the other part of it is, how do you keep the confidence of someone with all these different forces, family and outside people pulling at them and trying to get a piece of them, you know?
Speaker 2: Ah--.
Speaker 1: Now, you've been successful with someone like Nancy Wilson, you've been with her for years, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had my problems.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had my problems, and I've had my problems with every artist pretty much that I've ever managed to some degree.  There's always somebody, but I'm pretty diplomatic about it, you know.  In other words, I would--I tried to know as much about the person that--over and above their talents, I like to know as much about their personal life as I can.  And I like to, to be able to have the respect of them, to respect me as a person who is strictly involved in their career, and in doing the best things possible for their careers and nothing else, over and out, not--no connection in any other kind of way.  And that is my status that I want to remain to the relationship.  Now, I also try to find out from them exactly where they want to go in their career.  In other words, if they want certain things, if they would be willing to do certain things in order to enhance their career, if they are willing to listen about certain career-building things that I feel is necessary for their career, after having listened to them, after having researched all this, then we go into a deal.  And in most cases, I used to written contract deals, but I learned very early that the contract you write with somebody like that is not worth the paper that it's written on.  It's just a, it's just a means to say that you have an understanding of how much money you're supposed to collect for each different service that you are gonna--each different thing, earning power or thing that the person has that you're gonna collect from.  And I have stuck to just the careers of the persons, nothing to do with their outside investments or businesses or anything, although my helping them to a certain stage might have been very important to the success of them or to put them in a position to make more money in other fields other than--and I, I have never felt that that should be a part of my agreement because that's another thing all together.  So I've always kept that separate, and I've never charged more than a twenty percent commission, and that has to do with certain types of, and certain value, where they get to a certain amount of money, earning a certain--earning value.  In other words, up to that time, I may even do something for nothing or I may do it for ten percent.  I may do it for fifteen percent.  It's all spelled out.  You know, in other words, if you're doing certain things and you're only earning a certain amount of money, and your overhead is gonna be a certain thing, a certain amount of money, you've got to pay.  For example, if you get a contract where you have to pay for the transportation and hotels and everything, there's a difference between the one where you're gonna get a contract for say, $50,000, plus everything taken care of, all transportation, all hotels, all, everything that you're gonna be doing is taken care of; the cost of your musicians, the cost of everything is being taken care of by the buyer, then that's another type of--that's usually the 20 percent contract--I mean 20 percent payment deal.  Other than that, it's usually a, pretty much, it runs pretty much a standard of 15 percent, like the agency, usual contract which is what is usually allowed the top of, is 10 percent.  So I try to think in terms of having no more than 30 percent of a, of a person's money being taken out, with them having manager, agent and, of course, you know, the other expenses that, that go along with it so that, at least, they can come up with fifty to sixty, at least 60 percent of their entire money that they're earning, that they come up, come out with a 60 percent.  In other words, that it never goes over 40 percent of what it costs them to do that gig.  So if it's 100 percent, they, they're supposed to come out with sixty, sixty thousand dollars.  If it's a hundred thousand, they're supposed to come out clean with sixty thousand dollars.  Now, do whatever they want to do with it, invest it any way they want to invest it in, and that should cover their agents, their managers, their expenses, their everything.  That's it.  And I think that's fair.  Anything above that, I don't think it's fair.
Story_ID: 10046
Speaker 1: Were you the only black personal manager out here for--?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, oh, no, no.  I was at the beginning.  Oh, but a lot of, there were a lot of managers, you know.  Wynton Marsalis's manager is a friend of mine, you know, and he--a lot of them have learned a lot from me, a lot of black manager handle, handle talent now a days.  And, of course, in that hip-hop field and all that, I, I don't know any of these people because that's a whole different world (laughter) you know.  And Quincy, who's telling me, Quincy Jones was telling me, he said, "You don't want to get, you don't want to get involved with those kind of people."  He said, "I don't care how much money they made."  He said, "You wouldn't survive in it because you're, you're, your ways and the way the business is run today and the way these people operate, you don't want to get involved in them because it's like gangster stuff, handling them and them and being involved with their careers and all the other elements that are involved in their careers."  Say they're making a whole lot of money, but you'll note, you don't see many people lasting in it.
Speaker 1: Murderer's Row (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, you got--see, 'cause it's a whole different thing, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and it does seem to be a little more dangerous than--.
Speaker 2: It is, yeah, and a different outlook on it because if you notice, there's not many of the hip-hop people that are able to actually be performers, who can go out and perform on stage for an audience and really be hot stuff--you know, and really draw people to it.  Then there's the problem of who they draw.  The buyers have to spend so much money for protection and all that so when they come, and the time you get through all, it's, it's--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems to be dilemma for--I know there was a youth group in the City of Chicago [Illinois], and, that was agitating the city about not having any entertainment in the summertime for youth, cause there's a free gospel concert, free jazz festival, free blues festival--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: There are all for older people.  There's not a free hip-hop festival.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And some people in the city said, "Well, if we had a free hip-hop festival, the youth would come to it, and it would be fun, but you don't know--."
Speaker 2: You'd have to have the whole Chicago police force out there to control it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a little--.
Speaker 2: Or you'd have to have guards, in other words, to control it.
Speaker 1: At least that's the thought anyway.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what's expected.  Now, you know, it may be--I think it's more and more, as I listen to some of the stuff, and as I read about it, I think it's more and more into a kind of audience that you could draw it, and the right kind of artists could draw people to it that would not be in that, that type of temperament or that type of mood or that type of characters would, would not come, come to a concert like that, you know.  And I think some of the newer ones that I hear about and read about that have some, they're pretty good, you know.  But I wouldn't want to be involved with them.  I don't care, what, you know.  Of course, at my stage, my age (laughter), forget it. I'm planning a, a thing now that--it's, it's--there's an audience out there for middle-aged people that nobody is catering to at all.  You have so many great artists that can perform and sing in the their thirty-fives and forties, especially black, that can't get arrested now a days because they can't get on the radio.  They can't get on television.  They can't get on anything unless you're a young teenager or you in the hip-hop stuff.  And for jazz, it's got to be a white, strictly white, young white singer.  That's the criteria for jazz today.  They can't be pop singers cause they can't compete with the pop singers, the top pop white singers.  So they go to jazz, and they call themselves jazz singers.  And they're, now, that's the category for them.  So that locks out all the black jazz singers, the middle-aged singers who are doing jazz primarily and who are doing the old standards and doing the things that our entertainers who've been out here for a long time.  They're in their thirty-fives or forties or fifties even.
Story_ID: 10047
Speaker 1: Nancy [Wilson] is a special thing because Nancy has a, a cult following, and, you know, she's gonna have them there whether--no matter what because she's been out there, and she's got that following and all that prestige.  That was because she was built that way from the start.  We worked on that.  We, we made an image of a class, black woman, dressed, perfect.  A performer, no, you know, no, nothing vulgar, nothing about it.  And that is what we started to do, and this is what, the understanding we had from the beginning.  So there's been no gossip about her.  She's done some things just like everybody else, but it's all been, sure that there's never gonna be anything about her that--and she's never done anything really bad, I mean really--.
Speaker 2: I think she did--.
Speaker 1: She might have done a few things that have hurt herself more than it, than she would have been any, anything else, and that was trying to do something for somebody else.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can't remember anything, I mean as just a member of the general public which is what I am.  I can't remember anything.
Speaker 1: No, no, it's--.
Speaker 2: I'm sure she's done something wrong, but I can't remember anything (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, she, she and I had a falling out for a very short period of time, for close to a year.  And, and in the middle of that, she had a husband [drummer Kenneth C. Dennis] who wanted to take over.  And he finally got around to working it out, and they sued me.  But there was a suit, that automatically broke all contracts and all agreement.  And we didn't even have a contract.  We had a word agreement, an understanding.  Now, you had paper on it, but it was an understanding.  It wasn't necessarily a binding agreement on anything or a period of time, over years and all that, none of that.  I never had that with her, and I never had that Joe Williams.  I never had that with [Julian] 'Cannonball' [Adderley].  I never had that with Wes Montgomery.  I never had that with most of the people that I, that I stayed with.  I did have it with, with Roberta Flack.  I had it with a lot of, a lot of different people, but--that I had during the period, but not those people.  They were the standards.  They're the ones that I followed the whole, with their careers, you know, until it's over with, one way or the other.
Story_ID: 10048
Speaker 1: You always hear this kind of talk in the black community when an entertainer or an athlete gets, starts showing their talent, then there's always a fear that--as you were saying, Dakota Staton [later Aliyah Rabia], feared Jewish management.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: She, she didn't want to deal with that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There's also a fear of Italian gangsters, I mean, or the mob--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in whatever form they come, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: There's a--do you--.
Speaker 2: Sammy Davis [Jr.] went through that, you know, cause he came up in the era, the mob era, the real mob era.  That I think is, has been made legitimate now.  It's like a comedian who's on, what's the main channel?  Is on--?
Speaker 1: HBO [Home Box Office] or--.
Speaker 2: HBO, they are completed controlled by HBO.  Their careers, they have to take on managers that are connected to HBO.  In other words, they won't, they, they control their careers from then on, like a manager would do if you signed a manager.  And they can't sign some manager, outside person like me because I can't do business with HBO.  They have their own people who are the managers, and who they insist on you going with that person for your career, if you're gonna be on HBO.
Speaker 1: And so pick out--?
Speaker 2: They pick the people for you, who's gonna run your career.  You don't have any control over it.
Story_ID: 10049
Speaker 1: The only comedian I was ever involved with, in the managerial thing, was Arsenio Hall.  And I brought him--.
Speaker 2: Right, that's right--.
Speaker 1: --to town, you know.  That's it.  And I didn't want to manage that 'cause I don't, you know, I don't have a thing for comedians.  It's a manager--.
Speaker 2: Well, what has happened to--well, I don't know if you know or can tell me, but Arsenio, the case of Arsenio Hall seems to be very mysterious in the sense that he, he is a great talent, I mean as a comedian,
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That had his, rose quickly, had his own show ['The Arsenio Hall Show'].  He appeared in the movie 'Coming to America' with Eddie Murphy.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He played multiple roles in the movies, was outstanding, I mean he's a great, great talent on his talk show, but the rumor is, you know, he had [Minister Louis] Farrakhan on his talk show.  And that was it, you know. Nobody--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, after, yeah, that's how they destroyed him.
Speaker 2: Oh, is that what happened?
Speaker 1: He made a mistake.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He made a mistake to do that.  And see, he didn't have a manager to take any advice.  I brought him on, but I was out of the picture--by my own reasoning, because I didn't want to be involved--you know, I went to these comedy stores with him on a couple of occasions and around.  I said, "You know, Arsenio, this isn't for me 'cause I don't enjoy this.  And if I don't enjoy what I'm doing as a business, there ain't no amount of money that I, that I care for, that I'd want to be involved with."  This is before his, his career, you know, before he had his show.  But I would, you know, I said, "I'm always there to give you any advice you want, and I, you know, I'm always there like your father almost, you know, talk to you about anything.  But I don't want to be involved in your career because I cannot go to these places and listen to these people say the things that they say, and which is supposed to be funny."  And it's not funny.  It's all a lot of dirt, cussing and dirt.  And  I'm not no prude about cussing.  You know, if somebody gets me wrong, I'm the first one to fly off, and you'd say, "I don't believe he said that," you know, (laughter), but that--cause I can cuss, you know, I can say anything.  But I don't feel that's entertainment because when I came along it was a Flip Wilson, and even with Redd Foxx and all them, they were cleaver with whatever they said, and whatever they did.  But these people, and that's why--and even, the boy who's the greatest, you know. was--.
Speaker 2: Richard Pryor?
Speaker 1: Richard Pryor was clever with what he said.  He didn't just go out there and, and use a dirty word or call somebody a name just out of, just for the sake of it.  His stuff was clever, and so, you know, getting back to Arsenio, after I went around a few places with him, I said, "No", so I took him to William Morris, the top agents, and said, "You work with these people and everything."  And he signed, but he, he was very reluctant to sign any long-term contract with anybody.  And he played everything very safe.  And he was, for a while, Eddie, Eddie, Eddie's manager was sort of working with him.  But he didn't really dig him because the control that he wanted, and the way he wanted to go about it--Arsenio didn't really go for that.  Then, out of left field in a sense, this whole show of his came about, for him sitting in, I think, when something like that happened.  And then, and then it--from then on, he had it made until he got that religious thing involved into it, and then that was it.  That was ball breaker for, for him and the show.  Then everybody turned left on him, see.
Speaker 2: So you think that is the reason why his show--?
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm, I'm almost sure, positive.  Now, we are still very close.  He was over here a couple of weeks ago with his son, he, he's just like my son, you know.  He doesn't--a week doesn't go past or anytime--a holiday doesn't go past that he doesn't make sure that I'm looked out for with whatever I want, and anything, you know.  He came over here for, to show or bring his son who I hadn't seen.  His son is four years old.  And he came over here with him about three or three or four weeks ago.  And we had a barbecue, and so I had him outside there, barbecuing.  And I got a regular barbecue, you know, I just got--put some charcoal and go out there and let's have a barbecue.  So he enjoyed it.  The next day his office called, said, "Will you be home on the weekend.  We're gonna have something delivered to your house."  So they delivered electric, you know, barbecue, whole thing with gas barbecue thing (laughter), with all, I mean the top of the line, and (laughter), you know.  And that's the way he is with everything.  You know, he sends me presents of all kinds of things, all kinds of gifts, of jewelry and my, you know, it just goes on and on.  But I don't have anything to do with his career, telling him who should have handled that show or anything.  I went to the show several times.  And when Nancy [Wilson] was on, he did all kinds of things for her because she was the one that introduced him to me.  I went to Chicago [Illinois] and caught his act.  And that's how I got involved in his career.  And he's never forgotten it, even today.  If you talk to him, and in any interview, it comes up.  He said, "John Levy is responsible for, for me being in this business, for being here."  He made a deal with Paramount [Pictures Corporation] that locked into making a lot of money.  It's not on the surface, but it's on the inside.  In other words, Paramount gave him the rights to be able to do a lot of things, produce a lot of stuff that his name is not even on, and that he has to do with it, but he makes the money out of it, make a lot of money.
Speaker 2: Okay, so he isn't starving or anything?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, these deals would always go back, yeah.  He made some good deals.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he's a safe person and very personal.  Nobody knows his business or what he's doing, his home, where it is, and where--even this child is--the mother and the whole thing.  He had over because she said she just wasn't a mother for his child.  And he took over, and, and he's raising his own son, you know, very careful about everything, his whole career, his personal life.  And I've always stayed out of it, you know.  I don't know anything about his personal life.  People have asked me, when about, "You seen, talked to Arsenio?"  I don't know, and I don't.  And I don't ask him.  In fact, I don't ask any of the people that I've had any relationship about their personal life.  If I know about it, it's because I come in contact with certain situations in their life that make me privy to that kind of information.  Other than that, I--not in any way involved in anybody's personal life, that I have anything to do with.
Story_ID: 10050
Speaker 1: Nancy Wilson is probably, I guess, well, you know, I would guess she'd be probably the most--the longest lived clients, I mean in terms of the longest relationship with a client, you know, that you had?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she is.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and probably the most successful one, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: When did you first meet Nancy Wilson?
Speaker 2: I met her through [Julian] 'Cannonball' [Adderley].  Cannonball told me to catch this girl when she came--moved to New York.  And she was performing at a little club up in the Bronx [New York].  And I went up there, and I caught her act.  But I had already been approached by people who told me, "This girl, you should, you should work with this girl.  You should handle her."  And especially, Cannonball, he was so gung ho on her and everything.  And there was a guy working at my office as a, from Cleveland [Ohio], who knew her before.  And he was working as an agent, you know, working for me, as an agent for my office, working to help me handle talent that I was managing.  And he knew her pretty well, and he was gung ho about her.  So I went to see her, and when I first saw her and heard her, I said, "Oh, yeah.  This is it."  And, and she knew what she wanted.  We sat down and talked about exactly what she wanted and how she wanted to go, and what was most important to her in her life and her career.  And it was the business.  And it was not singing, believe it or not.  Family was the most important thing to her, and this is what she's devoted her whole life and her whole career and all the money she's earned and everything else.  It might not have been the smartest thing to do, but she stuck with it.
Story_ID: 10051
Speaker 1: We were talking about Nancy Wilson before we broke.  And, and your enduring management of Nancy Wilson.  You're still working with her.
Speaker 2: Yeah, still working with Nancy, yeah.
Speaker 1: And her prioritizing family above everything else.  Oh--.  We were talking about her prioritizing family above everything else.
Speaker 2: Yes, that, that's, that was her thing right from the very beginning.  And if you read anything or see anything about her, it, it always comes out.  She always says, "John Levy understood what I wanted, what was important to me."  And family was important to me.  And it was, I mean she looked out for everybody in her family, her half sisters, brothers, her own brother, mother, father, stepmother, stepfather.  I, I mean, I mean just, just that--she's just a person that just took care of all of them.  Now, she has family, her real immediate family is her daughter and her daughter's children, looked out for them.  So, yeah, but that's what she believes in, and that's it for her.  And I respect that.  I, I think that it may have hurt, in my estimates, you know, my feeling, I think that in some cases, it might have hurt her, hurt her children because they, they weren't allowed to really reach their full potential, I don't think, you know, because she was there to protect from every--trying to protect them from everything.
Story_ID: 10052
Speaker 1: You've been involved with some international stars. We were talking about Letta Mbulu and Caiphus Samenya.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And about--then later on down the line, and going--managing, I guess, [Julian] 'Cannonball' Adderley and Julius [sic, Julian] Adderley in Africa when they were, when the 'Soul to Soul' tour took place.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The 'Soul to Soul' tour, so unfortunately, that people like Caiphus and Letta weren't in, you know, weren't a part of that package because the package was really put together by a record company executive, you know.  And it was for that record company more than anything else, and that he had people involved in it.  And Ike and Tina Turner and all those people that were, [Carlos] Santana--.
Speaker 1: It was like Warner Brothers or--?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Was that Warner Brothers Records, or?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't Warner Brothers.  It was--I don't know who finally, in the final analysis--.
Speaker 1: Was it Les McCann, Eddie Harris--
Speaker 2: --the company it sold to, it probably is Warner Brothers who has the control of it now.  But at the time, it was his company, the, the guy and I don't, I can't recall his name right now.  I think it's in the book ['Men, Women, and Girl Singers: My Life as a Musician Turned Talent Manager'].  But that was put together for the people at Atlantic Records.
Speaker 1: Atlanta Records, I think it was, yeah.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Atlanta Records, basically was--.
Speaker 1: Les McCann, Eddie Harris.
Speaker 2: Eddie Harris, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Wilson Pickett.
Speaker 2: And I managed Les McCann and, and Roberta Flack.  That was my niche into that thing.  And I had worked with Pop--.
Speaker 1: [Pops] Staples, yeah.
Speaker 2: Staples, yeah, but I had never managed them, but, because Pops was the manager and handled it.  But I used to be so close with them as a family [The Staples Singers], you know.  I, I loved them, still do, you know.  And--.
Speaker 1: Do you remember June Moon, the drummer, who is now--?
Speaker 2: Vaguely, I do, yeah, yeah, I remember some of the people that were on that show.  But I didn't, you know, Ike and, had kept Tina so close, you couldn't even get close to her or even talk to her, you know.  He didn't allow nobody (laughter) around, (laughter) and so, I didn't get a chance to even talk to her and say anything except, hello, how are?
Speaker 1: We've seen the movie version of that.  I don't know if that's close to what the real--that seemed to be pretty close to the real life version of--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, Ike and Tina Turner, Cannonball Adderley, Les McCann, Eddie Harris, Wilson Pickett.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and the only person that those people knew is Wilson Pickett.  They knew about Wilson Pickett, but they didn't know anybody else.
Speaker 1: And it seems from watching the movie that there was a real connection between Wilson Pickett and the African audience.  They really connected.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's the only artist that they knew who he was.  They didn't even know Ike and Tina Turner, had never heard of them.  They used to have, they had little speakers on posts in the villages--we, we went all around to different villages.  And you know what music was being played on these, Guy Lombardo [dance band conductor] and all kinds of, you know, music like that was being played on those things--over those things.  They didn't have anything about--Wilson Pickett was the only artist, and they played a lot of stuff of their own, you know, countrymen.  But they didn't have anything of Roberta Flack and all them.  The people they brought over, they didn't know nothing about them.  And above all, Ike and Tina Turner, they didn't know nothing about them.
Story_ID: 10053
Speaker 1: You shot photographs, you were telling me of--?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I, I'm a kind of amateur (laughter) photo bug, and I have the excellent equipment, you know, and don't know how to use most of it, but I manage somehow to, to always carry and shoot pictures.  And I had shot a lot of stuff, pictures on that tour ['Soul to Soul' tour].  And Les McCann had his cameras, but he lost a lot of the equipment that, that--he lost the equipment, and I think he lost a lot of the pictures that he took on that tour.  He lost them somewhere, and I think he think he left his bags in a cab or something.  But he lost a lot of that stuff because he had the--he's an excellent photographer.  And he had a lot of stuff shot on the, on that same tour.  But I did, and, and they used it, a lot of stuff that I shot.
Story_ID: 10054
Speaker 1: What's your assessment of what happened to Letta Mbulu's career?  Did you really think it just, she just kind of (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: Well, Letta had signed with a, a record company in South Africa, and when she came to this country, and I made a deal for her with Capitol Records, and [Julian] 'Cannonball' [Adderley] and them did some arrangements for them, and then Caiphus [Semenya] did arrangements.  And we did a couple of, we did a couple of albums.  And they wouldn't, the African company, when they heard about this, said we couldn't release the stuff.  And they, and they put a--and Capitol Records just sort of froze on that.  And they, they didn't want any problems, and they backed up on it.  And that was the end of it.  So she couldn't record anything over here.  And they didn't have anything for her, you know, from, from Africa that they would send over here that we could use.  So she had no recording career while she was here.  So they put together an act, and, and I got them to open for a lot of different people around.  They used to do that boot dance and, and some other things they did.  And then I got the deal Harry Belafonte's package.  And that was working fine, except that Harry didn't really, you know, give her any publicity or, or do anything for her.  And, and I had to fight him each time the tour went out.  I had to fight him for money, you know, and all that, conditions and she, she really didn't, didn't get a break in this country, that, that she should have because she's a fantastic performer and entertainer.  Miriam Makeba was the only one that, over, over here that came from that country that really got play--not that she's not, was not great.  I think she was very great, but Letta was younger and more fiery and more of an entertainer than, than she was, or is.
Story_ID: 10055
Speaker 1: Some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My hope, believe it or not, fall almost in the same line of, of some of the things that Bill Cosby brought up recently about the family thing.  And I think that is the--if, if that can reestablished in any way for the black community, I think that would be the greatest success for them.  All the successes of being able to be in commercials and being recognized the movies and the, all of the great things that are happening with them to make money now-a-days and being considered and all that, the greatest could be if that family unit could ever be put back together like it was, say when I came along or, or, you know, or when Cosby came along, and how people like that--we're successful because of family or somebody like [U.S. Secretary of State] Colin Powell.  It's because of family.  All of the successes of the really prominent black people are family-oriented.  They have strong family ties.  These, these poor kids now, when they're successful and make something, they have nobody, you know, nothing to fall back on and nothing to relate to from where they came from.  In other words, the gang is their family, and that's so unfortunate.  And that's what my hopes would be for, for a reunion of, of the black family and the black culture and everything.
Story_ID: 10056
Speaker 1: Did your parents have a chance to see you become a successful--?
Speaker 2: No, unfortunately, my mother [Laura Hagan Levy] or father [John Levy] never got a chance to see me do anything, nah.  No, they died when I was very young, you know, a teenager, they died, both mother and father.
Speaker 1: Okay, did they die before you left high school or?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, my mother died, I had left, I had left high school.  In fact, my mother died, I think I was out of school when she died--maybe not, yes, I was out of school, when my, when my mother died and, and when my father died, I was out of school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you married in high school [to Gladys Levy] and--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, very young.
Speaker 1: And you had children, and--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, very young.
Speaker 1: Now, was this, was your career like tough on, on the family, you know, with all the traveling and so forth?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was.  And even to try to have the kind of career that I finally got into, you know, was hard on, on having to do that to family.  I missed out on a lot of being there with my children, especially from the first marriage.  Second marriage, when I was married to Gail Fisher, that was perfect.  I mean I was there, and with them.  But there was not the family because, it was not the mother, to be the kind of a mother, the kind of a family situation that had existed, you know, which, you know, my first family.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Gail Fisher is the actress, right?
Speaker 2: She was the actress on 'Mannix', yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was my second marriage.
Speaker 1: All right, and now, you've married a third time, right?
Speaker 2: And the third marriage was to someone to help take care of that second marriage (laughter) was the reason for the third marriage, to take care of the youngest child from that marriage, to try to give her some sense of home and unity and family, 'cause I could afford it at the time.  And that didn't work out, didn't work out for a lot of reasons.  And that finally ended.  It, it wasn't a good marriage for all the wrong reasons.  I got married for all the wrong reasons.  And it was an experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you're married now to [Devra Hall Levy]--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But it seems to be working out.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.  But that relationship started years ago, when I was married to, to my third marriage--not before Gail or anything, but that started back--because it, it was the wrong kind of marriage, and it wasn't a marriage of, really someone loving you or you loving them.  It was a marriage of convenience for both parties.  And there was no--right to the bitter end, it was a marriage of convenience.  And even after the fact, with the alimony, it's a marriage of convenience for taking care of her, and she was gonna take care of the family, and that part didn't--her part of the bargain didn't work out.  But my part of the bargain has done very well for her.
Speaker 1: So the taking care of her was--.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your children are all grown now, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Story_ID: 10057
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done so far, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Yes, but the, it would be, it would be the very personal things I would have done different because I think that, I think that I, you know, that my life might have been a little more pleasant through certain, a certain era of it, a certain period.  But I, no, I don't, I don't look back.  It's very difficult for me to look back at, or anything because I think fate has certain things to happen.  I got very, I was very fortunate in the beginning to be able to have hooked into a thing like George Shearing, to make the kind of living that I have made all of these years, to be able to earn the kind of money and have the kind of experience of traveling all over the world and the friends and relationship and everything.  I don't, I don't think I have any regrets, not really.
Speaker 1: And it seems like you've been fairly--it's interesting to have, you know, the kind of experiences that you've had without having to be the focal point of fans and that sort of thing, you know.  I mean--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you can kind of fly under the radar of all that--.
Speaker 2: Stayed under the radar and still try to stay under the radar (laughter), yeah, it's not my thing to be out front and talking about, you know, to do the thing--I've had people say to me, you know, for example, when I worked with Billie Holiday, Rob--Bobby Tucker, I said to him some time, I said, "Bobby, you know a lot of bass players, great bass players that come up in the era that, that I came up."  And I, and "Why did you pick me to work with you with Billie Holiday?"  He said, "'Cause you were a great bass player.  He said, you were listening better--you knew what you were doing.  You listened to everything, and you complement everybody you ever work with, ever played with."  And that's what I've honored, and that's what I think is important.  But, so, you know, to me I wasn't the caliber of bass player that some of the people were on 52nd Street [New York, New York].  Their reputations and, and, you know, and all of the--and 'cause nobody came around telling me how great I was.  I never won--I think there was one award or maybe something, you know, and, during those days that--the best of this and the best of that (laughter).  But, not really, you know, always had respect now of everybody, all of them.  Nobody didn't never say anything bad about my playing or anything like that, but I never considered myself being that great a bass player.
Speaker 1: Well, in that re--in terms of respect, I mean people, quite a few people recommended that we talk to you.  And when you look back at everything you've done, I mean, and you seem to have impressed quite a few people.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: And, but very few people really know who you are, I mean in the general world.
Speaker 2: In the general sense, that's true.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I'm saying, but--.
Speaker 2: Very few people knew--this, the book ['Men, Women, and Girl Singers: My Life as a Musician Turned Talent Manager'] that came out is the first really, time that I expressed who I was and had happened.  And it was amazing that people that I've known for years, when they read the book, it's, I didn't this was this, I didn't know you did this or I didn't know you were involved with this or I didn't know you helped this person.  Or I didn't know that--so many things in there.  But for the first time, Devra [Hall Levy] brought out all these things and researched all these different things that I had been involved in and had never talked to anybody about.
Story_ID: 10058
Speaker 1: When you look back on your career now, now, you're ninety-two now, and you're still working on some level.
Speaker 2: Yes, well, I'll work until, you know, I feel that I can no longer do it or physically and mentally, it's not working for me.  I've slowed down a little bit physically, and to a certain degree mentally, but not to a degree that I feel that I can't still contribute.  And with Devra [Hall Levy], as my wife and, and a partner in this whole thing for me and has been for years, I feel that I can still function.  But if tomorrow, I felt that it wasn't there, I'd be ready to give it up.
Speaker 1: Okay, when you look back on everything you've done, from this vantage point, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Legacy would be the information, the--I have given to people to help them in their success of their lives, in their careers and in their personal lives.  And, cause I've had people call me about all kinds of situations, that had nothing to do with their careers, but I happened to represent them or have had, in some way, they--came across them in life.  And I feel that, to me, that's the important thing because I have people come up to me now that I don't remember ever telling them anything, and say, Mr. Levy, you know, I met you, I was walking down in New York on 52nd Street, on 57th Street and saw you and said, "Hello," and, and I asked you about you something, something.  And you told me then, you said, you asked me about what I was doing, and then you told me certain things about the business that I've never forgotten that has def--meant so much to help me in my career.  So that's basically what I would say is the most important.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is similar to one that preceded it, but a little different--but first of all, is there anything that I haven't asked that you think I ought to ask about?
Speaker 2: The only thing I'd like to mention that in today's world, the way things are I'm still trying to make a legacy of, trying to create a legacy of entertainment people that will, that are capable of, entertainers and our singers or musicians, but get another chance, as long as I'm living and able to try to, to help them get that chance in today's world, and the way things are in today's world.  That's the only thing that I got left to do, and it's the only thing that I'm happy doing, as long as I'm physically and mentally able to do it.
Speaker 1: Okay, the last quick question and similar to legacy, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a person who thought of other people and respected their opinions, and respected them as human beings, and I've always believed that God put everybody, every single person on earth to do a certain thing.  And irregardless of whether it's financially the greatest thing that they could or everything, but put them on earth to help other people, to help each other, and I seriously believe in that.  I believe that, just like what I'm doing now, I believe what you're doing is to help other people, to let other people know, in this world, what other people think, like me or that there are people in this world like me that think the way I do.  That's the legacy I'd like to leave.
