Story_ID: 505916
Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gines, and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer, and Michael Reed [ph.] is observing.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me please.
Speaker 2: Hiram E. Little, Sr. [HistoryMaker Hiram Little]. That's H-I-R-A-M, initial E.
Speaker 1: What does the E stand for?
Speaker 2: Emory.
Speaker 1: Spell it for me.
Speaker 2: E-M-O-R-Y, last name is Little, L-I-T-T-L-E, Sr.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is March the 31, 1919.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: On a farm outside of Eatonton, Georgia, farm of Johnnie Greene Spivey [John Greene Spivey].
Speaker 1: And what is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: At my home 844 Skipper Drive Northwest, Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: The 10th of September '07 [2007].
Story_ID: 505917
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I think green is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: And what about food, what do you like to eat?  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Probably, let me see, I got, I haven't met a food that I didn't like yet (laughter).  My favorite food would probably be hot cakes and sausage from McDonald's (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I think wintertime is my favorite time of year.
Speaker 1: And when you go on vacation, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, long as I get away from Atlanta, Georgia, for just a little while and get back to it, just how I miss it when I, after I be away.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I think my favorite phrase right now is stay, stay, S-T-A-Y, and I use this when I talk to my, my grandchildren and my great-grandchildren 'course my great-grandchildren don't know what I'm talking about, but I say stay.  First stay I won't you to stay in school as long as you can and learn as much as you can.  Stay off of drugs, stay out of jail.  If they can do that, they gonna make me happy.  They might not care whether I'm happy or not, but I will be happy if they do that especially my, my grandsons.  Girls don't, don't have a whole lot of problems, but boys are, anyway I don't have to go into that story you know about that one.
Story_ID: 505918
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your, your mother and her family.  Tell me your mother's name and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother's name is Ella Grant Little.  E-L-L-A, G-R-A-N-T, Grant Little.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born on a farm in Putnam County [Georgia].  I'm not sure whose farm she was born on, but anyway she was born on a farm in Putnam County.
Speaker 1: And do you know what year she was born?
Speaker 2: She was born in 1912.  I mean 1812, I'm sorry.  No, no, no, no nineteen.  She--I was born in 1919.  She was born in 1892.  My father [Willie Little] was born in 1890.  Yeah she was born in 1892.  Both of them was born in September.  One was born on the 20th, one on the 14th, but I don't know which one is which.  I have to go back and get the Bible (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother share any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes she did.  Stories, I think she, she had most for me was the fact that she lost her mother [Talula Grant] when she was twelve years old, so I was cheated out of one grandmother.  You always have two, one on father's side, one on mother's side, so I was cheated out of one grandmother.  I won't say cheated, but anyway I had one grandmother.  And she talked about how growing up without, without a mother and how they had to make adjustments and get acclimated to this, that, the other and, but they made it.
Speaker 1: Did she, she talk about what she had to do on the farm?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she did some of everything.  She milked cows and she fed the hogs and she picked cotton, help plant cotton, shuck corn, all the different things on the farm.  Nobody was excused from anything.  You start out on the farm when you're about five or six, if it's nothing but watching the babies while their folks worked.  You'd be on the end of the row and if anything happened you let them know that the baby, the ants getting on the baby, whatever.
Story_ID: 505919
Speaker 1: Now you said that her [Little's mother, Ella Grant Little] mother died when she was twelve. What was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --her mother's name?
Speaker 2: Her mother was named--what was my grandmamma name?
Speaker 1: Well if you can't think of it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It, it will come to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, well was her father there to, to raise them?
Speaker 2: Yeah her father raised his, his children, I, I think it was seven or eight of them.  He raised them without, without, without a mother.
Speaker 1: What was his name, your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Adam Grant.  A-D-A-M, Grant, G-R-A-N-T.
Speaker 1: And do you remember your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember both of them.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you--
Speaker 2: I mean, yeah I remember him.  I, yeah, I couldn't get the other, the other long gone.  Yeah, I remember my, my, I got pictures of him.
Speaker 1: Okay, well tell me about your grandfather.  What do you remember about your grandfather?
Speaker 2: I remember by grandfather being a very small man.  He probably weighed 120 pounds soaking wet, but he was a very active man and he had eight or nine children, and I remember my mother talking about him said when her mother [Talula Grant] died, he started courting.  They didn't like that.  Nobody wants to be, anybody replace their mother.  I don't know, I didn't, I guess I would have felt the same way.  Anyway, she'd talk about my grandfather and she, he was always a nice person, easy to get along with, and they didn't always approve of these, these women folks he called on, but that's all right; they, they survived that too.
Speaker 1: So, he was a farmer in--you cannot remember the name of the farm or the location?
Speaker 2: No, I can't, I can't--no I can't remember the name of the farm.
Speaker 1: Now, were they sharecroppers?
Speaker 2: They were sharecroppers, right.  That, you, you know what that means sharecroppers they would borrow money or feed or whatever it take to, to plant and at the end of the year they would pick this cotton, take it to the gin, they'd bale this cotton up, you take it to town and sell it and when they sold this cotton everybody settle up.  They would go back and find out who owed who, how long they owed them, and inter- interest, but I don't think interest was in the dictionary then.  We didn't do things like that, but they would fi- figure out how everybody and they'd settle up and while they were in town they would buy the shoes and the winter clothes for (unclear) get back to town just two or three times a year.  We lived nine and a half miles from town and you didn't get to town all the time.
Speaker 1: Now, was there any talk about slavery or interracial marriages?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember them talking about that.  They never had any problem.  I never heard my mother or my father [Willie Little] say anything or my grandfather say anything about racial relations or, or lynching or anything like that.  I never heard them talk about that.  Maybe they didn't want to re- remember it or whether it never happened I, I have no idea.  I, I don't know what they did in Putnam County [Georgia].  I don't know what the relationship between the whites and blacks were, but we all survived it, they did and we did (laughter).
Story_ID: 505920
Speaker 1: All right, tell me about your father.  Tell me his name.
Speaker 2: My father was Willie Marshall Little [Willie Little].  W-I-L-L-I-E, Marshall, M-A-R-S-H-A-L-L, Little.
Speaker 1: And he was born, you said in, in 1892?
Speaker 2: He was born in 1890, 1890 I believe it was, yeah,--
Speaker 1: Eighteen ninety [1890].
Speaker 2: --she, she was born, my mother [Ella Grant Little] was born in 1892.  He was born in 1890.
Speaker 1: Okay, and tell me about your, your fam- your father's family.  Where did they live?
Speaker 2: Well, somewhere in, in, in Putnam County [Georgia], an area called Little River.  I think they called it the Little River area, Little River area, and there is a Little River down there.  I've passed by it and--
Speaker 1: Well, tell, tell me where Putnam County is--
Speaker 2: It's--
Speaker 1: --in location to Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: It's about ninety miles south, I guess it will be southeast of Atlanta if you were, let's see now if you get out here and get on I-20 [Interstate 20] you head all the way to exit 115 and you get off and hang a right, that will be 441 [U.S. Route 441], I think, and that'll take you into Putnam County, Eatonton, Georgia, E-A-T-O-N-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Oh so, it's, okay it's outside of Eatonton.
Speaker 2: Yeah, outside of Eatonton, Georgia.
Speaker 1: So, now your father also lived on a farm or plantation?
Speaker 2: He worked on a farm [Spivey Plantation, Putnam County, Georgia].
Speaker 1: He worked on a farm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he worked on a farm.  He worked on a farm for oh until I think he left the farm in nineteen- 1931.
Speaker 1: Okay, so even after he married your mother--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he was working on the farm.
Speaker 2: He was working on the farm, and what farm, farm work then was twenty, twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week.  You didn't have any off days because cows had to be milked twice a day, in the morning and afternoon.  The hogs had to be fed.  Everything had to go on, and I think my father decided after a while he got tired of the farm and he wanted to move to town, so he one Sunday evening while we were, my mother and, and my brother [John Little (ph.)] and, and I were visiting some of our relatives we came home, it was a Sunday afternoon, and my father was waiting there with an old Packard, I think it was a Packard.  It, it was a (unclear) funeral car, you know the funeral cars had the jump seat and everything and he said he decided he was gonna leave the farm and move to Atlanta.  Leaving the farm poverty and getting to the poverty you, you, ain't helping of yourself, but you're just changing locations (laughter).  Anyway, we got in this car and we started towards Atlanta and somewhere up the road the car broke down.  It wasn't anything, it was minor something.  Anyway, we got it fixed.  We stopped and got it fixed and we came to Atlanta, drove all the way to Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, well before we get to Atlanta, I want to go back a little bit--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and talk more about your father.  Did he share any stories about his growing up, how many brothers and sisters he had?
Speaker 2: Yes he did.  He, he talked about his growing up.  I think he said, he talked about--well it's how many brothers, let's see how many brothers.  I think there was seven boys and three girls.  Seven boys and three girls in his family and for some reason they called, always thought he was the black sheep.  He was gonna be, and I don't know why he did that, but anyway (laughter).  I think because he liked to drink and he liked to gamble, but anyway I think they called him the black sheep of the family.  But anyway, they were all--let's see there's Ber Flem [ph.], Ber- in other words they always referred to one another as brother, brother Albert [ph.] or brother, brother John [ph.] and they didn't, didn't say brother, they say Ber, B-U-R, B-E-R, Ber John, Ber Flem, Ber Albert.  They were saying brother, but it was, that was the way that country folks talked.  He used to talk about his, his brothers and how they got along with each other.  He liked some of them better than the others (laughter), but he talked about them a lot.  I think he was crazy about them--
Speaker 1: Who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) fond of them.
Story_ID: 505921
Speaker 1: Who were his parents?  What were your grandparents on your father's side?  What were their names?
Speaker 2: Lou- Louisa, Louisa Little, Louisa Rice [Louisa Rice Little].  My, my, my, my father's mother was a Rice; that was her maiden name, R-I-C-E.  It was--
Speaker 1: And how do you spell the first name?
Speaker 2: L-O-U-I-S-A.  I think they called it Louisa instead of Louisa.  Louisa Rice.
Speaker 1: And your grandfather's name was?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was, my, my father's name was Willie Marshall [Willie Little].  My grandfather's name, I think it was just Marshall Little [ph.] or was it Marshall Little.  I lose my memory too, ma'am.
Speaker 1: That's fine.
Speaker 2: Just give me a second (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you're doing the best that you can--
Speaker 2: Anyway.
Speaker 1: --and that's, that's fine.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, did you visit your grandparents on the farm?
Speaker 2: I visited my grandmother, but my grandmother was living with a white family.  They moved her in when a, when a, when a, when a boy, it was the family name was Reems [ph.]  And when their baby boy was born, my, my grandmother moved in to nurse the baby, and the only time I ever remember, the last time I remember seeing my grandmother she was living with the Reems house.  And pretty soon after we moved to Atlanta [Georgia] I still got the telegram that my youngest uncle sent a telegram and said mama died.  He gave the date; I still got the telegram. At least the copy that my father left and I said we, we will arrange the funeral.  Uncle Albert [ph.] was the, he was the smartest one of the people I, I guess he had learned how to read and write.  Probably went beyond the third grade.  The third or fourth grade was about, in a one-room school house about the furthest they got down there.  After that, you got, got that far you could read the Bible and you could, anyway sign your name.
Speaker 1: So, what happened to your grandfather?
Speaker 2: My grandfather?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh Marshall Little.
Speaker 2: Marshall Little, Marshall Little was my father.
Speaker 1: I thought he was Willie Marshall.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Willie Marshall yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: So, your grandfather who was married to Louisa Rice--
Speaker 2: Rice.
Speaker 1: --did you have any interaction with him?
Speaker 2: I, can't remember too much about him.  I can't remember that.
Story_ID: 505922
Speaker 1: I remember about my father because he tell me about where I was born.  He told me I was born Monday morning (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay well, well tell me about, tell me about your father then.
Speaker 1: My father liked to talk about the fact, well he had, I had a brother [John Little (ph.)] seventeen months older than I am.  He liked to talk about his two boys and he said I was born on a Monday morning, March the 31, 1919, and this is how he found out, well he knew that I was, I was on the way, and somebody, he was in plowing, somebody came by and said, said, "Marshall [Willie Little]," said, "you, you gotta another little big head boy up there," (laughter) that's was me.  And he said it was a Monday morning and I went back and got a (unclear) calendar and it was a Monday morning March the 31, 1919, was a Monday morning, was Monday.  I found that out, so he was tel- my father was kind of proud of his two boys.  He talked about us a lot, treated us royally.  I think he spoiled us if that was possible, but I was delivered by a midwife and I always referred--her name was Aunt Penny Hartgrove [ph.].  I always referred to Aunt Penny Hartgrove as my other grandmother and when you live on the farm you know you're delivered by a midwife you always refer to that midwife as my other grandmother.  You gotta a grandmother on your father's side and a grandmother on your mother's side and that other grandmother was always a midwife who delivers you.
Story_ID: 505923
Speaker 1: Tell me about growing up on a farm?  Tell me the name of the, well was it a farm or a plantation?
Speaker 2: It was, it was, it was a plantation, Johnnie Greene Spivey [John Greene Spivey], Johnnie, Greene, J-O-N-N-I-E, G-R-E-E-N, Spivey [sic.], and it seemed like Mr. Johnnie Greene Spivey owned that part of Putnam County [Georgia] as far as you could go you, you was on his farm [Spivey Plantation], some parts of it.  I don't know how he came by his wealth or anything like that, but he had a great big house.  The house is still there.  It looked just like it was a huge house.  He had a windmill, and the windmill would pump water up in a tank so that he, he'd have running water in his house and he had indoor bathroom 'cause he had running water and had a generator to generate electricity and he had electric lights.  Well, of course everybody else had lamps and lanterns to light.  He had electric lights, and it seemed to me that it was the biggest in the world, but when I got by there now it's just another ordinary house (laughter). I can remember it had some, on her front steps Ms., Ms. Molly Spivey, her name was Molly Spivey [ph.], grew some pomegranates and I don't know what happened to the pomegranates or did they change the name of it.  Pomegranate, I have to look that up.  Anyway, I can remember in her garden she grew something called currants, C-U-R-R-A-N-T-S.  They must have changed the name of those, I don't know.
Speaker 1: There the same, they're like raisins.
Speaker 2: Yeah and I, I've seen some currant jelly somewhere, but I never seen a currant since then.  That's a long time ago.  I'm eighty-eight years old and eighty-eight and a half, boy anyway I can't remember all that stuff.  But anyway ask me some more questions I might bring up something.
Story_ID: 505924
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Ella Grant Little] and father [Willie Little] met?
Speaker 2: I don't remember anything about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I do remember my father used to tease my mother about her, one of her ex-boyfriends, somebody who admired her and I, I don't know what he was saying about him, but I think he was making fun of him.  See I, I won out.  But anyway--what did my, my father always say about my, my mother's ex admirer, wasn't her boyfriend, was an admirer.  Anyway, I can't with all that stuff (laughter).
Story_ID: 505925
Speaker 1: Now you just had one brother [John Little (ph.)]?
Speaker 2: One brother.
Speaker 1: No sisters?
Speaker 2: No sisters.
Speaker 1: Just the two of you?
Speaker 2: Just the two of us.
Speaker 1: And was there a reason, usually southern families have, just like your mother [Ella Grant Little] and father [Willie Little], a lot of children.  Did they just decide they only wanted two or was there a reason?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess the good Lord decided that two is enough for them (laughter).  That's all I can say.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That, that, people usually had a lot of farm and the more children you have the, the easier it is and the more work you have and the more successful you are, but they had two.
Story_ID: 505926
Speaker 1: Tell me more about the Spivey Plantation [Putnam County, Georgia] where you grew up.
Speaker 2: What I can remember about the Spivey Plantation was that it looked like everything you needed there, Mr. Spivey [John Greene Spivey] had it on his plantation.  One of the things I remember most was he had a blacksmith shop, and the blacksmith shop was right across the street from his cotton gin, he had a cotton gin, where you gin the cotton, we picked the cotton, and you take it to this gin and they gin it and bale it up and send it to town and sell it.  But, right, right across the street from his cotton gin was a blacksmith shop, and the blacksmith was named Anderson, his last name was Anderson, A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N, and his first name was Alex, A-L-E-X, Alex Anderson and I understand from talking to some of the people he was a native of Sweden.  How he got to America I don't know, but he was--well mules and horses had to be shoed.  He would shoe, shoe them horses and mules, and I remember watching him and how he would take these, he would start, I think he always started on the left side of the horse or the shoe, the mule he was shoeing, and he would cut trim and I would ask him, "Does that hurt?"  I can remember asking him, "Does that hurt the horses?"  He said, "Nah just like your fingernails.  Say you cut your finger it don't hurt you.  It's the same way with horse." And he would know how, how far to cut 'cause he would have to nail the shoes, all shoes on the, that foot and he, I said, "At least don't hurt these horses you never been kicked?"  He said, "No I never been kicked."  He said, "I know where to start and I know why, how far to go and I nail these shoes on this horse and the, the mules.  They'll stay there until the, you know they wear off and they come back and I shoe them again."  I can remember his wife was named Jenny, Jenny, Ms. Jenny [ph.], and the thing I remember about Ms. Jenny she is--and, I, I, I've thought about this a lot. Ms. Jenny didn't have any white friends.  All of Ms. Jenny's people were blacks, and I found out that the white folks in that community since Ms. Jenny's husband did ma- manual labor and horse, shoeing houses it was a little below their social standing.  So, all the, the visit that Ms. Jenny had were black, black women and she would talk about.  She had a son, a couple of sons that lived somewhere in Florida.  I think it was St. Petersburg, Florida.  She used to talk about them a lot, but I, I can't remember what she used to stay about them.
Story_ID: 505927
Speaker 1: What else was on the plantation?  You said the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can remember, I can remember riding on the saw mill.  I can remember my father [Willie Little] working in the saw mill.  My father was, he, he could machinery.  That saw mill is where you go and cut these pine logs and you send them through the thing and cut the bark off of them and it's lumber, building, building material.  But, you had to, this saw mill was a machinery and my father was pretty good at this stuff.  You had to always set up a saw mill near water, running water, 'cause you had to have some water to keep some of the stuff cool I think it was, but I don't remember.  I can remember--and in the end they had a great big pile of saw dust and sometimes this saw dust pile would catch fire and it'd burn, look like burn for a week before it'd burn out.  I can remember all that stuff just like it was yesterday, and my father always liked to work around saw mills and he, he liked the saw mills and the only reason he left Mr. Spivey [John Greene Spivey] and went to work for the Ross' [ph.] is because Mr. Spivey, I think Mr. Spivey paid, paid off every other week or maybe ev- every week we went to work, but if the Ross' because they paid, paid you every week.
Speaker 1: Now your father worked in the saw mill on, on the Greene Spivey Plantation [Spivey Plantation, Putnam County, Georgia], but did he sharecrop there, where y'all lived?
Speaker 2: My father, my father didn't, didn't ever sharecrop.  My father worked for wages as he called it.  He worked for wages.  He said sharecropping was the same.  He found out that the sharecropping depended on the weather.  If you sharecropping and the weather turn out bad, and your cotton, which was the cash crop, the cotton didn't do so well, you, you end up in the hole.  So what he did he worked for wages, five dollars a month.  He worked for wages five dollars a month.
Story_ID: 505928
Speaker 1: Describe the house that you grew up in on the plantation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I remember the house, I got a picture of it, very vividly.  It was an L-shaped house. Room right here, I guess you would call it, what we called a front room.  It was a living room, combination living room/bedroom, and then the kitchen through here, end of the house right here, and you go to the kitchen right there and then back this way was a, was a, was another room, a back room and mother [Ella Grant Little] and father [Willie Little] slept in this room here and my, my brother [John Little (ph.)] and I slept in the back room.  And I can remember that sometimes a couple of guys would share that back room with my, my brother and I.  And I don't know why they never had a family, but they were, they were hired help on the farm [Spivey Plantation, Putnam County, Georgia] and every once in a while they would come there and spend the night especially in the wintertime, summertime they'd sleep anywhere.  They would come there and spend the night with us, Griff [ph.] and Bam [ph.], that's all I remember about them, homeless people, well not homeless people.  They didn't have no families, worked on the farm for wages.  But, my father didn't like the sharecropping idea, he liked to work for wages as I told you.  If the cotton didn't turn out, well that all depend on the weather and so a lot of other things and he worked for wages.  He worked for five dollars a month.
Speaker 1: Okay, now back to the house a little bit.  How, you said that Mr. Spivey [John Greene Spivey] had electricity, but you had lamps.
Speaker 2: Yeah we had a lamp.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how did you heat and cook?
Speaker 2: Well, we cooked on wood stove.  You always have to have firewood.  You, you had an axe, listen you just start out living there, you got an axe and some axes and you cut wood and--stove.
Speaker 1: Were that, were those chores that you and your brother performed?
Speaker 2: We did that when we got old enough to do it.  Before we got old enough to do it, we did whatever we had to do.
Story_ID: 505929
Speaker 1: How many other families lived on that plantation [Spivey Plantation, Putnam County, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Oh boy, I would say Mr. Spivey [John Greene Spivey] must have had about seven or eight different families on that.  I know he had Anna Lou Bailey [Annie Bailey] and her husband, Robert Bailey, had Fannie and John [John Reid] and Fannie Reid. They didn't have any children.  The Baileys had seven or eight children.  M.B. [ph.], Curtis [Curtis Bailey], Clifford [Clifford Bailey], and I think, can't remember what the baby's name and, and M.B. was the only girl.  The rest of them boys.  Let's see how many families.  My Uncle John [ph.] lived on the family.  He and his wife Seng [ph.].  They didn't have any children.  My Uncle Charlie [ph.], Uncle Charlie lived on the farm.  He had some of his children still living down there in Putnam County [Georgia].  Uncle Charlie had how many boys?  He had three boys, I think and four girls.  I think he had seven children.  Anyway, some of the children still down there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, it was about seven or eight families that lived on the property?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Story_ID: 505930
Speaker 1: Now, what crops were being raised on the plantation [Spivey Plantation, Putnam County, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Well, the cash crop was cotton.
Speaker 1: Did you ever pick cotton?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I picked cotton.  As I said, the first dollar I made was picking a hundred pound of cotton, but it was a secret to that.  You start early in the morning when the dew is still on the cotton, it's wet cotton.  The man gonna wait 'til it get dry.  He gonna weigh it, every time you pick a bagful and take it to the end of the road he will weigh it and when you pick a hundred pound you gotten a dollar there.
Speaker 1: So, the wet cotton actually weighed more is that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it weighed more, so probably thirty minutes before the sun is up it's light enough to see how to pick cotton, so you get out there and start picking cotton while it's still, you know the dew, and pick that wet cotton, get up there and you could get you a hundred pounds in a day (laughter).  You got a whole dollar.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a secret to picking a lot of cotton or picking it fast?
Speaker 2: Well, I picked a lot of cotton, but I remember that first dollar.  I picked cotton, plant corn, picked corn, shuck corn. Pretty much anything you done on a farm.  I was old enough to--I didn't leave the farm like I said I was eleven years old.  So, I could do a lot of things on the farm.  I could plant corn and the way, the way you plant corn you get, you, you have a bucket with corn in it, shell, shell corn, been shelled and you planted it.  And the way you make, make sure if you did the right way you walk behind the guy in the front and you put two or three kernels of corn in his heel step where he, and that you keeping, trying to keep them a certain length apart so that when they start growing they wouldn't crowd each other out and you wouldn't have to thin them out.  That's how you, you--now I don't know how you gauge the cotton how far apart you want to plant the cotton plants.  I don't remember that, but I do remember them corn.  Put a couple of kernels of corn in the, in the heel print; it worked.
Story_ID: 505931
Speaker 1: You and your, your bro- what was your brother's name?
Speaker 2: My brother was named John Willie Little [John Little (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is--
Speaker 2: They called him June, Jr. because he wasn't, he wasn't a Jr., but the Willie was in there, so they called him June, Jr.  All his life he was Jr. and they called me Joe.
Speaker 1: Were you the older or was he the older (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was the youngest.  He was older, seventeen months older than I am--
Story_ID: 505932
Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: I started school at Texas Chapel A.M.E. Church [Texas A.M.E. Church, Eatonton, Georgia], schoolyard right there, and my first teacher was named Hal Slaughter, H-A-L, I think he spell it, S-A, S-L-A-U-G-H-T-E-R, Hal Slaughter.  That was the Texas Chapel A.M.E. Church they had a schoolhouse there.  Two room, it was, it was a large house, but they used it for schoolroom, had upstairs and a downstairs, but we, the, the classroom was downstairs.  And that was the last, the first teacher I had in that schoolhouse.  And the last teacher I had before my father [Willie Little] left the farm [Spivey Plantation, Putnam County, Georgia] and moved to Atlanta [Georgia], his name was Lovie Howard [ph.], L-O-V-I-E, Howard and Ms. Lovie Howard.  I can always remember her as being my last school teacher on the farm.
Story_ID: 505933
Speaker 1: So now your father [Willie Little] decides to move to Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So you finally make it after the truck broke down and all of that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we got it fixed and finally got to Atlanta.  But, we came, it's, right now it's called the, what kind of highway is it?  Not the Risville Highway [ph.].
Speaker 1: You gotta sit up (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Sparta, Sparta Highway, some kind of Sparta.  Anyway, we came up this road and the truck broke down and they finally got the truck broke down and we came, we got as far as on the Covington Highway.  We got as far as, I'm not sure how far it is, but we walked from Covington Highway to Atlanta.  We came through Dru- Druid Hill [sic. Druid Hills, Atlanta, Georgia], and the first street we got on was in Druid Hill--Parkland Avenue [sic. Parkland Drive], got on Parkland Avenue.  And Parkland Avenue brought us all the way from down there on that Covington Highway to we got to what's right is Courtland Street; I think it's Courtland Street.  Either Courtland Street or the next street was--
Speaker 1: Or Piedmont [Avenue].  Juniper [Street] or Piedmont.
Speaker 2: Either Courtland or Piedmont.  An- anyway that Parkland Avenue brought us on right on to there.  I can remember that.  And the first address I had in Atlanta was 115 Chestnut Avenue [sic. Chestnut Street; James P. Brawley Drive], 115 Chestnut Avenue.  I don't know how long we lived there.  We lived there a pretty good while.
Speaker 1: So now you're twelve years old when you move to Atlanta.  What school did you attend when you got to Atlanta?
Speaker 2: When I got to Atlanta, we go to Atlanta and my father took my brother [John Little (ph.)] and I somewhere down on Forrest Avenue [Ralph McGill Boulevard].  At that time, it was known at Butler Street [sic.], somebody had a private school there, but we stayed there for about an hour talking to this lady and whatever they talked about I don't know, but my father didn't like that.  So, he took my brother and I and walked all the way to what is now David T. Howard [David T. Howard Colored Elementary School; David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia], it was David T. Howard, Howard High School then or middle school or elementary school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Elementary school.
Speaker 2: --elementary school, took us all the way to David T. Howard Elementary School and took us and put us in school, enrolled us right there.  And they put me and my brother both in I think fifth grade or was it sixth grade.  I don't know whether it was fifth grade or sixth grade.  Anyway, after they did a little testing there they moved by brother back and sent him to Yonge Street School [Atlanta, Georgia], no first sent him to Bell Street School [Atlanta, Georgia], that's right there behind where Grady Hospital [Grady Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia] is now, and they transferred him from there to Yonge Street School, and I believe Yonge Street School has changed now, but it's still there.  That school is still there.  They changed it.  Yeah I believe it's still a school there, anyway.
Speaker 1: So, tell me about your transition from going to school on a farm [Spivey Plantation, Putnam County, Georgia] and now you're at David T. Howard Elementary School.  Tell me how, what the experience was like.
Speaker 2: Well I, I think, what, what shocked me was the fact that--indoor, indoor bathrooms (laughter).  That was, that, that impressed me we had indoor bathroom.  We could go in use the bathroom and turn the thing on the end, you don't have to go out in that outhouse no more and use that Sears Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] catalog until it ran out, then you started using sticks or paper or whatever you could find.  Anyway (laughter) that was the thing.  I said boy I'm, I'm gonna like this.  I can go ahead and use the bathroom hit a handle here and everything gone with it; I loved this (laughter).  I can remember that more vividly than anything else I can remember about leaving the farm and coming to the city.
Speaker 1: Was being, being able to use the indoor plumbing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What about electricity?  Was this your, the first time that you live in a house that has electricity?
Speaker 2: It, it was, it was, but didn't have electricity when I first started living in Atlanta.  I had lamp for a whole long while.  Every once in a while you'd move in a house that was wired for electricity, but who had money to pay for electricity when you could use a lamp? Kerosene.
Story_ID: 505934
Speaker 1: So, now what are some of the activities that you and your brother [John Little (ph.)] are involved in?
Speaker 2: When I first got to Atlanta [Georgia], the first thing I did when I went to school [David T. Howard Colored Elementary School; David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia] I got, I'm, I'm not sure what my homeroom teachers name, but I think his name was Mr. Gibson [ph.].  And we were having something like health science and for some reason there one, one of the teachers, one, one of the faculty members there wanted to start a Boy Scout troop.  And he came around and wanna know who wanna join the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America].  I didn't know what the Boy Scouts were.  I wanted to join something.  I wanted to joint something, and I joined the Boy Scouts, troop number 94 I think it was, and I found out later that was the first Boy Scout troop in a black school in, in Atlanta.  So, I went in the history books right there, joined the Boy Scouts.  And I worked off and on in the Boys Scouts ever since.  That's my longest association with anything is the Boy Scout troop.
Story_ID: 505935
Speaker 1: Now, the neighborhood in which you moved into, now you told me that you didn't have electricity at home--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --but tell me about the neighborhood.  Who lived in the neighborhood, who were some of your friends?
Speaker 2: Listen we all lived in this, in the neighborhood and we all went to school together and as I said the first, first address, Atlanta [Georgia] address I lived at 115 Chestnut Avenue [sic. Chestnut Street; James P. Brawley Drive] and--
Speaker 1: Is that at southwest?
Speaker 2: No, that's right, right off of Courtland Street now, Courtland Street, yeah right off Courtland Street now.  Courtland, Pi- yeah Piedmont [Avenue] and Courtland, right off Courtland Street, right--in other words, white folks lived up here on the street and black folks lived in the back, in other words the basement, white family up here on, on the street and I the basement black family lived down there, right behind them.  I can remember that.
Speaker 1: So, who were the merchants in the area?  Where did you have to go to shop and, and--
Speaker 2: Well, let me--
Speaker 1: --and any type of entertainment (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) this is what, this is what we did.  Almost on every corner you had a store.  We called them Jew stores.  You had Jake Famine [ph.].  He had the biggest store there.  We had Madden [ph.].  He had a corner store.  And had somebody named, what was the other guy name, Gatlin [ph.].  Gatlin had a store over here on this corner, and you can go anyone of the stores you want to.  We called them Jew stores, racist, we, we were racist too then, still, still are, don't realize it, but, we called them Jew stores.  And I, one wasn't any different than the other except that maybe this guy over here had a couple of black boys working in his store.  This one over here might have one while you would favor the one had the two black boys working do whatever, he had to sweep up and keep the clean up.  But, I can remember one of the stores, Gatlin, the man had a son named Louie Gatlin [ph.], and Louie Gatlin was gonna go to Georgia Tech [Georgia School of Technology; Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia].  I don't know whether he ever got there or not, but I can remember he, he used to talk about his son, "My son is going to Georgia Tech."  And at that time, I think the, the school the, the technical schools, all the schools in Atlanta, a limited number of, of Jews that they would admit.  They did, they limited them.  Yes, I can remember that.
Story_ID: 505936
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers at the, at your elementary school [David T. Howard Colored Elementary School; David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia] that you remember that might have been encouraging to you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can remember my sixth grade teacher named Ms. Paschal [ph.].  Now Ms. Paschal realized when I walked in the door that I was from the country, and I'd sit over, she had me sit over here by the window and I was always looking out the window and I wasn't paying attention, so she moved from the window over here next to the door (laughter).  She said, "Emory [HistoryMaker Hiram Little]," she called me Emory, now I didn't like the word Hiram, everybody called me Emory.  She said, "Emory," said, "I'm gonna move you away from this window.  I'm gonna move you over here next to the door so you won't, you can pay attention to me and not keep looking out at, at the trees or whatever you looking at." Ms. Paschal.
Story_ID: 505937
Speaker 1: You enjoyed now living in, in the city [Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Loved every minute of it.  Loved every minute of it.
Speaker 1: Did you have an opportunity at home with your family to, did you eventually get electricity where you were able to listen to the radio?
Speaker 2: The first house I remember having electricity was, boy, I think it was at 254 Harris Street.  I think that was the first house I lived in where we had electricity, didn't have to use that lamp.  And at that time I probably was going into high school or graduating from high school [David T. Howard Junior High School; David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia].  I think I was graduating from high school.  That yearbook I got, yeah it gave my address as 254 Harris Street when I finished high school.  That was in 1937. Wow, seventy, seventy, seventy-something years ago, seventy years ago, anyway (laughter).  Okay (unclear)--
Speaker 1: So, you listened to the radio, did you have an opportunity to listen to the radio?  Did you have a favorite program?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the, the lady, when we lived at 254 Harris Street the lady downstairs, somebody there had a, had a radio that we could listen to and I remember listening to, was it Joe Louis/Schmeling [Max Schmeling] fight?  They fought twice didn't they, or three times?  Joe Louis was our hero; Schmeling was the white folks' hero, but he was a gentleman.  But, I remember listening to this radio to that fight, and these people had this radio there and we crowded around that radio.  Of course, the drugstore, folks (unclear) drugstore was up there.  We could go up there and listen at the radio to.  But, you could only do that when the, when the drugstore was open.  I remember that, yeah okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I got a picture of that house too.
Story_ID: 505938
Speaker 1: What did your father [Willie Little] do for a living now that he was in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: My father--first, when he first came to Atlanta my father started working for a man named Purkle [ph.], and Purkle did plastering.  You didn't have drywalls then, you had plastered walls.  And he worked for Mr. Purkle plastering these walls, and he did that for a while and then he, somebody needed someone to help them cook.  I think this lady, what was her name, she was, she tau- she taught nursing at Grady, at, yeah it was Grady Hospital [Grady Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia].  She taught at Grady Hospital.  What was here name?  Anyway she got my father involved in cooking for her or helping her cook or something like that, and he started doing that and he liked it.  And she boarded some people in, in a dental school, had a dental school on Forrest Avenue [Ralph McGill Boulevard].  What was the name of that school?  I, I can remember because if you--the only thing they could do for blacks they go by and pull a teeth for a quarter.  They wouldn't work on you, wouldn't fill no, but they'd pull a teeth for a quarter.  Anyway, my father started working for that and he started doing that and he just got in the business of cooking.
Speaker 1: And, and--
Speaker 2: And then he finally got hooked up with a lady who ran a, had a, her husband was an architect and he built a hotel, an eleven, eleven story hotel named the Pickwick Hotel [Atlanta, Georgia] on Fairlie Street, 133 Fairlie Street.  And my father started working for them and after a while he just started for working for Mr. and Mrs. Walker [ph.].  He cooked for them.  He cleaned up the building for them.  He did janitorial work there, whatever they did, he, he worked for them.  He did that for, until I think one of them died or both of them.  No, Ms. Walker didn't die.  Mr. Walker must have died, and she moved from there to Forrest Avenue, some apartments they owned on Forrest Avenue and those apartments are still there.
Speaker 1: Okay, did your mother [Ella Grant Little] work outside of the home?
Speaker 2: My mother worked, my mother first came to Atlanta she started working at a laundry, Atlanta Linen Supply [Atlanta Linen Supply Company], and it was on Highland Avenue and they did all the linen for looked like every hotel in Atlanta that had Atlanta Linen Supply.  My mother worked there for quite a while and, but she quit working there after a while because they found out they were doing linen from the tuberculosis sanitarium [Battey General Hospital] up in Rome, Georgia, and people started getting sick, getting tuberculosis and my mama quit working there.  She said I don't wanna get tuberculosis.  She stopped working there, and she didn't do any more work.
Story_ID: 505939
Speaker 1: Back to school, you're in the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America], that's something that--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --your activities. Did you play sports or, or involved in the band or music (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Only thing, no, the only thing I ever remember doing was trying to play baseball, and I didn't do too well at that.  I never could play any sports, none, never ever.
Speaker 1: What were holidays like at your house?
Speaker 2: Holidays, I don't think anything--the only holiday I can remember that we really made a big do was Christmas.  We would buy firecrackers and shoot them, sparkles and all that kind of stuff.  Other, other holidays just came and went, just another holiday.  But, Christmas was always you get toys and you buy sparkles and Roman candles, whatever was for sale you bought it and you set them off; this was Christmas.
Speaker 1: All right, and your brother [John Little (ph.)], what about movies and now you're a teenager are you--
Speaker 2: Movies.
Speaker 1: --doing activities, are you doing as, as a teenager?
Speaker 2: As a teenager let me see what did I like to do as a teenager?
Speaker 1: 'Cause now you've, you've gone on to David T. Howard junior high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah and I, I finished high school in 1937.  What did I do then?
Speaker 1: What was the name, what was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: David T. Howard [David T. Howard Junior High School; David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was an elementary and high school?
Speaker 2: Elementary school and high school.
Speaker 1: Did you have any idea of what you would do after graduation?
Speaker 2: I had no idea.  I didn't even think about it.
Speaker 1: You didn't?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did you go to the prom?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't have par- I couldn't dance and didn't have a girlfriend anyway (laughter).  I didn't go to my junior prom nor my senior prom (laughter).  Couldn't dance, born with two left feet, can't dance now (laughter).  I try sometimes, but I didn't have a girlfriend, so.
Story_ID: 505940
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So now what did you do after high school [David T. Howard Junior High School; David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Okay here's the story.  After high school one Friday evening a Sergeant Mays [ph.] came by and said the U.S. Army Air Corps is opening up to accept blacks for training, this was a Friday, and that Monday morning I was down at the recruiting office signing up for the U.S. Army Air Corps.  Didn't know what I was gonna do, but I knew I was gonna get paid once a month (laughter).  Somebody asked me, "Why you, why'd you join the service?"  I said, "I want a regular paycheck."  Just that simple.  I knew I was gonna get paid, and I was gonna learn something.  I didn't know what it was, didn't care, so--
Speaker 1: You had no thoughts of going to college after high school?
Speaker 2: No, no, no thoughts.
Speaker 1: So between 1937 when you graduate from high school and 1941 when you enter into the, the [U.S.] Army, what did you do for those years?
Speaker 2: I was in the [U.S.] military.
Speaker 1: Between 1937 when you get out of high school don't you enter into the Army in 1941?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '41 [1941].
Speaker 1: Okay so from '37 [1937] to '41 [1941] what are you doing those years?
Speaker 2: Oh, try, try, trying to, trying to get an education at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, you did think about go, going to college (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes I did right.
Speaker 1: So, did you go to Morehouse?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to Morehouse.
Speaker 1: For how long?
Speaker 2: And well it took me ten years to get, course five years in the military.  It took me ten years to get out.  I started out--I don't know why I wanted to major in chemistry.  I wasn't that smart, but I was just fascinated by how you could take two clear liquids and pour them together and get a color out of them.  It fascinated me.
Speaker 1: Okay let's stop here to change--
Speaker 2: But I was crazy I should have picked something else easy like Bible or religion (laughter), but I, I got involved in that and I, I did pretty well for a while, but I went downhill and I, I was down to about one class I guess a day.
Story_ID: 505941
Speaker 1: Now, we, we were talking about Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay how, how did I get to Morehouse.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: This was the story.  Clark College [Clark University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], it was Clark University, they called it Clark University then.  It was down, out there in south Atlanta [Georgia], a whole lot of pretty girls out there.  I'm out there fooling around with these, meeting all these pretty girls and it was, they had what you call a freshmen week or something.  You go out there and decide what you wanna do, and this was, I was out there with all these pretty girls and I, I wanted to go to Clark--I always liked girls (laughter)--and for some reason I, I didn't, didn't never really register out there, but I came back--when I left Clark and came, when I come to Atlanta, I mean came back to, must have come back home, and somebody said the, said, said, "Emory [HistoryMaker Hiram Little] what you gonna do?"  They called me Emory.  Didn't know nobody call me Hiram, they called me--, "Emory," said, "what you gonna do?"  I said, "I really don't know what I'm gonna do."  He said, "Well why don't you, why don't you go to Morehouse?"  I said, "What I wanna go to Morehouse for?"  He said, "Listen," said, "I can get you a scholarship there.  I can call somebody and get you a scholarship to Morehouse." And I said, "I don't know if I wanna go to Morehouse or not.  Man I think I wanna go out there at Clark where all them girls are," (laughter), liked girls then and still like them and I found out that girls had Morehouse too, but they, they were prettier at Clark (laughter).  I won't get into that now.
Story_ID: 505942
Speaker 1: So you take classes at, at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --with the intention of getting a degree in chemistry.
Speaker 2: Right, in chemistry.
Speaker 1: Who was the president at Morehouse while you were there?
Speaker 2: Was Benjamin Mays president at Morehouse when I was there?  Yeah, Mays, Mays was president [sic.].
Speaker 1: What was that experience like?  What was chapel like for you?
Speaker 2: Well chapel was required.  I think our chapel was at nine o'clock in the morning.  You were assigned a seat, and Mr. Dansby [Claude Dansby] who taught math was the guy who would sit up there and check your attendance.  If you weren't in that seat, you could have so many absences and then they started taking your grade points away if you had, I think they allowed you four or five.  And you go to chapel and after that you go to classes, whatever classes you, they would recommend for you.  They, they assigned you, they called it a counselor or something like that and the guy they assigned to me was named B.T. Harvey and I had told somebody I wanted major in chemistry and the biggest mistake I ever made.  Anyway, B.T. Harvey recommended the classes he wanted me to take, and B.T. Harvey coached football and I think he was the man (unclear) the SIAC, Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Association.  Anyway, he had his hands in a whole lot of things.  They named the stadium after B.T. Harvey, Moses Stadium [Edwin Moses Track at B.T. Harvey Stadium, Atlanta, Georgia], up there at the school now.  Anyway, where did I leave off?
Speaker 1: So, you were saying in chemistry you just--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --weren't doing well.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wasn't, (laughter) I wasn't doing well at all.
Story_ID: 505943
Speaker 1: So, you were down to taking one class?
Speaker 2: One class, yeah, and when the guy came by and said the U.S. Army Air Force [U.S. Army Air Corps; U.S. Army Air Forces] started accepting blacks to learn something about airplanes and I got in that program and I was sent to Chanute Field [Chanute Air Force Base] in Rantoul, Illinois, and I don't know you take all kind of tests and things and I was classified as an aircraft armorer.  That's the guy who takes care of the guns and ammunition on the planes.  So, I trained as an armorer.  I must have stayed up there about eight or nine months.  Left there and came back to Montgomery, Alabama, to Maxwell Field [Maxwell Air Force Base, Montgomery, Alabama] there for a while while they were finished building Tuskegee Army Airfield [Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama].  And I finally got over there at the Army Airfield and that's why I'm known as a Tuskegee Airman this day.
Speaker 1: Now what, what, this is in 1941.  So you're assigned to which squa- squadron?
Speaker 2: The 99th, 99th Pursuit Squadron.  They call it Fighter Squadron [99th Fighter Squadron] a little later on, but it was 99th Pursuit Squadron at that time.
Speaker 1: Now tell me about, about once you get to the airfield and become a part of this, the 99th.  Tell me who are the other people who are in the 99th with you?  Tell me some of them, some of your friends.
Speaker 2: Let's see I think when we transferred from Chanute Field back to Montgomery, Alabama, there were 401 of us, and out of those 401 I think the last convention we had, which was this last month in Texas, I think about three of us was still accounted for.  We don't know what happened to the rest of them.  But, one guy in our chapter had made it a, a pro- a problem of his to write--decided to go and get address of every, everybody who was discharged that their records are down in Montgomery at Maxwell Field.  He went down there and got the records of everybody who was involved in that thing and sent, sent a letter to them.  If they answered, you know, he could keep up with them.  If they didn't answer, he didn't know whether they were living or dead, so we, we can't ever--somebody asked you how many of them are still living?  Nobody knows, it's a guess.
Speaker 1: So, tell me who were some of your friends?  Who are some of your, you know, the people in the squad with you?
Speaker 2: Let's see the guy wrote the book, Jim Warren [James C. Warren] was in there with me.  Jim Warren.  He wrote the book 'Mutiny,' 'Freeman Field Mutiny' [sic. 'The Tuskegee Airmen: Mutiny at Freeman Field,' Lt. Col. James C. Warren].  You ever got a copy of that?  Jim Warren wrote 'Freeman Field Mutiny,' and it was a story about our experience, you know, how we got tied up in that thing up there in Freeman Field [Freeman Army Airfield, Jackson County, Indiana].
Story_ID: 505944
Speaker 1: Tell me what happens now.  You get down to Tuskegee [Alabama] to the airfield and tell me what happens next?  Tell me what happens (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I get down to the Tuskegee Airfield [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama] we got in--get the field started, learned how to do different things, parachute riggers, radio operators, mechanics, weather observers, all those different kind of things.  In other words, we independently learned how to operate an airfield, everything that went on there.  Had people to do metal work.  If you get a nick on the plane or something, it had to be repaired.  You could, two guys were metal, metal workers, Prine [ph.] and can't think of the other guy's name.  Just two guys did that.  When you get a nick in a plane you have to patch it up because air going over those (unclear) there, it had something to do with the performance.  I can't tell you about it, 'cause I wasn't a pilot.  I watched all the pilots training, so but anyway you have to have things running smooth.  When you get an airplane up in the air, all the little things can go wrong and you can, you can run into trouble up there.
Speaker 1: And what, what were some of the things that you did at the base?
Speaker 2: First thing I did at the base was I taught--well I was trained as an aircraft armorer.  This means I did the, the, the, the armament on there.  The first thing I did where the student, pilots come in.  They'd come into me and I would familiarize themselves with the 30 caliber Thompson submachine gun and the .45 pistol.  I'd get them when they first come down, familiarize those--the next time I see them I would teach them how you know the, the gun site and thing.  They were getting ready to go down to graduate as pilots; I wouldn't see them anymore.  I, I did that for, oh, a long, quite a long time.
Story_ID: 505945
Speaker 1: And then I decided I wanna go into the flying end of it 'cause you got 50 percent more pay when you--on flight duty.  So, after doing all this, all these times I said I wanna try out for flight training.  But, to apply for flight training it's a whole new ball game.  So, they sent me down to Keesler Field, Mississippi [Keesler Air Force Base, Biloxi, Mississippi], which was a classification center.  I must have spent eight or nine weeks down there, and they had some of everything.  Had you doing some psychological things, psychomotor things, depth perception, all the color blindness.  You could get out of there if you were color blind. You have to be able to recognize all of them lights by glancing at them, different colors what they mean.  You can't stay with them all the time, but you have to, if you're color blind you had to wash out of that.  But, anyway after they get through doing all these testing with you they, they had three categories of people.  The guys who had in the top third of the class were designated as pilot trainees.  These were potential pilots.  That mean we set these guys aside.  They, they in the top third of the class.  The second tier of classes were guys who, these are guys they were gonna send to Hondo, Texas, and train them as celestial navigators where you can be out in the middle of the Pacific Ocean and nothing but water, but you could shoot the moon or the stars or the sun and tell exactly where you are, celestial navigation; those are the guys.  Well, the third bunch well I fell, these guys are not gonna be much of anything.  We make, (laughter) we make them bombardiers slash navigators (laughter).  That's the way I feel.  That's all right I took it.  So, yeah--
Speaker 2: So you were a bombardier.
Speaker 1: Yeah, sent me.  I let there and went to Midland, Texas [Midland Army Airfield, Texas], and stayed down there in Midland, Texas for I don't know how many months, but anyway I left there with a ranking as a flight officer which is similar, similar to a warrant officer junior grade, same pay.  Flight officer is a bombardier slash navigator.
Story_ID: 505946
Speaker 1: Now, I want before we go forward going back now you were at Tuskegee Airfield [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama] from '41 [1941] to '44 [1944].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you ever meet Chief Charles Alfred Anderson?
Speaker 2: I did meet him, not--because--he, he taught the pilots how to train.  I met him because he was a chief instructor there.  But, they assigned me to an instructor, his name was--anyway he gonna teach me how to fly and he soloed me.  I got eight and a half or nine hours solo time air plane (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) With, with, with the Chief?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what kind of person was he?
Speaker 2: Quite, quite, quite a nice fella.  He was no nonsense pe- person, but he, I understand he taught himself how to fly.  But, anyway he was a good one.  Everybody looked up to chief.  But, anyway--
Speaker 1: What about Chappie James [Daniel "Chappie" James, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Chappie James was, he was one these, Chappie James first off was an athlete.  Yeah, he played football and all that kind of stuff.  But, Chappie was the kind of guy to get along with anybody.  He went as far as he could go in there.  Everybody liked Chappie.  But, the guy that soloed me was--can't think of the name now, but he sort of had enough confidence in me to risk me he had trained as a pilot.  He had risked me and risked my life and risked the government plane to solo me, and I did pretty well as, as thing, but the reason I washed out of pilot training I was a practicing coward.  I'd go up in this plane and you ever see PC behind me, practicing coward.  I'd go up in this plane and I could go up to three thousand five hundred feet and they give you an area to go in and you stay in that area.  You go up and practice, all the spins, and you pull the plane up and up until it almost stall.  You can tell when it stall because the motor is gonna stop, and you gonna kick the rudder and have it spin to the right or you kick the left rudder and have it spin to the left and after three or four spins you pull it out, you go back up and practice it again.  When the instructor is in there with you, yeah I'm doing nicely, but when the instructor wasn't in there with me, you know this, I'm scared of this thing.  I can't be up here and spin this airplane right here.  I might get killed.  I ain't ready to die (laughter).  I wanna, I wanna stay around here and chase these girls (laughter).  So, that's how I washed out of pilot training, practicing coward.  But, I enjoyed it while I was in there.
Speaker 1: Now, were you at the airfield when, when Chief actually takes Eleanor Roosevelt on that, the famous (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I wasn't there, I wasn't there at that time, but I heard about it, but I, I wasn't there at the time.
Speaker 1: 'Cause that, that must have been before you came in 1941?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 505947
Speaker 1: All right so now back to your bombardier, flight officer--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --and you began--did you do some training in Detroit [Michigan]?  I think, what's the name of the airfield? Selfridge airfield [Selfridge Air National Guard Base, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: I wasn't at Selfridge.
Speaker 1: You were not there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, no, this is where--when I, when I finished up bombardier navigator school in Midland [Midland Army Airfield, Texas], I was sent to Godman Field, Kentucky, Godman Field, Kentucky, G-O-D-M-A-N, Field, Kentucky [Godman Army Airfield, Fort Knox, Kentucky].  That's a part of Fort Knox, Kentucky.  I didn't stay there very long.  I left Godman Field, they sent me to Seymour [Indiana] , Freeman Field [Freeman Army Airfield, Jackson County, Indiana], F-R-E-E-M-A-N, Freeman Field in Seymour, Indiana, and this is where we, we get involved in all this thing here.  Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Go ahead.
Speaker 2: The commanding officer at Freeman Field was Colonel Selway [Robert Selway]. And Colonel Selway was, he was commanding officer and a full colonel, but he didn't want his white officers and black officers associating at all.  He was strictly a racist.  We was strictly a segregated society then.  There was nothing unusual about that, whether shocking about it, but he, what he did was every black officer on that field he designated them as a trainee and three were 453 of us.  I don't know how many white officers.  He designated every one of them as an instructor.  Well you might not know how to do anything, but he was, he still classified as instructor, and he got away with it because he's commanding officer.  Here's the thing, here's the deal, if you a trainee you were assigned to an abandoned non-commissioned officers' club as your club.  If you was an instructor, you had all these fineries up here, miniature golf course in the summertime or swimming pool, all the things that go with a club.  So, here we are down here with this abandoned non-commissioned officer club.  We don't like this, so we decide we gonna, we fighting this thing, so we decided we gonna go up here and try to use the instructors club.  That didn't work out.  After about two or three visits up there, they closed the club.  When they did that, that, everything--said we gotta change this.  So, what they did was move us back up to Freeman Field, Indiana, and took one of the big hangars, I think they had eleven or twelve or thirteen different organizations there, moved every plane out of there and set up about twelve or thirteen different stations there, your commanding officer and his adjutant and they prepared a statement that said I, [HistoryMaker] Hiram Little and blah, blah, blah having read and understood this order I'm going to use officer club number one or office club number two or whatever it was.  Anyway it was prepared for you and you were supposed to read it and say you gonna understand it and you gonna abide by it.  But I'm back here in the middle of the line, I don't know how far back I am and I don't know what the guy in front of me gonna do or what the guy behind me gonna do.  I said now if I go up here and sign this thing I'm gonna say I agree to segregation and I'll be lying to myself and I have to live with that the rest of my life, and I don't want to do that.  I've been segregated all my life, ain't nothing new.  You know it don't bother me.  Well I said but if I sign this I'm gonna say I agree to it and I, I, I, I refused to sign that.
Story_ID: 505948
Speaker 1: And I said I'm gonna refuse to sign when I get there. When I got up there, my commanding officer, his name was Chiappe, Anthony Chiappe.  I think he was from New York.  He had been overseas as a B-25 pilot [North American B-25 Mitchell], had served overseas, and I got up there and I said now, I read this thing I said, "No sir I'm not gonna sign it."  He said well now, he read that article (unclear) about disobeying.  He said, "Now if you disobey your commanding officer and you know what can happen to you.  It's a whole lot of things.  You can get a discharge, a dishonorable discharge.  You could get a reprimand.  You could be sent to federal prison.  All these things can happen to you," he said, "but in war time I don't think we gonna, you know, send you to prison for it, said but now you can get a dishonorable discharge in your file and you would have a hard time getting a job, any kind of a job." I said, "Yes I understand that, but I, I refuse to sign it." So I didn't sign it.  He said, "Well you consider yourself under arrest, you go back to your quarters and you only leave there to go to the mess hall," and that's to go to eat.  And I stayed there for twelve or thirteen days, but instead of getting a discharge, a dishonorable discharge or sent to prison, I got a nasty letter of reprimand, two paragraphs in my file, my 201 file and it said that I showed a disrespectful attitude, blah, blah, blah, commanding, I got a copy of it anyway (laughter).  I accepted that and I--from there on.
Speaker 2: But, you were not the only one who didn't sign, no one signed it?
Speaker 1: There were one hun- 101 of us didn't sign it.  That's how we came known as the 101, 101, but now we had four hundred and something.  Now what did the other 300 and something did.  Why did they sign that?  They were saving their behinds; that's all I can say.  But that was up to them.  I, I don't mind.  I, I, I accepted that.
Speaker 2: Well that was a big issue (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was a big issue.
Speaker 2: --at Freeman Field [Freeman Army Airfield, Jackson County, Indiana]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the 101 who refused to sign the segregated form.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and Jim Warren [James C. Warren] won that, wro- wrote that book 'Freeman Field Mutiny' ['The Tuskegee Airmen: Mutiny at Freeman Field,' Lt. Col. James C. Warren].
Story_ID: 505949
Speaker 1: Now tell me what were some of the things that you, you did as a, a flight officer?
Speaker 2: As a flight officer I got in the nose of a B-25 [North American B-25 Mitchell] and that was all I did (laughter).  But now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What about, did you train in the, the P-47s [Republic P-47 Thunderbolt]?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: In the nose of a B-25 now as far as I can remember this is the only thing we did we had a bomb site, a Norden bombsight, and this was supposed to be the latest thing.  I don't know how it worked, but my job was to take care of that Norden bombsight.  I would check it out and get on those training flights and watch that thing with my life and when I got off the plane take it back and have it signed back in, the Norden bombsight.  It was supposed to have been the latest thing there, and I don't know how it worked, but it had a gyroscope in there.  If you tumble the gyroscope or you had to, and in the training stage you had to come back and have the gyroscope, I don't know what you call it, set back up again.  Anyway I (laughter), I spent all that time nursing that Norden bombsight.
Speaker 1: So, did you do anymore training of, of any of the other cadets or you know like you did in the beginning, you know?
Speaker 2: No, I, I never did (unclear), no.
Speaker 1: No trainings?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the rest of your career like?  Did you go to, to Europe?
Speaker 2: What was the rest of my career like?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Did I go where?
Speaker 1: Did you go to Europe?
Speaker 2: No, I never got overseas (laughter).  I, once, once you do this you know, then you go where they send you.  They never sent me overseas and I don't know how I would have reacted under combat.  I might have fled, I don't know, but I admired other guys who actually got into combat.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Some of my classmates got into combat and some of them got killed over there in combat.
Speaker 1: So how, how long were you in the [U.S. military] service?
Speaker 2: Four years, seven months, and six days.
Speaker 1: Four years.  Now four years is a long time.  Did you have to reenlist or was your, your sign up the four years?
Speaker 2: No, I, I think the way, way it was when you sign up, now we were at war [World War II, WWII].  When you sign up, you sign up for four year time, but during the war you sign up for duration plus six.  You, you in there for the duration of the war plus six months after, so, or whatever time they--that's the way they had that thing setup.  But, before, before the war, we got involved in the war before Pearl Harbor, you, you sign up by enlistments, a three year enlistment, or another three year enlistment like that.  But, during the war you sho- sign up for duration plus six.
Story_ID: 505950
Speaker 1: All right so in, after the Freeman incident [Freeman Field mutiny] that's where you're, you're where now?
Speaker 2: After Freeman Field incident I'm down here getting, getting out.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you leave in what year? Nineteen forty-four [1944], '45 [1945]?
Speaker 2: Yeah 1945.
Speaker 1: Five [1945].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, is there anything else you wanna tell me about your time in the [U.S. military] service, any other inst- instance?
Speaker 2: I, I enjoyed, I enjoyed being in the service I really did.  I met some nice people and I met some, some that was not so nice (laughter).
Speaker 1: What about Lieutenant Colonel Dryden [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Charles Dryden].
Speaker 2: Colonel Dryden--
Speaker 1: Did you remember him?
Speaker 2: --Colonel Dryden and Norris Connelly, two guys that I, I always like to refer to.  Now those are the only two guys in our chapter, Atlanta chapter [Atlanta Chapter Tuskegee Airmen Inc.] that actually was overseas.  Dryden was over there as escorting the bombers, and Norris was over there as a mechanic.  I always liked, those two guys as my heroes.  They actually saw combat.
Speaker 1: What about [HistoryMaker] Alexander Jefferson.
Speaker 2: Well Jefferson is one of the guys that I met when he was first coming into the, the flight training thing.  I was looking at this guy and said how in the world did this sixteen-year-old boy get in here with the rest of the men?  He was that kind of guy, you know, he looked like he was thirteen or fourteen years old, but he's was assistant school principal, I believe he was.  That's how I met Jefferson, and I been in contact with him off and on all these times, quite a guy (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, he, he was POW [prisoner of war].
Speaker 2: Yeah he was a POW.
Speaker 1: Did he ever talk to you about that?  Did you ever talk to him about--
Speaker 2: As a group yes, not as, as an individual no he didn't.
Story_ID: 505951
Speaker 1: Now tell me about the organization that you belong to with the Tuskegee Airmen.  Do you have a chapter here (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tuskegee Airmen, yeah, well we got a lot of people who wanna be a part of it.  What we do--some- somebody in 1976 or something like that decided up in Detroit, Michigan, said we ought to make this a veterans organization and just get people in here who are interested in having a- aviation as a career.  There are so many different things you can do besides being a pilot.  All the different things, let's, let's start doing that as a pastime and that's how we got the Tuskegee Airmen Inc. set up.
Story_ID: 505952
Speaker 1: Now why do you think that it took so long for the United States to recognize the Tuskegee Airmen?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I have no idea.  (Laughter) I have no idea.
Speaker 1: But you did receive the--
Speaker 2: We received it and--
Speaker 1: --the Congre- what, what did you receive?
Speaker 2: We received a gold medal, replica of gold medal and free flight up, free flight back, put you up, wine you and dine you, take you all over D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and all that thing.
Speaker 1: That was the Congressional Medal.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Congressional Gold Medal.
Speaker 1: And that was this year 2007.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: So it took many, many years.
Speaker 2: Many, many years to get around to it, but they, they finally got around to it.
Story_ID: 505953
Speaker 1: What I was asking you off camera was about the Tuskegee Airmen per se because when you think of Tuskegee Airmen you just think of the 99th [99th Pursuit Squadron], and we know that there are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --others sq- other, other squadrons.  But after the war I was trying to understand why they called the, the aviation folks pilots and what have you Tuskegee Airmen if they are not trained through Tuskegee [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama]. Do you have to be trained at Tuskegee to be--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so it's what have--
Speaker 2: You just have to have the desire to promote aviation as a career, that's all.  Promote aviation as a career.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And it's so many different things you can do in aviation.
Speaker 1: All right so now some of the men who received the Congressional Medal of Honor [sic. Congressional Gold Medal] were not in the war is that right?  Or were they, were they all in War World II [WWII]?
Speaker 2: Well, some of them didn't see active duty.  Like I didn't see active duty, but I, I was there, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: If they had sent me somewhere, I would have gone.
Speaker 1: But, but what, the point that I'm making is that they had to be in the Service during the war.
Speaker 2: During the war, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.
Story_ID: 505954
Speaker 1: So now when you leave the Air For- the Army [U.S. Army Air Forces], tell me what do you do next?  You, now you leave in 1945, you come out of the service what happens in 1945?
Speaker 2: I went, went back to school.
Speaker 1: Went back to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, back to Morehouse.
Speaker 1: Okay, and are you still, did you change your major or do you still pre- (laughter)--
Speaker 2: I didn't change my major (laughter).
Speaker 1: You still were trying to do the chemistry?
Speaker 2: I was still trying to do the chemistry (laughter), and I, I finally got my degree in chemistry (laughter).
Speaker 1: What year did you get, what year did you graduate from Morehouse?
Speaker 2: Forty-seven [1947].
Speaker 1: All right.  So now who were some of your classmates at Morehouse?  Benjamin E. Mays [Benjamin Mays] is still the president--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --and who were some of your, can you remember who some of your classmates might have been?
Speaker 2: Yeah, let me, let me think of some of my classmates at Morehouse.
Speaker 1: Well, if you can't think of them that, that's fine.
Story_ID: 505955
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So do you get married?
Speaker 2: Yeah I got married.
Speaker 1: When?
Speaker 2: I got married in nineteen- let see 1949.  I got out of the [U.S. military] service in '47 [1947].
Speaker 1: You got out in '45 [1945].
Speaker 2: No, no '45 [1945], '46 [1946], forty- I got married in 1948.
Speaker 1: So after you come out of Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] you meet your wife.  What is your wife's name?
Speaker 2: My wife is name Marien Mozelle [Mozelle Harper Little], M-A-R-I-E-N, Mozelle Harper.  H-A-R-P-E-R.
Speaker 1: And where did you meet her?
Speaker 2: I met her, I believe I met her, they had a YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] up on Boulevard and her sister introduced me to her and I think it was up there, but I, I don't remember.  Anyway, she was living in Toccoa, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: Toccoa, Georgia, T-O-C-C-O-A, Toccoa, Georgia, and I met Mozelle and we started dating and we finally got married (laughter).  We got married up there in her home town, Toccoa, Georgia, at the, what was the name of the church, Friendship Baptist Church [Toccoa, Georgia].
Speaker 1: And how many children do you have?
Speaker 2: Had three.
Speaker 1: And what are their names?
Speaker 2: My first boy was Hiram Little, Jr., and my second was Anderlyn [Anderlyn Little].
Speaker 1: Anderlyn?
Speaker 2: Yeah, A-N-D-E-R-L-Y-N.  It's Ann.  We all called her Ann.  And my third one was, what was third? (Unclear) Lord have mercy.
Speaker 1: Marshall [Marshall Little]?
Speaker 2: Yeah Marshall, yeah Marshall.  Marshall came there behind the rest of them, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, did you wife work out of the home?
Speaker 2: My wife worked for Atlanta Life Insurance Company [Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia] for thirty or thirty-one years.  I don't know how long she worked.  She worked there a long time anyway.
Story_ID: 505956
Speaker 1: And so now what job do you take once you're back home and married?  Where do you go to work?
Speaker 2: I go to work at the post office.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And which post office?
Speaker 2: I started at, downtown at the main post office.  I stayed there, I think for eight or nine years and then I went to a station.  They built a station down on Sunset, 50 Sunset [Avenue].  I went down there to that station as a manager.  I ended up as a manager.  Stayed there thirty-three years at the post office.  Paid the bills for thirty-three years (laughter).
Speaker 1: Can you, can you speak about some of the changes in the post office and when you went there were there a lot of blacks working at the post office?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were a lot of blacks at the post office when I went there, but we were originally a segregated society.  The blacks could do a few things.  You had to put up a scheme.  That means you had to go in there and learn how to route mail to different places.  At that time, you didn't have email and cell phone and all this stuff.  You had to send mail by rail, so you had to, if you're sending some mail from Atlanta [Georgia] to say Jackson, Mississippi, you had to know which, which, which train to put it on.  You had to know all the side stops and the schedules and so forth.  So, you had to learn what they called a scheme.  You had to memorize these things.  You take the exam on it and you had to make, I think, 95 [percent].  If you didn't make at least 95, you flunked and you had to go back and do it again, do it again.  Real interesting, but yeah listen--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --pay was good.
Speaker 1: Do you think because you got credit for being in the [U.S.] Army and the fact that you had a degree, 'cause you did, you said you had--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a B.S.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in chemistry.  Did that help you move along in the ranks?
Speaker 2: Maybe it did, maybe it didn't.  You could run into some peoples--you had a degree here and I don't have one you know, you might think you're a little better than I am, so you know I had some reservation about how I'm gonna treat you.  Human beings are human beings.  If you think old Jake over there has got a leg up on you, I'd watch Jake you know (laughter).  He might be a little better than I am (laughter), not, not because he thinks he is, he might really be.  Human beings are like that.  Well, I'm like that anyway, but--
Speaker 1: But, okay so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I had to accept it (laughter), it ain't all perfect but, but that's the way I looked at it.
Speaker 1: So the, so the post office was very segregated also?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you belong to any organizations at this time because actually did you--well let me ask you this first.  Did you use your degree to work in any field in, in chemistry or the sciences, because you, you finished in '47 [1947], but you actually didn't go to the post office until '55 [1955].  What were you doing during those years?
Speaker 2: From, from what, from '47 [1947]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm from the time you graduated from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] until '55 [1955] when you went to the post office.
Speaker 2: No I, let's see now--I went to, I, I joined the [U.S. military] service nine months before Pearl Harbor.  So, what was I doing in--
Speaker 1: You graduated from Morehouse in '47 [1947], but you didn't go to, to the post office '55 [1955].  Do you remember what you might have been doing?
Speaker 2: (Pause) What was I doing?
Speaker 1: If you can't remember, that, that's, that's fine (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I can't.
Speaker 1: That's, that's fine.
Speaker 2: I'm getting a little tangled up.
Story_ID: 505957
Speaker 1: Okay, now back to the post office.  Is there anything you, you were there for thirty-three years, you moved up through the ranks.  What were some of the changes that you, you saw as you were raising your children right and, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: --civil rights came about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the things I see changed there not only don't they have a, a black postmaster in Atlanta [Georgia], she's a lady, a black lady.  That's a lot of changes.  In other words, that was the post office crew right there.
Speaker 1: Right--
Speaker 2: And the other older, just four of us on there.
Speaker 1: So, there were only four managers?
Speaker 2: Four, four black managers.
Speaker 1: And you can't, well okay that's fine.
Story_ID: 505958
Speaker 1: All right now I asked you a little bit ago did you belong to any organizations?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I belonged to, let me see the name of it, the National Alliance of, of Federal and, and--FAPE, Federal Alliance, National Alliance of Federal and Postal Employees [sic. National Alliance of Postal and Federal Employees].  That was a union, and we agitated for changes, this, that, and the other.
Speaker 1: What, what kind of changes were you actually looking for?  We, we, I understand the part of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --blacks, you know,--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --having equal rights to promotions, but what were some of the, the things that the union fought for early on?
Speaker 2: Well they fought for getting some of the, the plum jobs, the plush jobs, the, the jobs that paid, the jobs that--we agitated about a whole lot of things.  Unions are supposed to do that (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right did you belong to any social organizations, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], or any of those groups?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I belonged to a fraternity.
Speaker 1: Oh, did you pledge while you were in Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What did you pledge?
Speaker 2: Que, Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity].
Speaker 1: Omega?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 505959
Speaker 1: Now Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is in Atlanta [Georgia].  Did you meet him at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] or any other campus (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I met, listen the only time I ever meet Martin Luther King in person was I was on the campus, I don't know what I was doing up there, but Daddy King [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.].  I met him and he, he, I think he asked me said, "Have you seen my son?" And I said, "No sir I, I haven't," and right then I wasn't sure who his son was, but I found out later he was, you know, he was looking for his son.  That's the only time I ever had--my only personal contact with him.  I had just met him, but I didn't know (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Were you involved in any of the civil rights marches?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't get involved in the civil rights marches, but I tell you what I did do.  In nineteen- I think the Voting Right Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] was passed in 1965.  In 1966, I left my job at the post office and went over in Alabama and started registering voters.  I did that for sixteen weeks, working six days a week, ten hours a day.
Speaker 1: Do you know who you worked with, what organization did you work with?
Speaker 2: The organization I worked with was--Nicholas Katzenbach was our attorney general at that time.  They called it, it was a civil service, but it was called, we weren't called, we were called registrars, civil service registrars and the government was paying them, paying me and I was over there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they, they, they let you take a leave of absence from the post office to do this?
Speaker 2: Yep, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now why did you go to Alabama and not register folks in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Well, when you, when you volunteer they'll send you, you go where they send you.
Speaker 1: Okay so--
Speaker 2: You don't pick your places to go, that will be--I, I didn't, you know Al- Alabama is all right with me, ain't nothing wrong with it.
Speaker 1: What part of Alabama were you in?
Speaker 2: Most in and out of Birmingham [Alabama], mostly in and out of Birmingham.
Speaker 1: Did you have an opportunity to meet any, any of the civil rights leaders in Birmingham like Fred Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] was over there and Reverend Calvin [HistoryMaker Reverend Calvin Wallace Woods, Sr.] and Abraham Woods [HistoryMaker Reverend Abraham Woods, Jr.] who were working doing registration at Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: I met a lot of them.  I can't remember all of them.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, for sixteen weeks you did voter registration?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and here in Atlanta you, you really didn't belong to any organization, oh okay.  Now, can you remember when King was assassinated?
Speaker 2: Yes I can.  I don't know where I was at the time.  Where was I? I can't remember where I was at the time.
Speaker 1: So do you, do you have any remembrance of any dealings with racism?  Do you remember your first encounter with racism?  Even living back on the farm do, do you hear any stories about the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK]?  I know--
Speaker 2: I never heard my mother [Ella Grant Little] or father [Willie Little] talk about the Klan.  I don't know whether Putnam County [Georgia] was Klan free or people just didn't want to talk about it.  I don't know.  I never heard anybody talk about the Klan.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have any, any dealings with racism that you, that sticks out in your mind?
Speaker 2: Any what now?
Speaker 1: Did you have any dealings with racism that- or prejudice that sticks out in your mind?
Speaker 2: Other than, other than up at Freeman Field [Freeman Army Airfield, Jackson County, Indiana], no other than that nah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: There were some, but I, I probably just ignored them.
Story_ID: 505960
Speaker 1: Now tell me about your dealings--you continued to work with the Boy Scouts [Boys Scouts of America] is that right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the Boys Scouts?
Speaker 2: I, I don't why I, I guess as I said when my, my, my teacher decided to start a Boy Scout troop he wanted to know who wanted to be a Boy Scout.
Speaker 1: No, I'm talking in your ear- your later years.
Speaker 2: Oh, later years.
Speaker 1: Because you said you are still affiliated with them.
Speaker 2: Yeah I still--I got tied up with the Cub Scouts because my, my, my grandsons they went out to--remember when we first started the school about, you pick the schools you wanna go to and my, my, my, my daughter [Anderlyn Little] wanted her, her grandchildren [sic. children] to go out to what's this elementary school?  I can't think the name of it.  It was a, anyway when they went out there somebody found out that I had been working for the Boy Scouts, so they had me working with the Cub Scouts and I worked with Cub Scouts and still work with them.
Story_ID: 505961
Speaker 1: Do you have any other extra- well I won't say extracurricular activities, but other activities that you're involved in?
Speaker 2: Right now?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah going to schools.  I'm invited to schools and I go there.
Speaker 1: So, you're part of the speakers' bureau for the Tuskegee Airmen [Tuskegee Airmen Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what is the purpose of your, the speakers' bureau to?
Speaker 2: Well, right now all, all we're involved in is explaining to young people, selecting aviation as a career, ACE, Aviation Career Enrichment [Aviation Career Enrichment, Inc.] or enforcement or whatever, endearment.
Speaker 1: And do they have to go into the, the [U.S.] Armed Forces?
Speaker 2: No, don't have to do that. I, I got a schedule here that we just got and I'll let you look at it and see what we gonna be doing.  Hold on one minute.
Speaker 1: No, no wait, you have--
Speaker 2: If you don't want, okay.
Speaker 1: Wait until you, when, when we--
Speaker 2: I, I might, I can put my hand on it, I think I can (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that's fine.
Story_ID: 505962
Speaker 1: You also go back to school, you go to Atlanta Technical College [Atlanta, Georgia] in 2005.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What made you decide to do that, you had been retired (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I'll tell you why, yeah (laughter).  That kitchen right there is very small.  I can touch--I can get in my kitchen right there.  You know you, you, kitchen get a lot of wear down here, you know, and if the tile wear out and you wanna, wanna replace it and I'm, somebody recommended a guy and said this guy is a, he, he's, he's, he knows what he's doing, he's a carpenter and said he can come out there and replace the tile on your kitchen floor.  And this guy, they were lying, this guy didn't know nothing about carpentry (laughter).  So, after, after going and, and now out, out to Home Depot three times trying to get enough tile to put down there on, on this small kitchen floor, you know, I said listen I, I don't like this.  I said I'm gonna go out here and find out how to do this myself and I don't want to do it, I'll know if a guy is doing it right or ain't doing it right.  So, I went out there and talked to the guy, and he got me enrolled and I spent twenty-five months out there getting a degree in carpentry (laughter).
Speaker 1: And you got your degree?
Speaker 2: And I, I, ain't gonna never build nothing, but if somebody does some work for me and they not doing like I think it's done right, I'm gonna let him know before he get my money that you ain't doing this right.
Speaker 1: So you got your degree in carpentry in 2005, two years ago
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well I, I, just liked being out there.  I, you know, I loved to be around people who know what they're doing, and I had some wonderful instructors.  And I just was fascinated.  I said I'm gonna stay out here since I'm a senior, I'm getting for nothing, I don't have to pay for this, I'm gonna take this freebie and stayed out there (laughter).  I was going out there at one time day, day and night.  I had one night class out there because whatever they was teaching I couldn't get in the day and I'm, I'm retired, I'm sitting around here, I ain't got nothing to do but sleep and eat all day (laughter) and look at the TV, so I stayed out there and s- got through that carpenter business and enjoyed every minute of it.
Story_ID: 505963
Speaker 1: Mr. Little [HistoryMaker Hiram Little] is there something in--that you have not done that you want to do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to be a science and math teacher in somebody's high school, and I never got around to it. First of all, I didn't make that many, many good marks and when I, I didn't get a whole lot of good offers when I finished school and the best offer I got was somebody wanted me to teach down at, down in Macon [Georgia].  At that time, it was, it's Southwest Macon [Southwest Macon High School; Southwest Magnet High School, Macon, Georgia] now, but it, it was a private school.  What was the name of it?  Anyway, that was the only, best offer I got.  I said I don't want to go down to Macon, I'll just stay here in Atlanta [Georgia].  So, I didn't, I didn't, I didn't get in there.  I wanted to be a science and math teacher in somebody's high school.
Story_ID: 505964
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: That I did the best I could (laughter).  I tried, that's all.  I might not have, but I, I like to think that I did the best I could.
Speaker 1: What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: It really won't make much difference (laughter).  Someone, some peoples gonna like you, some people ain't gonna like you.  Some people don't like your looks.  I've had people come up first time they see me and--, "I don't like you."  Get in line back there, you know, you gonna be a whole lot of those and some people you know take to you.  Why, why people do that I don't know, but I forgive them.
Story_ID: 505965
Speaker 1: Well, I know that you have a heart for youth and if you could send a message to the future generations, what would you say?
Speaker 2: Do the very best you can, do the very best you can.  In other words, I use those three words, stay. Stay in school as long as you can, learn as much as can.  Don't ever think about quitting school.  Take it because it's free.  Stay off of drugs.  Stay out of jail.  If you can stay, stay, stay, you would have made grandpa happy.  And I got great-grandchildren (laughter).  They don't know nothing about all this, but I got some grandchildren who probably will listen and I'll appreciate it if they do.  I would like to set a good example for them.  I don't know if I am or not (laughter), but what when I call them to do something for me they, they right there, whatever it is.
Speaker 1: Well I want to thank you so much for taking the time to tell us your story and thanks from The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: Well, I hope I wasn't disappointing.
Speaker 1: Of course not (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right (laughter).
Story_ID: 505966
Speaker 1: Yeah, and these were the, the managers of the Atlanta [Georgia] post office in 1958 and out of that I think it's just four blacks in there.  I talked to two or three of them occasionally, not that often.
Speaker 2: Now that's me addressing somebody, I'm not sure who it was and the guy in the picture with me is Mason [Wilbur Mason].  I'm talking to somebody, somewhere.
Speaker 1: I am posing with Johnny Lewis and I don't know who the young lady, I don't know her name, but she's, I think she's the daughter of one of our members.
Speaker 2: I'm posing with some of our members, Shelly Jessus [ph.], myself, Mason, Eley [Roy Eley], Sam Jones, and Val Archer.  I think I named them all, and this was at Sam's, one of the Sam's Clubs.
Speaker 1: That's me, I'm not sure who that is with the face up there.  The other one is Johnny Lewis, and bending over there I believe is, could be Val Archer.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah we somewhere.  That's on the very, that's Ms. Atkins, our executive secretary, Ms. Addie Atkins [ph.] and myself and I can't come up with the other, the other two people, and that's and the last guy is our president now.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Sta- Stan- Stanfield [Floyd Stanfield].  The man next to Stanfield is deceased now.
Speaker 1: This was this year?  This was in (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh no that was about a couple of years ago, at least two years ago.
Speaker 1: Two thousand and five [2005]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my family, my wife [Mozelle Harper Little] and my three children.  I'm not sure what year that was taken. That's me recently, very recently, a couple of months ago. I was addressing a group, what group I don't know. That's at the end of my [U.S.] military career.  I had gotten all the way to be a flight officer.
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-five [1945]?
Speaker 2: I guess it was '45 [1945], yeah '45 [1945], and that's the beginning of my military career 1941, my summer uniform. That's the house where I was born.
Speaker 1: In Eatonton, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Eatonton, no not where I was born, house I was born in falling down.  Where I started the school in Eatonton, Georgia.  That's an L-shaped house (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have any pictures of your mother [Ella Grant Little] and father [Willie Little]?  Do you have any pictures of your mother and father?
Speaker 2: No I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got them from somebody, I don't know where they are.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got them somewhere.  Yeah that's when I got my degree in carpentry, I guess.  General Hood [ph.], myself, and my lady friend, one of my friends (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm at a luncheon there.  I'm not sure wh- I believe that was up at Dobbins Air Force Base [sic. Dobbins Air Reserve Base, Marietta, Georgia].  Had me up to be their speaker one day.
