Story_ID: 169054
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey, and observing is Tecumah Robeck [ph.].  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Vincent Lane, V-I-N-C-E-N-T, L-A-N-E.
Speaker 1: And do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No middle initial.
Speaker 1: Any nicknames?
Speaker 2: Vince (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 29, 1942, and I was born in West Point, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a real estate developer.
Speaker 1: Okay, and at one time, you were head of the Chicago Housing Authority [CHA], right?
Speaker 2: I was chairman of the Chicago Housing Authority for seven and a half years between 1988 and 1995.
Story_ID: 169055
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as sort of a warm up.  So they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  I think it's turnip greens, actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Somewhere warm, the Bahamas.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Yes, probably the fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Keep putting one foot in front of the other.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 169056
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but I'm gonna ask about them separately so we don't get them confused.  And then we're gonna put them together.  So, let me ask you for your mother's full name and spelling?
Speaker 2: Bertha Lane.  She was--her maiden name was Spraggins, B-E-R-T-H-A, Lane, L-A-N-E, Spraggins, S-P-R-A-G-G-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 15--I'm sorry, October 14, 1915.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where--
Speaker 2: West Point, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  I mean how far back can you trace them, and what kind of work did they do?
Speaker 2: Well, I probably can't go back too far.  I, I know a little something about her grandparents.  But that's about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, who were her grandparents?
Speaker 2: Her grandparents were Gilespie.
Speaker 1: G-I-L-L-E-S-P-I-E?
Speaker 2: Newt Gilespie, N-E-W-T, G-L-E-S-P-I-E, G-I-L-E-S-P-I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and do you know what they did for a living?
Speaker 2: Farmed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they own their own land or were they sharecroppers?
Speaker 2: Yes, the family owned almost a hundred acres, and they owned it for almost a hundred years.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how they acquired the land?
Speaker 2: The--I can't tell you exactly, but Gilespie, Newt Gilespie bought the land, and I don't know how he got it, you know.  I really don't have a clear picture of that, but, of course, I spent most of my time--I didn't know Newt Gilespie.  I spent most of my time with my grandfather and grandmother on the Spraggins' side.  They basically lived in the farmhouse in the hundred acres in West Point, and I would go there summers and spend the summers there.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: John Henry Spraggins.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he was farmer on that hundred acres?
Speaker 2: He--that's all he did all of his life.
Speaker 1: So what did they grow there, do you know?
Speaker 2: Basically, everything.  They grew cotton.  They grew corn, watermelons, and then I think they were, in effect, their cash crops.  But they had a substantial vegetable farming as well, mainly for themselves.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All kinds of vegetables.
Story_ID: 169057
Speaker 1: Okay, now, are there any stories from your mother's [Bertha Spraggins Lane] side of the family about the end of slavery or Reconstruction or any of that?
Speaker 2: No, we really didn't have that much in terms of--they didn't talk that much about slavery.  I got the feeling that the farm was pretty much insulated as opposed to the rest of, of West Point [Mississippi].  But my mother talked a lot about the interaction between the Spragginses and most white folks in West Point.  My, my grandfather was a master barber--barbecue-er.  And almost everyone, white, mainly white, would bring cow or hog and get my grandfather to barbeque it.  He also regularly placed meat in a smokehouse.  I mean the--and so he would, he had that capacity to smoke the meats as well.  And my grandmother, she was a master chef, although she raised--she had literally thirteen kids.  And she, of course, had those kids, not in the hospital, but on the farm.  And she, she didn't work in the fields.  But she would cook for the white families.  And my mother tells me that a lot of the white women would--when they wanted a special meal or for a special occasion, they would get my mother to go and fix the whole thing.  And then come time when, with the cook-offs, she was really good at making desserts.  So, many times she said the white customers, her white neighbors and customers would win blue ribbons for these cakes and pies, and, of course, she would never get credit for it (laughter).
Speaker 1: And so they would actually have a cook off, and she would do the cooking and they'd enter the--
Speaker 2: And they would take the credit.  But, you know, and she said that she didn't feel bad about it because whenever she would cook these big meals for the white neighbors, they didn't--when it came to leftovers, she packed up everything and took it to her thirteen kids.  So she didn't do too badly.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Gilespie, I mean Spraggins, of course.  I'm just trying to--I'm drawing a blank now.  I wrote it down 'cause I always called her mama.  Jessie, Jessie Lee Spraggins.
Speaker 1: Jessie Lee Spraggins, okay.  All right, now, if your mother was born in 1915, that means the grandmother was probably born in the 1880--
Speaker 2: She was the oldest girl so, you know, you probably add eighteen years or so, 'cause they were, you know, I think they got married, you know, in those days kind of young.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your great grandfather could go back, so he could go back all the way to the end of slavery--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --or it could be in the 1870s or 18--depending on--so you don't know when Newt Gilespie was born?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I have--my mother, of the thirteen, we have three left, two sisters and a brother.  And I wish that I had a chance to query them about some of those issues.  If I was, if I'd known--I'd have to go back to slavery days, I probably can find some information.
Story_ID: 169058
Speaker 1: But from what your mother [Bertha Spraggins Lane] says, your family was sort of--it was unusual that they owned land in that area?
Speaker 2: It was unusual.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was--I had, when I would come--go to Mississippi in the summers, a lot of my friends were children of sharecroppers.  And so that was not unusual for a lot of people to operate as a sharecropper.  But, you know, thank God, we owned that hundred acres and quite honestly, I think it was the most peaceful and joyous time of my life because there really were no issues and no problems.  I mean it--there wasn't, you know, unlike--and I don't think it was even, that was even the case during the [Great] Depression because that land took care of the whole family.
Story_ID: 169059
Speaker 1: Now, what did your mother [Bertha Spraggins Lane] say about going to school and growing up there in West Point [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: She was, she was--my mother was, as a child, kind of sickly but high spirited.  She was what you call high yellow (laughter), and there was, of course, a wide range of colors in the family because John Henry was dark as you can get (laughter).  So, so some of my aunts and uncles were all over the--all over shades of brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she, she was--my mother was into, now into education, I mean into thinking.  And so she always wanted to go to school.  And because of the health issues she could not handle much this, the farm work.  So she would help out my grandmother with all the other younger kids and cooking and washing, everything around the house.  But she also wanted to go to school.  So she, she fought every way she knew how to get into Mary Holmes [Seminary, later Mary Holmes College, West Point, Mississippi], and it's now Mary Holmes Junior College [sic, became Mary Holmes College in 1969], but she went to Mary Holmes School.  And actually, when she graduated high school, she actually taught school at Mary Holmes.  So she did very well in terms of education relative to most of the other kids in her family, her siblings and in, basically, in the African American community in West Point.
Speaker 1: Now, Mary Holmes, is that M-A-R-Y, H-O-L-M-E-S?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was she a famous black person from there or--
Speaker 2: No, no.  She was just--she married my dad [Doyle Lane].  My dad had a fourth grade education.  Doyle Lane--
Speaker 1: No, I was asking about Mary Holmes.
Speaker 2: Oh, Mary Holmes.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't--
Speaker 1: Was it named after--
Speaker 2: I don't know--
Speaker 1: --a black woman who started the school or something or something or somebody who gave the money or--
Speaker 2: I don't know the story behind Mary Holmes.  But I'll tell you an interesting thing about it.  Bishop Brazier, Arthur Brazier, he has a big church here in Chicago [Illinois].  He's passed away, but the Bishop and I often had conversations because he got an honorary degree from Mary Holmes.  So he had some communications back and forth with the school administration.
Speaker 1: So that was the high school for that area?
Speaker 2: That was the high school for that area, and it subsequently became a college.  And it's now still a college.
Speaker 1: Okay, you say it's a junior college now or a full--
Speaker 2: It's a full, four-year school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And your mother went on to teach after--
Speaker 2: She went on to teach at Mary Holmes until my father and her moved to Chicago.  And they moved to Chicago when I was three months old so I'm not much of a Mississippian.
Story_ID: 169060
Speaker 1: All right, now, before we leave your mother's [Bertha Spraggins Lane] family story, did she have any stories that she told about growing up that are particularly interesting or what were her observations of growing up down South in a turbulent time period?
Speaker 2: Well, I can tell you this (laughter).  I'm trying to think what--you know, they used these terms, you know, honky and (laughter), and that was her favorite term.  But she wasn't racist.  She just felt that, you know, the white folks, they worked them hard, I mean worked the black folks hard.  But that--she and that family, like her mother cooking, you know, had a lot of interactions with the white neighbors, and John Henry [ph.] barbequing for the neighbors.  They didn't--they weren't racists as such, but they didn't feel that they got a fair shake or fair prices or fair.  And so they basically were kind of insulated.  When I was there summers, maybe once a month we would go into town.  And in the early days--this was like, I was born in '42 [1942], so like the late '40s [1940s], they would farm with a mule and a plow.  I mean they didn't have tractors, and we drove, of course, a wagon, drove the wagon into town.  And I remember, we got all of our supplies and stuff.  And, of course, my grandfather went off somewhere drinking.  But, and he was, he never, I think lived a day without drinking (laughter).  But he made it to ninety-one years of age, and we went into the movie theater.  And, of course, the movie, the soda fountains there were, you know, white, colored, and white only.  In the movie theater, we had to sit in the balcony, and I did that every summer until I got into high school.
Story_ID: 169061
Speaker 1: Let me do your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is Doyle Lane, D-O-Y-L-E, L-A-N-E.
Speaker 1: No middle name either, or--
Speaker 2: No middle name.
Speaker 1: And no nickname?
Speaker 2: And, Skip.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, we didn't call him Skip, but I knew that the people in Mississippi called him Skip.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It was March 16, I think 1905.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was he born in the same place?
Speaker 2: He was born in West Point [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, what can you tell us about his side of the family, how far back?
Speaker 2: Well, unfortunately, I didn't know his mother or father.  They both passed away at his very young age.  I think his father passed away almost immediately when he was born, and his mother, she passed away when he was five.  So we were really truncated as far as my father's side of the family.  And the Spragginses, we spent most of our time with the Spragginses.  My father had three brothers and a sister.  And occasionally, we would stay with Annie [ph.].  That was one of his--that was his sister.  And she had a couple of kids, and Jack Lane [ph.] was a brother and James Lane [ph.].  So there wasn't much activity there.  We, you know, would--my mother having twelve brothers and sisters, and they, you know, built this--this farming went on all, you know, of course, farming, hunting went on continuously.  So we never did spend much time on my, with my father's relatives.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your father have any stories about his ancestors and all and about what they did and--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My father was a very in, inward person and didn't--my mother ran everything.  Quite simply, she ran everything.  She didn't force him to Chicago, but he had to go (laughter).  And he got a job almost immediately working at a smelting plant on the Southeast side.
Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute.  I don't wanna get too far ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me how did--so he had no stories about growing up and just his brothers and sisters around?
Speaker 2: He had no stories, and his--I mean--and I guess I should have asked or whatever, but there was never any reason to ask because, you know, the kids didn't--we were kids.  And the kids all played together, and fooled around with horses and farming.  But the adults, they would sit on the back porch, and sometimes they would tell stories about things in the graveyard and stuff like that, but not really much about ancestry.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, now, did your father have a chance to go to school too?
Speaker 2: He was, went to fourth grade.  And immediately, of course, went to work 'cause he didn't have any parents.  So that was probably his biggest challenge to get to work as soon as he could.  And he worked at, for the Bryan family.
Story_ID: 169062
Speaker 1: And the Bryan family, I think the mayor is a Bryan today in West Point [Mississippi].  And he said he drove a lumber truck and he--the CEO of Sara Lee was John Bryan from West Point.  And that whole family employed just about all of West Point, outside of the farmers.
Speaker 2: Those were the richest white people in the--(unclear) period.
Speaker 1: Period.  And Bryan Meat Packing, I guess they were famous initially.  Have you ever heard of Vienna sausages?  They, that was the originators of Vienna sausage.
Speaker 2: Now, those are, you know, Vienna sausage in Chicago [Illinois] is really a big thing.
Speaker 1: For us, 'cause we, you know, probably on that IC [Illinois Central Railroad] train.  You know, when I--they didn't drive us to West Point.  I got on that IC train and, you know, once we hit Memphis [Tennessee], we had to get on that car next to that locomotive because they made us get on the, off the regular car onto the, behind locomotive.
Speaker 2: That's where the, you catch more soot.
Speaker 1: You catch more soot, and noise and everything else.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But John Bryan actually, you know, I guess, I guess they did pretty well because they at least kept some industry going there and provided some jobs.  And my father, I think his major employment was hauling timber for the Bryan family.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, your father, I guess from what I read, and I don't have--I'm not looking at that page now, but he developed some skills as a contractor, right?
Speaker 1: No, he was, he--actually, he worked for a Jewish family, the Rothschilds, at Interstate Smelting and Refining.  It's on the southeast side.  And pretty much, he, of course, was a very hard worker and very diligent.  And so Fred Rothschild made him the night superintendent.  And he, you know, ran that plant for thirty-seven years.
Story_ID: 169063
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let me go back again.  I've got to go back and catch up on something else now just so we don't get too far from it.  But is there a story about how your parents [Bertha Spraggins Lane and Doyle Lane] met in West Point [Mississippi] or how they started going together?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Well, he was previously married, and he had one child.  His son's name was Sonny.  And he--my mother was, I think pretty attractive.  And, and my father was pretty attractive.   I mean--and so when my father broke up with his first wife, it was almost immediately.  He ran into my mother, you know, met her.  And I don't know how the--but he almost immediately got married again.
Story_ID: 169064
Speaker 1: Okay, now, all right, so your parents [Bertha Spraggins Lane and Doyle Lane] get together, and now, were they, was there like a family church in West Point [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  There was Shiloh Church, and there was, well, the only church.  Of course, it was a black church, and, of course, the--I didn't even know where the white, the churches were for whites in the community 'cause we never, we never went there.
Speaker 1: Now, was the Shiloh Church named for the Battle of Shiloh at, during the Civil War 'cause it occurred in Mississippi right down there, close--
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: I drove through the Natchez Trace [Parkway] and saw all the site--
Speaker 2: Really.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, I'm, I'm just not sure, and I don't really think that any of my aunts or uncles, they wouldn't know because they weren't church people, you know.  I mean they would go to church every Sunday, but they weren't, you know, fanatical about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your parents got married in West Point.
Speaker 2: In West Point.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then they--now, what caused them to move here?  Was there some offer or something or some incident?
Speaker 2: No, you know, it's just like my mother, she was motivated to go to school.  So when her brothers and sisters, you know, worked in the field and all of that, they didn't get high school or whatever.  But she was motivated to get knowledge.  And so as soon as she could, and as soon as she married my dad, she wanted to move to Chicago [Illinois] because there were things happening in Chicago.  And she wasn't a farm, a farming girl anyway.  So she thought that we could have--they could have a better life in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she wasn't like some people, she was tied to a contract with somebody or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No.  No, no.  She, she's very independent, and like I said, she was the boss in the family.  My father did, had very little conversation (laughter), and, and she pushed him to--I think we, they bought three apartment buildings over, during their lifetime.  And--
Speaker 1: So did they come here with a nest egg of money saved up?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't.  We started--we moved there at--and the first real place we lived--I think they had lived somewhere else for a brief period, but 37th and Wentworth, two blocks south of White Sox Park [Comiskey Park, later U.S. Cellular Field].  We lived on the second floor, and it was a cold-water flat.  And it was across the street from Wentworth Gardens, a public housing complex, low rise.  You know, in those days, they weren't building high rises.  It was a low rise, townhouse complex.  And we stayed there through my entire period in grammar school.  I went to Robert S. Abbott [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], you know, Robert Sengstacke Abbott of the [Chicago] Defender for the entire eight years.
Speaker 1: The school?
Speaker 2: The school.
Speaker 1: Robert S. Abbott School, okay.
Story_ID: 169065
Speaker 1: Let me just back up a little bit here.  And when--tell me, give me an assessment of your parents' [Bertha Spraggins Lane and Doyle Lane] personalities, and tell me who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My father was introverted, and he was a hard worker, but he was not--he didn't initiate things, you know.  He would fix things and work around the buildings that they bought, but he was not a spokesman type.  And I sometimes wonder how he would, how he managed being the superintendent of this plant, the entire plant because he did not have that driving personality.  But he, he knew what he had to do, and he did it, obviously, work-wise.  My mother, on the other hand, pushed him into buying the first building and then pushed him into buying the second building, and pushed him into buying the third building.  Most of them, all of them were not single-family homes, they were rental apartments.  And she also (laughter), she owned her own liquor store, a bar on 74th and Vincennes [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: So how long did it take her to get ownership of that?
Speaker 2: She, we, we were living at 6509 [S.] Harvard [Chicago, Illinois], the second--no, the first house that we bought, 6509 Harvard.  And she would have quarter parties.  She had a two-flat, and she--her brother, one of her brothers from Mississippi lived upstairs on the second floor, and she lived on the--we lived on the first floor, and we had a full basement.  And my father and I built out the basement with a bar and a rec room.  And she would hold quarter parties.  And, of course, by this time, most of her brothers and sisters had all moved to Chicago [Illinois].  And the brothers were big on sports, hunting, bowling, semi-pro baseball.  They had a--for years they played semi-pro hardball, you know, little--and so they were athletic.  And they evolved into--right today, I think a couple of their kids have fifteen or sixteen horses over in Hopkins Park [Illinois] down around Kankakee [Illinois].  So they never, that--her brothers and sisters never got into education.  But they all were athletically inclined, and they were all into sports.  And they worked every--all of them always worked.  They somehow got into whatever physical labor job, and most of them, I think did well.  They became supervisors at their various occupations, and all of them did well.
Story_ID: 169066
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Probably, the negative experience that I had with education.  When I was just starting at Robert Taylor [sic, Robert S. Abbott Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] on--we lived on 37th Street, I got involved with a young guy--well, a young person and his sister.  And they had me playing hooky, I played hooky for about almost a month (laughter)--
Speaker 1: From school?
Speaker 2: From school, (laughter) and--
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: Probably around six or seven.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my Uncle Paris [ph.], the one that lived on the second floor--he didn't live there then, but he lived with us at 37th and Wentworth because 37th and Wentworth, that second floor over the drugstore was the way station for the Spraggins' offspring, the siblings.  My mother [Bertha Spraggins Lane] as the oldest sister, and whenever somebody moved up, the three of us would have to put down pallets and sleep next to that oil stove.  And whoever was moving in at the time would sleep in the bedroom.  And so that went on for the entire, almost twelve offspring.  So they would move into 37th and Wentworth and somehow get a job, move out.  And then another would move in, move out.  And I mean it was, that was a way station.  So my, what that memory was, Paris, that was the brother, one day he saw me at the, out in the street rather than in school; told my mother, and, of course, all hell broke loose.  And I paid the price (laughter).  But I never, ever ditched school again, all through high school, you know, and, you know, my friends and stuff.  And they were bad guys.  I mean they're actually pretty good, my closest high school friends turned out to be preachers.  But I never played hooky, I mean cut school in high school after that little session that my mother, I had with my mother.
Story_ID: 169067
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you name them in the order of--
Speaker 2: Doyle Lane, Jr., my older, and he passed away in 2002.  And Roger Lane, my younger brother, he's, he's still alive.  Doyle, and again, Doyle, Jr. was a lot like my dad [Doyle Lane].  And he wasn't--he was very smart and educated in terms of reading, tremendous reader.  But he wasn't interested in--when he got out of Dunbar [Vocational] High School [Chicago, Illinois], he wasn't interested in going to college.  So he got married right away and drove a bus, CTA [Chicago Transit Authority], for years and then worked at Equitable [Building, Chicago, Illinois] and nothing particularly, you know, professional or academic.  So my younger brother, however, followed in my footsteps.  I got married at an early age as well.  I got married at nineteen.
Story_ID: 169068
Speaker 1: Well, I don't wanna get you too far off of growing up--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but I wanted you to go--we wanna kind of go through grade school, middle school, high school and all the way through.  So maybe we can go back, and can you give us the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: My first school was Robert S. Abbott [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] at--
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right.
Speaker 2: --37th and Princeton.
Speaker 1: So this neighborhood is right on the fringe of Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: It was right on the fringe of Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois], and I had, I made a--I had a paper route because I, you know, I wanted to make a little money.  And I had a paper route, and I sold--my brothers too, I sold papers at White Sox Park during the games.  And the newspaper office was on the west side of the tracks in the real Bridgeport, but I would have to run like hell to get my money and get out in one piece every week because it was, you wouldn't--you did not want to be caught on the west side of the tracks in Bridgeport if you were black.
Speaker 1: Now, this is in, we're talking about in the 1940s and '50s [1950s], I guess--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --but I know I left here six years ago, but as recently as 2000, a young man was beaten almost to death with baseball bats over there, right?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: A young black--
Speaker 2: --yes, he was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a twelve year old.
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: So, it's a dangerous, this is a real--so you knew the boundary.  But what was the boundary?  You said it was the tracks?
Speaker 2: The tracks.  I would--what my main streets--east and west was 37th Street.  35th Street, you had White Sox Park [Comiskey Park, later U.S. Cellular Field, Chicago, Illinois], but that was kind of a bridge because of the baseball stadium.
Speaker 1: Sort of a public aspect of it.
Speaker 2: Right.  But 37th Street, once we--from Wentworth, it was two blocks or three blocks.  Wentworth, next street was Well--no, Wells and Princeton, I think or the reverse.  And that third street was on the tracks, and I think it was Shields.  But once you hit that, the track, within, you know, two, two and a half blocks, and you crossed to go under the viaduct, you were in enemy territory, no question about it.  We had, you know, mild, if you would call it, it was gang fights.  It was throwing rocks and cans and whatever at each other from either side of the tracks.  But it was enemy territory.
Speaker 1: Now, this, for those who are listening to this who don't know it, Bridgeport is the home of the current--well, what would have been the future mayor of Chicago or the Daley family, right, and--
Speaker 2: And even before the Daleys.
Speaker 1: Okay, it was still that--
Speaker 2: Bridgeport was the (laughter), the Irish ran the city, and Bridgeport was the center of that Irish community.
Speaker 1: And particularly hostile to African Americans.
Speaker 2: And particularly hostile to African Americans.
Story_ID: 169069
Speaker 1: What else do you remember about the--did the baseball park [Comiskey Park, later U.S. Cellular Field] afford like any--I mean was that a fun place to be around in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was fun.  You know, my--that's the thing I remember--
Speaker 1: It's Comiskey Park, right?
Speaker 2: --about my dad [Doyle Lane] was he was an avid, avid White Sox fan.  And, and so he loved that stadium and, and the teams.  And (chuckle) that was one of the things that I remember about him is he loved cigars, smoking cigars and listening to the White Sox, not football, not basketball, but baseball.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any heroes on the White Sox team in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, [HM] Minnie Minoso.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Nelson Fox, Billy Pierce.  I mean those--I mean that was the day Jungle Jim Rivera.  White Sox Park was a, it really was a--I guess all of the old parks were, but it was a magical place, you know, in terms of the greenery, even though the pillars and posts was everywhere, but it was an exciting place to be around.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 169070
Speaker 1: Now, did you like school [at Robert S. Abbott Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, yeah, I liked school.  I, I took to it, you know.  It wasn't hard for me.  And I got good grades.  When I got bad--it's not bad, but when I got Gs and an occasional F, my mother [Bertha Spraggins Lane] would have another conversation with me.  And we got straightened out (laughter), you know.  And so as a result, when I graduated, I and about four others from Abbott were able to get enrolled in Tilden Technical High School [Chicago, Illinois] at 47th and Union, which was Back of the Yards [Chicago, Illinois], you know, with the old Amphitheatre at 47th and Halsted.  But that was Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois], and then go a little further south was the Back of the Yards area, still pretty tough territory.
Speaker 1: Now, these are--the "yards," they're referring to the Chicago Stock Yards, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, were they still in operation when you were going--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had, that [International] Amphitheatre [Chicago, Illinois], they would, every year they would have the big rodeos and the--in those days, they would bring in busting, riding steers and all like we would do in Texas or something.  It was a, it was a major thing in the Back of the Yards.
Speaker 1: Now, they had the, one of the political conventions there too while you were growing up, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  It was a major, it was an impressive place.  And I believe, and I'm, if I'm not getting confused, the auto shows were, the early ones were held there.
Speaker 1: I can't remember which convention it was now, but I know--
Speaker 2: But they had a convention there, and I think they held the auto shows there, you know, before McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Right.  Now, did you, were you--did you attend the shows at the Regal Theater in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Regal [Theatre, Chicago, Illinois], the Tivoli [Theatre, Chicago, Illinois].  My, from 37th Street, and I--remember I lived there up until I graduated from Abbott.  And then we moved to 65th and Harvard.  But while I was in grammar school, our theater was--we had two of them, the State Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] at 35th and State Street and the Joe Louis Theatre [sic, Louis Theatre, Chicago, Illinois] which is at 35th and Michigan.  And so we would, you know, alternate between those two theaters.  And that was, you know, I didn't know it then, but, you know, that was--we were at the edge of Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] going east.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Bronzeville didn't go--how far east did it go in those days?
Speaker 2: I--essentially, you know, 47th Street, a few blocks South of 47th Street, but all the way up through probably Cottage [Grove Avenue].  The tracks, the IC [Illinois Central Railroad] tracks which were federal, and up to about Cottage Grove from 35th 'cause at 35th Street, you ran into, oh, the high school, my God--
Speaker 1: De La Salle [Institute, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: De La Salle.  And, you know, that, that was a little tension there, you know.  De La Salle was there, IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois] was there, you know.  We stayed away from their institutions and went to the theaters and so forth, and they basically stayed with ours.
Story_ID: 169071
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, did you have a--did you like to play sports when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I played little league baseball.  We played at the field across, right around Federal Street.  The old Armour Institute [of Technology, Chicago, Illinois].  It's still there.  It's an old, dark red building.  And it was--it's still, I think, part of IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chciago, Illinois], but they had a huge field there.  And we would play our little league games at that location.  And, of course, it's not there anymore because Mayor [Richard J.] Daley and President [Dwight D.] Eisenhower hooked up the Dan Ryan to the Interstate [Highway] System.  And that's when this big urban renewal program took effect.
Speaker 1: Now, this is something that's really important, and it would be important to everybody, but especially to you with your future, you know, career being, you know, so closely aligned with the Chicago Housing [Authority] and all that.  What did you think when you--what are your reflections of urban renewal and the redevelopment of that whole State Street corridor from being what they used to call the Black Belt with the tenements to housing projects?
Speaker 2: Well, it--
Speaker 1: You actually were here to see all of it, right?
Speaker 2: I actually was here to see all of it.  Of course, my mother [Bertha Spraggins Lane] and father [Doyle Lane] were not political at all.  I mean they just were working and trying to, living over the drugstore at 37th.  And my mother worked occasionally.  Of course, my father worked every day.  But I remember during a period right after the war, I mean World War II [WWII], that we were, the country was involved in some tough times.  And I had to--and my brothers, had to go to 35th and State Street, just north of 35th Street to get this potatoes, you know, like out of the box or bag at that time, butter, eggs.  And so I remember the lines up there, people going to get these staples.  Of course, you know, my parents had money and worked, but, you know, it was--I think the government just gave it to you.  And that stretch, State Street and Wabash and Wentworth and Princeton, these old buildings--now, they had already torn down a lot of the tenements to build Wentworth Gardens.  But in that block where I lived on the corner, and going South to White Sox Park, a lot of old, old buildings, apartment buildings, cold-water flats.  I thought that--I was envious of the people who lived in Wentworth Gardens at the time because they had, you know, the steam heat from the piping that's run under Wentworth Gardens.  They had bedrooms upstairs and they got yards.  And, you know, my second-story flat, we would get together and, no grass, anywhere.  And the pool hall on the other side of the building, the drugstore, and then we had the pool hall (laughter).  And it was right over our apartment, so I was--always, something going on at the pool hall.  And we would go into the back, and we would hang up a bushel basket, and we would play basketball and, or we would go a block away and play at the playground over at [Robert S.] Abbott [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], football and baseball over at Armour Square.  So it was, it was that, almost end of the tenement, the real gutsy 1920s tenement era.  But we still had a lot of buildings that were run down.  That building that I lived in never had central heat, never until--and it never did have it because once they did start acquiring the tract for the Dan Ryan, all of that went down.
Story_ID: 169072
Speaker 1: We were talking about urban renewal--
Speaker 2: Renewals, yeah, and the--
Speaker 1: --and its equivalent.
Speaker 2: --tearing down so they could build the expressways.  But the interesting thing that I remember, because my family wasn't political, and I wasn't political, but I remember that there was a big fight with Reverend [T. E.] Brown at Progressive Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois].  That's where I was baptized, and it's right on 37th Street, right on, near Federal [Avenue].  It was LaSalle.  LaSalle was on one side of the track, the West side of the track, and Federal was on the East side of the track.  And the church was on the West side of the track.  And Reverend Brown had a big church, big congregation, and the Mayor wanted him to tear down the church--no, Rev. Brown started and fund raised, and he had a new church under construction.  And then Richard J. Daley came along and says, "Oh, well, we're gonna tear all this down, this got to go.  We got to build this expressway."  And Rev. Brown put up the biggest fight, and he got it stopped.  And so they had to literally, 'cause the super structure of the church was built, nothing interior.  They put that church on logs, and they rolled that church right across to my old second-floor building at 37th and State Street, and it sits there right today as Progressive, the new Progressive Baptist Church.  And so that was an interesting period for me where--and I didn't think about politically, that the black community had a little power.  They didn't--Daley couldn't tear down the church.
Speaker 1: So, okay, so you see somebody effect some change then?
Speaker 2: He, Rev. Brown, had power, and I think--and, of course, I didn't think it then, but I think it now, Richard J. [Daley] and the, of course, Richard M. [Daley] followed in his father's footsteps.  They courted the black churches.  That was a part of their political face, the black church.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I just wondered, now, what--did your family attend--you said your family attended Progressive?
Speaker 2: Progressive, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: --which is a half a block away.
Speaker 1: And I wondered too, because you were a news boy, I just wondered and that--and it seemed there are a lot of success stories from old news boys, did being a news boy put you in touch with what was going on in the city more, with the headlines, and you saw 'em every day, right?
Speaker 2: No, I just, honestly, I didn't, and really, because my parents [Bertha Spraggins Lane and Doyle Lane] were not political.  They would mention Daley and, you know, and once we finally had a TV, we would watch the news.  And I remember, you know, Harry Truman and [Dwight D.] Eisenhower, I remember that well because I just probably read a lot and just wanted to know, but for no political reason.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was, and, but Daley, of course, my parents, my mother particularly, they didn't like Daley either, you know, even though at times, they, well, you know, the black community always rallied to the Daleys at election time.  And they would work those--I've always had a recollection of the precinct captains, working the blocks.  No matter where we lived, there was a precinct captain working the neighborhood.
Story_ID: 169073
Speaker 1: What were you particularly interested in when you were in grade school [at Robert S. Abbott Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be an engineer.  And that's--basically, I emphasized, you know, math and science in grade school.  I wasn't really particularly interested in English or history.  And that's what I, what got me into Tilden Tech [Tilden Technical High School, later Tilden Career Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] because in those days, we had--public schools had two technical high schools.  One at Tilden on the South Side and Lane Tech [Lane Technical High School, Chicago, Illinois] on the North Side.  And most of my friends from Robert S. Abbott, they went to [Wendell] Phillips [High School, Chicago, Illinois], and they went to Dunbar [Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois].  Or if they stretched, they would go to Englewood [Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  But very few of us, I think about four of us went to Tilden.  And then three of the four didn't survive Tilden.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have any--so you were, intended on purchasing a technical, some kind of a technical position, engineering--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --position.  Did you have any particular mentors or, you know, among the teachers or anybody else in those days?
Speaker 2: No, because I didn't, I mean it's amazing that in grammar school, you just decided whatever you thought about you wanted to do, you just did it.  Nobody, nobody mentored you.  I had, I had one great teacher, Ms. Mitchell.  I think she's still alive.  I saw her in Walgreens not long ago.  And she's about this tall, and (laughter) I remember she had about five or seven rulers tied together with rubber bands that she would--she was only about three feet tall, but she would work you over.  And everybody respected her.  I--to this day, I really respect and admire Ms. Mitchell [ph.].  And, but she just wanted you to learn.  Whatever you were doing, she wanted you to perform.  And when I went to Tilden, I wanted to be an engineer, and I spent that four years preparing myself to be an engineer.  And I managed to get into the University of Illinois [at Navy Pier, Chicago, Illinois] in electrical engineering when I graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you made good grades and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --did you achieve any honors in high school?
Speaker 2: Not really, but I, I did well enough that I was offered a couple of scholarships.  One was Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], and at that time, you know, being raised in Chicago [Illinois], I, you know, I couldn't take advantage of them because I was planning to get married.  So I couldn't go to a Fisk and the other school because I had to--I was planning to get married, and I, you know, would have to work.
Speaker 1: So did you meet your wife in high school or--
Speaker 2: I met her in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of course, Tilden was an all-boy's school.  And my wife went to Englewood, which was a hop, skip and jump from 65th and Harvard where we lived.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And two of my friends that I ultimately wound up going--becoming friends with at Tilden, 'cause the other kids that graduated with me which, lived in the Wentworth Gardens neighborhood, they dropped out of Tilden.  And I then became friends with a group that attended St. Marks Methodist Church.  And so I had good grades, you know, in Tilden to be able to get into the University of Illinois in electrical engineering, and that was no easy feat in those days.
Story_ID: 169074
Speaker 1: Okay, so, did you have, once again, you said you didn't have any counseling or anything about that or just decided basically on your own to do it.
Speaker 2: On my own to do it.  And, of course, my, you know, my father [Doyle Lane] had a fourth grade education, and my mother [Bertha Spraggins Lane] was taught in high school.  So even though she didn't have a degree, some kind of arrangement at Mary Holmes [Seminary, later Mary Holmes College, West Point, Mississippi] allowed her to teach kids at Mary Holmes.  And so she didn't have a background, of course, in engineering.  I just, I don't know why.  I just thought about that no (laughter) black kids really are involved in engineering, and I said, "Why not?  I'll try it."
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you graduated from high school, was it 1960?
Speaker 2: It was 1960, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to, from '56 [1956] to '60 [1960], I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you, when you got married, did you continue living with your parents or did you move or did you get married right after high school?
Speaker 2: I, it was about a year after high school.  I got a job at the Post Office, working nights and going to school.  I stayed, I spent a year at the U of I [University of Illinois] at Navy Pier [Chicago, Illinois].  You know, at the time, they didn't have UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  We had a two year--University of Illinois had a two-year college operating at Navy Pier.  And then I finally decided that if I stayed in engineering, I would have to go to Champaign [Illinois], and I couldn't see having a family and living in Champaign, and so I decided to switch to business and accounting.  And I worked days.  I got a, after I left the post office, I got a job at Immigration and Naturalization Service.  And, again, I just loved business, and I started as a file clerk, and within a year, I was the supervisor of the whole file room.  And I spent another year, and I was in, I was still going to college.  But I, I felt put upon that I took the federal entrance exam--they give exams to be like GS-9 officer grades.  And I took it, and I got a ninety-eight.  Now, you weren't really, unless you had a degree, they discounted it, you know.  But I took the exam, and I got like a 98, and then I had, you know, I had great references and work record.  But the good old boys in the Border Patrol, 'cause the Border Patrol ran immigration.  They didn't, they didn't--and they came from, you know, Texas and rural areas in Nebraska.  The guy that was my boss was a cornhusker from Nebraska, good guy.  And he would support me becoming an officer grade, a GS-9 and the head of personnel at Immigration would have no part of that.  And so I left (laughter).  I got a job first, and then I left.  You know, I could have made a career out of it, and I probably would have done well.
Story_ID: 169075
Speaker 1: Okay, now, during this period of time--and I'm gonna ask you more about the history of CHA [Chicago Housing Authority], but during this period of time when you're finishing high school and the early part of your college life, they're building the high-rise projects, Robert Taylor [Homes] and Cabrini-Green [Homes].  Did you have any thoughts about that--or what were your thoughts about it at the time?
Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, I was, again, no concept of--they tore down all of these old, cold-water places and, you know, and basically, were building nice high-rises, I thought, you know, new plumbing, new whatever, although they were brick, basically brick walls, and, you know, but elevators are running.  I mean I think everybody was, felt important that they would get elevators up and down.  But at that point, when they first occupied, like Robert Taylor 'cause my Aunt Alice [ph.] moved into Robert Taylor, it was a decent place.  They were coming from cold-water flats, you know, rundown, tenement-like buildings.  And so everything was new.  And public housing at that point had not become distorted where they would only house the very poor, because public housing in the original days, you know, you worked and you took care of the place.  You paid rent and the beginnings of Robert Taylor and the other high rise, Cabrini, and so forth, people were still doing that.  But quickly, and I can't remember the year, the Brooke Amendment [1969], where they were basically, the government says, you know, we can't be housing people that have jobs and that could live somewhere else.  And they, public policy, forced people out of public housing, and replaced them with people basically on welfare.
Story_ID: 169076
Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanted--I think maybe we should go over what the State Street [Chicago, Illinois] corridor was like before public housing in terms of, you described the cold-water flats and I've read that there were numerous fires and these dilapidated structures--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and people had, you know, well, just kind of explain how black people lived.  Now, this is the kind of, this is the frustration that leads to the Lorraine Hansberry's play, '[A] Raisin in the Sun' and others.
Speaker 2: Right.  My, like I said, you start with my parents' [Bertha Spraggins Lane and Doyle Lane] cold-water flat over the drugstore and the pool room.  A lot of people came, coming up, migrating from the South and no job, no nothing.  Well, you all pitch in and live together and sleep together and eventually, you find a job and move on and rent one of these cold-water flats because public housing wasn't there anymore--I mean at that time.  And so you would live in these cold-water buildings.  The stores were neighborhood stores.  Like next door, you would find a small A & P [The Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company].  And further down the block, you would find a little hardware or a little vegetable shop and a poultry shop with live chickens and ducks and sawdust and cutting their heads off and plucking them right there (laughter), right there next door to you.  So that was the life at that time.  Movie theaters, you didn't go to the white theaters, but the State Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] and Tivoli [Theatre, Chicago, Illinois] and Joe Louis [sic, the Louis Theatre, Chicago, Illinois], night clubs, the Club, the Party Time.  My mother was young and at that age, you know, she had a couple of girlfriends, and they would go to the little joints over in the Bronzeville, what is now the Bronzeville area, Club DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois].  That was, I think on 55th Street [Garfield Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  You had the jazz joints at 47th and King or 47th and Drexel, the old Sutherland [Lounge, Chicago, Illinois].  You had 63rd and Cottage Grove.  That was an active place for jazz and blues.  And so people worked regular jobs.  I didn't see a lot of people on welfare.  They had blue collar jobs, and when they hit Friday, Saturday and Sunday, they would party Friday and Saturday and go to church on Sunday.  And it was a decent life, but then the other side, if you didn't have a job, you had the people hanging in the hallways and you had the people that, trying to get on welfare, and you didn't have food stamps at that time.  But you had some kind of subsidy like those places where they would give you butter and cheese and all the other stuff.
Story_ID: 169077
Speaker 1: It was at least, as I think back, it was at least a functioning community.  You had the doctors there.  You had the lawyers there.  I knew a lot of people that, you know, worked on the railroad, and they would go away with the--work at the IC [Illinois Central Railroad], and you had services.  47th Street, you know, you could go there and you'd have a shop, and they would buy, you know, shoes, and then, of course, we had Maxwell Street as well.  That was a regular place, if you didn't have the money to buy Stacy Adams shoes and stuff like that, you would go to Maxwell Street.  But it was a functioning community.  And what happened, the evolution of building this massive strip of high rises was the community didn't function anymore.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The services weren't there 'cause everybody that, the double-edged sword for integration was, you moved on somewhere else because you could move on somewhere else.  And in the days that, of the Robert Taylor [Homes], the initial Robert Taylors and this community, you couldn't move anywhere else because like in Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois], the laws were on the books to permit you to, a black person to move into Bridgeport, but you would, you would get killed or your house burned down or whatever.  And that went on all over Chicago [Illinois] in certain neighborhoods.  It took decades to, for that evolution to take place from white to black.
Speaker 2: Okay, so by the time you were in college, were you aware of that, this dynamic and how it was playing out?
Speaker 1: I was aware of it, but again, I did not--I was consumed with going to get a degree and I'm going to take care of my family.  And I was--school and work was intertwined, you know, 24/7.  And so I did not, again, get political.  I didn't get really political until I went to work at Mount Sinai Hospital [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 169078
Speaker 1: Now, I don't wanna get way ahead.  Now, we had you at Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois] I think, by now, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And you're studying accounting?
Speaker 2: Accounting.
Speaker 1: All right, and now, you're married?
Speaker 2: I'm married.  I--we didn't have kids right away, but once I turned twenty-one, we had the first child.  And I still didn't have the degree at that time.  I didn't get the degree until 19--oh, let's see.  I started '60 [1960].  It was like '64 [1964] or five [1965], 'cause even though I was working, I probably finished the degree in a little over five years.
Speaker 1: Okay, who were some of the--I know Roosevelt had that--I know Harold Washington went to Roosevelt at one time.  He was ahead of you, of course, [HM the Honorable] Gus Savage, and a lot of activists, Chicago [Illinois] activists, associated with--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because of--and I really didn't know.  When I switched to engineering, I was always looking to--I said, "Wow, what can I get into that I won't--that I will always have a job?"  I thought of accounting, bookkeeping, you know.  Somebody could always hire me as an accountant, a bookkeeper.  And so I was focused on that area of business, whereas Gus and Mayor [Harold] Washington and some of the other activists, as I found out later, Eleanor Roosevelt had a lot to do with creating this stable university.  And I got the feeling that there were a lot of Jewish people who went to school at Roosevelt and prospered.  And so Roosevelt was a great school in terms of accounting, that they turned out a lot of CPAs [Certified Public Accountants] out of Roosevelt.  But it was that, I think, that Jewish administration that encouraged business and welcomed blacks into the institution, as opposed to a Loyola [University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] or University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] or wherever.
Story_ID: 169079
Speaker 1: When I went to Mount Sinai [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois], and I worked side-by-side with Ruth Rothstein--
Speaker 2: Now, this is after graduation?
Speaker 1: It was, I graduated during that--I gradated--no, it was after graduation--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because I worked at International Harvester and U.S. Steel.
Speaker 2: While you were in school?
Speaker 1: While I was in school.
Speaker 2: Okay, and did you do accounting work at all or was it--
Speaker 1: Accounting work.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Basically, accounting work.  And once I graduated, one of--I was one of, I think, four blacks working in the corporate treasurer's office at the headquarters of International Harvester.  And they were headquartered here in Chicago [Illinois].  And, of course, a couple of CP--I wasn't a CPA [Certified Public Accountant].  I was, I had just gotten a degree, but David Taylor--you ever heard of Hill Taylor [LLC] accounting firm, Jim Hill?  Well, Jim Hill, is partner, David Taylor, worked with me at International Harvester when--and he was--David was already a CPA, and I was working as, in Accounts Payable.  But Dave was very dissatisfied.  One of his friends who was also a CPA, Wilson Stocky [ph.], but the four of us in this corporate comptroller's office at Harvester [International Harvester] was always griping.  We hated it, because there were no--the ceiling, the ceiling was always there.  You couldn't, you know, you couldn't get above a certain point.  And so, actually, David and I, and a guy, an engineer working at, I think Western Electric, we started a little business, a consulting business and had an office over on about 81st or send [82nd] and Stony Island.  And, of course, it didn't last.  But we fooled around with it for two or three years, part-time in the evenings, and it didn't work out.  But David went on, of course, to establish his own CPA firm.
Speaker 2: So, you all, when you had your business, you were focusing on bookkeeping, consulting for people (unclear)--
Speaker 1: We would do anything (laughter).
Speaker 2: Taxes too?
Speaker 1: We would do taxes, but we would also, we had a guy with us, an engineer who worked at Western Electric, and we would try to do consulting things around technical issues, consulting.  But none of us had--you couldn't work full time with what we were doing and be successful.  So we all kind of gravitated to something else, but David stuck with the CPA firm and started to work with Jim Hill, and went on to be a very successful African American firm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 169080
Speaker 1: What was the name of your consulting firm?
Speaker 2: Oh, my God.  (Pause) Wow, I'm gonna have to get back to you (laughter).  I can't remember.  I can't remember what that firm's name was.  Wow.  But we had it for about two or three years, and it just--I actually know how we, why we broke up because we brought in a party that was not a part of us because, you know, Jim and I, I mean Dave [David Taylor] and I worked at [International] Harvester.  Well, we brought in one guy, and he, he screwed up, a shyster, and he screwed up folks and everything.  And so that turned us off, and so that's when we shut the business down and went our individual ways.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I take it that as a student at Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois] because you were married and business-oriented, you probably didn't do much social life there?
Speaker 2: Not at all, not at all.  I wasn't in a fraternity.  You know, I couldn't, you know, if I wanted to grow in business, I had to really spend time on the books and at the workplace.
Speaker 1: Were there any local businessmen, this being the business Mecca, Chicago [Illinois], were there any local black businessmen or, you know, white ones that took an interest in you that tried to help you or mentor you?
Speaker 2: Actually, not.  You know, I--you know, David, you know, well, he was as young, a little older than me, but we didn't, we basically mentored ourselves.  And David was, even at that point, he was not into a lot of associations with blacks that were up there.  The two that or the main one that was in accounting was [HM] Lester McKeever.  And I think that, David, I think worked with Lester for a while.
Speaker 1: Did you know Eugene Varnado?
Speaker 2: Oh, Gene (laughter), I knew him well.  Yep, I knew Gene very well.
Speaker 1: Well, I heard there weren't that many in those days in accounting.
Speaker 2: I knew Gene Varnado very well.
Speaker 1: Okay, any stories about him or Lester McKeever?
Speaker 2: No, well, Lester, you know, of course, Lester was just--no, I won't talk about his partner, no (laughter) (unclear) [Hyrum?].  It was a good, solid firm.  You know, they were, you know--they were, if not pillars, they were foundations in the black community because that's where their clients came from until later on white firms started to embrace them and to hire them for, to do work for them.  But initially, you know, they survived off of the Defenders [Chicago Defender] and the Ebonys of the world.
Story_ID: 169081
Speaker 1: Okay, so you got your B.S. in business from Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois] in 1966, right.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And what did you--so you were, you had your degree.  Now what were you gonna do next?
Speaker 2: Well, I, when I left--it was at International Harvester in the Corporate Controller's office over at the Equitable Building.  And again, I hit that glass ceiling, and I said, God, I'm, you know, put me in a plant somewhere so that I can, you know, work with a work's auditor and maybe I can work myself up to a work's auditor.  And so they shipped me to Melrose Park, and then to Tractor Works over here near Cook County jail.  And so, I went from Melrose, and then I went for the Tractor Works.  And it was, you know, a few blocks from Cook County jail, and a few blocks from Mount Sinai Hospital.  So thinking again about accounting, (chuckle) where would I work, that again, I wouldn't have to worry about losing a job and being laid off and all of that.  And I said, a hospital.  And Mount Sinai was right there, on the near West side.  I was working at Tractor Works, over there on 31st and Western.  I said, I wonder if I could get a part-time job working in the hospital to just see what's going on; never had any involvement with healthcare at all.  And I got a job as a night telephone collector, working at Harvester at Tractor Works and then I worked at Mount Sinai.  And again, within, oh, my God, within four or five months, the business office manager offered me a job as assistant business office manager.  So I left Harvester, went to work as assistant business office manager and did a relatively good job there and within probably about nine months, the business office manager left.  And the president of the hospital promoted me to the business office manager.  And within another year, they made me controller.  The controller left the hospital and they made me controller.  And probably within a, within that year, after I became--shortly after I became controller at Sinai [Mount Sinai], I got a call from a friend that worked for the Ford Foundation--no, no, that wasn't there.  I got a call from a head hunter.  And the head hunter asked me if I'd be interested in talking to Leonard Evans at Tuesday Magazine.
Speaker 1: Now, Tuesday Magazine, this is a black supplement to the Defender [Chicago Defender], I believe.
Speaker 2: Right, right, well, it was, it was a supplement to the major papers.  At one time, it was a supplement to the [Chicago] Sun-Times and the [Chicago] Tribune.  And then because of the competition between the two, it wound up solely as a supplement to the Sun-Times, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're right, right.
Speaker 2: And it sat right alongside Parade Magazine, you know, which was an insert.
Speaker 1: And so it was like a black supplement.
Speaker 2: It was a black supplement, a high-class--the Ebony of supplements, you know.  And Leonard Evans was a master salesman.  And so, but he had, they had terrible books and records.  And--
Speaker 1: So Leonard Evans was the publisher of Tuesday?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 169082
Speaker 1: And we banked with, I remember, First National Bank, the big bank.  You know, and it was, you know, I was taken with it because they were black.  I mean I was feeling at that time that, the blackness because while I was at [Mount] Sinai [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois], [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was assassinated.  And as I said, I worked the business side, the financial side of the hospital, and Ruth Rothstein--I don't know if you've heard that name, she ran Cook County Hospital ultimately.  She left Sinai and, but she ran Sinai for years and years and years, and then she ran Cook County Hospital.  We, when that--they had started to riot.  Well, you know, it's a Jewish hospital, and so they sent me and Ruth to deal with Ed Allan and a lot of the others 'cause we were just, had under construction, Olen Sang Pavilion, and, of course, black folks didn't have enough jobs in it, and they raised hell as a result of the riots to get some jobs.  And so Ruth and I had the job of, if not mollifying them, trying to figure out how we could, you know, make peace.  And that's when I really, at the hospital, I really got a good grounding in healthcare.  And as a result of the riots, we started the--I'm trying to think, we started a health clinic over on Grenshaw.  I think it was called Martin Luther King Health Center [sic].  And I think that center is still operating today, but that's when I think I got really political, when King was assassinated.
Speaker 2: Now, a lot of people, you know, use that as a marker as to when they really, it really dawned on them that--
Story_ID: 169083
Speaker 1: 'Cause you described like a glass ceiling at International Harvester before.  And I had a note here to ask you like what day-to-day life was at International Harvester for you?
Speaker 2: It was--I did my job, but (gesturing to indicate a ceiling) no matter how well I did it, I couldn't--the white management would never let me get within that class, David included.  You know, we would just, we would just be there.  I guess eventually, after ten or fifteen years, we would do something.  But, you know, he was ambitious.  I was ambitious, and we weren't gonna tolerate, you know, staying therefore ten or fifteen years to get a promotion.
Speaker 1: Now, could you see the white accountants rising?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So they would come in and then go past you?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: But we were--I mean we were pushing now.  You know, they--we weren't just sitting saying, you know, I'm gonna be a career guy, you know, to get my pension at Harvester.  We were pushing to get moving because we had--we were qualified.  And a lot of the other guys basically, some of them didn't have college degrees because they came up in, you know, the rural thing from relatives and whatever.  And so, you know, we pushed and pushed.  I pushed, and forced myself into the plant environment as opposed to the corporate environment, the headquarters environment so that I could see if I could make a headway there with the common folk, you know, on the assembly line.  And I wasn't getting anywhere there either, and that's when I said, well, let me see what a hospital is like 'cause if I work there, you know, a hospital ain't going anywhere--
Story_ID: 169084
Speaker 1: Now, it just dawned on me that [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] came to Chicago [Illinois] the year that you graduated from Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you remember his visit or what he meant to you at the time?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  Yeah, you know, I lived at 65th and Harvard [Chicago, Illinois] at the time, I mean in that, always in that area.  And the, when he got hit in the head with the rock or the brick, it was just a little bit west of there.
Speaker 1: In Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Marquette Park.  And so, no, I was, I was well aware of the situation.  And when he died, I had responsibility for, financial and administrative responsibilities for running the emergency room.  And you can imagine what that was like.  And so all hell broke loose, and, of course, all the white employees were terrified 'cause it was--Mount Sinai [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] is sitting on the West Side (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, it's a cluster of hospitals right--Bethany [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois], Mount Sinai--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and some others right there.
Speaker 2: And Rehab, not the Rehab Institute.  It was a Rehab Hospital sitting right, Schwab [Rehabilitation Hospital, Chicago, Illinois].  And so everybody was terrified.  So basically, most of the white workers, except the medical people had to be there.  If they, anybody who couldn't, didn't have to be there were gone (laughter).  And the black staff basically, picked up the slack.
Speaker 1: Now, what did it look like, 'cause I know people have described this before, but this is really a terrifying thing, right?
Speaker 2: It's terrifying.  I mean buildings on fire, people throwing, breaking and throwing bricks into the store windows and ripping off whatever they had in the store.  And if a white person stopped in the neighborhood and wasn't very careful, they were snatched out of the car and brutalized.  It was not a fun thing, and the infamous Chicago Police Department, 'cause at that time, they didn't do things--they don't do it now, but at least present themselves differently, they were driving armored vehicles.  I mean it was, it was like a police state, and the National Guard was roaming the street.  It was, it was a war zone.
Speaker 1: I was gonna say, I guess, was it clear to everybody who was who in that situation (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, not really, but, you know, if you, you know, once--and I, even though I wasn't political, I've always lived in the heart of the black community.  So I wasn't, I knew how to handle myself, you know.  And so, and basically, a lot of, we had a lot of black employees at the hospital.  So--and basically, a hospital was a place that everybody sought refuge and support from.  So if they knew that you worked at the hospital, basically, they left you alone.
Story_ID: 169085
Speaker 1: As a result of the riot, you got assignments that you wouldn't typically get to go in the community, you said, that mollified--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, we had to, we quick and in a hurry built a medical center over on Grenshaw [Street, Chicago, Illinois] to mollify the absence in the community of neighborhood facilities, quick and in a hurry.
Speaker 1: Were there forums--I've heard that there were forums held after the riots and during the riots with community leaders who were able to give their grievances.  So was this in response to specific grievances that people had.
Speaker 2: It was in response to the grievances that they didn't, you know, they had to go to Cook County [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois], basically, to Cook County.  And not enough health facilities, and so Sinai, you know, it's fine that they have their big hub sitting there, but what about these neighborhood places where you could probably service people and they wouldn't have to travel for an hour to get there.  So that's what the response was.  And thank God, I was around as part Sinai's management organization, the high--really, the highest person in the organization of color, to help get the medical center off the ground.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 169086
Speaker 1: So, it was after that time you started working with Tuesday magazine.  You felt compelled to do it because it was a black publication?
Speaker 2: I wasn't looking for a job, and a headhunter contacted me.  Would you be interested in working for a black organization, you know, described it.  And I said, yeah, I would be really interested.  I mean, you know, [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated.  I would love to work for a competent black organization.  And so I--Tuesday was, it really was a professional operation, quality operation.  And the money was kind of funny because they didn't--but within that two-year period, I cleaned up all the books to satisfy First National Bank.  And Leonard Evans got a couple of major contracts, Chrysler, you know, they held auto, many auto shows, really around the country.  And, of course, with that, it was the big thing.  The ads at that time were automobile, all of them, GM [General Motors], Ford, Chrysler, liquor, mainly liquor, liquor and cars with like AT&T, big corporate sponsors.  So they would buy these ads, and this magazine, like Parade, would run, would be an insert in major daily newspapers in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], San Francisco [California], New York [New York], and so it was an impressive operation on the order of an Ebony.  And that, Leonard, that was his big competition, [HM] John [H.] Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what happened at the end of two years?  Now, you worked--what two years?  Was it 19--
Speaker 2: It was like 1990, no--
Speaker 1: Seventy, I mean sixty--'cause [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated in '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969] or '70 [1970], 1969, I think.  And I worked at Tuesday till '71 [1971] for two years.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And I--for two reasons. Leonard wouldn't handle the finances correctly, after I worked like a dog to get it stable.  And a friend of mine from the Ford Foundation out of New York contacted me and said, Vince, we want to give a community organization on the South Side of Chicago a million dollars [$1,000,000] a year for ten years to establish a community development entity.  And that was, of course, TWO [The Woodlawn Organization] and Bishop Brazier was running TWO at the time.  And [HM] Leon Finney was the executive director.  And we had taken Tuesday in these two years from 180 North Michigan and moved them to 625 North Michigan in plush Mag Mile [Magnificent Mile] offices.  And so they convinced me to give up my Mag Mile office and come down into under the L tracks where the Blackstone Rangers were shooting up the L tracks every Friday at payday and squeeze in behind a little desk where the plaster was peeling.  So I'd get plaster on my behind every time I'd go behind the desk (laughter) to run, to try to run a community development corporation.
Story_ID: 169087
Speaker 1: Okay, so your position there [The Woodlawn Organization, TWO] was not--
Speaker 2: I was senior vice president.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, had they, were they--was the gift of a million dollars contingent upon you being there to oversee that kind of money?
Speaker 2: They would not have given the money if I hadn't gone there.  So, you know, I had a--separated by [HM] Leon [Finney] with a few dollars, and Leon handled, basically handled, you know the community activism and politics.  And I handled the day-to-day operations.
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever meet Saul Alinsky,--
Speaker 2: I never met Saul Alinsky, but--
Speaker 1: --him being the founder of TWO.
Speaker 2: --he would, he was just about--he was concentrating at that time on the Back of the Yards [Chicago, Illinois].  And his health was failing.  And shortly thereafter, he passed away, so I did not, I did not ever meet Saul Alinsky.  But, of course, you know, the images were always there with TWO.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you worked--now, how did you, I mean Leon Finney is a pretty strong personality.  And you're there, I mean did you all ever clash on what ought to be done?
Speaker 2: Many times, many times (laughter).  But, you know, we worked it.  I mean the one thing that Leon found was, just as with Tuesday, I had some skills, and I could really improve things and help them.  And he found that out as well, that I had some skills that he didn't have and I could help build an organization.  And so he was, he was pleased with that.
Story_ID: 169088
Speaker 1: Okay, now, at TWO [The Woodlawn Organization], now what are the, I guess, the most memorable issues, I guess from your perspective, at TWO when you were there?
Speaker 2: Actually, we, TWO started back in the early, like '60 [1960], 1960.  And so TWO was grappling with gangs and fires.  And [HM Bishop] Arthur Brazier, he wasn't Bishop at the time, was basically running TWO from the board perspective.  Squire Lance preceded [HM Reverend Dr.] Leon [D.] Finney [Jr.], running it as executive director.  And they built quite a political activism machine that is really, still goes on today.  You know, they would, organized a hundred block clubs to get their arms around how to keep the gangbangers from, not only gangbangers, but the absentee owners from burning down the community because in many instances, they would (laughter), they'd pay a gangbanger to set fire to the place for the insurance policy.  You know, they would--they had a saying, they would rub two insurance policies together to create a fire (laughter).  And so the community, you know, was in a shambles, and at one point, you know, Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] was a very stable place.  And even today, a lot of the same homeowners that survived the fires still live in that, those same homes today.
Story_ID: 169089
Speaker 1: Can you kind of address what the housing stock is like in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois]?  I think people don't really realize.  They were thinking, they see it as a ghetto now, but what was the housing stock like?
Speaker 2: Woodlawn was basically like South Shore [Chicago, Illinois], a Jewish community.  And it evolved over time and turned into a black community, I think similar to what Chatham [Chicago, Illinois] was like.  You know, there's some, there was some black neighborhoods that to this day, and they're, you know, they're getting frayed at this point.  But solid neighborhoods, people--solid homeowners took care of their property, and, you know, gray stones, mainly two flats, but it was mixed in with Woodlawn.  In Woodlawn, you would have some, a courtyard building here or there, maybe twenty to thirty units.  And so those twenty to thirty units--and we--Woodlawn set up a dividing line with the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  The University butts up to Woodlawn, and, of course, the University is not going anywhere.  It is going to protect its turf and grow.  But [HM Bishop] Art[hur] Brazier and [HM Reverend Dr.] Leon [D.] Finney [Jr.] negotiated with Julian Levi a peace treaty.  Don't go south of 61st Street and we won't go north of 61st Street.  And that dividing line existed until probably within the last ten years at which time TWO and the Woodlawn Community Development Corporation evolved into detente and working with the university.  And after the community was stabilized, the fires went away.  The buildings, the lots were cleared, a lot of vacant land, the organization then started to build on the land.  And so TWO, under Leon Finney, got a lot of grants from HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development].  When I started to work there in 1971, through--'71 [1971] through about '74 [1974] and as a consultant during '75 [1975], the organization finished building Woodlawn Gardens at 63rd and Cottage Grove.  It was 504 units; finished building Jackson Park Terrace at 60th and Stony Island, 322 units, rehabbing six buildings, right around a node at 62nd and Kimbark, 101 units.  And so it became, that million dollars a year, that the Ford Foundation gave to the organization really permitted the organization to build capacity, to deliver community development.  We had--they had already started and bought the Maryland Theater, and that was an interesting experience because we tried to venture out and tried to do shows like the Regal or the Tivoli.  And we, we tried to book an act, you know, the entertainment.  And, of course, even then we had two competing acts that we wanted to select.  One was Chaka Khan and the Chi-Lites.  And, of course, I hadn't heard anything about the Chaka Khan, and I said, "Chaka Khan?  Man, you gonna put somebody up there that nobody wants to see?"  And so we chose the Chi-Lites, and of course, it did all right, but Chaka Khan clearly was, you know, blew the Chi-Lites away in terms of their presence and growth.  But, and so we had that first and only experience of trying to get into entertainment.
Speaker 1: Now, where was the Maryland Theater?
Speaker 2: At 63rd and Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right under the L track.
Story_ID: 169090
Speaker 1: I've heard from a lot of the people that grew up in Chicago [Illinois] that 63rd Street at one time was the boundary, I guess, the southern boundary, at one time of the black community, you know, before it moved further south.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And it was also the home of many, many jazz clubs, jazz performers all up and down 63rd Street under the L.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I mean all those little jazz joints in the basements, and it was a thriving place.  It was, and that's what I mean.  It was exciting.  I mean we talk about what happened with that double-edged sword with integration, and it was good to have, to be able to have options to live your life the way you wanted.  But once the professionals, doctors, lawyers, you know, civil servants, once they moved out of the community, it left a huge void.  And, you know, even though, like the Jewish community, they left, but they owned the buildings.  And the people that replaced them didn't have the incomes nor the social skills to maintain those neighborhoods.  And slowly, where people would come and go to the Sutherland [Lounge, Chicago, Illinois] to watch the jazz set, they wouldn't come anymore.  You know, they wouldn't make that trip from where they moved to, to the neighborhood.  And so that eventually eroded and not only music, you know, community services, you know.  Aside from cleaners, you didn't have any decent grocery stores.  You know, you talk about a food desert, everything just evaporated.  And what you had left was a proliferation of fast food joints and liquor stores.  And that was one of the things that Reverend Brazier [HM Bishop Arthur Brazier] and [HM] Dr. [Leon D.] Finney [Jr.] pushed, was zoning the precincts dry for liquor.
Speaker 1: Now, Chicago does have a proliferation, on the South Side, a proliferation of--well, the West Side too, of liquor stores on the corner--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Storefront churches on the block and liquor stores.  If you count them, you can just about run out of--
Speaker 2: Those and churches.
Speaker 1: Yeah, storefront churches and--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And which, you know, which is a good thing, and I don't object to anybody--you know, they say that, "Well, why would they have so many churches?"  Well, I would rather them have churches than liquor stores.  And churches don't really do any harm to the neighborhood.
Story_ID: 169091
Speaker 1: When you started at TWO [The Woodlawn Organization], I just wondered because of the nature of Saul Alinsky's organization and the whole community organizing thrusts, did you have to be trained into community organizing?  Did they, did the industrial areas foundation train you or anything to--
Speaker 2: No, in fact, the only thing that was done, you know, with CHA [Chicago Housing Authority], there's no training.  It's on-the-job training--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and fortunately, I guess because I was raised, you know, in West Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois], and over in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], I--it came natural to me.  Remember, my mother [Bertha Spraggins Lane], for about fifteen years, owned a tavern.  And so, I wasn't afraid to, of the environment.
Speaker 1: Did you work in the tavern when she owned it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I bartended for her, while I was at TWO, in fact.  I mean we'd, [HM Reverend Dr.] Leon [D. Finney, Jr.] and a few of the people, they would come by the bar and (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, where was the bar?
Speaker 2: At about 73rd and Vincennes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's not in the Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] neighborhood at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: That would be in--
Speaker 2: Like--
Speaker 1: Park Manor [Chicago, Illinois] or--
Speaker 2: No, it's, it probably would be considered almost in Englewood.  You know, they--
Speaker 1: Between Auburn Gresham [Chicago, Illinois] and Englewood.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Auburn Gresham was a little bit west, and, you know, a little bit south of there.  Auburn Gresham, I know is at, you know, 75th and Vincennes, 76th.  Yeah, it's kind of just tucked in between Englewood and Auburn Gresham.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 169092
Speaker 1: Now, what led to you leaving TWO [The Woodlawn Organization]?
Speaker 2: I, I wanted to do something on my own, and I had evolved to the point of TWO--I think when I started, I can't remember it, but I think TWO had maybe fifty, sixty employees.  And four years later, I think we had three to 400 employees and a proliferation of social service programs as well as the community development stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: Joe Gardner was running the community organization at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's been said, you know, by community organizers and people that get involved in this, that when the organizations are formed like TWO and other organizations, they focus on, you know, the powers that be as a target of their, you know, need to change, you know, for social change.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And, but after the organization's around for a long time, it becomes the target--
Speaker 2: A part of--
Speaker 1: --a part of the establishment.
Speaker 2: Right, absolutely.
Speaker 1: So was there a discussion around there about the posture of TWO and how it could keep itself from being the establishment that it was challenging?
Speaker 2: Yeah, actually, the tension was the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], the big, bad wolf.  And, you know, sometimes the community activists, I think they would need to create an enemy if they didn't have one.  And so, the university was TWO's enemy and adversary.  And so it kept rallying the people in those, hundred block clubs, keep the university out.  They're gonna push us out, they're gonna push us out, and they're gonna take us over.  And pretty soon, we'll all be wiped out.  And so they built up that adversarial relationship, and got support for it, for maintaining their neighborhoods, just as occurred with public housing, you know, in CHA [Chicago Housing Authority].  You know, when I wanted to, at the point, demolish public housing, those residents wanted no part of that, no matter how bad it was.  They wanted no part of that.  And so TWO and Woodlawn, that community wanted no part of the university gentrifying the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: And I know it becomes confusing when you hear people talk about it because they'll defend--they'll say that public housing was a trick in the first place.  And then they'll say, it's a trick to get them out of it.
Speaker 2: Right, (laughter) right.
Speaker 1: And so you don't know how--
Story_ID: 169093
Speaker 1: Well, you know, with black people in Chicago [Illinois], and this has come full circle.  My parents [Bertha Spraggins Lane and Doyle Lane], when they were living on 37th Street, and Richard J. Daley was mayor and all of these neighborhoods were on the lakefront.  You know, that's, you know, basically, from the Dan Ryan [Expressway] to the lake, prime land, you know, South Shore [Chicago, Illinois].  As blacks, the black population evolved, prime land, you know, parks, you know, around Soldier Field and McCormick Place, prime land.  They said, once, and once they built the Dan Ryan, and they put this wall of public housing there, blacks would say, "You know, you'd better watch out because they're coming back."  And we, they're traveling an hour, an hour and a half each way to get back and forth to downtown to their jobs.  And you better watch out; they're coming back.  And the thing that really triggered this revival of downtown and the white community was eliminating that ring of public housing that surrounds downtown.  And now, as we sit today, they have come back.  And once they did the massive demolition, almost simultaneously, all of the major developers built all of these high rise condominiums.  I mean they just flooded it, downtown with them, flooded downtown with them, and to the point when the economic collapse hit, you know, we're gonna say that the banks are stuck with those buildings now, those vacant buildings, but in reality, at some point within, you know, the no-so distant future, all of those buildings will be occupied.  But they won't be occupied by African Americans or Hispanics.  They'll be occupied by white folks, and because of the economic disparities.  Black people and Hispanics just can't afford to live in those buildings.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're sitting in the South Loop now, surrounded by $600,000 condos, yep.
Speaker 1: Right.  So it's, what the average black person said: once Dan Ryan was finished, once the public housing corridor was established, they said, "You know, it won't be long.  They're gonna come back," because their institutions were there.  Sure, they wanted suburban communities and, you know, the better schools.  But they still had to travel great distances to go to the museums and the Art Institute and all of, all of those places that--the movie theaters.  And (chuckle), it was a conscious decision of government to make those movie theaters that were filled up with black teenagers from the West Side and the South Side, it was a conscious decision to make them go away.  And that was the beginning of tweaking the community and the neighborhood and downtown environment to be not friendly to minorities.
Story_ID: 169094
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, [HM] Dempsey Travis, back in--I think it was 1975 told some friends of mine that were interviewing him for Black Books Bulletin that black folks by this, the time we are in now, would be living out in the suburbs of Chicago [Illinois] in Soweto [South Africa] basically.  That was his prediction.
Speaker 2: And Dempsey is not far from wrong because once--and I supported tearing down high rises.  What I did not support was tearing them down all at once and flooding the neighborhoods and surrounding suburbs, which have--now, had taken on a black character, flooding them with 15 or 16,000 vouchers, Section 8 vouchers, that were given to the people who lived in public housing because what those people did--and I knew they were going to do it, they puddled up with their friends and relatives in those same neighborhoods.  And so now we have a situation, whether it's in Harvey or Dolton or Maywood or South Shore or the South Side neighborhoods, you can hardly walk safely at night because they had--it's transformed from a vertical public housing to horizontal public housing.  If you think of public housing as subsidized housing, those vouchers are essentially public housing.
Story_ID: 169095
Speaker 1: Let's get on a chronology, and then we'll get back to this, the point in time when the projects are actually torn down to get deeper into it.  But in '73 [1973], you--well, I guess, did you start working on your M.B.A. while you were with TWO?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, it was kind of--no, no, absolutely--I started the last year at Tuesday publication.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, that first, I did the first year.  I did a two-year program at the University [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and that last year at Tuesday, I started at the University of Chicago.  And, in fact, when I took the position at TWO, I told them that I had one commitment that you'll need to bear with me because I'm gonna finish that second year at the University.  And so, they accommodated me, and I finished the M.B.A. at the University of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, in--so you have your M.B.A. while you're at TWO.  And then when you resigned from TWO in '74 [1974], in '75 [1975] you founded the Urban Services and Development, Incorporated?
Speaker 2: Urban Services, right.
Speaker 1: And LSM Venture Associates?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is your own business that you had dreamed of starting?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, now, what specifically were you all gonna do under this new business?
Speaker 2: Manage multi-family properties and develop properties in low and moderate income neighborhoods.
Story_ID: 169096
Speaker 1: What were some of the multi-family units that you developed when you were--
Speaker 2: The major one, I did a small initial, about thirty unit scattered site in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois].  And I, the major development was I joint ventured with the Seventh Day Adventist [SDA] Church, the Lake Region Conference.  And we bought the old Continental Can research facility which is at 76th and Racine.  They had vacated the property, and it was a huge site with massive limestone, industrial buildings.  And we came up with a plan to rehab the research buildings which were on the north side of the block into senior citizen housing.  I think it was, we had 120 or thirty [130] of senior housing.  And on the south side of the block, directly across from that senior building, we developed townhouses for, of course, low and moderate income families.  And that was 200 and something units.  I think the total was 300 and something apartments.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I remember that site now that you've mentioned it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I think I knew some people associated with CICS that--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --were over that.  And Roosevelt Roberts [ph.], Theresa White, Snow, I think it was.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, what's his name who ran it, you know, I was started out with those guys, John--wow, he passed away recently.  But, and so we developed that.  And then we tried to solve the food desert problem.  And we developed 100,000 square foot shopping center, anchored by a supermarket to be really anchored by Buddy Bear Foods.  Buddy Bear operated primarily on the West side.  He was an Italian guy.  And he died in the middle of the process before we ever could get it off the ground.  So I had to shift, and it was a, it was a big store.  It was thirty-something thousand square feet.  So it was a major store.  And so I operated in the absence of Buddy Bear in getting a Jewel or somebody because they wouldn't touch it.  I operated the supermarket as Shopper's Lane and tried to get Leonard Muhammad who was [HM] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan's, like chief of staff.  He wanted to change the ownership to a halal, you know, meaning like kosher.  You know, halal for Arabs [sic, Muslims] is similar to kosher for Jewish, the Jewish culture.  And but we never could pull it off.  And so eventually, Mayor [Richard J.] Daley tore the development down and built a skating rink.
Speaker 1: Now, where was this located?
Speaker 2: 76th and Racine.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 169097
Speaker 1: One interesting, another interesting part of that development was another corner, the northwest corner of 76th and Racine.  During Jack Kemp's time as Secretary of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], I was heavily involved in public policy in Washington to try to--you can't change anything here without Congress making it happen if you're dealing with government subsidized development.  And they passed a law, much like the Brooke Amendment [1969], when they forced working people out of public housing.  They passed a law that said you can't discriminate against senior citizens for housing.  They wanted the disabled in senior citizen housing as well.  And, of course, that created significant problems in many of the senior citizen buildings because, you know, you know, let's face it.  A lot of young people have been maimed and injured as a result of gang violence and so we have a lot of young people who are disabled.  And what it triggered was many of the places, as they became vacant, and the apartments turned over because senior citizens pass on, developers, owners and CHA started to house young, disabled.
Speaker 2: Okay, so they made it possible for the disabled to move into a senior's building because of the facilities for people with lack of mobility and that sort of thing?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it created such dissension in the existing senior citizen properties--
Speaker 2: Is it because--
Speaker 1: --the conflict with these young people who, and I don't know if they were singing rap music or what, but the conflict with a young, disabled person who plays rap music at all hours of the night and whose friends (laughter)--it's not a compatible situation with seniors.  And I had become a member of the board of the Corporation for Supportive Housing out of New York.  And they were, established an office here in Chicago.  And I got Jack Kemp to project base a thousand Section 8 vouchers, called certificates then, to permit developers to develop supportive housing for the disabled and others to live, not among senior citizens, but in their own supportive housing environments.  And I think that was the first time that we had, the government had project-based Section 8 in order to accomplish that kind of development.  And now it's common practice to do it.
Speaker 2: So it's--what is it called, project-based Section 8?
Speaker 1: Project-based Section 8.
Speaker 2: Okay.  About what year is this that--
Speaker 1: Well, I did it while I was at CHA [Chicago Housing Authority].  So it's probably '93 [1993] or so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Ninety two [1992], '93 [1993], but the interesting thing was, you know, with these relationships that I had at TWO [The Woodlawn Organization] and other not-for-profit organizations, like I was on the board, founding board member at Hispanic Housing Development Corporation, which is the first major Hispanic development entity--
Speaker 2: Okay, I--
Speaker 1: I gave, you know, The Woodlawn Organization [TWO] the Section 8 vouchers in order to rehab one of the Continental Can buildings as a supportive housing facility.  And it's still operating today.
Story_ID: 169098
Speaker 1: Okay, maybe we--can we maybe go over the steps from, I guess the late '70s [1970s] to I guess the time that, to '88 [1988] I guess, when you became the chair of Chicago Public Housing Authority [CHA], and--
Speaker 2: Right, and during that--
Speaker 1: --what were the steps there (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --during that period, I formed Urban Services and LSM, and we built the Rehab housing, and we built Continental Can, which was a major--you know, that covered both sides of a full block.
Speaker 1: I don't want to throw us too much off the chronology, but how did SDA [Seventh Day Adventists] get involved in this?  I mean how did they--what were their interests in it?
Speaker 2: Oh, because the president of the Lake Region Council, Charles Joseph, wanted to get involved in development.  And actually, he contacted me to try to--he wanted to operate a school, you know, the Seventh Day Adventists, operate Shiloh Academy on the South side.  And he wanted to acquire part of this property to operate a Seventh Day Adventist [SDA] School.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I know that SDA, Lake Region, was located on 87th in the black community.
Speaker 2: Right, and so how we got control of the site, Continental Can donated that entire site and all the buildings to Loyola University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And over the years, Dr. Joseph and I convinced Loyola that, you know, when Continental Can gave them, donated that facility, it was like turning Cinderella into a pumpkin (laughter).  Nobody could do anything with those buildings and with that site.  And we prevailed upon them to build this housing, build the shopping center, build the supportive housing facility and the long and short of it, Loyola did fine.  They made over $20 million that we paid for the land to build all of this.  So it was a win-win situation.  The buildings and the site were, was becoming run down, and I think it was--I'm proud of the development of those buildings and having some useful purpose for something that could have become a real, real eye sore.
Story_ID: 169099
Speaker 1: Okay, now, and you received--I thought it was interesting that Lloyds, you know, that's the Great Britain, I mean Britain-based bank.
Speaker 2: It's a bank, yeah--
Speaker 1: There's a U.S. arm called Daiwa Bank, right.
Speaker 2: And it--they were acquired by Daiwa, a Japanese bank.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But at that time, and remember this, you know, at one point in America, interest rates were at 20 percent.  I mean outrageous, and financing in a neighborhood like that was almost impossible.  And so, but we did it.  You know, we got the money.  We built the projects, and--
Speaker 1: They got a much--you got a much lower rate from Lloyds?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really, but I think that the foreign banks had more sensitivity to these kinds of neighborhoods than the First National Bank of Chicago, First Chicago and Harris Bank and whatever.  And in those days, you know, they weren't building branches in black neighborhoods in those days.  That was a recent occurrence when the feds [federal government] put all the pressure on them about the Community Reinvestment Act [1977].  And so it was a real struggle to put that together, but thank God, you know, the--Loyola played a real role in helping us pull all of it together.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, for the Continental Plaza Shopping Center development and the other things that you described, in '86 [1986], you received a HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] Certificate of Special Achievement.
Speaker 2: Yep, yeah, for that development of the shopping center because literally it had not been done on the South side.  [HM] Dempsey Travis developed some commercial pieces along 87th Street, east, but literally, there were very few places that African American organizations could pull off something like Shoppers Lane and Continental Plaza.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And HUD, because it was a mixed bag of UDAG [Urban Development Action Grants] financing that came out of Washington [D.C.].  It was (laughter), it was tough pulling it all together, and, but the Center was, you know, outstanding.  Harold Washington was mayor at the time, and I think probably--that's one of the reasons we got it done because Harold was mayor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 169100
Speaker 1: Now, I know the director of CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] in those days was [HM] Renault Robinson, right?
Speaker 2: It was Renault.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know he was catching a lot of flack.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, he was catching a lot of flack.  You know, Renault, unfortunately, the management skills were not there.  And the properties were not being managed.  You know, in spite of Renault's experiences with Chicago Police [Department], crime was going up.  And it wasn't just him.  I mean it was public housing in a lot of big cities, Detroit [Michigan], you know.
Speaker 1: Can you kind of--I was just wondering if you can like walk us--well, you're walking us through your involvement.  Did you get involved with CHA at this point at all, I mean after the HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], after the Continental Can?
Speaker 2: I, what happened with me, I got involved--I'm not sure how I got there, but I became an officer in the Metropolitan Planning Council, MPC.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they kind of pigeon-holed me into heading up, on a charitable basis, trying to do something with public housing.  And so MPC had a whole staff, you know, operated--operates from grants.  But MPC has a board of directors that they pull from for different things.  Like, they were always involved in regional planning, and that kind of--but they had an emphasis on public housing.  And so they drafted me as a board member to work with the staff to try to improve public housing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's how I got involved in public housing.  And I spent a couple of years, while I was working privately in my business, with public housing, through the Metropolitan Planning Council.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so it evolved, Renault--the mayor [Harold Washington] had to, you know, move Renault out of that position.
Speaker 1: Now, before I get--before we discuss that, I wanted you, if you would, and I was asked to try to get your version of the history of public housing in Chicago.  I know we've interviewed [HM] Barbara Bowman, the daughter of Robert Taylor and other people that have talked about this development, including [HM] Phillip Jackson and some other people.  So--and Renault Robinson.  And so, I'd just like to get your take on what--'cause I've heard that people say that the high rises, even when they were developed, some derided them, but some folks said they were really nice when they first were developed.  And so how did they deteriorate and how did we get to the crisis point it was when you came in?
Speaker 2: They really were nice, relative to the substandard housing that was there before.  They were nice.  But the flaw in the policy--and it's not the buildings.  Understand this, poor people in Russia and in Asia, they live in high rises, poor people, and they live decently in high rises.  But the flaw was, the concentration of poverty, the combination of HUD and congressional policy that literally forced working people out of public housing.
Story_ID: 169101
Speaker 1: You said it was the Brooke Amendment [1969] that, I mean the--
Speaker 2: Ed--[HM] Senator Ed Brooke, the first black Senator in the United--
Speaker 1: In modern times.
Speaker 2: Right, in modern times, pushed that.  The government, you know, we needed to take care of the very poor.  We shouldn't be taking care of people who have jobs and can live elsewhere.  And so over the time, they forced the working people out of public housing.  And the flaw was, not in the high rises, but in who occupied the high rises.  When you have the poorest of the poor concentrated in twenty-two story buildings.  And then you have second, third, fourth generation of people who live on welfare, there was no, not even any thought to moving on and doing better and getting a job.  They had a system, some families, you would pass on that apartment from one generation to the next.  So eventually, we had four, almost 5,000 apartments just in Robert Taylor [Homes] alone, occupied by families that had earned between $3,000 and $10,000 a year.
Story_ID: 169102
Speaker 1: Let me just also throw this in that, public housing, I mean the projects were designed as transitional housing, right?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Not for permanent--
Speaker 2: All public housing was basically designed as transitional, and it worked because those working families, like it was intended, had a leg up.  They got reduced rents, but they worked.  And so as they worked, they got down payments and moved on to buy homes and whatever, and then somebody else would take that place.  But after the Brooke Amendment [1969] took effect and set in, there were no bringing in working folk as historically took place when public housing started in 1937.  And, but it only took a short while after the development of the high rises to really bring about that concentrated poverty and social issues that were just overwhelming.
Speaker 1: So that's one wing of it, and I've been told--and I was told years ago by an Irish organizer who's a veteran that city politics had a lot to do with the deterioration of the projects too, in terms of how they were managed--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --siphoning off of resources by the city.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, I mean Charlie Swibel.  I mean Charlie Swibel [Charles Swibel], and, you know, I'm, you know--Richard M. Daley gets irritated with me, but his dad [Richard J. Daley] was responsible for a lot of that.  The people at CHA [Chicago Housing Authority], when I started at CHA, you know, I laid off over, almost 300 people within the first three or four months because I knew they weren't working.  And that was one of the things that had to change because the CHA employees--and they were irritated with me, with my conversation because I spoke publicly about it.  The unions were irritated.  Some of the long-time staff people and tradesmen were irritated because they wouldn't come and fix an elevator in the middle of the night or they wouldn't come and fix a leaky faucet or a toilet that was plugged up, you know.  It just didn't happen.  And one of the things that I said, when I circuitously became the chairman, was that you could not any longer--and the people in public housing deserved better.  And the political forces in the City of Chicago [Illinois], they didn't care.  They didn't care about public housing residents.
Story_ID: 169103
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've been told by people also that in CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] that if the money for services at Robert Taylor [Homes], Stateway [Gardens] and other projects was actually used for the services, that the people would be in a lot better shape.  I mean there would be, you know, garbage pickup on time, the elevators would work, different things like that.  And did you, do you have any reflections on that about how that--
Speaker 2: I think that we made a sea change in the operation of public housing during my administration.  And the garbage did get picked up.  You know, one of the things I--the first things I did was try to make efficient use of the funds we had.  I set up the initial program for buying gas because those buildings used natural gas.  I was buying it at the wellhead, and over the decades since then, they've saved hundreds of millions of dollars from just buying gas at the right price.  And janitors, I hired residents.  I made residents--I encouraged residents to be part of the solution and not the problem.  And with that, the first thing that I tried to achieve was to improve security because you can't get buildings and block upon block of high-rise buildings with residents taking and wanting to have a better life if they're hiding in a bathtub from gunfire.  And so we set up tenant patrols.  We set up twenty-one tenant patrols in twenty-one developments.  And we established our own Chicago Housing Authority police because the Chicago Police Department could care less about protecting public housing residents--
Story_ID: 169104
Speaker 1: With the proliferation and the strength of the gangs in public housing, do you think that the Chicago Police Department was actually afraid to go in there, I mean not that they didn't care.  But do you think there was, because there was a, I know a report that a Chicago reporter did when I, after I came to Chicago [Illinois] about ambulances being afraid to go into public housing to, on calls.
Speaker 2: Right, because they were shooting, random--
Speaker 1: They wouldn't go on a call--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Sometimes they would just wait for hours and hours--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --until they could get a police escort to go in.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And that was the case with the Chicago police.  In fact, shortly after I became chairman [of the Chicago Housing Authority], I was--and I, you know, I'd be up at 1:00, 2:00, 3:00 [o'clock] in the morning trying to get my arms around what was happening, really happening at the buildings.  And I was driving by Ida B. Wells [Homes], and I heard this noise, this music that was blaring from the high rises.  And I said, drive over to see what is this--why would they be playing music this loud?  Why wouldn't somebody be saying, no, you know?  You know, this, you know, this can't be at this hour.  And I pulled up beside a Chicago policeman squad car, and the officers were lounging on the hood of the car.  And I said (laughter) to them, I said, "Officers, do you hear this, this loud music?  Why aren't you stopping it?  You know, they're disturbing the peace."  And they said to me--and one was white and one was black, "I'm not gonna, we're not gonna do anything.  You know, why--they may be having a dope party or drug party.  Why should we get shot up because they're playing loud music?  The neighbors don't care anyway."  And at that moment, I tried, I started trying to figure out how I could get better police protection for public housing.
Story_ID: 169105
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this goes back maybe--I'm just gonna list these, events of these problems.  You've got, you have--there's, you've got, first of all, you have high concentration of people with no income who have become permanent residents, inherited over generations in the same neighborhood.  So you have the street organizations and the gangs forming.  You have this corruption in terms of how resources are allocated and services are rendered to it.  This, I mean there's a lot of factors here, you know, security, you know, the inattention that the police department gave to it because of one reason or another.  So you decided to set up your own CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] security system, I mean was that--that sounds like a hard thing to do.
Speaker 2: It was a very hard thing to do, and I really wasn't sure how I would get it done.  But fortunately, the city and the state and the federal government with all that was going on in public housing, I petitioned them for funds and it was really the funds that we would ordinarily get, not for operations but for major--what they call, major rehab, for a period of time to fund the police department, a fully-sworn police department, not rent-a-cops, you know, the security guards.  I worked with Leroy Martin when he was superintendent of police, and--
Speaker 1: This was in the '90s [1990s], right.  So, we're now like 1994 or so or '93 [1993], '94 [1994]?
Speaker 2: No, no, I think it was like '92 [1992] or 3 [1993].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, early, early '90s [1990s] because we took a while to, one, get the funding together, and two, to get the state legislature to authorize the housing authority to operate a police department within the City of Chicago.
Story_ID: 169106
Speaker 1: There's a step before the police department that I wanted to mention too, and that was the Operation Clean Sweep?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what was--how did that come about and what was it?
Speaker 2: Well, in, I think within a month of my becoming chairman of the [Chicago] Housing Authority [CHA]--
Speaker 1: This was '88 [1988], yeah.
Speaker 2: In '88 [1988], I got a call one day from Nancy Jefferson who was a community activist on the West Side.
Speaker 1: She's probably one of the revered community activists in the city.  She's almost sainted by people, Nancy Jefferson.
Speaker 2: I developed a close relationship with Nancy, and she said--and I didn't know at that time well.  I knew of her, but she says, "Vince, you've just gotta do something.  The gangbangers just burned, severely burned a little girl in Rockwell Gardens."  And, of course, you know, I was full of energy and vigor to take on this.  And so I got over to Rockwell Gardens, and sure enough, the gangbangers were trying to torch somebody's apartment that they had a grudge against.  And he, they picked the wrong apartment.  And they firebombed the apartment where this little girl was severely burned.  And that really just set me off.  I just, I said, how can we think about fixing the elevators and fixing sinks if, you know, employees are being terrorized, residents are being terrorized.  Something has to happen.  And so I don't know what.  I just said, we probably--I was thinking about a war, one of these war movies, taking a hill in Korea, you know.  And I said, what they do, the soldiers do is, when they wanna take a hill, they have to come with overwhelming force.  And they have to surround whoever is on that hill, and once they take the hill, they have to control the hill.  They just can't walk away from it.  And so we, I worked out with Leroy Martin that we would have surprise, what we called "sweeps" of selected high rises, and that first one was at Rockwell [Gardens].  And we would plan a major offensive with not only police and our, what we--all we had at that time was rent-a-cops, you know, security guards.  And we would, unannounced, and I wouldn't tell Leroy Martin where we were going because I knew that if I told him, that some of the Chicago police hierarchy would pass on the information and we wouldn't have the effect that we needed.
Story_ID: 169107
Speaker 1: So, I guess I'm--I was thinking, now, is this--so were you working on conjunction with the [Chicago] Police Department on this [Operation Clean Sweep]?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: So, so--
Speaker 2: I didn't have any police.  I just had security guards.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you would initiate the sweep with the security guards or then the police would come--
Speaker 2: No.  I said, with Leroy [Martin], I would work it with his police officers.  But I would set the building.  I didn't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I would dictate where we held the sweeps.
Speaker 1: So you would let them know on the day of, then, is that it?
Speaker 2: I would--we would meet at 51st and Wentworth [Chicago, Illinois] at about 6:00 o'clock in the morning.  And everybody would assemble, my security guards and my tradesmen because once we would get there, I wanted to set up a perimeter and secure the building.  Once the Chicago police swept down the buildings, they would go up to the top and walk down every, on every floor till we got to the lobby, cleaning out anybody who didn't belong there.  I mean cleaning out.  If you didn't have a lease, you got out of the building.  And so we would sweep down the building, force out all the bad guys, and, of course, public housing wasn't built, with Robert Taylor [Homes], Cabrini [-Green Homes], they weren't built with lobbies, normal lobbies with doors.  And so they were wide open.  So I got the craftsmen to create lobbies, not nice luxury lobbies, but lobbies that functioned.  And so after we swept out all of the people who didn't belong, the tradesmen were welding steel and screens, and we would wind up with a lobby, with a door that was controlled.  And I put a security guard on the door, and I (laughter), and that's when I got into trouble with the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] because I started setting curfews and issuing resident I.D. cards.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I know what that looks like to the ACLU.  It looks like you're putting them in jail.  (Laughter) Their rights are being...
Speaker 2: Their rights are being whatever, but the--I saw the distinction as we were not violating the rights of the tenants or their families.  We were establishing control the building so that if they requested and showed the proper documentation, that the people, they could continue to live there, but we had to have them on the lease.  You didn't have to be married or a legal--but if you're in an apartment with any private landlord, they want you to list on the lease who lives in the apartment.  And I wasn't asking for any more than that.  Once we get people who were not on the lease, we then had to work with the legitimate tenants to get people on the lease that belonged there.
Story_ID: 169108
Speaker 1: One aspect of the sweep [Operation Clean Sweep] is to find out who is on the lease, was living there.  Was there another, any other objective?
Speaker 2: Well, the other objective was to literally prevent gangbangers from controlling the building and to limit drug sales because at the time, drugs were being sold at 30 to $50,000 a week.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the advent of crack in Chicago [Illinois] in the early days.
Speaker 2: Right, right, I mean drugs were rampant.  And the young, you know, ten or eleven-year old, they served as lookouts for the drug dealers.  And drugs, the drug dealers are part of the gang structure.  Individuals weren't going to a building and establishing drug sales.  The gangs were.  And the gangs had territories.  And I acknowledged that they had territories, and later on, when I recognized we had a difficult situation, that legitimate gangbangers were on the lease and living in the apartment and creating havoc within the legal lease, I would transfer them to another development in a rival gang territory.  And, of course--and that, I was didn't evict them.  I was just transferring them to another development.  And, of course, they never would show up at the building in the rival gang territory.  So, it really--it was literally warfare.
Speaker 1: Now, did it--when you look back on it, did it--a lot of people were concerned about the legality of it all, and though I understand your motives.  And everybody who would hear the news coming out of the projects, would just, you know, be livid.  But when you look back on it, do you think that--would you do anything different when you look back on this?
Speaker 2: No, because I had to, you know, [HM] Renault Robinson and his predecessors--and Charlie Swibel [Charles Swibel] didn't care, but Renault and some of the others that, they tried to get the elevators fixed and to get the garbage picked up and get, you know--make things happen.  But they couldn't because the gangs and the social environment didn't permit it.  And when I went into the CHA, that's the first thing I thought.  Well, I'm gonna get this garbage and I'll make the tradesmen do their jobs and clean this place up.  But once that little girl got bombed--firebombed, I knew then that I could never make the physical improvements in the real estate if I couldn't secure the property.
Story_ID: 169109
Speaker 1: And thus went [Operation] Clean Sweep, and once, once that first building--when we drove up to Rockwell Gardens from 51st and Wentworth and surrounded that building.  And they all saw, but too late, that the building was being surrounded and police were coming up the stairwells, then they started tossing out drugs out the windows and whatever.  But it was a little late.  The second go around--and the tenants, the decent tenants, 90 percent of them, were happy, happy that that, after that day, they could feel safe.  And at the second building--I think it was 2822 Calumet--of course, news travels quickly when you're doing something like we did at Rockwell [Gardens].  And I announced the building, and the motorcade, you know, it was a huge, huge number of vehicles that we were--as we approached the building.  And, of course, they were in high rises.  Once they saw that this motorcade of police and workmen was approaching this 2822, everything started to rain out of the buildings, guns and drugs and whatever because they knew what happened over at Rockwell.  And so the decent people who suffered with random gunfire and putting their kids in the bathtubs and not being able to go, have the elevators repaired so that they're working, they don't have to walk up 20 flights of stairs, they were thrilled because once we secured that building--one, we got any bad guys out.  And believe me, some of the gangbangers, they took over the decent tenants' apartments.  I mean they--and they used them as their drug outfit, drug retail establishment in the building.  They just took it over.  If they found a weak tenant, they took over the apartment.
Speaker 2: Well, there's familial relationships too, I mean--
Speaker 1: It's some--
Speaker 2: --the children of--
Speaker 1: --some familial, you know.  I found many of these little kids that's ten and eleven that are lookouts, and they're providing money to their mothers who would have none.  You know, they'd get paid $500.00 a week.  Well, they're sending money to the mother and the mother says, "Oh, yeah, thanks, you know.  You know, I don't know where it's coming from, but keep it coming."  They knew where it was coming from.
Story_ID: 169110
Speaker 1: But, and so once those buildings were secured, the whole environment changed.  And I had a challenge, you know, just as with, how do I fund this CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] police once I got it established.  The problem was, what do I do?  Just do one building or two buildings?  Well, you know, this is a whole city full of buildings.  But I was determined and I just don't know how, but Jack Kemp supported me, and subsequently, Bill Clinton supported me.  And when Henry Cisneros, and we kept going, one building after the other.  And finally, we, you know, we secured Robert Taylor [Homes].  We secured Cabrini[-Green Homes].  We secured ABLA [Homes], Henry Horner [Homes].  I mean, and the tenants were overwhelmingly supportive of the process and procedures because it wasn't just about locking people down like they do in prison.  It was about making the environment as normal as you could be with those kinds of buildings and those kinds of conditions.  They became buildings that actually functioned.  And the workers at CHA, where they wouldn't go to work, they would just collect their checks and avoid being around, they started to work and to function.  And garbage got picked up, and we got the graffiti off the buildings.  And we planted grass, instead of the horrible glass and dirt that surrounded the properties.  And so they became actually places that people could live and function.
Story_ID: 169111
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a--did you model this strategy [Operation Clean Sweep] after any other model that--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --existed in the country?
Speaker 2: No, I told you.  I saw a movie somewhere along the lines about taking a hill, and I figured, we'd take--if the soldiers could take a hill, I could take a high rise.
Speaker 1: Okay, and another thing too, I remember there were quite a few critics of this--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and I don't know.  I mean it's, some people said, "Well, if this was a white community--"
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --no matter how bad it was, they would never tolerate sweeps.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So when, you know, police rushing through unannounced, opening their doors, rifling through their possessions, looking for people, questioning people, asking them for their names and their identification, this is something that, they said, "This is out of South Africa or some place."  This is something that, you know, no matter what the motivation, there's still (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But it's not whatever the motivation.  It's not, you know.  Kids are losing their lives, maimed and maligned.  Drugs are being sold.  They can't, you know, after a certain hour, if a mother needs to get some pampers or whatever, they can't leave the building because they're not in control of the building.  And, you know, so they, in effect, they are in prison, and they are being locked down if these measures were not taken.  They are on lockdown by the gangs.
Story_ID: 169112
Speaker 1: The result of the sweeps [Operation Clean Sweep] and the creation of the CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] police force, now this had to be done--were you talking, I think you were mentioning, you were alluding to the fact that this had to be done incrementally--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --one building at a time?
Speaker 2: One building at a time, and hold it, just like you would, the soldier held that hill, I mean took a hill and couldn't just move on or else the enemy would take over the hill.  You had to take the over the building and control it until you took over the next one and the next one and the next one.  And it was a major effort.  You know, the resources, I just don't know how we got the resources to do it, but we did it.
Speaker 1: Right.  That was my next question.  How did, who paid for the CHA police?
Speaker 2: The federal government.
Speaker 1: Okay, but the money had to come through the city, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No, it came directly to me.
Speaker 1: Now, that's unusual 'cause mostly, most of the time, at least I don't even know an exception, federal funds when they go to a municipality, there's a community development block grant board and other--
Speaker 2: Right, but--
Speaker 1: --kinds of boards that--
Speaker 2: --but most housing authorities are set up as independent agencies.  We're, CHA is actually, technically a municipality within the city, and those funds flowed directly to CHA.  Now, Mayor Daley, Richard M.--J. Daley [Richard J. Daley] controlled it absolutely and controlled the board, and the money flowed to CHA, but it flowed where the mayor wanted it to flow, out of CHA.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this was, I think--I think we talked about this off-camera but this characterized the Charles Swibel regime--
Speaker 2: Right, and [HM] Renault [Robinson] tried to get a handle on it, but it just, they just couldn't do it.
Story_ID: 169113
Speaker 1: You know, [HM] Renault Robinson, I suppose, I don't know if you, what your thoughts are on this, but I suppose he was appointed by Mayor [Harold] Washington because of the trust factor.  He trusted--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --this heroic figure.
Speaker 2: Right, and figured he could get more out of the Chicago Police [Department] to protect public housing residents than he was able to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And it's been said that the Chicago Police Department is really, it's like turning around an aircraft carrier to get them to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --change anything.  It's really tough.
Speaker 2: With the union, and, you know, we had twenty-one unions at CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] when I started.  And then, you know, we had so many things working.  And then I started to privatize management and started it with Lake Park Place, when I rehabbed what was gang-infested high rises at 30--Oakwood, 39th Street and the lake.  But I had to get all kinds of laws passed in Congress to let working people occupy the buildings.  I mean it was an enormous challenge, and it just--Renault didn't have the tools with which to pull it off.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I remember, I think the commander of the CHA police was Leroy O'Shield, was that true or did he just command one of the--
Speaker 2: He was just one of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was just one of them.
Speaker 1: Did you have a commander for the overall--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--in fact, you know, at one point when Leroy could no longer deal with the mayor, he became my chief of CHA police.
Speaker 1: Okay, I thought he was at one time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, how did that--I know there was a tremendous shoot out or something at Cabrini-Green [Homes] in the late '90s [1990s], and do you remember that?
Speaker 2: No, because I, remember I--'95 [1995], I was out.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I think, yeah, Commander O'Shield was the chief at that point?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Story_ID: 169114
Speaker 1: There was change.  You could see change in the way business was being conducted in CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] when you were director, and you could see the result of, positive results from the different activity (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The actual day-to-day living was improved dramatically.  And evidence of that was the twenty-eight tenant patrols that I set up.  They could actually walk the grounds in the buildings and protect themselves and meet and coordinate with the police and, you know, it was--and they weren't being paid.  I did not pay them.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now, did they continue, did your policies after you--well, I shouldn't get you out of here yet until we--okay, let me ask you this question.  Was there any attempt to replicate what you were doing at CHA in other cities?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But it, because of the composition of public housing in Chicago, I mean New York [New York] was bigger, but Chicago [Illinois], nowhere else in America did they have the concentration that took place in Chicago.  That State Street corridor ran from 55th Street all the way up to 22nd Street, Dearborn Homes and Ickes [Homes] and Stateway [Gardens] and, I mean it just, you know, if you--again, to make a war analogy, it would have been very easy if you declared war on the State Street corridor to have jet fighters strafing buildings because all they had to do was go in a straight line.  And New York, that doesn't exist, building after building after building after building.
Speaker 1: So what you're alluding to really, when you think about it, Chicago has the highest concentration of poor people in any one place of any place in the nation.
Speaker 2: Right, in the nation.
Speaker 1: Okay, and these are not just poor people, people without any income.
Speaker 2: Without anything.
Speaker 1: Okay, everybody is subsidized or they couldn't live there, right?
Speaker 2: (Nodding yes)
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So did the media take notice of this and write about it, talk about it, universities do studies about it or did they--
Speaker 2: I think they, I think that they are--I just sent Leslie [ph.] a piece on urban policy that took a little look at that, the dynamics of what went on in Chicago.  And, of course, I've visited and consulted with a lot of housing authorities.  But, again, it was just--they had one building or a couple of buildings that they have problems with like in Chicago, but they didn't have this concentration.  So I can consult with them like we consulted with the Washington D.C. Housing Authority.  And we did a couple clean sweeps there, and I met with the Newark, New Jersey Housing Authority, and we tried a few things there.  The housing authority in San Juan, Puerto Rico, Los Angeles [California], you know, it's--but they deal with really isolated situations.  And Chicago (laughter), it was the whole city.
Story_ID: 169115
Speaker 1: Okay, now did the crime rate go down in the projects as a result of the--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  Murders were, my first year, were a hundred and something murders [sic].  And after [Operation] Clean Sweep, I think we had fifty or so murders a year [sic].  Now--
Speaker 1: So it cut them in half?
Speaker 2: That seems, you know, wow, fifty people are still getting killed, that that's bad, but at least it's not 110 people getting killed.  And so we made dramatic dent.  Now, the--when I set up the Chicago Housing Authority [CHA] police, the gangbangers tried to destroy it overnight.  They actually hired, paid a U.S. Army guy, a sharp shooter to set up a place where they could literally assassinate one of our police officers.  And they did that.  They assassinated him at Robert Taylor to send me a message that we are not going to permit you to disrupt our business and control these buildings.  They shot a police officer in the artery in the thigh, the carotid artery that runs--and unfortunately, you know, he, the bullet missed his vest, and, of course, they intended to miss it 'cause it was a scoped rifle, that intended to kill him.  And as disheartening as it was, because even the Chicago police, the gangbangers didn't hire an assassin to take one of them out, you know, a Chicago police officer.  But they decided to take out one of the CHA police, almost the first year, the first few months that we had it going.  And, but I, I knew, I believed it was the right thing to do, so I doubled and tripled and quadrupled down on the hand that I was playing.  And we shut down almost six or seven or eight buildings at Robert Taylor and shut down all of the drug trafficking as a result of that.  And the message was to them, "If you ever do this again, you won't have any drug business," 'cause at least if you're functioning, you know, the gangbangers controlling the business, they're still doing their drugs.  But that was a big part of the effort to continue the sweeps and securing the buildings, and HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] and I think at this time, Bill Clinton, supported doing it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and gave me the resources to do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 169116
Speaker 1: Did you think at the time or do you think now that the drug trade could be actually stopped in the projects--well, the projects don't exist anymore the way they did, but is--
Speaker 2: Well, what--public policy that I wanted to establish was not just to maintain a police state throughout the high rises.  I finally signed on to the concept that we had to have a different way of housing poor people.  And my way was to eliminate the concentrated poverty and all the social characteristics that go with it.  And I spent a lot of time in Washington [D.C.] because when you, public housing is owned by the federal government, not owned by the city.  I mean it technically is, but it doesn't get any money unless it comes from Washington.  And so I spent the time trying to work with others in public housing and in the Congress and different public and private agencies to change laws.  And Jack Kemp appointed me as co-chair of the [National] Commission on Severely Distressed Public Housing.
Speaker 1: So this would have been in '91 [1991]?
Speaker 2: It would probably have been in '89 [1989] or '90 [1990] because we took about a year, year and a half to complete the report from the Commission.  And we actually, once the report was completed on creating mixed-income communities in public housing, which went 180 degrees from the Brooke Amendment [1969] where people that worked couldn't live in public housing.  And that commission report, once it was issued, to start to do--tear down and build mixed income, public housing communities.  And at first all of the public housing authorities, they said I was crazy, you know.  I mean we just need more money, we just need more money to fix things up and do that.  You can't, you know, destroy the whole concept of public housing.  We just need to take care of what we have.  And, thank God, society prevailed.  The report was issued supporting the concept of tearing down bad public housing, concentrated public housing and building new housing, but building it in a way with different kinds of resources, private resources, not just federal government resources.  And like any other developer, build a new community where poor people can live in those communities.  And the first funding for Hope VI, which was the actual program that was generated out of the commission was funded in November of '91 [1991].  I think the first funding was close to $600 million and it has been funded every year since 1991.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's called Hope VI?
Speaker 2: Hope VI.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Hope VI generated funds to tear down the high rises here.  It generated funds that were given in joint venture to private developers to build the new stuff around United Stadium, that Henry Horner [Homes], around UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], around the lakefront, Cabrini[-Green Homes].  You know, that's how it happened.
Story_ID: 169117
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know one of the common complaints in Chicago [Illinois] is that there are not enough--well, there are enough Section 8 vouchers, but not enough housing for people when the projects were torn down.  So--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, and that was a major, a major objection that I had to the mayor's [Richard M. Daley] approach to doing mixed-income housing.
Speaker 1: I think one of the first examples was mixed-income housing in the places that supplanted Cabrini-Green [Homes], that there was not, you know, there was basically hardly any room for poor people there, you know, after they were torn down.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the government, HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], requires that a third of the housing that is developed is occupied by public housing, true public housing residents.  Another third is occupied by what they describe as "affordable" housing which involves the use of tax credits, and a little higher income, of people up to 60 percent of the income could occupy, and then a third theoretically, can be occupied by millionaires, market rates, straight market rate.  The problem is with that formula, it's very difficult to get somebody who is working in the commodities exchange, making a million dollars a year, why would they wanna live or buy next to someone that's on welfare.  And so it is not, you know, the media, the media promotes myths that are maintained by the government.  And it's a real problem.  I won't say it's a failure, but it's a real problem that they cannot occupy these new communities with market-rate, working folk, alongside people that are paying no rent.  And that is the problem that I had with the mayor's (unclear) approach, to the plan for transformation.  At first they, in rapid order, demolished all the high rises and then without thinking about how to integrate those families into a broader community, communities that are more traditional with resources, they just gave them the certificates.  And then they puddled up in Roseland and South Shore and Dolton and Harvey.
Speaker 1: And I remember during the time a lot of people took buses to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] or Minnesota or, and Las Vegas [Nevada] was another destination at one time.
Story_ID: 169118
Speaker 1: Now, did you get a salary for being director of CHA [Chicago Housing Authority]?  They had to give you something, right?  Or--
Speaker 2: They initially, when I was operating as, like Zirl Smith and [HM] Renault [Robinson], I got a salary.  But after I gave up one of the positions to just become chairman and not run the day-to-day, I basically took a $1.00 a year salary.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, so in 1991, now tell us about the American Community Housing Association, which was formed in '91 [1991]?
Speaker 2: I had a relationship with a firm out of Los Angeles [California], Bruce Rozet, and he owned about 40,000 units of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development]-financed, subsidized housing, privately owned.  And Bruce had some problems with some of the developments like I had, initially, with CHA.  And so he entered into an agreement with me to acquire up to 29,000 apartments around the country.  And I worked at that for two or three years, and, but we couldn't get the support from HUD Washington [D.C.] to make the transformation from his ownership to mine.  But we did it for about, about three years.
Story_ID: 169119
Speaker 1: Now, you left the CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] in '95 [1995], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what led to your leaving CHA?
Speaker 2: The mayor wanted to get rid of me.
Speaker 1: Okay, by this time, 'cause you came in under--well, Daley was--
Speaker 2: No, Gene Sawyer [HM Eugene Sawyer].
Speaker 1: --Gene Sawyer was mayor in '88 [1988]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --fulfilling the unexpired term of Mayor [Harold] Washington.
Speaker 2: Of Mayor Washington.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And a couple of the African American politicians didn't want Sawyer to finish out his term.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Richard [M.] Daley was elected, I think in '90 [1990], is that true?
Speaker 2: I think it was about '90 [1990].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, well, 'kay, you wanna talk about the dynamics of that and what happened?
Speaker 2: What, with the mayor?  I, you know, I'm--even though he's not the mayor anymore, I don't think his ties to the administration are separated from his past.  And, you know, I just--I will leave it at this.  The mayor wanted me out.  And I think he wanted me out because basically, he wanted to control it, and I wouldn't--I was not cooperating with him controlling it.
Story_ID: 169120
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety four [1994] you received a Public Official of the Year Award from Governing magazine, and this is, you know, I mean so this is part of an overall feeling of satisfaction with the work that you did with, you know, CHA?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, also in '94 [1994], concurrently, Alderman [Dorothy] Tillman demands your resignation.  So what (laughter), we've got two, a balance of two different things happening.
Speaker 2: Well, Alderman Tillman, like many of the aldermen in wards that have a lot of public housing, I was advocating the demolition of public housing.  And she was threatened, as some of the other aldermen were.  And they weren't black, you know.  The alderman covering Cabrini-Green [Homes] was white, and he was threatened as well.
Speaker 1: Was that Bernie [Stone], I'm trying to think of his last name now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bernie--
Speaker 1: I can see him.
Speaker 2: He was voted out a few years ago.  But if the housing came down, their voting base would be decimated.  And that was her major concern.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this was like scattering her constituency around the city, basically.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's what happened with Cabrini and Henry Horner [Homes] and ABLA [Homes] and Robert Taylor [Homes] and Stateway [Gardens].  So the elected officials, whether black or white, were not happy with the concept of tearing down public housing.
Speaker 1: Okay, but in '95 [1995], you resigned, you said, under pressure by the [Richard M.] Daley administration?
Speaker 2: Under pressure by the Daley administration and with the concurrence of the Washington [D.C.] establishment.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this was the Bill Clinton administration we're talking about.  And so, now, was Cisneros still the head of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] then?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, Henry Cisneros of San Antonio [Texas].  Okay.
Story_ID: 169121
Speaker 1: When you look back on your term as chair of CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] which most people associate you with, you know, here in the city, what do you see as your legacy there?
Speaker 2: That the high rises are gone.  They would not have been gone without the legislative and social policies that I promoted.  And people who live in the mixed-income communities, public housing resident who live in those communities have a much better life than they had when they lived in the high rises.  And that, for them, hopefully, their children will not, in the next generation, continue to live as their parents did from generation to generation in public housing, but truly, like the original intent of public housing, that it's temporary.  And when those kids move on, they will be in communities with better schools, and they will do well in school, and they will move on and out of public housing to other communities.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's hard to argue against that, and I don't--I think, to think of poor people in a static condition like that is just, perpetually, is probably something that we needed to change.  So--
Speaker 2: It definitely needs to change, but it can't, they can't change by themselves, and that's why you try to promote, you know--when I was advocating for a wider distribution from the poor in public housing, I lobbied for a brief while, suburban city managers and mayors and tried to advocate with the Deputy Director for Civil Rights in the Attorney General's office to establish quotas, quotas, economic quotas, not racial quotas to permit the unbundling of Section 8 vouchers and certificates to limit them to a certain percentage, five, no more than 10 percent of any given block, anywhere in the metropolitan area.  In other words, I could not, I would not subsidize more than 10 percent, five to 10 percent of any block, anywhere in the metropolitan area which would have, I think--and you could look at it, coercion or forcing them, but I think that we wouldn't have had the build up and the tearing down in these neighborhoods in Chicago and the Westside and the suburban neighborhoods that were on the brink already before the flood of Section 8 vouchers.  And those families would have been much better off, I believe, living in those neighborhoods where they were five or 10 percent of a typical working-class, normal neighborhood than they are now where they have overburdened all of the municipal and institutional resources that make life normal in a South Shore and a Roseland.  It would be much better off.  And so I, even though I am really happy about and pleased that the high rises are gone, new mixed-income communities have been developed, I'm not at all happy about the 60 percent that have suffering in low-rise, basically, low-rise public housing environments.
Story_ID: 169122
Speaker 1: Now, in '96 [1996] it says here, the attempt to refinance Continental Plaza kind of collapses--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So tell us what happened there 'cause you had worked on this a long time, and this is--
Speaker 2: Well, we could not get a major supermarket to operate.  And I tried to refinance the development, and I did refinance the development.  And like my partner, Loyola University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], I convinced them to guarantee a loan from American National Bank.  And they did.  They provided a 100 percent guarantee that the loan would be paid back from American National Bank.  And for some reason, the federal government, in terms of the Justice Department, unsolicited, said that I didn't give a proper financial statement, even though it was prepared by a CPA [certified public accountant], that included a possible foreclosure situation in Paris, Texas, with a property.  And so they said that I did not disclose that there was a possible foreclosure so that I misstated the financial statement and that that misstatement of the financial statement could have caused American National Bank to lose money if the property were foreclosed.  Well, my position is, then and it still is now, that I was not guilty, that Loyola, the president of Loyola testified that Loyola made over $20 million on Continental Plaza and that why would I misstate a financial statement when Loyola is guaranteeing the loan 100 percent?  So I will say this and not elaborate, I think the political forces got me out of and into that situation.
Story_ID: 169123
Speaker 1: What are you working on currently?  Are you or what are you doing?
Speaker 2: I'm working on various real estate, multi-family housing.  I had several properties that I'm still general partner on and outside of Chicago [Illinois], and I'm working on those developments.
Speaker 1: Well, I guess I should ask you, now, what kind of toll did all of this, the federal indictment and all that sort of thing take on you 'cause this is years, this goes for years, doesn't it?
Speaker 2: It was a dramatic, absolutely dramatic.  I just, I'm just fortunate that the political forces did not take away everything that I've learned because after I left CHA [Chicago Housing Authority], I assisted a developer in demolishing 1,500 units of public housing in New Orleans [Louisiana] and rebuilding a new mixed-income community, anchored by WalMart.  I worked as a general partner to cause the demolition of 900 units in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and recreate mixed-income communities.  So I have continued with my goal in public housing and low-income communities, to create a situation where, you know, people are better off.  And, but it took a tremendous toll on me and my family, this, what I consider as erroneous indictment and conviction.
Story_ID: 169124
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on your life, especially the part of the CHA [Chicago Housing Authority], are there individuals or organizations that stand out in terms of, you know, you're fighting the, you know, the good fight in public housing?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I mean it's, I mean, like I said, you know, it's--after I left CHA, I helped residents in New Orleans [Louisiana] and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and down in Florida and in, you know, Alex Polyakov [ph.], the control [ph.] decision to try to get rid of the high rises, Metropolitan Planning Council.  I think they are elated that the buildings are down.  They have some, I think, trepidation about, again, this displacement of residents.  But I think the public housing directors, when I started in '88 [1988], I remember meeting, having a meeting with the Council of Large Public Housing Authorities, and I suggested to them that things will change dramatically over, in the near future for public housing and that we should be building housing that everybody, poor people can live in, not housing for poor people, and that public housing can be built by the same people that build housing for anybody else.  Why should we have a system that builds housing just for the very, very poor?  And so the developers, these private developers that are now developing this new mixed-income housing, I think that without a doubt, they would say to anybody that that which I helped stimulate and formulate policies to not just work with federal monies and federal properties, that developers are working with bank loans.  And they're leveraging money from the federal government to create huge pots of money to tear down things and to build things up, that, I think, was a function of my time at CHA.  And I think that we have plenty of heroes that have carried on the fight.
Story_ID: 169125
Speaker 1: They say in '95 [1995], they started demolishing the buildings at Cabrini-Green [Homes], and from what I hear, I'm surprised 'cause I've been out of the city for six years, that the last Cabrini-Green building was demolished last year.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that--were you around for the first demolition in '95 [1995] or had you, were you still there?
Speaker 2: I actually had the first demolition on the lakefront in probably '94 [sic, 1995 Washington Park Extension].
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was before Cabrini-Green actually?
Speaker 2: That was the first demolition that occurred, and we didn't blow them up, but we demolished a high rise, the first high rise.  And part of the other thing that I think I was responsible for, we privatized management.  We did away with the majority of the, this so-called civil service at Chicago Housing Authority [CHA].  We had, at one point, 5,000 employees, and I remember as clear as day, I had a meeting with the staff, citywide, and I said, you guys better get on board because we're going to have the private sector run public housing just like they do anywhere else in the city.  And rather than 5,000 people, we'll probably only have 400 people.  We will line up the resources from the federal government, but we will pass it on to individual, private firms that can, hopefully, manage these properties better than we could do.  And we set up an asset management division that is still functioning today at CHA.  And CHA now has less than 400 people working for it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there a, was there a way to increase the oversight for those, I mean to make sure that all the properties are--
Speaker 2: Well, that was the asset management division.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They have strenuous oversight for all of the private people who manage CHA property.
Story_ID: 169126
Speaker 1: I was asking you what your activities now, I guess, and you're still in the development business and real estate business?
Speaker 2: Basically, acquiring existing properties and fixing them up and operating them.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What--we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, it's, I pray a lot.  I pray a lot because when you look at--and I will just talk about, although I see other parts of the country, I have to talk about Chicago [Illinois].  And I see the educational system is hemorrhaging badly in spite of [U.S.] Secretary of Education, Arne Duncan saying how great things were.  You know, it hadn't worked.  It hasn't, it hasn't worked.  Now, I don't think that Arne Duncan or anybody else had good intentions.  They dump on the unionized teachers, and I'm not so sure that that isn't correct.  I certainly dumped on the unions and civil servants at CHA because I thought they were doing a terrible job.  And, you know, I suspect there are many weaknesses in the public sector.  But education is going out the window.  I was born in Mississippi, raised across from public housing.  I got a normal education, you know.  I didn't go to inferior schools.  But today, how can the next generation or two survive when they can't finish high school?  And so education, to me, is now the key to stopping the slide in lower, low-income neighborhoods.  And it's no longer just in public housing because public housing is a part of traditional neighborhoods.  Education is the key, and how do we get parents to feel committed to their children in getting an education.  You cannot, I don't believe, stop the slide in the African American community without starting to educate our children.
Story_ID: 169127
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point in your life, is there any major thing that you want to do in the future, that you're planning to do right now?
Speaker 2: Well, I really would like, and, you know, I'm sixty -nine years old, but I'm in good health.  I hope to live a lot more years, but I would like to go to a place like Haiti or Latin American country or Africa to try to improve the lives of some people who really have absolutely nothing.  We think of, we think in terms of public housing residents or even those that are living, you know, in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] and Roseland [Roseland] and those people are living well compared to some of the families in Haiti and some of the families in Africa.  You know, they're eating gruel three times a day with their fingers.  And so, as distraught as I am that African Americans in this city and other cities with huge unemployment rates and huge percentages of drop outs--and maybe that's why some of the conservative politicians want to stop it, is that they are doing relatively well compared to others in countries that have nothing.  At least, low-income families get healthcare.  They get food stamps, they get housing subsidies.  They, it could be a lot worse.  It could be a lot better, but it could be a lot worse.  And I've basically served my time in purgatory.  I will always try to help the less fortunate, and help as far as housing and social environment.  But I think I can't do much more than that in America.  And I'd like to have a, try my hand at something in some other country.
Story_ID: 169128
Speaker 1: We were just saying off-camera that CHA [Chicago Housing Authority], I mean the way it existed when you became the chair was one of the biggest buggers in the world, you know.  So, I mean how did, and you were explaining how you managed to cope with it or deal with it?
Speaker 2: Well, I became chairman because as part of the MPC [Metropolitan Planning Council] organization, we encouraged [Richard] Dick Ogilvie, who was governor of Illinois to become chairman.  And I never will forget in New York [New York], I was at some conference at a hotel, and I got a call.  Ogilvie had agreed to do it.  Everybody was preparing for his occupying the chair at CHA.  And he had a heart attack and he died.  This was when [HM Eugene] Gene Sawyer was mayor.  And circumstances brought me to the position.  I didn't want the position.  I never wanted to be in government, but I said, given who else is available, I probably have the best chance of those people that are available to do something to fix the problem.  And so when I went into the chairmanship, I said, I'm actually going to try to fix the problem.  I didn't know how, and it evolved over the years that I was there.  But I said I would not compromise.  I would not let politics divert, move people from one place to the other because somebody's brother or relative or hire an incompetent tradesman or janitor that would only incrementally make somebody's life worse off than they had.  And I would not, I would not continue to be beat myself, hit my head against the brick wall that the last thirty or forty years of running, somebody else running CHA, doing the same things that didn't work and didn't improve people's lives, whether it's the--I wouldn't allow the mayor, the governor, the head of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] or the president, I would not compromise what I believed needed to be done to turn CHA around.
Story_ID: 169129
Speaker 1: Who--I was trying to ask you this before, and I guess I phrased it wrong.  But I was trying to ask like who do you think were the pivotal residents of CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] that played a role in the activities that were occurring when you were the chair?
Speaker 2: Well, literally, the Central Advisory Council, and the local advisory councils or the people that represented the vast majority of the residents.  I worked hand-in-glove with them.  And that's why--and there was an Artensa Randolph and she led the organization, the Central Advisory Council, but all of the members of each project development--and we called them developments, I didn't do anything without talking to them first, whether it was sweeps or entering into agreements to tear down public housing.  And we entered into these negotiations with the civil aid lawyers, Bill Wyland [ph.] at Henry Horner [Homes].  And we, you know, we had hard discussions and hard battles over demolishing public housing.  But I did it upfront and to their face.  I didn't sneak around and say I'm gonna do one thing and then do something else.  And so the resident leaders were a critical part of turning around CHA because without them I could do nothing, because clearly, if those resident leaders were opposed to me and opposed to the policies, I could get nothing done.
Story_ID: 169130
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you this too, when you look back on everything you've done this far--you still have some things to do, I think--but what today would you change?  Is there any major thing that you would change if you could?
Speaker 2: I would change right now the use of these Section 8 vouchers.  What I proposed to the broader metropolitan community and mayors and city managers, I would set quotas on the use of Section 8 vouchers that would permit no more than 5 to 10 percent of the vouchers be utilized in any given block, anywhere in the metropolitan area, which means that the 60 percent that now occupy South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] or Chatham [Chicago, Illinois] or wherever, those tenants would have to transfer into private properties and reduce the concentrations from the current levels to 5 or 10 percent in any block.  That's anywhere in the metropolitan area.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you had that idea then, right, but it wasn't--
Speaker 2: Well, you know--
Speaker 1: What I was asking--I understand what you're saying, and that's a good--I understand that, and that's--I agree with that.  But the, what I was asking, is there anything that you've done and you would not--that you'd go back and redo if you could, not something that was proposed that wasn't followed?
Speaker 2: Actually, I--honestly, I think the ideas that I had and the policies that I promoted, you know, we can have disagreements about how I achieved the security situation in those buildings initially, but other than that, I think the public policy positions were right on.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I was not just asking about that, but anything in life, I guess, since you--
Speaker 2: Well, no, I'm just, you know, I don't regret even the criminal indictment.  I think it was unjust and that I was not guilty, but I basically am fully satisfied that I did the right thing and the people who did to me what they did to me, they will have to live with that, not me.
Story_ID: 169131
Speaker 1: We always ask people about their families.  And tell us about your family, your children and your wife or--
Speaker 2: Well, I got, you know, I was divorced after eight years.  And we had--I had three kids, and my ex-wife adopted another girl.  I have three boys, and my ex-wife wanted a girl so she adopted a girl.  All of them have done fine.  They've all gotten, graduated from college.  A couple are running their own businesses.  And one's a school teacher and I have four grandchildren.  And, in fact, two of my--the oldest grandchild this summer will graduate from Iowa State University [Ames, Iowa], and I'm very pleased with that.  And she got a full scholarship so, it took a lot of pressure off of her dad and mother.  And her sister is following in her footsteps, with a couple--two years after that, she will be graduating.  I was just elated with that, and I, I married four years ago to a young lady that worked with me in public housing in St. Petersburg, Florida.  And she has one son, and he is an up and coming chef.  She grew up in Pueblo, Colorado and Denver [Colorado].  And he is doing extremely well.  And I'm just--I think, you know, we all have issues, little issues, but for the most part, I am, I'm just terribly happy that my family and my new family, one, they're all believers in God and Jesus Christ.  And for that I'm grateful because I think with that, like Tim, what's his name, Tim Tebow or (laughter), the Denver Bronco, I think you can do anything with the Lord's help.
Speaker 1: Okay, so are you a member of a church here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I attend St. Thomas the Apostle in Hyde Park at 55th and Woodlawn.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything I have not asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I--there're probably a lot of things 'cause, I mean there were so many things going on, particularly, during the era when I was with CHA [Chicago Housing Authority], but I can't think of anything right now.
Story_ID: 169132
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but, sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as really improving the lives of these tenants at, in public housing.  I spent so much time in Washington and other places trying to bring about systemic change.  And even though I didn't oversee the actual transformation, I don't, without a doubt, I believe that I played a major part in laying the groundwork for this privatizing and normalizing public housing in this mixed-income environment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Yeah, thank you.
Story_ID: 169133
Speaker 1: Describe this one.
Speaker 2: This is the three of us, my older brother, Doyle, Jr. on, the tallest one.  I'm in the center, and the younger one is Roger Lane, my younger brother.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  And do you know approximately when this was taken or what your age was?
Speaker 2: I think I was around four, three, around three.
Speaker 1: About nineteen forty-five [1945] now?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, tell us about this.
Speaker 1: That was taken when I was working on the mixed-income, tearing down the St. Thomas public housing development in New Orleans in probably 1998, yeah '98' [1998].
Speaker 2: Okay.  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: This is my two first cousins, the young ladies and the young man on, is my ex-wife's cousin.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  On the left?
Speaker 1: On the left, and I'm on the right, and this was at a cotillion, a coming out cotillion for my cousins, the two young ladies.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, and their names left to right, if you could name everybody, please?
Speaker 1: Tony.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Last name?
Speaker 1: Wilkins, Gloria Saverson and Edie Saverson.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  And yourself.
Speaker 1: And myself.  I wasn't sure whether all these people--I just grabbed--it's the only ones I had.
Speaker 2: But this is a picture of the Spraggins family basically.  You know, my mother's and her twelve siblings.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, and which one is your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother is, where is she?  Here.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  And are you--is your father in there or--
Speaker 2: No, he's not there.  That's me here, and this is my mother's sister, Alice, brother, Percy.  That's my older brother, Doyle, Jr.  This is Callie and her husband, Willie Spraggins, and this is Howard Spraggins, and, of course, they're getting married here.  And this is Paris, a brother.  He's the youngest boy, Paris, is a brother, and Roger is my younger brother, and this is Saverson, one of the family from Mississippi.  I can't make out who that is, and that's Johnny Morris my--oh, and that's Louise.  She's her, my mother's sister, Louise, and that's her husband, Johnny.  And this is a, I think that's Harriet.  That's a sister as well.  And this is a sister, Ethel.  And this is a niece, Maggie Lee.
Speaker 1: This is about 1960?
Speaker 2: And, well, that--Howard and Beverly got married, oh, let me see.  I don't think that's an original with a date on it.
Speaker 1: Wait a minute, there's something on here, 1958.
Speaker 2: No kidding.  Wow, wow.
Speaker 1: Let's try this one.  We'll put it this way because it's curling.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, tell us about this photo?
Speaker 1: And that's my father on the left, my younger brother, Roger, next to him, my mother in the center.  That's me on there and Doyle, Jr., my older brother on the right.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Was that for a specific occasion?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I don't know why we were taking a picture.  Probably my mother ordered it and so it was done (laughter).
