Story_ID: 60173
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My name is, my name is actually William Matthew Little.  W-I-L-L-I-A-M, M-A-T-T-H-E-W, L-I-T-T-L-E.  I am known by just my middle name, Matthew Little, Little and--
Speaker 1: Could, could you please give us the date of your birth and place of your birth?
Speaker 2: My--the date of my birth is August the 21st, 1921, and the place is a town on the eastern coast of North Carolina by the name of Washington, North Carolina.  It's only, it's only, it's only distinction in the whole world is the fact that now there are more than 21 cities named after George Washington, but my little town was the first even exceeding Washington, D.C.  So, that's where I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Retired.  Best occupation in the world, retirement.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you're retired?
Speaker 2: I'm retired.  Well, I retired as president of Minneapolis [Minnesota] NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the most significant one.  And I've also, I've been person at the Post Office, having been superintendent of a station at two different stations, and I left there and found my own business, a landscape and garden center business of which I operated for about ten years prior to really complete retirement and devoting the rest of my life to civil, civil rights, exclusively to civil rights.
Speaker 1: Okay, what is today's date.
Speaker 2: Today's date is August the 11th, 2002.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Maplewood, Minnesota, which is a suburb of Saint Paul, Minnesota.
Story_ID: 60174
Speaker 1: Okay, and before we get into depth there are five "People" magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the fir--they only require a short answer.  And the first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Collard greens.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the second question is what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: And sir, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes Cancun, Cancun, Mexico.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite saying is--no I don't.  I don't have a favorite saying.
Story_ID: 60175
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's talk about your background.  You, you were born in [Washington] North Carolina.  Can, can you give us the names of your parents and spell them for us please and the, and, and the dates of their birth and where they were born?
Speaker 2: Sure, I'd be glad to.  My parents were both born in the same hometown that I was born in, Washington, North Carolina.  My father's name is Authur James Little, A-U-T-H-O-U, A-U-T-H-E-R [sic, A-R-T-H-U-R] , J-A-M-E-S, little, L-I-T-T-L-E, and my mother's name is Bessie Parmley Little.  That's B-E-S-S-I-E, P-A-R-M-L-E-Y, L-I-T-T-L-E.  And she also was born in Washington, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what are the dates of their, their birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, my father was born in the year 1898, and my mother was born in the year of 1986.
Speaker 1: Okay, do they, do they have a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: They never revealed it to me as to who they met, so I, I can't answer that.  They never--it was never revealed to me.
Story_ID: 60176
Speaker 1: Okay, now did either one of them have stories about their ancestors about what occurred during slavery or reconstruction or, you know, what, what their ancestors did for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of that is obscured, but through, through some research we found out that my great, that my great-grandfather was an indentured servant by having purchased his, his freedom, and he became an engineer and worked on the, on the river because my little town of Washington is located right on the Pamlico Sound, which leads right into the Atlantic Ocean there.  And he transported fertilizer and other goods up the Pamlico River which served most of eastern Carolina at the time.  And my father followed him.  My grandfather, I'm sorry, my grandfather followed him on the boat and finally he, he came back to Washington [North Carolina] and began to work on the, work at a mill that was right on the river there that grind up corn and so forth for the farmers that came in.  And my--that occupation he transferred to my father, and my father [Arthur James Little] worked for a lifetime at that particular mill becoming a main, what they called at that time, milling engineer.  He carried the mill.  But, of course he was, did not have the, the, did not get the credit for it of course, but he was responsible for running that what we call at that time a gristmill in which the farmers from all over the area would bring in their wares and to have it grind up for the livestock and some of it, and also made some flour from the wheat that was grown there.  So, that's a short history that I know of as far as my fath, my immediate fath, my grandfather and father and his father.
Story_ID: 60177
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have any history on your mother's [Bessie Parmley Little] side.
Speaker 2: I have no history on my mother's side other than I remember my, her father, my grandfather, who is, was the first black in the City of, of Washington, North Carolina to have a T-Model Ford, and I can remember how I used to just become glassy-eyed watching him manipulate that, that Ford, that glossy Ford.  It was almost like a miracle at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what, what did he do for a living, your father's mother?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: You're, you're mother's father?
Speaker 2: I do not know to right now, never did know what he did for a living.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he's the first, he was the first black to have a new car?
Speaker 2: Have a new car, Ford.
Story_ID: 60178
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so is there--did you get a chance to meet your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my, my paternal grandfather was very close.  I knew him very well.  My maternal grandfather, one with the car [Model-T Ford], with the car, strained.  We didn't go there very frequently or anything else.  But, my maternal, my paternal grandfather he had a lot of land directly behind our--we lived in the edge of town and there was vast areas of which he owned and did some farming there and, and he was a very prudent person and he saved everything.  He had a whole shack of things that he saved, and he was alway, could always give us, have us to do chores from him by giving us some, some of the things that he saved, particularly the, I could remember the candy that he would pick up.  He was kind of a scavenger, so to speak, and so we were very close to him.  Help work, help work in his passions and so forth and, and he was representative one of those unforgettable fears in my young life, but not so with my pater, my maternal grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 60179
Speaker 1: So, can, can you describe for us, I guess, some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Washington, North Carolina, you know, what did people look like and what were the smells and what did it look like and?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all as a small southern segregated city it had all of the things that you read about as far as what the South was about during those days in extreme because--and what more of course and this is the thing that sometimes puzzles me now and was totally accepted as being such.  For example, you could very well tell where the "colored," quote unquote "colored" section began because that where the pavement ended and so was the lights system, the running water and the whole thing.  And in spite of the fact that we paid our taxes, we accepted those things per se.  I, I always joke about when people ask me "Why did I, why don't I learn to roller skate."  I said, "Brother if you could skate in that sand (laughter) in that sand where I came from it had to be a miracle", but--and also conditions of downtown.  You've heard those about not being able to put on, to try on clothes and all, all of that.  You had to hold 'em up to you, to you, decide whether or not you wanted to buy them and, and, and it seemed again as I look back there was absolutely no, nothing that the, of the black man that the white man had to respect.  For example, you know, we are very con, very conditioned about when you enter the house you pull off all hats and so forth, that was, that was a part of, of, of our tradition, but when the white man came in it was an insult for him to pull of his hat or anything else.  He, he would come in your house with his hat on and the whole bit, and it was little things like that, that just degraded you and have you growing up with the feeling that you were less than a whole human being and that becomes epidemic almost with you.  And it was organizations like the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and that's when I became involved in the NAACP in spite of the fact that it was banned during that era.  It was banned.  It was more or less an underground organization that was, that was subversive, but we did had our, we still had meetings and so forth.  And that was the thing, one of the things that was taught to us, the unfairness of it, that this was not as it should be.  Because growing up, of course, as a youngster and that with all that you knew, you, there was a tendency for you to feel that that was it, that was the way it was supposed to be.
Speaker 1: Yeah to, to accept that as reality.
Speaker 2: As reality and that you were indeed an inferior human being.
Speaker 1: Let me thank you for raising that, I mean, for, for describing how the town, the development of the town sort of stopped at the edge of the black community 'cause I think that's, that's a description of a lot of segregated southern community, and nobody has ever raised that before in doing these interviews of how the development just stops like that and I know, I, I've seen it more or less.  I know, what, what you're talking about.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: The pavement stops, it stops right there.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly and, and so, but, but growing up under that and you accept that as a reality and maybe that's the way it supposed to be, maybe I am an inferior human being, you know.  You began to ask, you'll question yourself those kind of questions and that's why I felt that the, that the NAACP was important for, for teaching the fact that, that this was an absolutely misuse of the democracy that America was supposed to be about.
Story_ID: 60180
Speaker 1: Now before we get into the development of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I wanna talk a little more about childhood.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I know that that was important in the development, but let's--I wanna go back and talk about what, what things looked like; what they, what sounds you heard; what, what the neighborhood was like; what you did as a little boy, you know, and what you observed in the neighborhood, what you saw.  Can you talk a little bit--
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.  Well because of the complete segregation of, of the community there are, except when you had to go downtown to get things, there are many of us who lived our entire life in the segregated portion of the community which, of course, was less in every aspect of it and we grew up, many of us grew up to just accept that as being Washington, North Carolina and had very little contact until we saw-- Saturday's when the, the farmers came in downtown with their merchandise and so forth.  We would go down there then and of course there were no theaters in the black communities, and so we would go to the black, the white communities of which was segregated.  We had to go up in the top of the, the loft so to speak.  As a matter of fact, there was one theater, the Regal, I never will forget that, in which the, the entrance for the blacks was on the outside as what was actually the fire escapes that was utilized for the black, the official black entrance to the theat, to the, the theater for the city.  And again going back to our accepting things, we accepted it wholeheartedly.  I could remember how hard I used to work and because my old man, my father, who would not allow us to go to the theater unless we had (and give us the 10 cents to go), unless we had done our work at home.  And how hard we worked to do that to get a chance to run up those steps and see those, to see John Wayne and those cowboys on Saturday, boy that was, that was a real treat.  But, again it was something we accept, accepted as being a part of life and that's the way it was period.
Speaker 1: What--could, could you tell as a child that, that the black community was actually being intimidated by, by the white community?  I mean could-did, did you have a sense of that or did you think--
Speaker 2: Yeah I had an inner sense.  I had an inner sense of that, but it was so well accepted that you hardly openly made those, made those complaints really.  It, again, became a way, a way of life, an accepted way of life.
Story_ID: 60181
Speaker 1: Well, did, did anybody in when you were young that you know of challenge those rules or, or, or become a victim of punishment because they violated 'em?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, yes, oh yes.  There were frequently arrested people, arrested for going over the line so to speak, there was no question about that and, and it was almost automatic as far as the punishment is concerned.  And one of the--I actually remember the worst incidence of that was a black, a blacksmith, a black blacksmith, yeah, because at that time we still had horses and shoed horses and so forth, and he had a dispute with one of his cust, white customers, and in his anger he took an axe and was going to, and was going to hit the white man.  He was restrained, of course, but they, but nonetheless the mere, his mere attempt to do that bought about, bought about almost a mobilization from the white community and the Baptist preacher got word of that and they had to rush him out of town because of fear of, of a mob getting him.
Speaker 1: Do they have stories of people being lynched in the, in your hometown?
Speaker 2: No, no not directly in my hometown.  There were some places not too far from my hometown in which there were stories of actual lynching.  I know another incident of a youngster not too much older than I who they caught, who was caught with a, with a, with a, or least rumors to the fact that he was with a, with a white young lady and there was, there was a posse coming to get him, and we had to, and we were--he was able to be rushed out of town immediately.  I can remember that, I guess I was about ten years old then, and I can, and I can remember that happening.  He was a teenager.
Speaker 1: Do you have any idea--oh I'm so sorry.  Do you have any idea of who people rushed him out of town and what method did they use to get somebody out of town then?
Speaker 2: They, they'd find somebody with a--they were afraid to use the trains, which was the mode of transportation, so they would find someone with, with a truck or a car and, and just immediately by the time that they get to get him out of town.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't know if there's a plan or anything about how to get out?
Speaker 2: No, no we didn't.  It wasn't organized to that extent.  It was more or less ad hoc.
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Just decided to--a few people would get together at night and they'll do some whispering and so forth and this is what we're going to do, but it had to be done immediately because, before the, before they would assemble, before they could assemble.
Story_ID: 60182
Speaker 1: Okay.  Just to change the subject a little, a little bit--
Speaker 2: Yeah okay.
Speaker 1: --like what--who, who--what, what people constituted your household and what was your household like when you were coming up and you know, what, what kind of things did the family do together and, and what kind of things were you expected to do?
Speaker 2: First of all, the church was the centerpiece of our, of our community, the good old Baptist church.  Ours was the Spring Garden Baptist Church and we spent, Sunday of course, all day (laughter) from Sunday school right straight through the evening service, BYPU [Baptist Young Peoples Union] and the whole darn thing.  And, and that was, I mean you didn't have a choice it was an automatic thing that you were, that you were in the family that you were a devoted Baptist parishioner; there's no question about that.  And you would participate in all of the church activities; that was a given.  And, and one of the things that, that the segregated community did bring forth was a closeness of the community.  We felt that a real closeness not only as far as our immediate family was concerned, but also as far as the community is concerned itself.  Everybody knew everybody else and their children, and, and what church they went to and, and the whole bit we were, we were really family, no doubts about it and kept up with each other and the whole thing about discipline each other's families and so forth and all of that kind of thing.  And of course a real sin was going, walking down the street and see somebody on the, on her porch, front porch and walking by without speaking.  I got--I kind of being kind of shy.  Sometimes I would kind of turn my head sometimes as if I didn't see it.  Boy, by the time I get home my daddy--(unclear)--would know that.  He would tell my daddy and he would get and say "Why can't you do the things that's right that I teach you" and that kind of thing.  So, that closeness was the thing that really was symbolic of the, of that segregated society, that little segregated society in which we lived.
Story_ID: 60183
Speaker 1: So the community [the black community in Washington, North Carolina] was a lot tighter then?
Speaker 2: Much, much, tighter.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: But, much more harmonious and a family like much more so.
Speaker 1: Now in terms of political power in the community, did the community have any?
Speaker 2: No.  Well, the fact of the matter is we didn't have-- incapable of voting, which is the machinery for assuming political party, power, and if we couldn't vote naturally we didn't have the power.  Well, the, the mechanisms that they had to keep us from voting, of course was so stringent that mostly during my time as I can remember we'd given up on.  There never was--I can't remember any major attempts to even try to vote.
Speaker 1: Well as a, as a youth was it ever explained to you why we couldn't vote by the, by the--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, we, we--I can remember--
Story_ID: 60184
Speaker 1: I'm sure that practically everybody has one teacher that sticks out in their mind and Mrs. Weddington (ph.) (I'll never will forget her) sixth grade teacher, and in that time of course you taught everything, but she taught--it was her that taught us history and social sciences, and she explained all of those things.  She was just--all of the black heroes we had to, we had to remember them by rote or else we could never get out of her class and along with that the Constitutional rights that we should have as, as a people and so forth that we did not have and should have rightfully as a people.  She even listed on the board of all the great--that we had everyday to, to repeat who they were.  John Brown, that was, he was the only white.  That was John Brown and, and--
Speaker 2: Who were the black heroes she, she--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah at that time there were a few--(unclear)--Booker T. Washington, W.E.B. Du Bois, Paul Robeson, Paul Laurence Dunbar.  We had some singers like Roland Hayes and at that time, a more current one like Marian Anderson because she was at that time was at her peak and those were just some of them I could remember right off hand, but--
Speaker 2: So did you like school a lot?
Speaker 1: Oh yes.  Oh, I, oh yes.  It was--teachers like, like her and she's not the only dedicated one, but she's the one that stuck out in my mind mostly.  I, I think for the most part that they inculcated the fact that there was a better way; that this was not it.  That this was--there was a better way.  But they--and they also stressed, which was important I think, that as a way out education and as of now leaving the South and that was the time of the great migration, of course, straight up north.
Speaker 2: So, they urged y'all to get an education and then to leave basically.
Speaker 1: Exactly, that was the, that was the unwritten law for young people that had ambition.  And of course like any community there were some people who were, had no interest in anything and were, were kind of drags on the community in that they were, were negative, were ver, very negative.  No question about that like any other society we had those of which the, the white community of course would equate with all of the black community and I think, I really do believe that the percentage or even of my little hometown I think more or less of the, of the South in general that the percentage of the real people that did not have any, that were just instinctively were less than they are today, really.  I think that there was really an urgent desire, I certainly found it in my community, the majority of the young people to have some of these ambitions as to whether they were able to make them or not, that they did have ambition and as I said and I think the, the cornerstone again was to get that, that education and to move up north for an opportunity to use, to use it.  And that I saw as, as a part of my bringing up and I think it was inculcated within me and which brings up another story of course how disappointed I was with the promise land, the so-called promise land, not reaching it, but that's that's another story altogether.
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah right.
Story_ID: 60185
Speaker 1: So, when you were in school did you have besides Mrs. Weddington were there any other mentors?
Speaker 2: Yeah I had Mr. Daniels.  He, he was an inspiration as far as just plain achievement is concerned.  Achievement, for achievement's sakes and he seemed to have the ability to motivate you into doing things.  As long as it has been, I can remember the first day of in our math class that he taught, and he was trying to show us the importance of math in the whole world in which we lived and how it affects in some way in everything that we do and everything that we would bring up he would relate it in some way to math.  And finally, he told us this, he said "Now you go home tonight and if you can think of anything, whatever it is, that not involve math in some fashion come back tomorrow and let me know and I'll give you an A for the course and you won't have to come to class anymore."  Boy, did that ever got us thinking about what-- the idea, but he was that kind of a motivator and very ingenious thinking of ideas of how to motivate his class and get them interested, so.
Story_ID: 60186
Speaker 1: What were some of the activities that you engaged in at school.  Were you, you very active in school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was active in school in spite of the fact that I, of course athletically.  In spite of the fact of my size, I played football on the varsity football team, the basketball team, and, and the track team and also debate, debate team.  And we used to have an oration, oration contest each year and I participated in that.  Won that a couple of times.  The small schools like ours we used to go have on the east coast, we used to have in the spring a contest in athletics and, and different subjects, educational subjects and so forth.  All the schools on the east coast, the black schools of course, would go up to Elizabeth City State College, which was located in, in Elizabeth City, North Carolina who--and incidentally the, one of the--(unclear)--from Atlantic, from Elizabeth City State College became the athletic director at University, at University of North Carolina, Minnesota.  Quite a coincidence.  But, any way we would, we would go there and we'd compete again all the other col, colleges and first we'd have, we'd have contest among ourselves to decide which ones are gonna repre, represent each other in the various things.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: My school?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Which--
Speaker 1: High school.
Speaker 2: High school, oh.  Well at that time Washington Colored High School, okay, but it was more than a high school because it was, it was K through 12, actually in that same building, in that same building,  But--
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry usually how many students were, were, I mean,--
Speaker 2: Total of about 500, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the, in the whole school.
Speaker 1: K through 12.
Speaker 2: K through 12 in the same, in the same little school.
Speaker 1: How big was the facility actually?
Speaker 2: Good question.
Speaker 1: It wasn't big enough, I guess that's what--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: No, (laughter) of course you had to double up in, in classes sure.  The classes had to be doubled, had to be doubled up and so forth and sometimes teachers would teach dual classes also.  And, of course, our books and, and desks and most of the things that we had were passed down from the white schools after they had used them and the same thing was true of the athletic facilities.  That's why we never had Washington High School on our jerseys because they were passed down from the white, from the white school.
Speaker 1: What did you jersey say?
Speaker 2: "Peabody" (laughter).  We were Washington High School--(unclear)--.  We were able to do that, get it on ba, because in basketball because there were fewer, there were fewer, there were fewer positions, so we were proud to have our own jerseys, sweatshirts playing basketball.  And they even allowed us to go to watch the white high schools play.  Of course, they had separate high school.  They had high school, middle school, and, and elementary school, but we only had the one for everything.
Speaker 1: But, they allowed you to go to watch the white high school kids.
Speaker 2: Partitioned off, of course, not (laughter), not mingling with the athletes, so that we could, hopefully we could learn something from them, from watching them play basketball.  And I always wished we could, we could have challenged them.  I always felt that we could challenge.  So, that's the way it was.
Speaker 1: You kind of suspected that they weren't necessary as good.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I just felt that, I just had that feeling that boy I could dribble all over this guy, man.  But "never the twain shall meet," you know and so again those were the things that we accepted and that's the way it was.
Story_ID: 60187
Speaker 1: Just on the subject of athletics.  Did the Negro Baseball Leagues come through town [Washington, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Occasionally yes, yes occasionally.  Occasionally we would see more or less exhibition.  They would come out on the fairgrounds, we'd have it on the fairgrounds.  Oh, incidentally, we, we had--there was a cornfield that we used for our football.  You can just imagine who--we had to be good to overcome that (laughter).
Speaker 1: A corn, I mean the stubble from the corn-- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Exactly the stubble from the corn.  They cleared it off somewhat, but it was still--
Speaker 1: Pretty tough.
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).  So to overcome that we had to be, no doubts about it.  Oh incidentally, of course way before his time, but being on that east coast one of our competing schools (they were larger than we of course and beat the heck out of us most of the time), but was Wilmington, North Carolina from whence Michael Jordan came from.  Well, that was one of our main rivals in Washington, North Carolina.  Things had changed, of course, by the time that he was there.  But again all of this we accepted as being the norm because that all we knew.
Story_ID: 60188
Speaker 1: And you said things started to change when the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] started holding meetings?  I mean, that's when you started--
Speaker 2: We became, more, more aware, more conscious, more conscious of, of that as a subversive, subversive organization.  We had to meet, we had to meet at certain people's houses.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you went to those kinds of meetings?
Speaker 2: About twelve years old when I started going, when I found out about them.  As a matter of fact, I was kind of, I was reluctant about telling my dad [Arthur James Little] because you know he had been born in the old system and to, and he would conceive of that as being kind of revolutionary, rocking the boat.  He had his house and everything and he didn't want to, he didn't want to do anything to rock the boat at that time among us young radicals.  That was considered radical at that time.
Speaker 1: How did you find out about the NAACP meetings at age twelve?
Speaker 2: Would you believe at the church [Spring Garden Baptist Church].  Some of my young kids were telling me about it and it sounded like an adventure (laughter).  You know I was a young twelve years old eager to be a part of something that's an adventure and so that was some--most of course were young.  There were a few old-timers too, very few, of which my dad would never be one of them.
Story_ID: 60189
Speaker 1: He [Little's father, Arthur James Little] wanted to play it safe, what he had known all of his life, and he had, and by comparison he had fairly well.  He started working at the mill at that time and became a pretty good what they call miller.  He also, he also had raised a little farm and, and was able to build a fairly nice house, but again he could never let his, his boss know that the house was his, never let him know that.  So, the principal of the school lived right next door, so he would tell his boss and his name was Mr. Moss, I'll never forget that, but that house belonged to the principal of the school.  Because he was afraid, actually afraid of getting fired if his, if his boss would know that he had a house like that, if he had a house that was that nice.
Speaker 2: That's, you know this is--I've heard this story before this is, what a world to know, I mean to, to live, to grow up is really something.
Speaker 1: And I, and another thing in that same regard finally, I guess it was 1934, I guess it was, he was able to get a used car and you know he couldn't allow his boss to know that.  So, he couldn't drive the car to work.  He would always ride the bicycle.  He always rode a bicycle.  So, my uncle who was a barber had a barber shop that was not to close to the downtown area, so what daddy would do would drive his 1933 Chevy to the barbershop, leave it there, get his bicycle and bicycle on to work, not letting, letting, making his employer feel that he was still using the bicycle.  Those are the kind of things that was just a part of the scenery.  And I'm sure that there many worse, but that's one, just one of them that's, that was a part of my life.
Speaker 2: 'Cause he had basically learned how to conceal, you know the things he had acquired in order to be able to keep 'em, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He was, he was one of the best Uncle Toms that you ever seen.  We used that expression.  They knew that he was supposed to have been afraid of mice, you know, and so they would make, they would place, they would place a mice somewhere under, near him and let him-- and then so that he could, and then let him know it was a mice and he could, and they would laugh.  They'd really get a kick out of that.  He carried on, just jumping and so forth as if they were, as if he was frightened to death of them.
Speaker 2: Was he really wasn't?
Speaker 1: A little bit.  He was that afraid, not that afraid, no.  But, but he got a lot of favors as a result of that.  He got an awful lot of favors as a result of that.
Story_ID: 60190
Speaker 1: Now, what, what did your mother [Bessie Parmley Little] do for, for a living, and what did she think about some of the same issues?
Speaker 2: Nothing, nothing.  I have never known momma to make any issue on--she was, of course, a complete stay-at-home mother, of course.  We didn't have that two-family stuff then.  Besides that was ridiculous at that time.  And she baked three meals, three, three meals, three different biscuits, meals of biscuits a day on a wood stove, and she, and she with her eight kids she with no washing machine or nothing like that was a scrubbing, scrubbing, and hanging 'em up on the--of eight kids, keeping them clean and I guess that was more or less the woman's place in the society at that time, and, and she didn't have any strong convictions about, or not voicing it any.  I'm sure she had some as far as, as far as the social scene is concerned, but that was all a part of living in Washington, North Carolina in the '30's [1930s] and the late '20's [1920s] and '30's [1930s].
Story_ID: 60191
Speaker 1: Now, when, when you got ready to, getting ready to graduate from high school [Washington Colored High School],--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --did you have any idea of what you were gonna do?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, no question about it, and so did my father [Arthur James Little] for that matter.  I was, I was definitely again that syndrome of educating and up north; that was it.  And I knew, well I was the salutatorian of that class of course and I was going to college, there's no question about that, regardless of what it took to get there.  And of course, my, my father did everything that he could do and of course I worked like a--I knew that I had to work and I and I did work, going to college and worked all kinds of jobs and then, then in the summer, of course, would go to these resorts and work as a waiter primarily Virginia Beach, which was at that time (I understand it's a tremendous city now), but it was just a beach at that time.  And I worked at the Cavalier Hotel and made almost enough money for my tuition next year.
Speaker 1: Okay and where were you going to school?
Speaker 2: A&T State University [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical University in Greensboro], which was A&T College at the time in Greensboro, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and which I--my intentions, of course, was to become a doctor because you almost had to be a professional at that time, it was very limitations in spite of the fact that that was a technical college that had a fairly good, certainly at that time, a technical institution at that time, but I knew, it felt-- and I had some interest also in being a doctor and so I took pre-med with a major in chemistry.  I mean, a major in biological science and a minor in chemistry and, and near the end of my fourth year old Uncle Sam intervened and it was so near the end of graduation and everybody was so compassionate at that time for the war effort that the college declared all of the graduating seniors pre, prematurely to be given their, be given their certif, certificate, their degrees and we all marched off to Fort Braggs [sic, Fort Bragg], North Carolina.  See we were in what they called enlisted reserve.  Most of us were in the enlisted reserve.  We had a big celebration on the campus and we all got on the bus, went down to Fort Brigg, Briggs, Braggs for induction into the Armed Services.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is about 1941 or--
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: Forty-two.
Speaker 2: Two, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well four, actually '43' [1943].  They called me in '42' [1942] from my local, from my local board, but I was able to get out of that by being a member of what we called the enlisted reserve from the college which we took some military training and, and was enlisted as a unit.
Story_ID: 60192
Speaker 1: So, just before we--you're, you're inducted into the Army in 1943, '42' [1942], '43' [1943], you go in '43' [1943], but just before you leave North Carolina A&T [Agricultural and Technical University in Greensboro] I didn't ask you if there were any significant teachers there or role models there that made a difference in your life?
Speaker 2: No, I can't remember one that made a significant difference in my life.  I learned an awful lot more about African-American history.  We had a history teacher who was really a Carter G. Woodson fan and almost an associate, and he taught us an awful lot about African-American history, but as--
Speaker 1: What was his name?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Trying to think what is his name.  What was his name.
Speaker 1: If you can't, it's okay.
Speaker 2: No, I am afraid my memory slips me.  Maybe, maybe I may think of it afterward.  My memory slips me right now as to, as to what his name was.
Speaker 1: Okay and so that's the only one really you think that stood--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that, that--I can't think of any of 'em that stood out in that regard really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 60193
Speaker 1: So, at Fort Bragg [United States Army instillation in North Carolina], what did you, what did you encounter at Fort Bragg?
Speaker 2: Well, as s- as the whole Army was segregated at that time, of course, we, we went through the, all of the enlisted men and all of the--were black and all the officers were white, of course; and we went through--it was just--that was just a staging area.  We went through the examinations and all kinds of examination to see that we were fit physically to join the Army, to be in the Army, and as far as I know we all (laughter) all passed; and then we were assigned to different units for basic training.  I was--mine was camp, Camp Croft in South Carolina--Spartanburg, South Carolina.  And that's where I did my basic training.  And again as was the other case, all of our officers were white, our enlisted men; our non-coms [non-commissioned officers], most of our non-coms were African American.  And we went through the rigours of basic training, which was just that (laughter): complete rigours and, and let you know exactly what you had to do, where you had to do it, and how you have to it; no deviations whatsoever.  All those things, that's a part of transferring a civilian into an army and an army mentality, and learning to shoot different rifles, the different ammunition of that time; and, and the whole bit and stand out those bivouacs at night; and, and learn to find your way on the compass; and learning to assemble your, your favorite weapon, which was an M1, how to dissemble it and reassemble it at night; and all of those very basic things that you had to learn in, transform a civilian into, into a soldier.
Story_ID: 60194
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now what was the name of the [United States Army] unit that you were in?
Speaker 2: Well, oh well at that time [1943] I don't think they even gave unit names to you in basic training.  It was only after you became, after you have been indoctrinated--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --then they transfer to you to a unit, after that you become as a unit and in as much as you know they had different kinds of basic training too.  And one of the things during that time very few infantry outfits, although all of basic training do take some infantry training, but the specialized basic infantry training units were rare because at that time again that mentality of, and perhaps it worked in our favor to some extent, but there was a feeling that African Americans were not capable of actually combat, of actually--they were more used as service units and much of majority of them were service unit who serviced the combat unit and engineering that helped fix the bridges and that kind of thing rather than the actual combat.  But, we were--there were a few--there was one what they call a black army, the 92nd and the 93rd [Infantry Divisions] which was located at Fort Huachuca, Arizona, and then there were scattered regimens, of course, which is a smaller contingent.  There was the, the historic 124th [Regiment, United States Colored Infantry from 1865 to 1967 in Kentucky] and then there was the one of which we were eventually transferred, 364th Infantry [Regiment] outfit.  And so we were located of all places in Mississippi in the worse part of Mississippi also.
Speaker 1: What part was that?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember the name of the little town now.  It was, it was in the southeastern area of, of Mississippi because there were two things I remember, because we were not too far from, from Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and we were to go, and we took some of our, our furlo, furloughs there.
Story_ID: 60195
Speaker 1: You, you were assigned to the 364th [United States Army Regiment] Infantry--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --stationed in you said the worse part of Mississippi southeastern--
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember that little town.  It was very little, insignificant.
Speaker 1: Near, near Louisiana, near Baton Rouge.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  As a matter of fact, we went to when we had our maneuvers prior to going overseas and everything, we had maneuvers in those swamps of Louisiana.  I never will forget that (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: So, they were actually training you all to be combat?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were trained to be combat troops, but, but there's another thing that happened in that regard and, and it was racial also.  We, along with several, I mean another army, we were attached--they had attached us to a Third [United States] Army as an infantry regiment.  But, somehow or another nobody told [United States Army General George S.] Patton apparently okay and you know like you do when you're maneuvering you try to capture the other, you try to make breakthroughs and capture the ones that's operating as an enemy.  We had a breakthrough and the senior officers including Patton himself, I suppose, were watching and for the first time they discovered that they had a black infantry regiment attached to the Third Army, and that was prior to going over to, to it.  The next day we got orders, the unit, to go to Washington, to Seattle, Washington, for invocation to the Aleutian Islands, the very next day.
Story_ID: 60196
Speaker 1: Now, now where--so you all [the 364th United States Army Infantry Regiment] went to the Aleutian Island?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Now where is the Aleutian Islands?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's an extension of Alaska, those coral islands leading to, toward Russia.  As a matter of fact, the, the Kuril, the Kuril Islands is owned by Russia.  Of course, the whole thing was owned by them until we bought Alaska way back then.  But anyway, they were by the same token at that time the closest to Japan, those, those islands.  There was Attu, Amchitka, and what was the other one, Adak and those islands.  But, they had, they had secured one of the, the, the inner islands but the, no they had cured the, the farther most island, which was Adak, no Attu and the innermost island, but there was an island in between that they had not and that was ones that we were going to be, our outfit of which we were attached to.  Again, we were as a unit, we were attached to another outfit.  And we were supposed to be the guard unit for that outfit and, and this was the thing you know I never seen it in the history books that Kiska, the island in between that had not been conquered.  That was our mission and by this time they had forgotten about the fact that we were a guard unit.  They needed, they needed the manpower and so we went aboard, we went aboard to attack that island and in the meantime the Alaskan scouts were to attack it from the north side, and when we, and we fought our way in and when we met we, and when we met we thought each other were the enemy and lot, some of the people were killed actually.  And what the Jap, what the Japanese had done, escaped, left everything intact, hospitals, ships, and everything else.  And that had been a mystery and I never heard anything about what actually happened.  But that--
Speaker 1: So, the personnel were gone--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The personnel was gone, but everything else was intact, just like it was, the hospital and everything; the ships in the harbor, the whole bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there we were killing each other.
Speaker 1: Now, this was in the '40's [1940s].
Speaker 2: This was in Kiska.  This was in '43' [1943], '43' [1943].
Speaker 1: What's the name of that island again?
Speaker 2: Kiska, K-I-S-K-A.  It's--you can see it on the map, Kiska.
Speaker 1: That is a mysterious kind of a--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah one of the mysteries. Well, we [the 364th United States Army Infantry Division] stayed up there preparing because at that time prior to the, prior to the atom bomb, of course, we were this extension of islands, they were the closes actually, the closes to the Japanese empire.  As a matter of fact, geologist claimed that the Japanese island is almost an extension of those, of those Aleutian and Kuril islands.  And so we were--after we had completely secured, although we did get a few bombings occasionally, matter how I got hurt, after we got--we developed a real station there then and all kinds of resources there preparing to, to striking the Japanese homeland, which was supposed to be the big one.  We were attacking them from the north, the other people attacking them from the, from the south and so forth.  That was supposed to be after, after the victory in Europe.  That was supposed to be the next jump off, so.
Story_ID: 60197
Speaker 1: And, and after I had gotten injured I was sent home on a recup, what they call recuperation furlough.
Speaker 2: Now, now how did you get injured?
Speaker 1: I was acting as a medical aides person and we had, and we had, and we--one of the, one of the, of our planes was shot down.  And of course as a medical aide man, we rushed toward to save the pilots.  Just before we got there, it exploded.  The last I remember.  When I knew anything, I was in the hospital, I was in the hospital and so I had--it wasn't serious though, concussion, nothing last long, lasting half the day or so.  I woke up and--
Speaker 2: So you were out for a couple of days?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, yeah, and they treated me and they felt that I should go, should be sent to the states so-more intensive observation and so forth.  So, they were what they called recuperation furlay, furloughs where pretty common then.  And so they sent me to--and thanks heavens before time I was supposed to report back to Camp, Fort, it was in Kansas, Maple, some kind of wood in Kansas and before that they, they had the huber--they dropped the atomic bomb.  I had immediate orders not to return back to my unit and I was so happy.  They gave me a real assignment to Seattle [Washington].  I stayed there the rest of the time, so that was my service.
Story_ID: 60198
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you do when you got out of the Service?
Speaker 2: Well, while I was in the Service, oh this was a disaster, you know, I was telling you that I was, my ambition was to be a doctor and I had taken my pre-med.  So, while I was in my, from overseas I had applied to Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] for medical school, for medical school, and my reply was if I were to send them fifty dollars they would and come back there and take a few courses, refresher courses, and particularly in bio-medics and I would next year that they would accept me.  So, I stayed at Howard a whole year taking refresher courses and then when I applied they said that they were full I could not.  And I guess I must have been a very emotional person then.  I was so--I have never been so disgusted.  I was absolutely so disgusted.  I tried--(unclear)--I applied for Meharry [Medical College in Nashville, Tennessee] (that was the other black medical school) and they said with the G.I.s coming out we have already been--you would have to wait two years at the very least before you could hope to get in.  And then so by this time and I knew that my father [Arthur James Little] was expecting good things for me and all of that and how he had sacrificed and it all got too much for me I became--I was willing to give up the whole thing.
Story_ID: 60199
Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, I even wanted to, I even wanted to disappear, and I did disappear without telling my father anything.  Didn't know where I was going or anything.  As a matter of fact, you know, travel by that time, of course, was primarily by train, very few plane traveling.  I can remember from I had been working in New York [New York City, New York] at the time as a waiter, which I had done most of my collegiate year anyway, so I felt I was pretty proficient there.  I had been working at Long Island, Forest Hills Inn out in Forest Hills.  At that time, it was the site of the U.S. National Tennis and so forth.  But, anyway, I decided crazy plan, I don't know, just leave and not let anybody know, father or anything, just disappear.  And I wanted to go somewhere I'd never been before, never seen, and when they asked me where did I want a ticket for, I had narrowed it down by that time from New York, I mean, from Minneapolis [Minnesota] or Denver [Colorado].  And right there purchasing the ticket, he said, I flipped a coin, head Minneapolis, tails Denver.  It fell on heads.  I said give me a ticket to Minneapolis 1948, and I've been here ever since.  --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: You didn't have anybody here at all?
Speaker 1: Nobody, nobody.  In February too, in February and I looked at everyone walking down (laughter) Nicollet Avenue and they had one of those big thermometers down there and to doggone thing said "zero" and I had a little jacket (laughter).  It said "zero."  I said, "What the heck is this?"  'Cause I was not, it was not too far for me because I had been in the Aleutians, of course, that's about as bad a weather as you can find anywhere as, as a soldier.  But, I didn't know anybody, anything and I walked around, I found me a place at the, at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] , to live at the YMCA downtown.  And I walked around here two days and did not see a single black person.  What the heck is this?  So finally I go bold enough to ask a policeman.  I said, "Where in the heck are the black people around this place?"  And he said, "Well I, well there is a place on Third Avenue that there is a bar that's own by a black person right off on Third Avenue between Fourth and Third Street."  So, I said "Good," and I walked there and I, and I opened the door and I never seen black people look so good in my life (laughter).  I said, I said sitting all around there on the bar and everything.  So, I finally asked them where could a person find a place and live in the black community, and, and so they told me to go up to, take a, take a trolley and go up to Fourth Avenue and 38th Street and there was a barbershop there and you sure you could find somebody there who could give me some information.  And so that I did, and they gave me some information for a person that was taking in boarders.  So, that was the beginning of my living here in Minnesota.
Story_ID: 60200
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did anybody tell you about the Phyllis Wheatley [Community] Center?  I was just wondering.  --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: That was, that was, that was a little, came a little bit later with Phyllis Wheatley Settlement House they called it.  I became involved in that.  As a matter of fact, that's where I met my wife [Sylvia] at that--became later, that was later I became involved with the Phyllis Wheatley House in a lot of activities and we were in a play together and that's when I met her.  She was a young girl from Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you, well you may as well finish that story.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We are planning--
Speaker 1: But, you're in the boarding house, now okay let's just go like this you're in the boarding house--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and, and you're trying to figure out what, what to do, so what, so what do you do?  Did, did you find work or anything?
Speaker 2: That's a whole different story.  I felt that it would be, you know, again going back to my boyhood with the ambitious, one get an education; two up north.  I in my find felt it was a slam dunk.  I had a B.S. degree and I was up north.
Speaker 1: Pretty far north.
Speaker 2: Pretty far north and I thought that was it and that was the biggest disappointment.  Application after application and nothing.  I ended up with, thank Heavens, I had learned pretty well the trade of waiting tables.  I ended up waiting tables at two, at two different hotels, one for lunch and one for dinner at that time.  And, and, and I still could not find any meaningful employment of my--and by that time, I was almost getting desperate because I had married this girl whom I had met at--cut off, no.
Speaker 1: Well, we're close, we're close, go head.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I met--the girl whom I had met at Phyllis Wheatley we had married and had a kid, so I had to do something and so waiting table would not do it.  And so I was told that there was, which was a heck of a lot better, that there was an opening at the, at the fire department, fire department and heck I was young and strong, been an athlete and everything and I thought that would--because they paid a heck of a lot better, benefits and the whole bit, which I needed it at that time.  And so out of 250 something applicants I was the only black, of course, but they used a number for each person and they, and all that you instead of your name that was what you were graded by, your number.  And there were three different elements of it:  One the physical, then the, the, the written exam, and then the oral, oral interview and you had to make at least seventy-five percent in each of those categories.  The physical was a snap.  As a matter of fact, they said that in, in on phase of it in which you had to, in which you had run 100 yards with a man on your back they said that I broke the record on the physical record on that one.
Story_ID: 60201
Speaker 1: Okay, so you broke the record, the 100 yard record on the physical exam for the fire department.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yep and the next, and the next one, the written, well haven't been recently out of college [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical University in Greensboro and refresher courses in medicine at Howard University in Washington, D.C.] the exam that was given was, was snap.  I didn't have any problems at all, score high on that one.  Then the final one, and as I said before, you had a number for each of those others so, but the final one, the oral interview, was one of the first time you came in contact with the examiner himself and, and I remember it as it were yesterday.  There were three retired fire captains that did the oral interview.  And between them they asked me three questions.  Why--one why did I want to become a fireman?  Two, did my--why did I want to leave the job which I presently had to becoming a fireman?  And thirdly, was did my wife agree with my becoming a fireman?  Well, of course, and I answered those questions truthfully, which was pretty evident to me, and that ended the interview.  And on the basis of that interview, oral interview they gave me a 74.3 or 73.4, one of those, and in as much as the requirement from the Civil Service that you had to make at least 75 on each part, that disqualified me.  Now that really, that really got to me.  It really hurt me.  I and at that time we did not have a civil, active Civil Rights department here.  We had a committee that, that was, that used volunteers mostly of them white that you'd bring your complaint to.  I brought my complaint to it, and fought it and one of the things that was done is that it was, that it was documented, it was documented there, but they felt that, that they couldn't, couldn't do anything about it.
Story_ID: 60202
Speaker 1: But, I was so upset that I felt that I wanted to consult, to contact a one-on-one basis those three retired captains.  And from the Civil Service they said that that was, that they couldn't do that.  But, finally I was so persistent, finally I got one of the clerks to give me the name and address of one of the, those captains, and I'll never forget it one Sunday morning I went over to his house.  He was living in Saint Paul [Minnesota], and this was Minneapolis [Minnesota].  But, I went over to his house and when he saw me and wandered what I wanted.  I said, "I'd like to talk with you," said may I come in.  He said--finally let, he let me in.  And I said I want an explanation how in the world could you possibly have given me that kind of score on the strength of the questions that were asked.  And he actually confessed.  He said, "Well I tell you Mr. Little, you know, I've been in the fire department for thirty-five years and, and this is a special kind of job.  That you work closely, you live with your companion that's assigned to you, you sleep with him, you're a buddy with him, your life depend on it, and I think mixing of the races just simply won't mix; it won't work out," which was to me was a total admission and I took down the exact words, I did for documentation purposes.  And later, of course, after becoming in the sys, being part of the system and becoming head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and involved in some other Civil Rights organization, we were able to get a suit against the fire department, which, which reached a decree that they had to hire--they stopped hiring the process altogether until at least fifteen African American fire were, were, were hired, was certified and hired.  And the main, and, and the main, and, and the main-- of that suit, that that main telling testimony was the documentation of my course, of my case and now, of course--
Speaker 2: When was that ruling?
Speaker 1: Good question.  I think that was ruling was about seventy--, about some place in the mid '70s' [1970s].   I could, I could get that--
Speaker 2: That's almost thirty years after the event, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.  By this time, of course, we had a lot more young people to come into Minnesota.  It was yep.  It was quite a distance after that we didn't have any, and, and they filled those and got--(unclear)--and now we have, and ours and they have an African American Firefighter's Association, which is a part of the national, and they enshrined me into their Hall of Fame with a certificate and everything.  But, that's what led me more and more to this being involved in civil rights of this area, primarily with the NAACP and several organizations.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry.
Story_ID: 60203
Speaker 1: Were you working with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at that, at the time that you applied?  I mean, had, had you started going to meetings and that sort of thing at that point?
Speaker 2: No.  L- yeah, no I don't think I had.  I don't think I had.  I think it was after (laughter).  I knew it was time then to get involved with the NAACP or some organization, haven't been--re- again, remember in my childhood, my twelve-year-old involvement back in Washington, North Carolina and that was the organization that I knew most.  And I began to know the parties that worked in civil rights here with the Urban League and so forth; and, and [W.] Harry Davis [Sr.] and the, what they were doing over at, at Wheatley [Phyllis Wheatley Community Center] and so forth.  I had become a part of the machinery by this time; and then I began to really go completely with the--see what I could do with NAACP and make it meaningful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this is about, where are we now in terms of time?  Are we like 1950 or so, or?
Speaker 2: Well, we kind of moved up to, in the early, kind of, up to the early '70s [1970s] by the time that we actually got our, where we actually got this landmark thing of, the landmark thing of having the, the mandatory apply--hiring of black firemen in the, in the Minneapolis [Minnesota] fire department.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah, when, when that occurred, that was about 1950 or?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  Oh that was in the '50s [1950s] yeah (unclear) right exactly.  And I--yeah, and then I--so then I, then I went to the--my kids were growing up then so I went to the place that they were hiring with my, with my having been a veteran and so forth and went into the Post Office and be, became a Post Office official, became stationed, became in charge of public relations there and then became the station superintendent with one of the largest stations.  And then I left there and became my--all the time I was heavily involved with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], okay, and with the political process too because I learned very early that that was one of the powers that could change things being with the, with the political process.
Story_ID: 60204
Speaker 1: My mentor all along because I needed, I needed him very much as far as the getting out the news to our community and editor of the black paper here who had-- Cecil Newman was his name and he also had political clout also.
Speaker 2: Can you spell his name for us?
Speaker 1: Yeah, N-E-W-M-A-N, Cecil, C-E-C-I-L--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Newman and he was well known in these parts [Minneapolis, Minnesota] as, as, as a black leader and, and through him I connected with the political process of which I helped to use.  As a matter of fact, Cecil Newman was the, he was the mentor of [Minneapolis Mayor and United States Vice President] Hubert Humphrey as far as civil rights is concerned.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Hubert, Hubert being from South Dakota had nev, had no contact with civil rights at all and through Cecil Newman who was his, became his mentor impressed him the importance at this time as a political issue of which he bought and, and after making his speech in 1948 [at the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], that Civil Rights speech that had the Dixiecrats [Southern Democrats] to walk out and so forth, then he was tabbed with that label and he became a Civil Rights supporter ever since and was very instrumental in the, in the civil rights leg, legislation of the '60's [1960s] and so forth.
Speaker 2: Right, they called him Mr. Civil Rights.
Speaker 1: Mr. Civil Rights.
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But the person who was responsible for his knowledge, for his enthusiasm for it was Cecil Newman who became, who was my mentor in that regard.
Speaker 2: Cecil had a black newspaper, right?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.  He had--as a matter of fact, it developed into an area because there were blacks in Duluth [Minnesota] and Rochester [Minnesota], and a few and Mankato [Minnesota] and that kind of thing and it was the black newspaper of Minnesota period.  And--
Speaker 2: The name of it was the--
Speaker 1: "Spokesman".  He had two.  It was actually the same paper really, but in two.  "Minneapolis Spokesman" and the "St. Paul Recorder" and they were most, mostly the same it's just letterhead primarily was different.  But, it was at that time the official spokes of the black community, and I clinged onto it as far as Civil Rights, NAACP's Civil Rights program is concerned.  And then the "Metropolitan" newspaper began to pick up on a lot of it also and it became an advocate more or less for our cause and that's the way that, that worked, and where do we go from there?  I'm trying to remember the--and of course--
Speaker 2: You're, you're being mentored by Cecil--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --yeah and, Newman and he then belonged to the, I guess, the NAACP and the civil rights activities of the city at this point.
Speaker 1: Right and became deeply involved in the Democratic Party, which we called in Minnesota the DFL, Democratic Farmer and Labor Party (laughter) because back then there was a struggle we had three different parties, so the Republicans, the Democrats, and the Farmer and the, and then there was a labor hanging out there, so it was Hubert, it was Hubert who combined the two to give us a strength to be the, gave us the strength to become the major, a major, the major party of, of Minnesota and so forth.
Story_ID: 60205
Speaker 1: It was--and then after [Minneapolis Mayor] Hubert [Humphrey] began to become a civil rights advocate, then of course the others like [United States Senator Eugene] McCarthy, [United States Senator and Vice President Walter Mondale], and the rest followed, more or less followed his, his path.  And again, but the initiation, I still say the initiation of it was Cecil E. Newman who is my men-- mentor and supporter.
Speaker 2: Now, now did you--what was--did you all have any relationship to Senator Joseph McCarthy in terms of civ, civil rights?
Speaker 1: Joseph McCarthy--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --from Wisconsin?
Speaker 2: Oh he's Wisconsin, okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Please (laughter), heavens no.  Yeah, Joseph McCarthy.
Speaker 2: My mistake.  I'm thinking Joseph was here.  I know Eugene McCarthy.
Speaker 1: Gene.  As a matter fact, Gene kind of split off with Humphrey.  As a matter of fact, they were both running for nomination against each other for a nomination for the Democratic, for the presidency.
Speaker 2: Yeah in '68' [1968].
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight and he, Gene, Gene, clean Gene got the young kids and everything behind him and was a real threat.  They, they finally got together though and they came together after that.  Again, good friends that was all a part--let me see I was trying to think if there was something else that was, that would fit into that would be worth, worth mentioning as far as my involvement in the movement per se.
Story_ID: 60206
Speaker 1: Well, what were the major issues here in Minneapolis [Minnesota] when jobs, of course, was an issue in the black community?  That had to be--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No doubts about it.  Oh it was amazing the changes that were made after the Civil Rights Movement as far as jobs.  You know we had a lot of Fortune 500 countries, companies here and in spite of that when I came here it was rejection.  They became almost falling over each other trying to find blacks in different categories and redevelop a whole lot of vice presidents and, and of course every one of them would have to have a Civil Rights, an Affirmative Action Department, no doubts about that.
Speaker 1: And, and we're talking about companies like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: General Mills--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: 3M [Company].
Speaker 2: Three, yeah--
Speaker 1: Pillsbury [Company].
Speaker 2: Pillsbury, International.
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: International, Cargill, International Milling, all those and then later of course all those electronic companies and the whole bit.  And not only that we had recruiters that would recruit from the southern colleges to bring in qualified African Americans here.  And, and that was a job and I found it so much easier to get the financial support for the NAACP for those, from those major organizations.  We used to have to scrap and try to get, you know, the big things that we had.  Well, the biggest thing was what we call our Freedom Fund Banquet.  It was not only important for the local because, but also half of the funds, of course, would go to the national and we would never reach our quota.  But after that, shoot we had--it was--not only that they would fund the whole thing including getting the major speaker, major speaker; we just had to name them.  And, and this was something that I initiated too, to make it, to perpetuate that.  We would name the CEO of the company as the honorary banquet chairmen, okay, other than paying the bill, of course, his only, his responsibility was to choose the next one for the next year (you know, they have their little club), so for who would be this year would be the vice chairman, but the next year he would be the chairperson and it would be his responsibility to finance the thing, and it's still working in that regard.  But, all, all that came as a result of the successes of the Civil Rights, the Civil Rights Movement and, and I, I think sometime if I had, I was born about, I feel I was born about thirty years too soon that would have different as far as that is concerned.  Not to say for one instant that discrimination has disappeared in Minneapolis [Minnesota] and the Twin Cities [Minneapolis and St. Paul, Minnesota].  It still certainly exists, but apart from that aspect it is a new day.
Story_ID: 60207
Speaker 1: Okay now you took a group to, from Minneapolis [Minnesota] to the March on Washington--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --in '63' [1963].  You organized that yourself?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes I did.
Speaker 1: Now tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that was quite an experience because I'm sure you don't remember but there was some bad press in regard to that proposed march.  There was--it was shortly after Stokely Carmichael had raised his hand for black power and so forth, and there was some fear that that many people, that many black people in Washington D.C. would be, would be a disaster; there'd be a riot and every other thing.  And so there was some reluctance in regard to that, and I don't know whether you know this or not, but the supporters, the, the people who had planned the march in order to--they had decided a long time ago about the composition because it was not just for Civil Rights, but the march was a march for jobs and freedom.  That was the name for the march, march for jobs and freedom.
Speaker 1: It was student non-violent coordinator.
Speaker 2: And with playing a large part--as a matter of fact, John [HM John Lewis] what's his name--
Speaker 1: Lewis.
Speaker 2: Lewis, right, who said he came out here, and we had had a meeting with my group and explained very definitely that we had the signed commitment that, that regardless of the provocation, how difficult that we would not, that we would be non-violent, under no circumstances and that our comp, the composition of our contingent would be comprised of so many Indians, so many blacks, so many (because it was about jobs) so many unemployed people, and so many clergy people of different religions; that had to be our composition.  And we, and so, so the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] like usual not having the funds we had to get up a fund, a fund raiser in order to get this started.  And, and I asked the mayor [Arthur Naftalin] at that time if he would spearhead that for us, and he was reluctant to do that because of the- that article in the 'Life' magazine at that time, no, 'Time' magazine about the possibilities of what could happen and so forth.  He later came around, of course, and did help.  But, we were able to meet all the requirements and was able to get a lot of our, well with the help of the churches primarily, to get the help, with the help of the churches to get our, to get our contingent completely as it was.  And, and it is certainly one of the, one of the greatest experiences I've ever had in my life.
Speaker 1: Now how many people did, went from Minneapolis?
Speaker 2: There were--
Speaker 1: How many went to [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 2: There were eighty, some from on the--we got, we were able to get a chartered plane.  Those of us who were able to pay could.  You know I think about that now.  Chartered a plane from Northwest Airlines for can you beat that to stay there and take us back for $6,200 bucks.  I can't imagine it probably be ten times that now, but anyway and then we had a couple of, a couple of buses going also.  So we must have had a total of about twenty, we had about a total of about, about 250 all-together.
Story_ID: 60208
Speaker 1: How was the actual March on Washington [1963]?  You had like two, about 250 people from Minneapolis [Minnesota] and Saint Paul [Minnesota] area go--
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: --in buses and on, in a chartered plane from Northwest [Airlines]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so how, how did you find the actual March on Washington?
Speaker 2: Oh, I found the most exhil, exhilarating thing that I could ever think of.  There was something that was ac, actually capitalizing about, about that whole thing, particularly [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] speech.  We were entranced.  As a matter of fact, on the bus on the way back when I, we had a loud speak and I asked, asked how did people feel about it, and boy did I get an uproar.  The whole feeling was that we couldn't let it go at that, we had to do something more, and these were whites and Indians and the whole, and our whole contingency now felt, and so we did.  We formed a new committee when we got back called the Washington, March on Washington, the, no, the March on Washington Committee, the Minnesota March on Washington Committee.  And we operated on a regular basis.  We formed a committee, speaking committee and got the message around the state with the help of the clergyman who were committed.  And our fist mission was that of to make sure, because the civil right legislation had not passed, of course that was prior to it, to make sure that every congressman and senator within the State of Minnesota voted for all of the civil rights legislation 100 percent.  That was our goal.  And to do that both through the political contact that I had and the, the, the, the segment of faith from religious communities we were able to, we were able to make contacts with people throughout the state and I'm glad to say that we were successful, Democrats and Republicans.  Not a single one voted against any of the legislation, and we like to feel that we had a part in that.  That was not enough either and so we decided this to continue and to--at that time when the, when the young people were making the voter, the trips down south to register, to register African Americans and particularly in Mississippi we formed a support group for that and we--
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-four the very next year.
Speaker 2: The very next year.
Speaker 1: Freedom Summer.
Speaker 2: Freedom Summer, yeah.  We became--we from the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota] we were able to get kids.  We were able to get buses, chaperones, and the whole bit, and we were able to do it by selling throughout this, this network that we had formed what we call "Freedom buttons."  It's a white hand and a black hand shaking hands like that, and we sold them through the churches and through the--and we used those funds to support the--and we also had a couple of events too at some of the colleges and was able to get some of the, some of the entertainers to do that for us.  And so we and we had an office and we were able to support our, our, our Freedom supporters that did that down in Mississippi.  So, all that was an outgrowth of the March, March on Washington.
Story_ID: 60209
Speaker 1: Now, there's a--I'd like to ask you about the Freedom Summer of '64' [1964] 'cause there was a role that [former Minneapolis Mayor and United States Senator] Hubert Humphrey played at the Democratic National Convention in '64' [1964] that criticizing--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah right, I'm very much aware of that.
Speaker 1: --when--and when the delegation of--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, you know, with Fannie Lou Hamer--
Speaker 2: Fannie Lou Hamer, exactly.
Speaker 1: --Bob Moses, and all the rest--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --in Atlantic City, New Jersey.  The question was whether their delegation, which really was more legitimate than the Dixiecrat Delegation, would be seated or the Dixiecrat Delegation seated and, and there was--Hubert Humphrey was head of the committee to work out a compromise--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --and what happened from what I understand is that he took the, the leadership of Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party across the street while the convention went ahead and pushed forward legis, I mean, a proposal they'd had already cooked up and he kept reaching out of the partic, participating in the activity and so he really criticized those pe, people and this is Mr. Civil Rights, said he has really just turned his back on us and he--
Speaker 2: Let me tell you the history of that because I was there (laughter).  I'm in the background of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: First of all, he appointed, gave it to [Walter] Mondale and Mondale did not have the rapport of--a good guy just coming up, did not have the rapport that Humphrey had with them, but the bottom line on that was [President] Lyndon B. Johnson who gave Humphrey a mandate.  Humphrey wanted more than anything else to be the vice president.  This thing to, to Johnson could completely wreck his chance of being the delegate, the candidate for president, so he told, told Humphrey that if he did not settle he would not be his running mate, and so, and, and oh we criticized him like hell.  But, Humphrey with his ambition to be the vice president he gave in to Lyndon B. Johnson through Mondale, and that has--we have just recently, Mon-- over at the Humphrey Institute [now called the Humphrey School of Public Affairs] that has been lectures by Mon, by, by Mondale reviewing the last fifty years in the Democratic Party and his role and so forth, and we had, and, and, and it came out very clearly of which he had to acknowledge of the duplicity of that he had to do on behalf of Humphrey's desire to be the Vice, the vice president and that he felt sincerely that had he not taken that action that he would never been the vice president, and he felt he could do more as the vice president than he, with the chance to become one day president than he could otherwise.  So, that was the, that was the story behind, behind that and there are a lot in the movement who has never forgiven Humphrey for that.  And, I'm not too sure I have (laughter).
Speaker 1: A lot of people really felt betrayed--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, that, that was, that's, that's documented, that's documented.
Speaker 1: Did Humphrey ever, ever express any re, re, regrets about it?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes he did.  But he felt, but he said he felt that was the thing to do at the time for the best long rest, long range interest of the movement.  No, I don't know.
Story_ID: 60210
Speaker 1: Okay, now what, what other issues, you know, that you know come to mind that you wanna discuss about your--now you become president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] when in here in Minneapolis [Minnesota]?
Speaker 2: I became--well let me see I didn't become president until the eighty about '84' [1984], but most of this, most, most of my activities were done not as president, but as various other capacities and through committees.  I because I--for about twelve years I was what they call the executive vice president and, and in as much as I had developed the political connections and so forth so I was given the, the go ahead in the name of the NAACP to initiate these actions.
Speaker 1: Now did, did the Post Office ever try to exert any pressure on you to, to move out--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, I can say unfortunately--well at that time my savior, of course, was [Hubert] Humphrey and [Walter] Mondale and the Democratic Party because we control, because at that time there was a hell of a lot of patriots in the Post Office, per se.  And they were because of how they felt they were afraid to touch me because of my relationship with, with Humphrey and Mondale and the party per se, and if they wanted, and if, if they wanted promotions of their own in the Post Office at that time--it just, it's not exactly the same now that it's supposed to be as an independent non-profit corporation losing money, of course, it is no longer that way, but at that time it was a lot of patriots and I'm sure that was one of the things or, or if the Republicans had come into power (laughing) I'd probably been out period.  But, I had a lot of leeway particularly, particularly when I worked as public relations.  I can remember I'd go to the Star Tribune and the United Press and as soon as they see me, "No Post Office, Civil Rights, so don't come here talking that Post Office stuff."  At that time, you know, they didn't have, there was no budgetary thing for the Post Office.  Everything was on the pu, public ser, had to be public service announcements and everything and they detested that, but anything about Civil Rights was news.  So, I could remember that they welcomed me in that regard.  So, so no I did not have any at all from the Post Office as a result of my activities in Civil Rights, at all.
Story_ID: 60211
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have--where you--did you play a part in the school desegregation struggle here in Minneapolis [Minnesota]?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes.  Yeah I became kind of infamous for that in some respect because of the fact that I, I felt that the State Department of Civil Rights--no, the State Department of Public Education was violating the letter and the principles of Brown v. the Board of Education and was doing nothing about it and for years we fought the darn thing, you know.  With the school board itself, I remember meeting every, every school board and it was, it was always on the agenda and they felt that it was an impossible task and the whole bit.  And so, and so I reached the point where I in 1992 we had sued, and that was before I was president, we--
Speaker 1: Eighty-two, '88' [1988].
Speaker 2: Seventy-two.
Speaker 1: Seventy-two, okay.
Speaker 2: Seventy-two we had sued again on behalf of civil, on behalf of--the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] we had sued the state and a federal, a federal suit and quite a few at that time, quite a few country, states, African Americans were suing states in regard to Brown v. the Board of Education and not segregating, not desegregating the school system as was required by, by the edicts of Brown v. the Board of Education.  And so we, we did sue and of course won in the federal courts and they set--so what they did under the auspices of the federal judge [Earl Larson] developed a plan of desegregation for the City of Minneapolis and they monitored it for ten years and then after the state came in and each year, of course, the, the city would come back and asked to be deprived of that and so they would, and, and the judge would ask us and we felt no it was not progressing enough.  And so finally, the state, after the state came in and they said that they would take the responsibility of seeing that the Minneapolis school district would become properly desegregated, and, and on the basis of the agreement with the state the depart, the judge released their compli, their supervision and so then I discovered that they dropped the ball.
Story_ID: 60212
Speaker 1: The state [Minnesota] completely dropped the ball and had another plan, and developed another plan that was contrary in our judgment to de, desegregating the state, I mean the City of Minneapolis [Minnesota], and so that's when I went into all of those arguments with the state and finally it reached the point whereby when they were not going to change anything so I had no choice but to go back to that federal court and let them know that you have not lived up to your promise.  And when I got there, our attorneys, our, our attorneys who has been supporting us all the time and things, he said things had changed so in that regard so much that he felt that instead of going to a federal court (he was afraid because there had been some advice, adverse federal rulings by then) and so he felt that instead of going to a federal course that it was better to go to a state court on the basis of not segregation per se, but inadequacy of education for African American kids, and that was the basis of which we went on  the, we, we, we sued them on and what we called an adequacy suit, and brother that went for, back and forth for four years and as a matter of fact it finally, it was finally on an agreement that they're still working on.  It becomes a point whereby now that they cont, our African Americans or at least people of color has become so large and so engrossed that it makes it extremely difficult to think in terms of desegregation as we did in, in, in 1954, of course, so it's a different animal altogether and brings on a lot more complexities and so forth, but I have contained, and that was my difficulties with the mayor, with our black mayor [Mayor Sharon Sayles Belton] which was a very good personal friend of mine, that, that, that principle should still (we know that there has to be some modification), but that principle should still hold true and so that, that and I really don't even know because what, because what-- they're still working on that.  Right now there are certain, there are certain school districts, suburban school districts that's required to have, within the inner, inner ring of suburbs--you know you have the inner ring and the outer ring, but still have the, still tied to that lawsuit agreement and at this time I don't know how it's finally working out to tell you the truth.
Speaker 2: Now the mayor you're referring to just for the record is?  What's her name?
Speaker 1: Sharon Sayles Belton.  B-E-L-T-O-N, Sharon Sayles Belton.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, we're still struggling with that issue in Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Still struggling with that issue after all these years, still struggling with that.
Story_ID: 60213
Speaker 1: Now, now here's another issue that comes to mind.  Many people around the country who are sports fans who watched the development on the Minnesota Vikings, which at one time--this is Minnesota was the only, the only NFL team with a blond mascot and we don't associate it with black people necessarily, but at one time the coach becomes black and then the quarterback was black and a lot of people--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Defensive, offensive coordinator was black (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, Tony Dungy.
Speaker 2: And, yep Tony Dungy.
Speaker 1: So, in that you had some influence over all of this?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes, we worked hard on that.  This started out with the, it started out with at that time Mike Lynn was in charge of the Vikings.  He had taken over from the original owners and ran the damn thing, and some people, some of--I was president then [of the Minnesota NAACP], and some of the people had talked to me about it.  Well, listen we're getting more and more black players here, and I got out there and I seen nothing but white cheerleads, white everything as far, as far as that is concerned.  So, I with my executive committee I scheduled a meeting with Mike Lynn, and I brought in a copy of the, from the front desk of, a picture of the cheerleaders, and I said, "Mike, what's wrong with that picture?"  He said, "Nothing I think those are some nice looking cheerleads."  I said, "Do you realize that there isn't a single black in that whole group (laughter)."  --(Unclear)--stupid remark he made.  He said, "You know I never even thought about that, you know what I didn't even paid that no attention, you know, people are people with me, I hadn't paid any attention."  So ok, we fixed that.  We had a special tryout for just blacks in order to get them some black cheerleaders.  We got, we were able to get about, oh about a hundred and some and, and so we after going through all that test and everything and their school that they have to train and everything we ended up with probably, we ended up with about eight up 'em on there.
Story_ID: 60214
Speaker 1: And then we started pressing them more about the--then we started pressing about the coaching situation and he said that, and he said well he had nothing against coaching.  "We don't have any, I don't know that we have any qualified."  I said, "Wait a minute I heard that one, that's an old one.  We heard that so many times," so he said well--
Speaker 2: That got Al Campanis [General Manager for the Los Angeles Dodgers] fired--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yep, right exactly.  He come telling me that kind of stuff.  I said, "Well how is that they can play so well and they have to know the fundamentals in order to be able to play."  Well, he finally conceded that that was true and that he, that he would make a genuine effort to try to get some, to, to try to get some.  And I give him credit, he, he, he did.  He, he actually did, he did try and he was so proud when, when Dennis, when Dennis [Green] came and he called me up and wanted me to meet Dennis first doggone thing to meet Dennis.  And then before it's over with, before it's over with Lynn got fired himself (laughter).  They had, they had ten (at that time the Vikings management was all screwed up), ten different owners of the doggone thing and they was feuding among themselves and that was all--and Mike had been a protege of the original owner of the darn thing, and they wanted to get rid of him anyone, so they finally made the agreement to get rid of him.  And they brought in a guy from Pillsbury whom I knew because I had been negotiating with them, and he accepted the--Denny of course and, and Denny is, Denny is a race man.  And once you got Denny you got--they gave him charge because first of all this guy from Pillsbury was not familiar with football, with the intricacies of football, so he had to give over to, over to Denny and Denny stacked it with blacks from Tony [Dungy] on down man.  So, that was that.  So, I do feel that we did play the part.  In the meantime, they contributed heavily to NAACP functions too, financially and so forth.
Story_ID: 60779
Speaker 1: Sir, tell me about the Grand, what is it Grand--
Speaker 2: Grand Metropolitan--
Speaker 1: Grand Metropolitan of Britain--
Speaker 2: --of Britain.  They purchased one of our longstanding companies here, Pillsbury, the Pillsbury Company, and which also owned Burger King.  They purchased it and from coming from Britain they were not at that time, were not aware of the, of the, of the need for Affirmative Action and diversity per se as a part of their structure.  And so when they came here and found out that Pillsbury had a well-established diversity department and they felt it as being in excess, and one of the first things that they did was to eliminate that as being unnecessary.  Okay, so the director at that time came to NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] of which I was president at that time and alerted us to, to that.  And we immediately got in touch with Grand Metropolitan, the new owners, and gave them an educational lesson on diversity in America, the history of Affirmative Action, the meaning of it and so forth, and the, and fortunately the, the head man of Grand Metropolitan who was merely here to get started, would not be the runner of it, he is of the, of the whole Grand Metropolitan was able to get an audience with him, and he, and after through our committees and everything else, we were able to persuade them not only to maintain their Affirmative Action, but to increase it, and became a main supporter of the NAACP per se, and, and we maintained good relationship with them after that.  He formed the Affirmative Action Department, he developed, he promoted a vice president of Pillsbury whom I assume is still there; I'm not sure.  And so that was one of the things that I think that the, that the NAACP and I'm not saying this as a person, but the organization first of all the name of the org-- and secondly our, our committees because as a volunteer organization we have to do everything on committee, and we have Legal Redress Committee that meets on a regular basis and it is through that committee along with me as the president that did the negotiations that resulted in their not only maintaining their Affirmative Action Department, but expanding on, on it per se.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think you were saying off camera that corporations, especially when if, if other corporations are seeing this have an Affirmative Action they kind of look bad in the public if they don't, don't--
Speaker 2: Exactly, that, well that was certainly one of--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that this, that this was standard, was established of the major corporations in the, in the Twin City [Minneapolis and St. Paul, Minnesota] metropolitan area and that they, and if they were to get rid of their Affirmative Action as claiming it being unnecessary it would look bad on their part.  So, that was one of the persuading arguments, no doubts about that.
Story_ID: 60780
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, with your long career in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], can you tell me about any of the, your, about your relationship to some of the outstanding personalities in the NAACP that people know like [W.E.B.] Dubois, and Walter White, you know, Thurgood Marshall, Roy Wilkins, you know, James Weldon Johnson, maybe.  I don't know you, I think you probably had a chance to come in contact with most of them right?
Speaker 2: Well, some of them was a little bit even before my time; now that was a long time ago (laughter), but, but Roy Wilkins I did know him intimately.  As a matter of fact, he did his, although born on Kansas City, he was educated here in Minnesota and--
Speaker 1: He, he went to high school here didn't he?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, high school and college at the University of Minnesota [in Minneapolis, Minnesota] and was even the, even the editor at one time of the, of the dail, what they called the 'Minnesota Daily,' which is a daily paper on the university campus.  He was the editor there, and he--the Saint Paul chapter of the NAACP is named after him and just recently, not recently, but during my--(unclear)--anyway as president, we were able to through the state legislature and support to get a monument to him on the State Capitol grounds of the State of Minnesota, so and also to name one of the major city buildings downtown Saint Paul after him so.  Oh, I knew him ver, very, very well and of course and all of the heads of NAACP since then, since him, of course, I have known them, known them, but when it goes back to Dubois and so forth that preceded me a little bit, just by a few years and James Weldon Johnson.
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--you know he died in '63' [1963], so he was, so he was in Ghana then.
Speaker 2: Ghana.  He was in Ghana then, yes I've seen they had a memorium there for him.  I've seen that when we went to Ghana, you know.
Story_ID: 60781
Speaker 1: When, when you sit here, coming in here we saw like scores of awards and certificates and they're all over the place.  You even have them in drawers and stuff, and you don't have room for all of them or wall space, so there has certainly been a lot of appreciation for your, your contribution to the community here in Minneapolis [Minnesota] and in the nation, but what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, if, if I had to think of one thing I still like--it might not have been the greatest thing of my con, contribution through the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and other organizations, but I, but I see my greatest thing, the one that I'm most proud of is chairing and organizing the Minnesota Contingent of the March on Washington.  That is something that has been imprinted in my memory in a lot of detail, and I shall never forget.  It will always be a part of me.
Story_ID: 60782
Speaker 1: Okay, and you, you have--right now you're still somewhat active and--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --and you got five children and just from some of the conversations we've had here today I'm learning a few of them are involved in, in social change activity and in politics and civic activities are you, are you proud of what you've been able to do as father?
Speaker 2: Yes, you know, the old saying about the apple does not fall too far from the tree.  I think some of that--and I'm proud of that because of my activities, my constant activities and sometime necessary to hold down two jobs I thought, I was afraid that I did not give, did not give the nurturing that I should to my kid in their tender ages and, but so I am proud of the fact that they, that they are, they are active.  I have one who has, who has instituted a very successful school for primarily for black boys to teaching them the importance of their culture and each year--as a matter of fact, she's in Ghana with them now and teaching them their culture and so forth.  Very successful program.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is as, as we did at that time she has, her name is an African name, Titilayo Bediako, is her name and she is a twin and the other one whose also very active politically and happens to be an aide to the present mayor of Minneapolis [Minnesota] her name is Kinshasha Kambui and they are very known and very vocal in the, in the community.  And then I have another one who is strictly a political junkie.  She has worked with the Democratic Party for some time, and now she's exclusively, working exclusively on voter, voter education, registration, and participation, and so they all have seemed to be--and I got another one also in, in Atlanta, Georgia, whose working with the city council there with the community, so, so some of it somehow seemed to have rubbed off, and I'm proud of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's, let me go the other way now and did, did your parents [Arthur James Little and Bessie Parmley Little] find out where you were eventually?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: You know what, I'll never know exactly how they found.  About more than a year later one day I got a phone call and then she said (and they always called me "Brother"), said "Is this brother?", and it was my daddy.  I almost cried.  I didn't know what to say to tell you the truth.  I was so embarrassed I didn't know what to say.  I had completely abandoned and, and everything.  Because at that time, I had no idea of be, becoming involved in Civil Rights 'cause there were other things that was--I just wanted to disappear at that time and then all of a sudden hear a voice, which I recognized so.  They said "Brother;" I didn't know what to say.  All I could do was cry, apologize and said I, and promise that I would make him proud anyway, and it didn't happen.
Speaker 1: Well, did, did they live to see you become successful?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Indeed so, yep.
Story_ID: 60783
Speaker 1: Well sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as one who tried, who gave his, the best years of his life trying to make this a better relationships between the races, and I think that that would make it a better America living up to its promises.  Thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you sir.
Speaker 2: Welcome.
Story_ID: 60784
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Yes sir, who, when, and where is what we need.
Speaker 1: This was, this was at Central High School in Minneapolis in which my--this is me and my two grand-daughters in 1985, I believe.
Speaker 2: Do you want to name your grand-daughters?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  No, I got it in the caption here.
Speaker 2: Okay, this was, this was taken in 19, 1990--this was 2000, the year 2000 at the Freedom Fund Banquet--the annual dinner of the Urban League in which that is Mfume and myself and, and a gentlemen whom I've known a long time.  I can't remember his name.
Speaker 1: That's Kweisi Mfume there.
Speaker 2: Kweisi Mfume, right.
Speaker 1: This is Anita Hill in 1992.  We had her here as a speaker at our Freedom Fund banquet, and she told us all about the incident with Supreme Court Justice [Clarence] Thomas.
Speaker 2: This is, this was me and the mayor of the City of Minneapolis, Sharon Sayles Belton, and she is congratulating me as having won the honors of the Man of the Year.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in 1996 on a boat in Cancun, and this is my wife, Lucille, Lucille-Bryant Little.
Speaker 2: This is me alone with Myrlie Evers who at that time was the chairman of the board of the, of the National NAACP.
Speaker 1: And what time was it?  When was it?
Speaker 2: It was the National Convention, the NAACP National Convention of 1994.
Speaker 1: That, that is the presidential electors from the State of Minnesota who were casting the electoral votes for the president pledge to [William "Bill"] Clinton, and that is all of the eight president, the ten presidential electors plus the governor of the State of Minnesota.
Speaker 2: This is, this is myself mee, meeting at the vice president's home, [Walter] Mondale and his wife [Joan Adams] at the time, when he was vice president of the United States.  I think that was 19, it was in the 1980s when he was vice president.
Speaker 1: That was taken in 1990 of [HM] Andrew Young and Martin Luther King, III.  That was a banquet.
Speaker 2: That was a meeting prior to the March on Washington with the Minnesota contingent was getting ready and we had all of the politicians there to welcome us to give us support for our trip to the March on Washington from Minnesota representatives there.
Speaker 1: And that is me with all, with my five kids and going from left to right it is Titilayo Bediako, my son, Stanley Little, my daughter, Matthea Smith Little, and myself and then my Kinshasha Bediako, and Azania who now lives in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: That is, of course, the former president of the United States, President [Bill] Clinton.  At the time, we had voted for him as presidential electorate, and he invited us at this, at the White House.
Speaker 1: This was the, this was an honor that was given to me as the Person of the Year by the, by the American Bar Association, the Black Bar Association, and on the left is the president of the Saint Paul [Minneapolis] branch of the NAACP and in the center is the, right next to him is the president of the, of the American Bar Association.
Speaker 2: Isn't that the National Bar Association?
Speaker 1: Yeah, national, I was thinking American.  The National Bar Association's local, local president, then me, and then the president of the Saint Paul branch's wife and next to her is my, my wife.
