Story_ID: 76744
Speaker 1: So, sir, I want to get started, and we start out by slating it.  And my name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer.  And Scott Stearns is the videographer.  And observers are:
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Phoebe Layton
Speaker 1: Phoebe Layton.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Mary Layton
Speaker 1: Mary Layton.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Mary Layton
Speaker 1: And Connie Brooks.  And we're going to start out.  I'd like you to state your name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: William Wendell Layton.  W-I-L-L-I-A-M, the usual spelling of William; Wendell, W-E-N-D-E-L-L; Layton, L-A-Y-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Aren't you a junior?
Speaker 2: No.  I'm not a junior.
Speaker 1: I was wondering.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess Wendell Philips (unclear) was an influence on that.  They have great abolitionists.
Speaker 1: What was your father's name?
Speaker 2: William Brown Layton.
Speaker 1: Layton--oh.  Because it's the Brown you don't--okay.  I see. I was gonna say...  Okay. And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: July 17th, 1915.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is January 26th, 2003.  So I'll--I'm 87 years and how many months?  July, August, September, October, November, December.  And six months.  Little less--yeah.  Little more than six months.
Speaker 1: And can you give the location where we're at?
Speaker 2: The location of--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: Address.
Speaker 2: Oh.  It's 4901 Connecticut Avenue, Northwest.  It's a retirement home, different levels of retirement support, run by the Methodist Church; at least it has the name, Methodist Home.
Story_ID: 76745
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I'm going to ask five questions of you, very short answers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They're sort of "People Magazine"-ish questions.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: My favorite food?  Dessert or just, you know, main entree (laughs)?
Speaker 1: Either or-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, it's catfish, believe it or not.
Speaker 1: I had catfish last night.  A favorite color?
Speaker 2: The favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Springtime.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Well, in Shenandoah Valley, Virginia.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite what?
Speaker 1: Phrase or saying.  Favorite saying.  Do you have a favorite saying?
Speaker 2: Saying?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: It's later than you think (laughs).  Yeah.  That's my favorite saying.  Later than you think (unclear).
Story_ID: 76746
Speaker 1: Sir, I'd like to start out by talking about your father--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: --and your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: If you could give your father's name?
Speaker 2: My father's name was William Brown Layton.
Speaker 1: Can you tell what you know about his background and his--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, his background, the Brown comes from John Brown's half-brother, I'm told, who disclaimed, I guess, any connection, which really, the old John Brown, I guess he was a little bit more radical than William Brown.  And his name was William Brown.  There was--I think there were 16 children.  His father married twice.  John Brown's father married twice.  So it would be his half-brother was my--would be my great-grandfather.  And now his mother was a descendent of--was the granddaughter of Benjamin Harrison, the signer.  See, there was a whole lot of--you know this Jefferson thing has to come out, but there was a lot of that, specially among certain, you know, families of so-called upper crust families.  And because a man by the name of Johnson Quivers, who was free.  He description was, he was more Indian than he was African-American.  And he married Sharon Harrison him who was Benjamin Harrison daughter in the late 1700s.  They had six children--we got the full record on them; and they had six children, and one of them was the mother of my grandmother, Betsey Harrison Brown, was her name.
Speaker 1: Did your father talk much about his growing up?  Was he--he grew up-- (simultaneously)
Speaker 2: Well, no.  He never did talk very much about it, because, you know, in that--back when I was growing up, you just didn't say much about it, except he was always saying that he was free his self .  Neither one of his parents were ever slaves, see.  Neither one was ever--was ever a slave.  Neither one of his parents.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you find out about the history on your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, I had one document that tells you about one ancestor who was a slave, is a document testifying to the freedom.  I know it from memory.  R. James C. Bailey, Clerk of the County Court of (unclear), was the (unclear) of Virginia.  You hear about certifying that Louis Dumm--that was the name of the master; D-U-M-M, spells the last name.  Louis Dumm did own (unclear) last will and testament set free in the charge from bondage, one Mulatto woman or girl by the name of Peggy.  It said, "Peggy was a bright, yellow complexion; five-feet, four and a half inches high, no particular mark or scar; and appears to be about fifty-five years of age.  Given under my hands the 23rd day of September 1814."  But after that, apparently there were no, there were no slaves.  They were free from there on, because, see, if the mother was free, then her offspring were free, male or female.
Story_ID: 76747
Speaker 1: And the town that your father [William Brown Layton] was from?
Speaker 2: Millwood.  Millwood, Virginia, gets its name from an older Grits Mill.  Magnificent building; built by (unclear) prisoners during the Revolutionary War. It was recaptured by Daniel Morgan, who famous for the battle of the--battles up in New Jersey.  The Battle of the Cowpens in South Carolina.  He was a native of a section of the Northern Virginia, right up in the tip of Virginia.  See, Virginia is sort of triangle shaped, and, of course, Pennsylvania is just a few miles past Maryland.  And after 1860--December 1861, West Virginia was caused from the western part of Virginia, see.  Well, Daniel Morgan was from the Frederick County in the northernmost county in Virginia.  And he brought about 400 Hessian prisoners who were here fighting for the British, see, to Frederick County.  And they built this mill.  They were great artisans and builders, you know.  And then they computed the--you know, where the water was.  There's a water wheel in this.  It's magnificent.  I'll show you a picture of the mill.  It's four stories high.  It's been built with stone, and just a little trickle of water run that big wheel; you know, which does the grinding which has--furnishes the power for the grind.  A little of trickle of water--it's twenty-two feet in diameter, but it's bigger in diameter (unclear) of this room.  And, yet, a trickle of water--the engineer was so precise that it turns--that great, big wheel, see.  Well, Daniel Morgan brought these four hundred--well, they chose to not to go back to Europe, you know.  Hessian prisoners.
Speaker 1: When you say--are you saying Haitian prisoners?
Speaker 2: Hessian, H-E--
Speaker 1: Oh.  Okay.  Hessian.  Okay.
Speaker 2: German.  See, they were--they lived on the lands owned by the German princes.  And they were recruited by the British, see, to fight these new colonists, you know, the American.  But they lost.  As you know the battle--the Revolutionary War battles.
Speaker 1: Now, you--how long had your--your father was from Millwood.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is his--was his--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: His father and his mother were from Millwood.  You see, those families--what happened was, in many instances--there was a Byrd, he was related to the Byrds, the Hansons; and then the Randalls (ph)--Edmund Randall was Judge George Washington's--was George Washington's first attorney general.  First attorney general of the United States.  And those families had to have had servants.  See it didn't have the plantations set up in Virginia states, you know.  There were mostly house servants.  And so there was a lot of interaction, a lot of mixing, too.  You know there's a whole lot of shaking going on back then (laughs).  The sight that--the title of a popular song over several years back--more than several years.  A whole lot of shaking.  So those were--see, the persons--the servants or the slaves--well, they were slaves that started out, you know.  Well, just as soon as the--like around my great-great grandmother, you know, was freed in 1814, well, from then on, all of--all the issue of that family would be freed, you see.  See?  Every issue.  So that's the way that operated.
Story_ID: 76748
Speaker 1: Did your father [William Brown Layton] talk anything about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  Well, what happened was, when he was fifteen years old, he interacted with, you know, there was very little segregation or separation of the races up in northern--tip of Northern Virginia.  It was just more integrated housing and has always been than in most northern communities, because, you know, they're closer, because they're all mixed in with the whites, you know, the dominant group.  Oh, yeah.  So at fifteen years old, he went to St. Paul's (unclear) College in Lawrenceville [Virginia], which was an Episcopal Church, schools here.  Episcopalian occupied Northern Virginia.  And incidentally, I didn't add it, but George Washington was the--he surveyed that whole area of several counties, and then the north most tip of Virginia.  And--and, oh, yeah, he talked about orphans, real orphans, because there was a lot--at fifteen years old--my daughter who lives Arkansas, is very active on the Internet, and she had documented through the--I'll tell you what, she got a lot of material from the Mormons.  You know, the Mormons have a record of all these, all these old families.
Story_ID: 76749
Speaker 1: Well--let me see. I've lost my train now.
Speaker 2: I was saying--you were talking about him being at St. Paul's Episcopal.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah.  Well, there was a document she got her hands on some kind of way, which said that, William Brown Layton was such a studious, bright, and mannerly boy, that the good white people of Clark County--in 1837, a portion of Clark County, which had the Byrds and the Rachel Melllon's parents, and so forth, my dad [William Brown Layton] and Rachel Melon were playmates, because they lived at Carter Hall, and they were next door to where my grandfather--see, my grandfather owned extensive property in this--in 1837, a portion of--they had most of the millionaires broke off from Frederick County became Clark County, which is the smallest county in Virginia; the wealthiest county in Virginia.  It's even now the wealthiest county in Virginia; the smallest but the wealthiest.  Even when we getting folks from California, from all over, coming to Clark County; even now.  And so she got a hold of this document, and the good white people saw the potential in him, that he had leadership ability.  And they sent him to St. Paul's in Lawrenceville with--founded in 1881.  He was born in 1886.  But when he was 15, they sent him to St. Paul's.  And he said that while he was there, he went there to St. Paul's Institute [St. Paul's College, Lawrenceville, Virginia].  Booker T. Washington came to (the example?) St. Paul's to speak, he met--he was assigned to met him at the train station.  And that's how he met Booker T. Washington.  And Booker T. Washington told him, you know, stressed the importance of using the hands, you know, rather than the--DuBois, on the other hand, was talking about using the academic side of it.  But, anyway, so he completed St. Paul, was on the faculty for a year or two, and then he went back to his old hometown after he married my mother [Mary Sully Layton] in 1910, 1910.
Story_ID: 76750
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your mother [Mary Sully Layton].  Can you talk about her side of the family?
Speaker 2: Oh, now, her side was all--there's no record of slavery area at all on her side.  And her folks were mostly, you know, Native Americans, Pamunkey Indians.  And I have some pictures of--taken down at the reservation, Pamunkey Reservation.
Speaker 1: Hold on just one second.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so.
Speaker 1: [TAPE INTERRUPTED]
Speaker 2: And he had a cousin, the Quivers (sp), and they were--'cause my father [William Brown Layton] and a man by the Quivers who was a pharmacist here in Washington, were first cousins.  And the daughter of--what was Quivers' first name?  I can't think of what his first name was, but anyway, she married George Layton, Judge George Leighton [HM] in Chicago, my first cousin.  Virginia Quivers married George Leighton of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  We had a nice interview--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: I understand you did.  Well, anyway, I got--you know, I collected everything I could find that got the--you know, the anecdotes that I could get from my father--and Harold Quivers--and Harold Quivers--I couldn't think of it back a minute or so ago.  Harold Quivers was his name.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Quivers?
Speaker 2: Q-U-I-V-E-R-S.  Quivers.
Story_ID: 76751
Speaker 1: Now, but let's go back to your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Okay.  Now, back to my mother.  Well, her grandfather was Ballard Edwards.  Ballard T. Edwards, who married Sarah--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Coy.
Speaker 2: I--what was her name?
Speaker 1: Sarah Ann Coy.
Speaker 2: Sarah.
Speaker 1: Sarah Ann Coy.  Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Coy.  Coy.  Coy.  Now, Coy was the Indian tribe.  The means the Indians were members of the Pamunkey Indian tribe.  Pamunkey Indian tribe.  And he was a builder, a contractor.  Before the Civil War, he had a (unclear) to the school.  It was more underground school than--because he couldn't afford the, you know, the--to have it out in the open, the public side of the...  They taught slaves to read and write.  Then after the war, of course, he was free to publicize it.  They trained hundreds --he and his wife, who was also--she was also educated--to read and write and also the bricklayer trade.  They built the capitol building in--well, the one in Washington, you know--the slaves built the one here in [Washington] D.C., and most of the big public buildings were built by either slave labor or free labor.  But blacks, you know...  Well, so there's no record of slavery on either side of my mother's side.  Now, her father was a man by the name of Edward Sully.  I don't know much about him.  We haven't been able to find, but that was a wealthy Jewish family that lived near Dulles Airport; Sully's.  I know he was not a--he was never a slave, so he was perhaps the offspring of a free woman and a white man or light complected black man.  Anyway, anyway there's no record of slavery at all on either side as it was.
Story_ID: 76752
Speaker 1: My--they met at St. Paul's [College, Lawrenceville, Virginia].  My mother [Mary Sully Layton] had finished Hampton [Institute, Hampton, Virginia] in 1905, went to St. Paul's; she took a course in dressmaking at Hampton, but she wanted to be a teacher, see.  So she got her academic--did her--majored in academic courses at St. Paul's.  And so my dad claims that he hit a baseball--and she was a couple of years older than my dad [William Brown Layton]--he claims that--well, he claims that he hit a homerun, see, at a baseball with Hampton; and my mother was attracted by that.  He was a great hero.  So he won the game at the last inning.
Story_ID: 76753
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 1: How's that?
Speaker 2: Your earliest memory of growing up (unclear)?
Speaker 1: My earliest memory was World War I.  See, I--World War I, I was born in 1915, so I was three or four years old.  I remember collecting pictures of the old Kaiser, you know, the German Kaiser, either from World War I.  Then I also have some early graduation programs from Hampton Institute [Hampton, Virginia].  I collected all of this stuff when I was a little--young.  I tell you, my--what made me so interested was that when I was nine years old, my dad [William Brown Layton] bought from a traveling salesman a book called the Volume Library.  It was in one, big red-back book.  It was a complete encyclopedia in one book.  And I usually would take that book to me to bed and read it, read it.
Story_ID: 76754
Speaker 1: Then my teacher at this reform school where my father [William Brown Layton] worked--I'll tell you how he got there.  He and my mother [Mary Sully Layton] were married in 1910, 1911.  Early in 1911, he went back to his hometown [Millwood, Virginia] thinking, you know, here he was a carpetsmith, you know, all his training and so forth, blacksmith or shoeing horses and so on.  But people didn't pay him, see.  They'd pat him on the back and say what a good job he did and so forth.  And so he--and then the early 1911, the house burned down, the father's house.  He and my mother, his new--he and his new bride were living in his house pending construction of their house.  And so my mother--I did an audio tape with him back in 1954.  My mother said I wanted a new hat for Easter, but all I got was a big cry because of the fire.  Well, 'round the time of the fire, which burned up all our clothing, and you know, all the gifts they'd gotten when married and so forth, I made this audio tape.  And, but, 'bout the same time of the fire, he got a letter asking him to apply for a job at the Negro Reformatory [Association] Negro Reformatory of Virginia ion of Virginia down in Hanover County [Virginia].  So, you know, he knew he wasn't going to do well back at home, you know, with a blacksmith shop, which he'd--which had been built on his father's property, see.  So he--they offered him $40 a month--the housing and food was free--you know, was included--were included in the $40 a month.  So he jumped at that offer, and they moved in 1911, didn't come back to Clark County in Northern Virginia until 1948.  So for thirty-seven years, he was down--first as blacksmith, teaching blacksmithing to juvenile delinquents, as I recall; incorrigible boys.  And then he became superintendent in 1927, head of the school, largely because at that same time, one of the Byrds from a small town in Virginia was also governor of Virginia, see.  And so that he and Luther Foster was head of Virginia State College, where they was the two highest state government officials in Virginia.
Story_ID: 76755
Speaker 1: Now, when you--when your father [William Brown Layton], when he went to take this position, the whole family moved.
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: Well, we weren't born then, see.
Speaker 1: I know you weren't born there.
Speaker 2: No, no.  We were born at the school [Virginia Manual Labor School, Hanover County, Virginia].
Speaker 1: You were born--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I was born there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My sister was born in Richmond.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your brother was born there.
Speaker 2: At the reform--and we had a third--there was a third boy, but he died, you know, as a baby.
Speaker 1: Can you give the names of your siblings?
Speaker 2: My siblings?  Oh, yeah, yeah.  Jeannette (sp) was the oldest.  She was, you know, she was born in 1913.  I was born in 19--April of 1913.  I was born July 1915.  My brother's December 24th, 1917.  And this little, Little Edward Sully Layton--see, he was named Edward Sully for my grandfather.  I have a picture of me with curls.  My hair was long.  I had some reddish-brown hair, see.  You wouldn't think so now (laughs).  Got very little of any color now.
Speaker 1: So--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: And so we were--the boys were born there.  But my mother and father were told, don't let them be born at the school, because they felt where you were born would have some of their relatives felt it had an influence on their character, see.  My dad would say to them--or did say to them, "They couldn't be born in a better place."  You know, because he said, we teach you good character here," and--excuse me (laughter).
Story_ID: 76756
Speaker 1: So how was it growing up there?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was great, because the members of the faculty, all the staff there, hired a woman who was the first black female--we were called colored back--colored female there at Western Reserve.  We were asking her.  Her father was an Episcopal minister.  You know, they had to see, colored Episcopal, it was separate from the whites.  And so they hired her, but she was the first black female graduate of Western Reserve [Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio].  And she stressed reading, reading, reading, reading.  And so as writing--reading and writing.  And so I had that influence, you know, a great influence from her and from my--and I'll never will forget when my father became superintendent, I was in his office one day, and a man, a traveling salesman came in there, (unclear) called my father a bishop.  Bishop this--bishop.  My dad said, "Why are you calling me Bishop?"  He said, "Because you're a big man, business person, big title.  Had a big title."  My dad said, "No.  You calling me that because you won't want to call me Mister."  He said, "Yeah, well, that's it."  He said, "I can't--I've never called a colored man Mister."  See.  My dad said, "Why don't you try."  He said, "I'm not going to buy what you are selling."  I've forgotten what it was.  "You won't sell to--"  He said, "We're beginning now to, you know, to resent those things being called 'boy' you know, first name, and so forth, or saying anything but giving us a title."  And the man said, "Well, I'm going to try."  And he did.  Then, you know, for years, he sent my daddy--he said, "Your business was so good among colored or black clientele," that he sent my dad a Christmas present for years, every year, a great big crate of fruit.  I never will forget that.  We enjoyed it very much.  Every Christmas.
Story_ID: 76560
Speaker 1: But let me--so what did--what's--I'm going to get back to school, but when you were on the--with the freed--you know.  When someone was freed, how did--what was their life like?  You know, especially when they were living in a--you know, in a place that people--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, it depend on how much training, you know--usually if a person was freed, they either got to--they either--it was usually because they had some skill, you know; something that they could market.  For example, this woman Peggy [paternal grandmother], see; I understand she made--she was a seamstress, see.  She was freed in 1814, but that's quite a while before the Civil War, but, you know.  I have one document where in Alabama where this man, this man--this white man is, he's a man of considerable means.  He had two families; he had his old white family and he had this mixed family.  He left everything to the mixed family, including provisions for them to go to Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio], see.  I have the document with me right here.  And the white family sued to try to get some of the money, but they lost the case, because he, you know, he was of sound mind, body, and he--that's what he wanted.  Huntsville, Alabama, case.
Story_ID: 76561
Speaker 1: Ballard T. Edwards.  Yeah, that's--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Talk about him.
Speaker 1: Well, he not only had this school for, you know, the freed--hundreds--trained hundreds, several hundred--five or six hundred of the freedmen, to read and write and also the construction trade; bricklaying and stone masonry and so forth.  But he was a member of the State Legislature in Virginia [Virginia House of Delegates].  In the first post-Civil War, you know, after the war, the states had to ask to be readmitted.  Southern states had been in rebellion, see, had to be readmitted to the Union.  So when Virginia was admitted in 1869, four years after; and then, but in 1870, the first legislative body sat, and he was a member of the--he was a member of that bar, because he was voted in.  The Republican Party, see, dominated Virginia politics then.  It's come back around to that now.  And, it was quite a different party from the old party, the old Republican Party because of the slave--you know, the slave issue was not--the reason we know something about the Trent Law thing now, you know, just to talk about the old days and to show any desire to romanticize them, you know, gets you into difficulty.  But he was voted--he was a member of the State Legislature, the House of Delegates in Virginia for eight years.  Now, in 1870, was five years after the end of the Civil War, but the [Virginia] capitol building, the capitol, C-A-P-I-T-O-L, the capitol was--had been damaged, you know by the shelling.  And the Legislature was going to build a new--appropriate money for a new building.  He got up and made an impassionate speech saying that, "Let's keep this building.  It can be restored for a lot less than a new building would cost.  And this is a great building because it has--we have here the members of Washington and Madison; you know, all the great Virginians."  And so he made such an impassionate speech that they voted to restore the building.  And he took on that task of it, so.  And that building now, the recent Legislature have voted now to put his painting over here in that building.  They've got some literature also.
Speaker 2: Do you know--he served for how long?
Speaker 1: Eight years.
Speaker 2: Eight years.
Speaker 1: From 1870 to 1878.
Story_ID: 76562
Speaker 1: And do you--do you know--have you researched much about the Reconstruction Period yourself?
Speaker 2: I know more about--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: The Civil War.
Speaker 2: Oh.  About the Civil War.  Well, I hadn't done a lot--but it was--you don't think right back you go to worser.  Most of the freedmen were worse off, you know, because they had no training, no skills; they couldn't compete against the unskilled white population.  But in Virginia--Virginia was quite--they never had the old, big plantations set up, you know, like in Mississippi, Alabama, and Georgia and the Deep South.  And they--so that--and they had several schools in Virginia that really did a great job.  Virginia State College for Negroes [currently Virginia State University, Chesterfield County, Virginia], and then Hampton Institute [Hampton, Virginia], St. Paul's [College, Lawrenceville, Virginia], and several other schools, did a good job in, you know, in bringing them in, and the support team from a number of very wealthy white families, you know.
Story_ID: 76563
Speaker 1: Now, you--I want to go back to you at, you know, at school.  You know, at this school [Virginia Manual Labor School, Hanover County, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So did you study at the school that your father [William Brown Layton] was head of?
Speaker 2: How's that?
Speaker 1: Or did you study at another school?
Speaker 2: Well, in 1927, I went to Richmond [Virginia] to public school.  I was in the seventh grade.  I went to Richmond and lived with my aunt, Janet, Ballard Edward's daughter.
Speaker 1: So what did you do before 1927?
Speaker 2: I went to school in Hanover on the campus of the reform school because the faculty members--I mean the staff, the people who were on the staff there, like my father, they pooled their money and hired this woman, this woman by the name of Ruth Woods, see, is a graduate of Western [Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio], and she, you know, finished Western Reserve.  I mean, that was really something for us to have her as a teacher.  And she instilled in us the importance of reading, writing, and arithmetic.
Speaker 1: And her name?
Speaker 2: Was Ruth Woods.
Speaker 1: Ruth Woods.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Her father was some high official in the Episcopal Church, in the colored side of the Episcopal Church; called the wing of the Episcopal Church.
Speaker 1: So you--she--that's who taught you up to the time that you went to Richmond?
Speaker 2: To Richmond.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then that was Aunt Janet.  I lived with Aunt Janet.  Aunt Janet had two--had three sons.  One was a--two of them were physicians, see.  I mean, there's (unclear) now these were Ballard Edward's grandchildren, see. Ballard Edward's grandchildren.  Ballard Edward and Sarah Coy's grandchildren, see.
Story_ID: 76564
Speaker 1: Ballard Edward was married to Sarah Coy, they had full-bloodied Pamunkey Indian.
Speaker 2: Can you spell the Pamunkey?  Can you spell that?
Speaker 1: P-A-M-U-N-K-E-Y.  Pamunkey.  M-U-N.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Do you know the history of that tribe?
Speaker 1: Say what?
Speaker 2: The history of the Pamunkey tribe.  Were they--you know, 'cause you hear of--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: I have (unclear) of it, but I just can't--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Were they--'cause were they separate?  You know, you hear of Cherokee.
Speaker 1: Well, they never turned in a runaway slave, I know that.  They never did.  They never did.  They would always harbor, you know, runaway slaves.
Speaker 2: Did you hear of any--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: It was the same tribe Pocahontas belonged to.  Pocahontas (unclear).  In fact, some of my relatives claim we are related to Pocahontas.
Story_ID: 76565
Speaker 1: Did you ever hear of--or anything about how American Indians and African-America--you know, black people got together?  'Cause I'm told--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, they did, but it mostly, you know, without the law--it was mostly the Indians helping--the Native Americans helping the blacks to either escape or, you know--they was--the relationship was--generally was very good between the two groups.
Speaker 1: Do you know, like when they--when blacks and Indians married, was it viewed positively by both sides?
Speaker 2: What was?
Speaker 1: When they married, did--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  But, yeah, it was viewed positively by both sides, because usually the person who they married was either free or, you know, the aggressive type that they admired, you know, that they admired.
Story_ID: 76566
Speaker 1: And so when you went to Richmond [Virginia] to live--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: --you know, to stay with your aunt, was that a different experience?  How old were you at that point?
Speaker 2: Whole different experience.  Now, the first week, of course, I went back to the school [Virginia Manual Labor School, Hanover County, Virginia] every weekend because I loved--if you read, but I think you did, Hanover that campus that my father [William Brown Layton], you know, being influenced by Booker T. Washington and his parents and so forth, he was determined that that school was going to be a productive place.  So he had 700 acres on the (unclear) at one time.  I remember one year, he had over 3,000 laying hens.  And, you know, there were lot of--700 acres was under cultivation.  One time when they had drought conditions, the school my dad had fed all the other schools in Virginia; you know, the state schools in Virginia; the public schools in Virginia.
Story_ID: 76567
Speaker 1: So that-we--my brother and I were both at--with Aunt Janet for three or four years.
Speaker 2: So did you like Richmond [Virginia] when you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Oh, I liked it very much, because it was a city, you know, and Aunt Janet lived in an area--her husband was a--had passed many years before, so she had her two sons who were doctors.  One of them died just as the same year that I went to live with her.  And then she had a third son who was--had a barber shop right on Hope Street (ph) in the midst of the white business district.  The only blacks who lived in that part of Hope Street, on, you know.  It was a little nice brick building, finest one--one of the finest buildings, 'cause, see, Ballard Edwards had really stressed--as I said, she was the first colored public school teacher ever at Richmond.  I never will forget--see, I finished the seventh grade in South Richmond.  This was--my aunt Janet lived in South Richmond, which was a separate municipality at one time from North Richmond.  But they were gone at that time, the old one cities, and one of the government.  But I would take the--take--board the old streetcars.  This was 14th and (unclear) Street, where my aunt live; pay a nickel, they'd go to the high school in North Richmond.  The one black high school was in North Richmond.  We had begged and begged for a second school, a high school, but to add insult to injury--(unclear) purchase.  By the time when our voices were strongest, they purchased land in the middle of Richmond, where the John Marshall High School was, to build a drill field for the white cadets at John Marshall High School.  And so I'd pay a nickel.  And the thing about it, the streetcar would go up Hope Street--down Hope Street on passed--passed the capitol.  I'd look over and, here I am in the back of the streetcar; you know, they have those signs, colored folks in the back, white folks up front.  You could pay your money up in the front, but then have to come around, you know, like they did in Montgomery, Alabama, Rosa Parks.  And then if in front, if the seat in front of you had whites in it, there were vacant seats ahead of them, if one of them wanted that seat where you stand right in back of the last white person, you had to get up and move.  They used to--"Get up, boy."  You know, I used to get so mad, I felt like, you know, becoming violent at times.  And they couldn't visit the capitol except on Thursday, black school days, except that Thursday was the day--the maid's day off, you know.  Mount Vernon, you couldn't visit Mount Vernon in Washington except on Thursday.  I never will forget that.  We were always glad to come to Washington, however, because the streetcars were integrated; you know, you could sit anywhere on the streetcar.  That was a happy day when I came--first came to Washington and sat anywhere I wanted to on the streetcar.  Just a little bit.  But--and we never--I got--never got a new book the whole time I went to school in Richmond.  You know what we got?  In the black schools we got the books that were used by the white kids.  And the advertising company would furnish, you know, free the cover to put on the books so that you could get a book that had a nice looking cover.  I can sure support that saying about "you can't tell a book by its cover."  Yeah.  The cover would be nice, 'cause they had been covered with one of these advertising covers, you know.  And, but pages would be missing.  So we played--what we did, we made fun of this discrimination.  We played "get the best book" game.  At the end of the day, teacher tell you to march, you know, mark something--you'd pick a book, you didn't have time to go through the book; yet, you just pick a book, see.  We'd see who got the best book at the end of the day, see.  And we just made fun out of it, you know, the discrim--(unclear) discrimination.
Story_ID: 76568
Speaker 1: Now, so what were you like as a young boy?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What were you like as a young boy?
Speaker 2: Well, I was very introspective.  I was rather quiet, but I wrote poetry.  I wrote my first poem when I was eight years old.  It was a poem on Abraham Lincoln.  I became a devoted Lincoln follower.  And, as I said, I wrote my first poem at eight years old.  I'll never forget, one line--the last line in there was "Of all those who died for others, I list them next to Christ," Lincoln see.  Because, you know, he was assassinated in 1865.  It was the end of the Civil War.  And--but, you know, I was just--I was very quiet, read a lot.  You know, I took books to bed.  Interestingly enough, my oldest daughter, Andree, when she was a youngster, she (unclear).  At one time when we were living in Lansing, Michigan, she burned a hole in the sheets and the mattress because she had put a lamp under the cover.  We'd tell her she had to cut her lights off at a certain time, but she wanted to finish the books.  She read "Time Magazine" when she was six years old.  I lived with that Volume Library, that book you know my dad got, he paid $10 for that book.  We thought it was outrageous, see.  You pay $10 for a book, but it was a big, thick book; it was that thick, and it had the alphabetized, you know, the various subjects.  So I learned a lot about the world.  And I could--I could escape, see, that way.
Story_ID: 76569
Speaker 1: I remember several of us were walking through a park in the north side of Richmond in a place called Church Hill.  See, Richmond built on seven hills like (unclear), see.  And the white boys ran us out of the park.  "You can't come in this park.  Niggers can't come in this park."  It made me so mad, you know.  I said, if I ever get a chance, I'm gonna--and what I did, when I finished high school, Armstrong High School--Richmond Armstrong, you know, General Armstrong was the head of the black troops in the Civil War--I went for two years to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia] right there in Richmond.  And one of my best friends who finished high school, (unclear) was James Jackson, who later became editor of the "Thomas Daily Work" of Virginia.  So I was followed by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] or whatever.  Didn't have the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] back in those days for a long time, even up until the 1940s, because James Jackson--I tell you what, what turned him, he was the first black Eagle Scout in Virginia.  He and his father were in the--they lived in a place called Douglas Fort (ph), which was a new section of Richmond which blacks had developed, you know, and it wasn't well known by white--the white community.  So it was publicized that James Jackson, here was this guy who was an Eagle Scout, see, and so the Governor invited all the Eagle Scouts in--you know, to the Governor's mansion, and when James and his father arrived at the mansion--his father was a pharmacist--and when they arrived at the mansion, the Governor's mansion, they told them, "You have to go around the backdoor."  And they said, "Hell, we're not coming in here then."  And that turned him around.  So, the first year I was at--the second year I was at Virginia Union, James and I were arguing against Haveford College--I think it was Haveford College.  The only question was, should the Negro adopt Communism as the way of, you know, freeing himself.  And we came--we had the affirmative side.  So I guess I was an--and then when I married in 1940, James Jackson, in 1941, came to visit us after the United States got into World War--what, it must have been '42 [1942], wasn't it?  I think it was '42 [1942], because, you know, for the United States to get out of the war--it was in '41 [1941]--it was '41 [1941], because Andree, our first child had--so before that, had been born.  And he came to visit us and stayed two weeks.  We didn't know it until after he had left, the FBI man right across the street from where we were living and followed James Jackson.  He was in Nashville.  We lived in Nashville for two years after we married.
Speaker 2: But--so you did get involved with the Communist Party?
Speaker 1: No, no.  Never.  Never.
Speaker 2: But they thought that you were?
Speaker 1: Yeah, because we debated, not on that--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: But you get-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: But what happened was--I'll tell you why they thought I was.  Because James notified there was a Communist Party cell in Richmond at that time.  And James invited them, told them about this debate, then they came and sat on the front row at Virginia Union.  You know, this all, it upset the President of the university and everybody.  They said, don't never do anything like that again, 'cause they were clapping.  We'd make a point, they'd clap for us (laughs).
Story_ID: 76570
Speaker 1: And then later on when I went to take my granddaughter to Russia--I mean to--yeah, to Russia for a visit, that was thirty years later, they were still following me around.  They-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Now, I have a--what were your favorite subjects?
Speaker 1: My favorite subjects were history and sociology, you know, in college.  In high school, it was social studies, you know.  My favorite--my heroes were Frederick Douglass and Paul Robeson, and--well, George Washington Carver.  You know, but now, especially Frederick Douglass and Carver.  I met Carver in 1939 when I was in graduate school down at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee].  And I'd always wanted to met him and talk with him, but Frederick Douglass and Carver.  I like (unclear).  I admired him for what they didn't know, and what they did know.  Now, neither one of them knew who their father was; neither one of them knew when they were born; neither one of them knew their mother, you know, because, well, you know, was Carver.  You know, he and his mother were kidnapped, and his mother was sold down in slavery in the Deep South.  They were from Missouri, see.  Missouri was a slave state.  And so he--and he went back to Missouri.  And the master determined to get him back.  The mother they never found, but the little boy, man by the name of Carver, he took the surname of the master, see, his mother's master.  He left there and worked; he did laundry work and cleaning the houses; did everything.  He got his bachelor's degree and master's degree from, you know, the University of Missouri, which was there at that time.  It was called something else.  It wasn't called the University of--I've forgotten the name of it.  But anyway.
Speaker 2: Now, this-so [unclear]. Okay.  You said your subjects--your favorite subjects were history, and you were talking--did--were you--did you, like George Washington Carver because of your father's, you know, like for him also?
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: Your father [William Brown Layton] had liked George Washington Carver.  Right?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Yes, indeed.  And I liked him because he--you know, he made a contribution regardless of, you know--he, really, he revolutionized agriculture in the South, you know.  The peanut (unclear) from the peanut; the soybean, he introduced the soybean which is now one of the most lucrative crops, you know, in the world now, soybeans.  And peanut butter, of course, everybody likes peanut butter, I guess; most everybody.
Story_ID: 76571
Speaker 1: Anyway, I--well, not only that, but at the same time, I wrote a poem in Richmond in 1930.  I finished high school [Armstrong High School, Richmond, Virginia] in 1932.  James [Jackson] and I organized a boycott of the A and P stores because they wouldn't they wouldn't hire clerks; you know, black clerks.  And, of course, I got--my father [William Brown Layton] was told to stop that boy from--you know, because he had a state job, see.  "You better watch him.  Stop that boy from engaging in activities like that."  I wrote a poem.  I remember the first was, "Listen to me, lady," something like that.  I guess I can't remember the first one, but it was saying, "Don't buy here anymore because they won't hire us," you know.  And so, I became rather well known around Richmond [Virginia], you know, and all over Virginia.  And when I went to Lincoln, see, in 1930--no, wait a minute--19--.  I finished high school--when did I finish, 1932.  I went to Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] in 1935, and one of the first things that happened to me when I--a couple of white fellas and a white girl from one of the New York universities who had heard about me be coming to Lincoln, see, they came, want me to organize some youth Communist group on Lincoln campus. I said, "No, indeed."  I was more interested in what girls came to Lincoln.  You know, it was all male then.  What impressed me on Lincoln was that in 1926, I had a cousin who stopped by Hanover, the boys', see, you know, the reform school [Virginia Manual Labor School, Hanover County, Virginia]; he was my first--and my father's sister's son, he and I were first cousins; he and Thurgood Marshall and Langston Hughes and a friend of theirs from Petersburg named Chuck Weaver, and one other fellow, stopped by my--the house at the reform school.  And, you know, they built a house for my mother and dad when they moved there, and see, it's a nice little six-room house.  And the food was all included in the pay, you know, $40 a month.  And so, they stopped by there, and I told them, you know, I left Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], went on to Lincoln, see, that next year.  And I said (unclear).  And what they did, here's what they did; see, they were very clever.  The two fellas said they gonna walk around the campus, left the girl there in the room with me, and she was telling me, "We believe in equality," you know, "We don't make any difference."  Well, you know, I didn't fall for that stuff.
Story_ID: 76572
Speaker 1: I was more interested in, you know, in writing.  So I was editor of the Lincoln--"Lincolnian."  You know, during the Depression days, they discontinued the Yearbook and the "Lincolian.  And I reactivated both, largely through my own funds, see.  I was editor of the Lincoln Annual (unclear) in 1937.  I had done so well in sociology that I was recommended for an NYA [National Youth Administration] Fellowship to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  At that time, James Jackson's sister had filed to enter the University of Virginia, see.  But what happened, Virginia passed--the Legislature passed the bill whereby any black person finishing college and wanting to go to graduate school could apply to the university--to the state government or whatever bureau--Department of Education, I guess, was the state.  And your tuition would be paid and transportation to and to (sic) the Graduate School of the (unclear), that would admit you, twice a year.  So I not only had my, you know--I had the NYA fellowship would pay me $40 a month.  I bought a car, I did.  And, oh, man, I was the most popular guy in Nashville [Tennessee] for a while.  Went down to Fisk, and I was--but I was terrible at tennis.  I was on the tennis team at Lincoln, you know, I (unclear).  You couldn't get on the tennis court without a white shirt, white trousers, white tennis shoes.  And so I was one of the most popular guys in Nashville.
Story_ID: 76757
Speaker 1: You know, I got a little something I want to say about being (unclear).  I used to do twenty-five, thirty talks a year, every year.  I could speak--Andre thought I was the best speaker in America.  But I used to always open up by saying I was born in reform school.  There's two kinds--two categories of sin: there's sins of omissions, sins or commission.  I'm guilty of both.  My wife [Phoebe Anderson] is a good burden of all of my sins.  And from to time I wanted to say or do something she didn't think I should have said or done or failed to say or do something, she'd pointed her finger at me several times and said, "Good thing you're born at that reform school, otherwise you'd been sent there."  And I used to start every talk with that about reform school.
Speaker 2: Now, you know, I want to ask just one question about the reform school [Virginia Manual Labor School, Hanover County, Virginia].  How many--it was for boys only.  Right?
Speaker 1: And for black boys only, and as I've stated in the beginning of my first book, there were some that were sent there that were young as seven years old.  They--I tell you, the man who found that school was John Smyth--Doctor John Smyth, who was the minister of Liberia.  When he came back from Liberia, he saw these conditions, and, you know, in the county and city jails where boys were only seven mixed in with, you know, the adult prisoners.  So he founded this reform school.  They already had one for the white boys, but none for the colored boys--the black boys.  And so, you know--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: And how long would people usually stay there--would the boys stay there?
Speaker 1: They usually stayed there a couple of years.  No more than two years.  Well, listen.  My dad [William Brown Layton] not only did he institute a brick making operation--they made the brick to build the building.  They got about a third of what the white school got, the white counterpart for delinquent boys.  But, (unclear) a brick making, so they not only made the brick, but they built the buildings.  They had brick, stone buildings there.  And they had a farm with 700 acres under cultivation; 3,000 chickens, and laying hens.  Oh, man, he had that place--it was a model.  I tell you who--who was this guy who--from Europe who came? Oh I can't think of his name now.  He was the source of all of this.  Oh, but, anyway, he invented that.  He said it was one of the operations that he'd ever seen.
Speaker 2: So your father, would he--when the boys left, would they go back to their family or where would--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Yeah.  They either go back or they'd find a place, someplace for them to live; parents or relatives or--they'd always try to find a, you know, a suitable home for them.  Many times they couldn't.  Well, listen--and, oh, yeah, another thing.  My dad got these uniforms from the war, you know, the War Department, and they had a band.  He hired a man from Hampton who was the music--who had a band in World War One.  E.B. Coleman was his name.  He has a famous band, the 369th Band.  He played in it.  And people would come--hundreds of people would come out there on Sunday to see the boys drills, see.  So when World War One--Two came along, those boys, they all graduated-just (unclear)--some of them got to be officers, you know, because they had had the training and everything. And he said--and it's a beautiful campus.  My wife could tell you. It's beautiful campus there.
Story_ID: 76758
Speaker 1: I want--in fact, I'd like to take you back just a little bit--(simultaneous) (unclear)
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to the time there and also in Richmond, but I'm going to ask you, when you think back about that, if you could sort of close your eyes and think, what sights, smells and sounds remind you of, you know, of that school [Virginia Manual Labor School, Hanover County, Virginia] and living on that campus?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, in the back of the house in which we lived, there was a grove of trees.  And my brother and I would climb those trees, and we named those trees, and we talked to the trees.  We believe the trees talked to us.  So I have a nice and a very good, cozy, warm, friendly feeling, not only because of people, but people who worked there.  See, it was just like a big family.  And they were interested in those boys.  In fact, my brother and I had started what we call a little YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] group, see.  We really didn't know what the YMCA was.  We knew that it was--YM had male--Y--Young Men's Christian Association.  We--so--but it's a wonderful feeling I have.  And then later on, my wife [Phoebe Anderson]--see, my wife's father and my father [William Brown Layton] played tennis against each other.  My dad, one time, was the black singles champion.  And my wife, Phoebe's father was a double thing.  He had a man by the name of Turner, who was at St. Paul's [College, Lawrenceville, Virginia].  Well, they both taught at St. Paul.  That's where they met first, my father and my wife's father, met at St. Paul's, because they were both on the faculty there, as well as my mother, see.  And she taught dressmaking, tailoring, and all of that, so.  And so--and in 19--I think it was 1928.  Or, no, 1930-something; '32' (1932) or '33' (1933).  \Must been '33' [1933] or '34' [1934].  My wife's father moved his family to the--it was then called the Virginia Manuel Training School.  First, it was Negro Reformatory [Association] of Virginia, then the Virginia Manual Labor School."  Then my dad had the name changed to Virginia Manual Training School.  It was a wonderful operation there.  Those boys--a lot of them came out did very well in life, you know.
Story_ID: 76759
Speaker 1: Now, did you--you met your wife [Phoebe Anderson] how?  I mean, I know you're--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, we met first back when we were four or five years old.  I don't remember that, but I think she remembers it (laughs).
Speaker 1: And give your wife's name.
Speaker 2: Phoebe.  Phoebe Anderson.  Now, her father was from Alabama.  He looked--he was as white as any white person you ever saw, but I don't know how he got that white; but anyway, he was.  But anyway, I never met his mother or his grandmother.  In fact, my wife used to go down there to Alabama, Union Springs, Alabama and spend some time during the summer with her grandmother.  But anyway, he--loved both--my dad.  He and my dad worked that thing beautiful, I think, 'cause my father-in-law could pass for white.  He could get information and find out things that me and my dad couldn't find out.  And my dad was more handsome than my father-in-law (laughs), I think.  I think my wife would admit that.  They called him Dollar Gable, you know, but he was really--he just had the right touches.  He had a golden colored skin, beautiful hair and so forth.  He was a handsome rascal.
Story_ID: 76760
Speaker 1: Now, when you first--well, let me ask you that.  Was there a lot of passing?  Did people pass?  Do you know many people from your--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I--in fact, I had a first cousin, my father's sister's daughter, Mary Layton.  She would go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and work as white and come back and tell us all, you know.  I had several relatives to do that.
Speaker 1: Did you have any relatives that you lost that just disappeared?
Speaker 2: No.  As far as I know, I don't remember any lost.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wait a minute.  I know, yeah.  On my mother's side, I lost one first cousin.  He went to California and passed as white, lived as white, and he didn't anymore to do with us.  His name was Teddy Trim (ph).  Trim.  Philadelphia.  He lived in Philadelphia.
Story_ID: 76761
Speaker 1: Now, with--when you went to--okay.  First, you finished--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Armstrong High School [Richmond, Virginia], 1932.  Went to Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] for two years, then went to Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania]; finished that in '37' (1937); and I changed majors, you know.  So I--everybody thought I was going to be a doctor.  In fact, when I--most of my relatives call me Doc, you know, nickname.  But I started in sociology, I had that in my blood, you know, to help people.  I give away most of what I get now.
Speaker 1: Now, when you went to Virginia Union, was it a two-year school then?  No?
Speaker 2: What was that?
Speaker 1: Virginia Union.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no.  It was a four-year college.
Speaker 1: Well, why did you just stay there two years?
Speaker 2: Because I wanted to go to Lincoln.
Speaker 1: Well, why didn't you go to Lincoln at the beginning?
Speaker 2: Well, because, you know, (unclear); well, I suppose it was an economic thing.  You know, not only--and then I wanted to be in Richmond anyway, 'cause most of friends lived in Richmond, and so forth and so on.  In Lincoln, I was scared, a little bit scared to go to Lincoln, 'cause I told you I roughed it, where you had to run that hard, you know.  When I went there--when I went to Lincoln, I had a, you know, some courses--some harder courses I was in.  A guy said to me when I walked into the refractory on that first--for that first meal, that dinner meal, you know, my father and my cousin and my brother had gone back to Hanover, see.  Got soup, bread at me just soon as, you know, and they say--then I say, "I'm not a freshman."  I said, "I went to Virginia Union."  They said, Went to Virginia Union for a couple of years, so when do you plan to go to college?" (laughs)  So they--you know, it was rough up there.  I had to run that arch--you ran the arch, the arch (unclear), the entrance of the--you ever been to Highway One.  See, there was a (unclear) arch there at the end of the campus.  You had to run through that arch and the guys would have paddles, paddle you all the way up to the first building.
Story_ID: 76762
Speaker 1: So did you like--were you happy when you went to Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because I got rough with them, you know.  And the girls liked lean about, you know, you stand out there, you get a ride to Washington or New York, everywhere.  I'll never forget, 19--when Ella Fitzgerald--(unclear) see, that was the Number One highway, which was the first national highway in this country; Number One.  It went from New York to Florida, see.  And you get out there, within a couple of minutes, you'd have a ride either north, or if you're going north or south.  And I'll never forget, the last time, the last ride I got to Washington, and the man had four, five, six flat tires all the way from Lincoln, which was matter about less than 100 miles to Washington.  And I wished him well.  He bought this car two days when he was going to a funeral down in--down in North Carolina, see.  He bought the two days before he made the trip.  The car was all polished up, the tires were rotten, see.  Say, "I worked my way all the way to Washington."  Took him about four or five hours to get down there with all these flat tires.  He had taken the thing off the rim, you know, and put the patch on it (unclear).
Story_ID: 76763
Speaker 1: Now, who at Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania]--who were some of the teachers that you remember that, you know--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, there was one black professor, and that was Newton Hill.  Newton Hill was his name.  And he was a graduate of Lincoln.  He did very well.  He was an English teacher.  English Literature teacher.  He talked like an Englishman.  "I must a way." I use that sometimes in dining room--when I get up in the dining room.  And--(simultaneous) (unclear)
Speaker 1: So there was only one black teacher then?
Speaker 2: The only one then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And also, who in your--were the other people at Lincoln at the time that we might know (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, Langston Huhhes would come back every, you know, two or three weeks or so.  I got to know Langston Hughes, and, you know, I had a number of--
Speaker 1: Countee Cullen was always my favorite poet, being a poet myself.  And I sold to--about three years ago, I sold twelve letters of Countee Cullen to the National Archives for $16,000.  I had bought them for about $50 or $60 apiece.  But twelve, that was $16,000.
Story_ID: 76764
Speaker 1: Now, sir, when you--what--how do you think Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] changed or influence you?  I mean, what impact did it have on you as a person?
Speaker 2: Well, I like the fact that, you know, you could throw out your idea, any idea that you (unclear) ridiculed. About the only bar that they had there was if only guy was, you know, didn't like girls.  I remember one guy came up--I felt sorry for him.  They called gays now, of course.  But this guy was, you know, he wasn't an active homosexual or anything like that.  But he just was effeminate, see.  And then they didn't, you know, they run the guy off.  I've known guys that have--and not only that, but you could go linger with five dollars in your pocket, somehow, you could make it.  Those guys had the missionary's zeal.  See, all the faculty members were retired principals, professors.  They built these nice brick houses for them.  They were--some of them were, you know, outstanding in their field.  We had two or three of them who were ex-patriots of the Germans, you know, that fled the Nazis; Hitler's, you know, regime.
Speaker 1: But was there ever any talk about how a Lincoln man differed from a Morehouse man?  Was there any discussion--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, there's always that--Morehouse band, you know (unclear) than Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania].  I think we always won that contest, so; because--well--and women just love to come to Lincoln, you know (laughs).  I think guys were--see, we'd have a party there, prom or whatever, and the guy would stand and the girls would--of course, they had all the restrooms were male--the guy would stand there and say, "You can't go in there, cause the girls are in," you know, taking showers and whatnot, getting ready for the party and dances.  And most of them stayed overnight, you know, which was a pretty nice deal (laughs).  I shouldn't say that.  Nowadays, they have coed dormitories, you know.  That was before the coed dormitories was (laughs).  I wasn't in there.  No, I was editor.  I tell you who was there at the time, [Kwame] Nkrumah, you know, he headed Ghana.  Nkrumah and I were great friends.  He wrote poet--he was a poet and so was I, and I would publish his poems in the "Lincoln," you know, in the "Lincoln Journal," or whatever it was.  It was a little Lincoln paper.
Speaker 1: So Nkrumah was there when you were there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Oh, yeah.  Yes, indeed.
Story_ID: 76765
Speaker 1: And do you--can you remember one of the poems you wrote around that time?
Speaker 2: One of the poems I wrote?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yes, indeed.
Speaker 1: Can you recite one of the poems?
Speaker 2: Let me see.  I ought to be able to--yeah.  I wrote one about this repression on the road (ph).  I wrote this poem was before I went to Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania].  This was--at the place where the school was located, the site of the reform school, Virginia Manual Training School [Hanover County, Virginia]--since there's no reform school anymore, that's what it was (unclear).  It reformed then, you know; but had been the site of a planta--big plantation.  The Huntington Plantation.  The Huntingtons were great railroad people.  And on that plantation was a man by the name of John Dixon, who was--had been a slave there. I talked with this man.  He'd tell me all about slavery and how bad.  And when the Depression came, in 1930, I wrote this poem called (unclear) you can refer to the Depression as this Repression.  See.  He had not--hadn't had a day of--not one minute of schooling, formal schooling.  "Everybody crying hard times, pocketbooks is getting thin, dollar bills are scarce as hens' teeth.  Hard times seems to have no end.  President or the governor said the money can't be found.  Banks have failed, folks are starving.  Where's the money?  In the ground?  I think folks have got too selfish and we're reaping what we sowed.  But we alls got to suffer to suffer where to make the evil go.  Still I can't see why this is--that is in these hard times coming hurt the man like me.  Well, I guess the (unclear) of people.  Hard times, well is good, but see."  Then he pointed to me, he said, "Boy, don't you worry about these hard times.  You just try to have some fun.  This Repression just like dog days.  Brighter times are bound to come."
Story_ID: 76766
Speaker 1: I wrote seven poems at Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania].  They were a little.  They're more nature-born.  Yeah, I wrote one poem that I can remember about trees.  "Ode to loftier heights that tower, touching skies in nature's flame.  Bowing through the snow and ice, and then bowing into the winds and rain.  In the spring they've taken on a new life, it's called the winter day race.  Every leaf a fuzzy color, tinted to (unclear).  Only God creates a (unclear). To His call and touch they heed.  That's why we--that's why they attain such great as the heights.  Men like trees is what we need."  That poem was published in several magazine--.
Story_ID: 76767
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  I wrote a poem once--wrote a poem once that was in the "Crisis" Magazine when [W.E.B.] DuBois was editor.  DuBois was editor.
Speaker 2: So what were you thinking--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  I think it's "Young Negro Boys."
Speaker 2: Oh, "Young Negro Boy" is the name of the peom?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  "Young Negro Boy" was the most popular poem I ever written in Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 2: Can you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: "Young Negro boy, what will you do when time makes you a man?  Will you fall back and miss the mark or fight to hold your stand?  We have no chance (unclear) as boys of other races.  We will have and will maintain our sway, because of Pharaoh faces.  Fight on, strive on, young Negro boy, fill up the vacant places.  The Negro made a place where we're known for deeds, not faces.  Say ill of none, learn all you can.  Who knows that you'll be. God rules and doth protect us all.  Did not he set us free?  Be proud you are a Negro.  Think straight.  Fight for a place.  And some of these men will praise your name for deeds and not your face."  That was the most popular--I would recite that poem hundreds of times in Richmond.  I went back for my fiftieth--my wife, Phoebe, was with me, and my grand--oldest granddaughter, Phoebe Rowe (ph) was with me.  And somebody got up at (unclear) and my fiftieth anniversary, my graduation, somebody got up and one of the former, students, graduate of the class, at this banquet, got up and recited that poem.  Everybody remembered that poem, knew it by heart.  It was published in the daily paper and so forth.
Speaker 2: So you like--was poetry an outlet for you?
Speaker 1: I think it was.  Yeah.  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: And what--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: I love words.  You know, my favorite word is concatenation.  Concatenation. That means there's a linking or joining.
Speaker 2: Spell that word.
Speaker 1: C-O-N-C-A-T-E-N-A-T-I-O-N.  Concatenation.  Concatenation.
Story_ID: 76768
Speaker 1: Now, sir, what were you majoring at--with--and in Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania], you were majoring in--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Sociology.
Speaker 1: And what made you decide to go into, to major in sociology?
Speaker 2: Because, you know, I just like interaction process with individuals.  And, you know, being born in reform school, I think it did have an effect on me.  And seeing how people could be rehabilitated.  And--but, so I tell you,  ask Fred--Charles Johnson, I don't whether you ever heard of Charles Johnson.  He was the social science department at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  I had got a $40 NYA [National Youth Administration] scholarship to Fisk.  And so I--my second year--it was a two-year program, you know, for a graduates degree in sociology.  My whole--all of my second year, I spent in the Deep South.  I was in Tennessee, Alabama, Mississippi, Georgia, Louisiana; all over the Deep South, conducting--first I would conduct an intelligence, say, Kuhlmann-Anderson intelligence test.  Then a battery of attitudes has to see the attitude of black youths toward white, you know, towards white youths, or white people.  And I was in Greenville, Mississippi, once when I spent two weeks there when Hodding Carter Senior was editor the Delta.  Delta, 'cause he won a prize, Pulitzer Prize for his editorials on race relations.  Greenville, Mississippi, had a big flood down there in 1927, and black people who lived down near the river were just killed, just grounded; just hundreds of them are drowned.  Just hundreds of them are drowned.  They didn't care a thing about them, see.  And so I went down with this psychiatrist by the name of Harry Stack Sullivan.  This was in 1939.  And he wanted to make a study of, you know, race conditions in the South.  And so I had this new Chevrolet coupe.  And essentially, I was a chauffeur, see, but I know my job was to contact, you know, make contacts in the black community and refer them to him.  Well, he was so impressed with one young--young boy, fourteen-year-old-boy, who had not had one day of schooling, yet he was so intelligent.  He'd taught himself to read and write.  And Sullivan said, "Want to take this boy back to New York when I go."  He took him back to New York, but the boy, you know, was nothing in New York.  Sullivan had a black fella working for him as a valet and a Chinese cook, see.  And they didn't want to fool with this dumb guy from Mississippi, see.  So the boy was lonely, so he asked to go back after two or three weeks.  So Sullivan sent him back home.  But I made the contacts in the black community.
Story_ID: 76769
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna--just one thing.  So you graduate--I want to understand--you graduate from Lincoln in 19 what?
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-seven [1937].
Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-seven [1937].
Speaker 2: (Unclear).  I did now.  I was away so much at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], I didn't write a thesis, but when I went to Michigan, Charles Johnson, I had him to come there to speak.  He was then president of Fisk, see.  And so he said, "Bill, what do you--"  "Wendell," he called me Wendell, my middle name; my family all call me Wendell--he said, "What you did in your second year was to get me material for my book."  Said, "I got most of the material for the writing of the book 'Growing Up in the Black Belt,'" which is a really--this is a seminal book on, you know, black youths in the thirties (1930s).  And so I my degree, and I didn't know I had a--I had been awarded a degree until I went to the Federal Reserve, which was my last position.  I retired from the Board of Governors.  (Unclear) I was born in reform school, ended up in the central bank of the United States as a staff officer.  Well, now, I didn't know--so Johnson, what he did, he gave me credit, you know, for the work I'd done on his book, so I got my degree that way.
Speaker 1: I see.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't know it 'til the guy told the man, (unclear)--till the personnel director of the Federal Reserve, he say, "Yeah, you got your degree."  I say, "Yeah."  Say, "I didn't know."  For a long time I wouldn't say I even had it, because it was an awarded they had to send it to you, you know.
Speaker 1: What--did you get your master's or--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Master's.
Speaker 1: Master's.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I didn't get a Doctorate.  I--well, see, Doctor Johnson wanted me to go for a Doctorate, you know, 'cause the Rosenwald Fellowships were available then.  He was on the Board of Rosenwald.  He said, "Wendell, you need to get a Doctorate."  I said, "No.  I'm through with the college campuses."  I did.  I got sick of the university.  It was too much superficiality and so forth.
Story_ID: 76636
Speaker 1: When I, When I completed my work at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], Doctor Charles Johnson recommended me for a job with the Nashville Public School System, because that year in 1939, September the day it began, a Visiting Teacher Attendance Division Program, whereby they treated learning problems and attendance problems through a case method.  I had had some casework courses, you know.  So what happened was, the Nashville Superintendent of schools, William A. Bass, decided he was going to get the best person in the United States to head up this new division.  So they hired a woman from New York--from Johnstown, New York, named Pauline Fairchild.  She was an expert in visiting teachers and principals.  That's where you did casework on, you know.  You went to the home, you know, the home and school; you tie it all, you know, together, see.  And so, Doctor Johnson already said--now they wanted somebody to head the attendance work in all the Colored schools.  Doctor Johnson said, "There's one person I want to recommend, that's William W. Layton."  I got the job, see.  Well, they hired--they had a white employee who was (unclear) that was in charge of attendance in all the white schools.  Before they opened up schools in 1939, they had several meetings getting us ready for opening schools.  And Ms. Fairchild insisted my desk be down at the school headquarters.  I said, "Yeah, but it's against State law, see.  You're supposed to separate blacks and whites."  She said, "No, I won't, Mr. Layton."  (unclear) the only white person that called me Mister, see.  "I want him to be down here, because this is a new program.  I want him to be here along with all the other staff." So here I am with my desk down here the Nashville Public School Systems headquarters.  All--everybody else was white, see.  So, Superintendent Bass said, "Ms. Fairchild, it's not going to work."  He said, "The School Board does not know Layton's desk is down here.  That Layton works out of this building."  She said, "But did he ask us?"  Now, we had a few meetings before the opening of the school.  And I'm sitting--now, my white counterpart right at the desk right next to mine, see.  We were going to this small auditorium for a meeting.  I forget, you know, that Colored folks supposed to sit in the back, white folks up front, see.  I go on in.  We're talking, see, and I go in.  I sit next to him way up front.  I said, "Oh, Lord, I'm going to have this job for one day, that's all.  I know I'm out now."  Immediately after the meeting is over, the superintendent's running this meeting, he's explaining what to do and when to do it and so forth.  I go to him, I said, "Mr. Bass," say, "Superintendent Bass, I messed up."  I said, "I didn't mean to sit up there."  I say, "I know it's against the law."  He said, "Oh, Layton.  I can't believe you didn't" forget that you said (unclear) I was, this man was--he was a great man for his time.
Story_ID: 76637
Speaker 1: So we had another meeting that same week, you know, before the opening of the school.  And there were about seven or eight or ten--even ten rows between the white, you know, supervisors and, you know, heads of programs and the blacks seats, were over in the Colored school; what we call the Colored school then.  Before the opening of the meeting, Superintendent [William] Bass said, "You folks in the back there,"--the Colored principals and the supervisor said, "Move on up."  So they grudgingly moved up two or three seats--rows more, see.  Oh, and now here, I get through, you know, he has--then next I'm married, see.  And I'm still down there in the school headquarters.  And the school is open.  They been open about a month, see.  And in walks the superintendent to, who knows of what the set up is, but he was one of the school board members.  They don't know if there's a black man down there with a desk.  Here we had two white (unclear), here I'm dictating, you know, I'm gesticulating and explaining this case for this--and, man, then going to Miss Fairchild's office (unclear).  We had this big room, we had the professional (unclear); then right off from there, there was Miss Fairchild's (unclear).  They go in there and stay about one minute, see.  Miss Fairchild rings the buzzer on my desk.  She says, "Mr. Layton, we going to have to go to the superintendent's office.  We're going to have to make a change."  Overnight now.  What they do?  We go in there and he says, "Layton, sit here, and Miss Fairchild, you sit there."  He calls up Jay Galloway (ph), who's the principal of the one Colored high school there in Nashville. He said, "Galloway, open up a principal office for Layton.  He'll be over there tomorrow morning."  And they hired a girl--overnight they hired a girl to be my secretary--hired a woman, rather; young woman to be my secretary, the undertaker's daughter, Gardner; Virginia Gardner is the name.  They hired her.  And the next day, I'm over there in the Colored high school (unclear).  That's the end of integration.  I was the first person in America, United States, to, you know, to be on staff in a school situation where--well, now, what happened, I was glad of it because the black principal (unclear) thought I was telling the white folks downtown, see, because my desk was down--you know, I got to be telling them everything they're doing that's wrong, see, I think it's wrong.  I'm down there trying to protect them.  There's one guy Superintendent told me to investigate a guy who was supposed to be gay; supposed to been gay, supposed going outside of Nashville, probably white and black fellas meeting, you know, and having a good time.  I go up to this principal at this high-- at thiselementary school--I say, "Listen, I don't want you to say a damn word."  I say, "I'm going to tell you something, now.  I've been asked by the superintendent to investigate this behavior, if it's true, you do what you think is best, you know, to preserve your job; if not," I say, "just forget it," I said, "But I'm not going--I'm not going to ask you whether it's so or not, but I just want you to know I've been asked to investigate it."  He didn't answer, but it was the black doctor to do something.  The black doctor said, no, he couldn't do it, see.  So he asked me to do it.  And so this guy--I don't know what happened, but he kept the jobs.
Story_ID: 76638
Speaker 1: Then when I got ready to leave Nashville [Tennessee] the next following year--I was in that job two years, I guess, after I married, 1943; beginning of 1943, I moved to--we moved to Columbus, Ohio.  We had one child then, my oldest daughter, Andree; and she should be a history maker because she was a judge of the Supreme Court in Arkansas.  She was born in Nashville, Tennessee.  And so I was in--I'd been put in 1A then, see; I mean 3A, because we had just one child.  Then Mary came in 1941; we had two then--'43' [1943].  And then the third one came in '43' [1943] (sic) after we moved to Columbus, see; right after we got to Columbus.
Story_ID: 76639
Speaker 1: Well, anyway, I was in 3A then.  But then the--my draft board in Nashville, when I moved, see, left Nashville [Tennessee], they put me--reclassified me as 1A.  I said, "Hell, no."  You know, I'd been doing--I was much need in Columbus because I did--I'd written and designed the first radio program that the Urban League or any Colored group had had in Nashville, and meaning Columbus, Ohio; I lectured at Ohio State, and so on and so on.  So I was very popular there.  And then on top of that--what was I going to say?  On top of that--oh, yeah--I had done some work for Governor [Frank] Lausche, who is governor of Ohio.  And so when they put me in, one day I called the governor.  I said, "Listen, man," I said, "they gonna draft me, and I got three children here, and I--he said, "Bill, you're doing too much good work here, and folks are coming in to work in Buckeye, Seal in Columbus , and Curtis Wright Airplane plant."  I integrated, you know, a number of plants there in Columbus.  The telephone company didn't have anything but white operators, and I put them first on as--Colored women first on as the elevator operators.  They had manual operators.  And then what the company said, "We want them all to look as much like Lena Horne as possible."  I said, "No.  I know what I'm going to do, I'm going to give you a wide range of them."  I had them from high yellows to black (laughs).  Oh, boy, I had a lot of fun.  So and then (unclear) said, that you go into Layton's office and ask for something and he doesn't give you--he won't give it to you, but you'll be so happy he'll make you think you got it and you know and (unclear)."  And so, but, you know, I did do quite a lot.  So the Governor wrote my draft board, said, "Don't draft this man.  He's doing too much good work for the war, you know, effort."
Speaker 2: So what year--what age were you when they were trying to draft you?
Speaker 1: Well, I was--1940, '41' [1941], '43' [1943], '44' [1944]--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: You were thirty-something.
Speaker 1: Yeah. That was twenty--no.  I was twenty-nine.
Speaker 2: Twenty-nine.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Nine and five is fourteen.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Right.  Twenty--okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, but I want to--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  I wasn't even--(unclear) I was twenty-eight; twenty-seven-see I married at twenty-five--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Twenty-seven, twenty-eight.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you had two children now.
Speaker 1: Had three.  Three.
Speaker 2: Three.  Okay.  Right.
Speaker 1: See, one died, you know, in '44' [1944].
Story_ID: 76640
Speaker 1: But I want to ask--I want to ask another question that--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that wasn't even raised.  And I want to ask a little bit about Nashville [Tennessee].  But when you were doing your work with Charles Johnson--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: --you know--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I want you to explain what NYA [National Youth Administration]--what its purpose was.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Its purpose was to determine the attitudes--to determine the attitudes of black youths towards white youths--towards whites generally; white adults and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Why were they wanting to do this?
Speaker 2: Because they wanted to make conditions better, find out, you know, what the problems were.  We thought we knew what the problem is that white people had.  Now, we were finding why blacks don't, you know, get along better with them or whatever and what the attitude is.  It was an attitudinal thing, you know.
Story_ID: 76641
Speaker 1: And what did your research find?
Speaker 2: It, it found that they--you know, there was a lot of misunderstanding, fear, lack of interaction; for example, every night, in 1939 toward --in April 1939, I went to Greenville, Mississippi.  I had a new car, and Doctor Harry Stack Sullivan and Doctor Johnson interested Doctor Harry Stack Sullivan, the leading psychiatrist in America, to make an observation of race relations in a southern city.  Greenville, Mississippi, was the city chosen.  The "Delta Democrat" newspaper--one newspaper was edited by Hodding Carter, Senior.  Okay.  Well, Johnson said, "Layton's got a car; and he's a good student; and he'll take you down to Greenville.  He'll make the contacts in the black community--Colored community--and he'll refer them to you," see.  "Okay."  That's when I came across that boy not having a day of schooling.  Okay.  Well, here in Greenville, it was a great city, because there was a black doctor there from French Martinique named Doctor DeLaine, who had moved to Greenville for some--I don't know why.  I can't remember why.  But anyway, he was from French Martinique.  And a little boy had gotten a safety pin caught in his throat, and the white doctor tried to get it; they couldn't get it, and he rigged up some kind of instrument and got that pin.  Well, he was a hero, see.  And he--so Doctor DeLaine, Hodding Carter, William Alexander Percy who wrote a bestseller called "Lanterns on the Levee."  Walker Percy (sic) wrote that, "Leve" was a bestseller.  And I would get together every night--see, the first night I was in Greenville--the first afternoon, rather--see I was a sensibly, sort of a chauffeur, but my work was to make contacts in the black community.  And so the first afternoon I was there, I walked into a drugstore.  They had all the magazines in the--behind the counter.  You couldn't thumb through the magazines, see.  Well, I walked up to the counter.  There were two white customers, they were white males, and, of course, the clerk is white.  I said, "May I have a copy of "Times Magazine?"  He said, "Goddam you can't have it."  Just like that.  (Unclear) I'm uppity, see.  (Unclear) "They don't read 'Time Magazine' themselves," I said to the two customers there.  So I go out, you know, I don't whether he gonna hit me in the head or what they gonna do to me.  So I just, I said, "Thank you."  Bowed and walked out.  Well, see I was supposed to be insulted for sho', but they figured I would be getting for him, I guess.  I don't know.  I said, "May I have."  My language was correct and everything, see.  And so I reported that that evening when we met at--we met at--William Alexander Percy was the biggest cotton planter in the world.  He owned hundreds and hundreds of acres of cotton.  Cotton was at its height back then, see.  And so we discussed that, see.
Story_ID: 76642
Speaker 1: And, and, well, that next day, I wanted--somebody wanted to see, I was from Greenville.  I was driving on with Virginia plates, this brand-new Chevrolet now, I had it just less than two weeks.  We were getting the plates on it, and I'm gonna see somebody.  I'm from Greenville, a mile south from here.  And I hear this siren.  It was the high sheriff, see.  He pulls me over.  He doesn't get out of his cruiser, but he moved over to the passenger's, and he say, "What are doing down here?"  I said, "Sheriff"--I didn't say Mister Sheriff or Hi sheriff.  I said, "I'm down here on a study for the American Youth Commission."  I told him what I was going to do.  I said, "I'll be interviewing people (unclear) like negroes and whites."  He said, "Oh, no."  He said, "Listen.  We have enough trouble around here," he said.  He said, "You probably with that N-A something."  He didn't know what the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was.  Didn't know.  Correct that. (Unclear) NAACP.  So.  I said, "No, sir."  I said, "I assure you I'm not."  He said, "Well, what are you doing?"  I said, "Well I (unclear).  William Layton is a field representative of American Youth Committee.  I handed him this letter, see.  I'm over on, under my steering wheel.  He moved over to the passenger side of his car--cruiser.  He looks at the letter.  He can't read it, see.  He doesn't care to figure this out, see.  This guy from Watts.  I say, "Sheriff, you'll notice that the group I'm working for in Washington.  Headquarters in Washington."  I said, "People I talk to, I write them up every day and I send it in before the day is over."  I did.  I took it to the post office and send it Doctor Johnson--but to Nashville, see.  Mr. Charles Johnson.  And he say, "Oh, now." (unclear).  See, Washington was the key word, see.  He said, "Oh, now I can understand what you do."  He say, "Come see me."  The next day I went to see him, he had some confiscated liquor, see, 'cause it was the county option on whether or dry or wet.  It still has that in some places in the South.  One county can be dry, one county--the next county can be wet.  And they do all, you know, and get all the booze business, see.  So he say, "Come in."  He offered me a drink from the confiscated liquor.  I said, "No, sir.  I don't drink."  I wouldn't drink with him.  He never called me anything.  We supposed to drink (unclear) 'cause he--you know, I (feel?) you call me William, you know, by my first name.  But he--that was a real confession to me.
Story_ID: 76643
Speaker 1: Sir, let me ask you.  When you were doing the research, did you come across anyone doing the slave narratives?
Speaker 2: Did anyone what?
Speaker 1: That were recording slaves, the former slaves?  'Cause this--did you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No.  I knew there had been those slave narratives, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you ever come across anyone doing that--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I came across some who--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: During the interviews?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yes, indeed.  Yeah.  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well an you talk about that a little?
Speaker 2: I called--I came across a woman once.  I said--I asked her what were her hours of work.  She said, "Boy, I work from can to can, like I did during slavery.  I said, "can to can?"  I had never heard that before.  That means from the time you could see in the morning, 'til the time you couldn't see at night.  From can to can.  Oh, yeah.  I ran across a number of them.  You ought to get a copy of that.  My--I have a granddaughter married--her niece; a granddaughter, Phoebe--no, no, no; great granddaughter, yeah, married Ruth Rosen, getting her doctorate in anthropology at Temple.  She just got a copy of that book.  And Country Books has got a copy of it, too.  I did ninety percent of that work.  In fact, that's why [Charles S.] Johnson, you know, the award that he gave me, processed the papers on that degree--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Sir, you think you did some--of your work, you did some interviews of former slaves?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yes, indeed.  If not in that book, 'cause it was going up in value.  This was youths, negro youths, but--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I did, but as far as I know, I don't know whether any of it ever was published or not; I don't think so, now with the adults, cause my work would figure with the--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Youths.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Black youths, see.
Story_ID: 76644
Speaker 1: Now, when you were in--so what took you from--when did you get involved in the Urban League?
Speaker 2: 1943.  I left Nashville--we left Nashville in April of 1943, and Serena, our youngest daughter was born, in August of 1943.  Now, on the way up to Columbus [Ohio] from Nashville [Tennessee], we stopped in Louisville [Kentucky] at a black hotel, Colored hotel, as they call it.  And I laid down on the bed.  I had Mary on the bed with me.  And the bedbugs came out with the light on.  I never--I thought bedbugs wouldn't come out of the light, you know, one of those real flea joints, as they call them.  And I had three, or four, or five flat tires on the way up.  And in Kentucky, I got stranded on a hill with a flat tire and a white guy came along, he lifted the side of the car; but one man lifted one end of that car.  And if didn't--didn't he, Phoebe [Anderson]?  She may not be in here.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 76645
Speaker 1: Now, you know the other thing--so, what, did you get recruited to work for them--(simultaneous) (unclear)
Speaker 2: No.  Phoebe's godfather was the head of the Urban League, a guy by the name of--was celebrated--a guy by the name of Nimrod Allen.  I went to Columbus [Ohio].  I was really--I was really hot stuff, you know, 'cause I--I got this radio program going--I wrote, you know, wrote the format of the radio program.  One of the news segments called "Lights and Chatters? on the Interracial Front."  And Nimrod Allen--well, I tell you what had happened.  This was in 1940--whatever it was--'43' [1943], '44' [1944].  Well, I did, you know, the folks were coming into Columbus by the hundreds, see, to work in the foundries up the line from Mississippi mainly.  And I was doing such a good work finding houses for them and jobs and so on, that the Governor, you know, asked that I not be drafted.  Okay.  I mentioned that earlier.  Not only that, but I was very active in the Council of Churches and so forth and so on.  I just became the number one, you know, black guy in Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: So how long did you live in Columbus (unclear)?
Speaker 2: It was from '43' [1943] to--eight years.
Speaker 1: Eight years.
Speaker 2: Fifty-one [1951].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 76646
Speaker 1: Fifty-one [1951].  Went, went up to Michigan.  Well what had happened was, I went to Michigan.  I interviewed--at the Urban League conference, I interviewed for a job in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And I didn't know whether I had the job or not.  I left the conference and went back to Columbus and found that Lester Granger was his head of Urban League.  He said, "Bill, you had the damn job."  I said, well, what I did, I stopped from the Urban League conference in Richmond [Virginia], see."  I stopped at Millwood [Virginia].  Told my folks, my parents, they said, "You want to go south again?"  And I was in Columbus, see.  I said, "No, no."  I talked with my wife [Phoebe Anderson].  She said, "No, no, no.  We don't want to go south."  I said, "Okay."  Well, then I got to (unclear).  I was blackballed by, you know, by the Urban--National Urban League I think because they said I had the job.  I said, "Well, they should have told me I had it."  In the meantime, I applied for the job in Muskegon, Michigan, even higher north, you know.  I figured opportunity be even better there.  I got up there, I interviewed for the job.  Got the job.  It was in the wintertime.  And woke up and found out that, you know, when the snow melted, about April or May, see, 'cause it's on the east side of Lake Michigan; right on Lake Michigan; and that's where the warming influence of the lake, you know, it just creates a lot of heavy snows, see, and the snow piled up.  In fact, it was a while ago, I usually put little--tie a handkerchief on your radio antenna, see, 'cause it's coming crossways, you know.  Yeah.  You say you know what I'm talking about.  You know what I'm talking about.  And so--and then when the weather--when the ice thawed, I found that he didn't even have paved streets out there.  (How we come to?) a damn place where it didn't even have no streetlights or nothing.  So I--man, you talking about work.  I worked night and day.  Night and day.  I got in with the Governor of the State like I did in Ohio.  And, man, we turned things around.
Speaker 2: Sir, can you talk a little bit about the importance of the Urban League and--you know, during that time?  (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Oh, it was crucial.
Speaker 2: Right.  Because it was more of a group of social workers, wasn't it?
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.  Yep.  Yes, sir.  That's right.  Winthrop Rockefeller later became governor of Arkansas, was very instrumental in it.  I used to play tennis with Winthrop Rockefeller.  And, you know, they gave the Urban League building in New York, Broadway, in honor of his mother, in memory of his mother, Winthrop's mother Rockefeller.  And the Urban League really was a bellwether, you know, as far as advancing the economic opportunities.
Story_ID: 76647
Speaker 1: And, oh, I was head of the Council of Churches.  I really went to town.  Then I got--I wanted to get out of the Urban League movement.  While we're in that, Toby Williams was Governor.  (Unclear) Williams, he met a multimillionaire (unclear), you know, company family.  And I was--I taught his daughter, and Mary--he has daughter named Mary Williams and Mary Layton, my daughter.  I taught them in church, see, Sunday school, which was right across from the capitol in Lansing [Michigan].  And while I was there, Langston Hughes--I introduced Langston Hughes at a program, and, you know, I just got to really be-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Active in the community.
Speaker 1: Very active.
Story_ID: 76648
Speaker 1: And I was, you know--I went to Europe.  While I was in Muskegon, a group of Germans came over from Frankfort.  Frankfort, Germany, was the most heavily bombed city in Germany because they had--it was the center of the ball bearing industry.  And (unclear) I gave a luncheon for them, these Germans, you know, the goodwill--Frankfort is the same size as Muskegon with a heavy industry, just like Muskegon, see.  And they said, "Well, we want somebody to come over and visit us, exchange visits.  And it should be William Layton, director of the Urban League here."  And the State Department picked it up, so I went and spent six weeks in Europe, all over Europe; Berlin, Frankfort, Rome; everywhere.  I had (unclear).
Speaker 2: Did you enjoy that?
Speaker 1: Oh, very much.  So that was 1954, see.  And my physician, black physician who was a physician for the Tuskegee Airmen, he went with me, see.  So here I was traveling (unclear).  Man, I was hot stuff, traveling with my personal physician, see.  I had had an operation early in '54' [1954], and this was in the fall of '54' [1954], see.  I had a hernia operation.  I helped a woman who was strained in the ice outside of Muskegon [Michigan], and I pushed her car and developed--and got a hernia on my right side.  See, I would always get in trouble trying to help somebody.  But, God's been good to me.  I'm, I'm a great believer.
Story_ID: 76599
Speaker 1: [Sir, so of all the states that you were in] did you like Michigan the best--did you--or Ohio? --(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Michigan.
Speaker 1: Michigan more than Ohio?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, yeah.  And the people loved me, 'cause I just got a, you know--I set up--I hired a woman for a year from Washington [D.C.], Mary Gregory, who was head of the Y, the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association]; they call them YWCA.  She had lost out in a (unclear), so I hired her.  She was very good.  We organized neighborhood, what we call, neighborhood units.  Got streetlights, you know, and so forth and so on.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: That was in Muskegon [Michigan].  Then I moved to Lansing [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Lansing.  During that time, do you remember, you know, Roger Wilkins' mother lived in, I-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah.  Sure.  Sure.  One of my best friends.  Yeah.  Yeah.  She was married to a doctor, physician.  (Unclear)  One of my dearest friends.  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: [OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION] Yeah, Roger Wilkins' mother.  She married him after Wilkins-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Oh, Clayton.  Clayton.
Speaker 2: Clayton.
Speaker 1: Clayton.
Speaker 2: Clayton.
Speaker 1: Clayton.
Speaker 2: Clayton.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Oh, sure.  Yeah.  Yes, indeed.  Yeah.  Oh, yes.  She was in Grand Rapids [Michigan], see.
Speaker 2: She was active also.  Right?
Speaker 1: Very active.  Very active.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 76600
Speaker 1: So this is a time--let's put everything in historical context a little bit.
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: Since you're a lover of history.  This is a time where there's a lot of movement-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for Rights for Colored people or Negroes or whatever we were calledat that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We were called.
Speaker 1: --at the time.  And so you're making a lot of progress.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know.  And you say Michigan is more--it was a more liberal state.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, yeah, yeah.  I remember shortly after I went to Columbus, Ohio, we had a meeting at The Neil House, which was the finest hotel in Columbus.  And they wouldn't have the white waitresses to serve us.  They called the bartender, who was black, they had him serve us.  So we were complaining about it.  And what he said when we--we said--he said--we said--several of us black folks were there.  We said, "This was a meeting now to improve race relations."  We said, "Do you serve these tables like this?"  He said, "No.  You gonna get better service if you have one of these white women to serve you."  We said, "No.  Do you--have you--"  He said, "No.  I don't do this all during the--"  So we complained about it.  And--but that was Columbus back in the--see, this was in early '40' [1940s], before Martin Luther King [Jr.].  And I was very active in the Civil Rights Movement.  I urged Lansing [Michigan] to set up a City Council while I was speaking before the City Council. Phoebe--my family was down there with two or three hundred people marching around the building.  Yeah, you know.  I used to ring the bell (laughs).  Yes, sir.  I loved it too.
Story_ID: 76601
Speaker 1: So what brought you to Washington [D.C]?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What brought you to Washington?  Wasn't it 1965 you-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965].  Well, I had handled some cases for the Michigan Civil Rights Commission.  I had a case against General Motors.  General Motors wanted to hire me, see.  I said, "No.  I can't go on the other side of the table.  You know, this is my--my life is this work."  And so, the head of the Michigan Chamber of Commerce recommended me for a job with the federal government, see.  And the Agricultural Department, at that time, was being harassed because they had not hired someone to handle the cases; you know, the--what they call it--the Affirmative Action cases.  And so-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Discrimination cases.  Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But they was called--what were they called?
Speaker 1: Equal Opportunity-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Contract Compliance.
Speaker 1: Contract Compliance.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So I was recommended for a job.  But the personnel department of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, assistant director of the president--well, at that time, Hobart Taylor--and Hubert Humphrey, see, was living, Hubert Humphrey, whom I'd met as an Urban League person up in Minneapolis back when he was Mayor of Minneapolis.  Hubert Humphrey was Vice President.  He headed up the President's committee on government contracts.  And so they were pressing the Agriculture.  But Agriculture, but agriculture (unclear) ain't doing a damn thing about it, see.  Excuse my French.  And so Hubert Humphrey said, "Well, put Layton on Contract Compliance rather than Personnel."  So I became head of (unclear).  I just revolutionized Agriculture.
Story_ID: 76602
Speaker 1: I, I never won the case.  See, Agriculture had the responsibility of on-site reviews of all of the companies that did government business with the federal government.  And the food and (unclear), that didn't interest (unclear), the beer companies and the liquor companies.  Well, I found out that Anheuser-Busch, I wouldn't--delete this name, you know, because I don't want--but they're very proud of what they did.  I'll tell you how far this reach, see.  They didn't hire women or minorities, no blacks in two categories: the bottlers and the brewers.  And so I said, "No, no, no.  We can't have this.  You got (unclear).  So I had the power under the President's Committee to either order them to change within 30 days or either delete or cancel, or suspend the contract.  And so when the Secretary of Agriculture, who was Orville Freeman at the time, when he heard that I had issued this (unclear) order against (unclear).  He said, "Bill, you have cited one of the biggest companies in America."  I said, "I don't care."  I said, "They're wrong."  And I said--so I called them into Washington for a meeting.  Well, they bring the superintendent of the plant, four or five big shots; vice presidents, and so forth.  And so I told them, I said, "You got 30 days, you know, to come through with an acceptable plan."  Also with them came a man by the name of Al Fleishman , who practically ran St. Louis.  He died at age 95 of this--not long ago.  And so Orville Freeman said, "Bill, you," he said--I said, "Well, that's all right."  What it was, they hired him in those categories, you know, those (unclear) categories right away.
Story_ID: 76603
Speaker 1: Sir, let me ask you.  So under the Department of Agriculture, you're saying, were companies like Anheuser-Busch and all-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, now, what happened was this.  I'll give you an example.  Only type that you mention, you look at the employment practices of hiring; promotional patterns; firing, you know; employee facilities; restrooms; everything.  If they weren't integrated fully, you know, the whole process, the hiring process, plus its employee facilities, then they were not in compliance, see.  Well, there were these two categories that they discovered in a lumber company.  There was another company called--they put on the show--the program called--it's a (unclear) service company.  Well, anyway, I can't think of the name of it.  Archer Daniels Midland.  Archer Daniels Midland.
Speaker 1: I was going to say ADM [Archer Daniels Midland].  Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  ADM.  Now--ADM.  Now, they had--they were operating a restaurant in North Carolina.  No, their eating facility.  They had a little building, a separate building for the-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Black workers?
Speaker 2: --for the, you know, the--not restaurant.  What you call it? You know, the dining room--dining hall.  It was old--the one like the--well, there was a door on the right; the whites went into the door on the right.  The black employees went to the door on the left, and the steam table right down the middle, see.  All, big room.  But there were two separate, you know.  I said, "You got to change that."  Overnight, now, they tore that building down and put up a new building, see.  Well, they were in compliance then.  Okay.  Archer Daniels Midland.  And the same thing with two or three other companies.  I ordered them--we called them to Washington and told them what they had to do, see.  And they did it, too, 'cause they knew I was the--either cancel or, or suspend their contract.
Story_ID: 76604
Speaker 1: Now, at this time, who, who is, is President of the United States?  Is it under [Lyndon B.] Johnson?
Speaker 2: Well, Lyndon Johnson, first--after.  And then [Richard] Nixon.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Nixon didn't--you know, I just did everything I wanted to do, was big enough to do with Nixon was President.  He didn't seem to care what I did.  Oh, and then I did--they said I did such an outstanding job at agriculture that when I happened to bend over and, Al Edwards, who since is a black man who was at--now a University of Michigan professor-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Now what was his name?
Speaker 2: Al Edwards.  He had been to Nigeria.  He had set up a program in Nigeria, heads up that university over there.  I knew him from Michigan, from when I was in Lansing, 'cause he had taught at Michigan State along with Andy [Andrew] Brimmer [HM].  I knew Andy Brimmer there, too.  Okay.  So here I am.  I'm in Al Edwards' office at Agriculture.  Now, he's Assistant Secretary of Agriculture, see, who was a man who informed the president of Michigan State--I can't think of his name, former president of Michigan.  I knew them both.  Andy Brimmer calls, said, "Listen," he said.  "Al," he said, "we need a man to come over to head up the program at the Federal Reserve, the best job in the country."  He said, "You know anybody?"  He says, "There's a white guy in Chicago that offered the bank, the Federal Reserve Bank in Chicago, was supposed to be in line.  Yeah, but I want at least one good black candidate."  He said, "I got a man in my office."  So Andy Brimmer said--Andy Brimmer is the Governor, now; and, you know, Johnson appointed him as the Governor of the Federal--Board of Governor of the Federal Reserve.  He said, "I got a man in my office.  Bill Layton."  He say, "You have Bill Layton, headed up the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Voter Registration Drive in Lansing when I was at Michigan (unclear).  Have Bill get his papers in."  Well, within two weeks, I got a recommendation from August Busch [II], who owned the Busch, you know, the Red--what did they call it--the baseball team?  You know, the one with everything in St. Louis.
Speaker 1: Anheuser-Busch.
Speaker 2: Anheuser-Busch.  Yeah.  August Busch [II], the president.  Oh, and now--and also, from Sandy Bemis (ph) the Bemis was a corporation in Minneapolis, I'd done a--made them get rid of a-- they ran one of the last of the old company towns, you know, where you bought everything in the company.  You lived in the company building, you bought in the company stores (unclear).  I'd done them.  They got that changed, do away with that town, company town.  They had a 400-something unit.  They had 425 units for whites, and only about 25 for black employees, see.  Now this is in Bemis, Tennessee, which they owned--they owned the whole town, Bemis, Tennessee.  And right next to Talladega.  They had a plant in Talladega, too; Talladega, Alabama.  Phoebe remembers.  So both of them--both Sandy Bemis had been president of the St. Louis Urban League Board--not the Urban League.  I meant, the Federal Reserve Bank Board.  See, these (unclear), there're 12 Federal Reserve Banks.  All of them had presidents who were from, you know, from big corporations.  And Sandy Bemis had been president over in Minneapolis.  So when they heard that I was, you know, being considered for this job with the Federal Reserve, they said, "Yeah.  Get Layton."  (Unclear) so here I am now.  It's who you know and not what you know.  It's who you know (laughs).  So I ended up being the first black officer of the Federal Reserve.
Story_ID: 76605
Speaker 1: Did you enjoy that, sir?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved it.  My office was at Watergate.  See, when they were building new modern buildings right back of the main Federal Reserve, which is the second most beautiful building in Washington.  The Library of Congress is the most beautiful interior.  Oh, yeah.  I enjoyed it.  And it's just like--it's almost like Heaven compared to, you know, these other agencies.  It's not a federal agency, per se.  It's a federal--it's within the government.  It's an agency within the federal, and not a part of the federal government.  Congress can't do a thing with it, you know.
Speaker 1: So how did that experience differ from, you know, doing the contract compliance--well, how did it differ?
Speaker 2: What differ in?  Differed in?
Speaker 1: You were over banks at this-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Banks.  That's right.  And, you know, and-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Now, who in the Congress were you-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: The first case I had was a case of a Jewish woman who had filed for a job, and they had said they were going to pay her living expenses--I mean, her travel expenses and had failed to do so.  So I took the case, and, you know, she filed with me.  And I got her money paid for moving everything.  But see, the personnel director of the Board had concluded that, but he had learned her husband was looking for a job in Washington at the same time.  He was a Ph.D. (unclear), see, and that he had a job.  So I told him he had job.  So he said, "Well, we not going to pay your expense because your husband won't get the (unclear).  But she said, "No.  That wasn't right."  Which it wasn't.  They promised to pay her, you know, whatever her expenses was. The second case I had was a Chinese fella out in San Francisco; San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank.  And so within a short time, I was, you know, lecturing around the United States, to bankers and whatnot and living at the Waldorf-Astoria, when I went to New York [City, New York]; and riding first class on airplanes and whatnot (laughs.)  High on the hog.  I should say, don't put this on, 'cause it'll hurt the Federal Reserve.
Speaker 1: (Laughs.)
Speaker 2: Because I had a back ailment.  That's why I travel first-class.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yes.  See, I've had five back operations.  I am really--I shouldn't sit more than about fifteen minutes at a time.  We been sitting now for two hours, haven't we?
Story_ID: 76606
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Who were the people that you were interacting a lot--you know, who were playing a role with this whole, you know, equal opportunity, you know, sort of contract compliance-- (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Who were the people I knew?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Like in the Congress, and, you know, who were the people who were instrumental on the Hill?  You know, which--was the Congressional Black Caucus, were you working with them a lot or--?
Speaker 2: Not a whole lot, but I knew them all, and I was up there, you know, with them.
Speaker 1: Who were you interact--did you ever interact with Bill [William] Clay [HM] or-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Bill Clay and a guy from Michigan--what's his name?
Speaker 1: Conyers?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: John Conyers [HM]?
Speaker 2: John Conyers?  Yeah.  Yeah.  I knew all those guys from Michigan, see.  I had gotten around quite a bit, you know, with the Urban League and with the state of Michigan.
Story_ID: 76607
Speaker 1: And I had the first case that went to a State Supreme Court, a Civil Rights case.  It involved houses.  See, Michigan had--was the first state to have an omnibus. Civil Rights law was in the Constitution, the only one now.  Only one.  The only way you can dissolve is maybe rescinding the Constitution, you know, the Amendment to the Constitution.  The only way you can dissolve it.
Speaker 2: So, you're proud of the work that you did during that--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  And Governor [Mitt] Romney and I were very close.  He was a Mormon, but I tell you, he was a great man.  He would assign me to a task, and he'd say, he wouldn't bother you, you'd report to him.
Speaker 2: If a young person were to ask you what was the importance of your work, what would you say?
Speaker 1: What was what?
Speaker 2: What was the importance of the work that you did over that period of time, like, from the '50s' [1950s]--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Importance was proving that we could, you know, could hold jobs that they didn't think we could hold.  Even black folks themselves, a lot of them, you know--some of--I've had to take several of them to the woodshed because they just didn't think.  I should have pressed, you know--well, particularly information.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 76608
Speaker 1: And what--which industry--did you find the banking industry more difficult to break down barriers than the, you know, agriculture, you know, those with the food?  What was harder?  Was--or didn't it--it didn't--or what--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, I tell you what happened.  I'll give you an example:  Now, I handled a case in--where was it--in Dallas.  It was at Dallas Federal Reserve Bank, and it involved a black woman.  And she got in touch with WEAL, Women's Equity Action League.  And somehow a black minister got involved.  So Arthur Burns, who was then chairman of the Federal Reserve, said, "Bill,"--they had written Arthur Burns and told him, you know, about this matter.  "Bill, go down to Dallas and see what you can do about it."  So I went down there.  And this black minister, this woman's black minister wanted to get into the matter, you know, so he can say he had a--I said, "No.  You can't do this."  You know.  So he wrote Burns and said, "Don't ever let Layton come down here again."  (laughs.)  He didn't know I was making all the decisions for, for Arthur Burns.
Story_ID: 76609
Speaker 1: Now, when you and Andy Brimmer [HM], while he was there, he was the only--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --put on the board?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, yeah.  Only governor.  'Cause later another man, a good friend of mine.  Who was it?  (Unclear).  Rice.  Emmett Rice.  Emmett Rice was the second.  They got one on there now that's really a crackerjack.  He was in charge of all the financing in America when 911.  I was at a meeting of Retired Governors and Officers of the Federal Reserve last week--last--a week ago--no.  This week.  This week.  This past Tuesday.  And the man who was the former head of the Council of Economic Advisers, he said, "This man done something great."  Mary, what's his name, the new governor of the Federal Reserve?  I don't know why I can't think of his name.  He was a young black man.  He went into economics because of Andy Brimmer, see.  But he's a crackerjack.  He was in charge, and so this man was saying how--what he did to stop the panic.
Story_ID: 76610
Speaker 1: Sir, let me ask, with--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: So a lady panicked rather.  A lady.
Speaker 1: So now you left government in 1977.
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: Now, what--who was president at the time?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  Had a guy who was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Carter?  No.
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Was Jimmy Carter?  No.  No.
Speaker 2: Oh.  Who was president?
Speaker 1: [Richard] Nixon.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  I think it was [Jimmy] Carter and later--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977].
Speaker 2: It was Carter.
Speaker 1: Carter.
Speaker 2: Carter was president.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Carter was president.
Speaker 2: So what made you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Well, because I got so--see, it got so, I couldn't travel, you know.  I was in pain.  I had to have five back operations.  Five of them.  And the pain--even riding first-class where I could get up and move around, see.  I shouldn't have sat (unclear).  And so I just decided I wanted to retire.  I knew timing would be good, you know.  Retirement was more than I ever thought I'd make, you know, even just, you know, working every day, see.  And I had good contacts and whatnot.  And if it's something I want to write.  (Unclear) I've written two books.  Working on the third one now, which is going to the best one.  And so I decided that's what I wanted--just wanted to retire and live the life.  Got a big place over in the mountains of Virginia.  Want you to come there sometime.  Yeah.  My daughters and granddaughter is going to finish Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] with honors.  Then we got a master's at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey].  Paul Volco (ph) was the one where--he was the head of--he was at the Federal Reserve.  I retired the same day that Arthur Burns retired.  He and I were great friends, Arthur Burns.
Story_ID: 76611
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, sir, when you look back over--you know, even a lot of change has happened between, you know, 1977 when you retired and today.
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: Are you happy with the changes that you see in the black community--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes.  As far as I know, it is progressing beautifully.  They got several officers now, black officers over there.  And I made a study of, of course, out of--the first case I had was a Jewish woman, you know, but that wasn't so much a problem of her religion as it was.  Just this guy didn't take--you know, he thought they were trying to double up on the moving expenses, which they weren't really, 'cause husband didn't have a job when she was hired.  And the Chinese person was a--yeah, I'm real pleased with what they're doing.
Speaker 1: Are you pleased with--do you have any concerns with the black community and the way it's going?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'm very well (unclear), 'cause what they're doing, they're leaving Washington [D.C.] going up buying these classic houses out in--I'm a member of the Boule, and about seven months ago, I made--I got up, I said, "Gentlemen, I (unclear) brothers of (unclear).  I've got to make a little (unclear)."  I said, "I'm just unhappy about the way we are abandoning Washington, going buying these classic houses, where a strong wind will blow them over."  And they all agreed with me.  The guys spent the rest of the meeting, you know, on that subject.  I said, "We're losing Washington."  There were several black businesses in southwest Washington.  See, my wife and I, before we moved here, we had two apartments, three bathrooms in--the equivalent of four bedrooms and so forth; two apartments in southwest Washington.  And we sold them, because whites are buying all these places now.  Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] was completely black at one time.  You know, that's right after the Civil War.  Nowadays, you couldn't even--my daughter Mary and her spouse, they have one of those million dollar and half houses like those northwest right off--on Klingo (ph), see.  And they got a place in the country, too.  But that's what bothers me, because, listen:  there were several black businesses in Southwest Washington where we lived at.  Now, there's zero.  None.  The Asians and the--you know, I'm not against them, but you know I'm glad to see them move up.  Asians and Hispanics, all, you know, up there on Fourteenth Street, and so forth.  There's nothing.  Their business all gone up around Howard University.  Morgan, you know, the Adams Morgan area.  After Martin Luther King, you read it so well when Martin Luther King was assassinated, where I was?  Pep Boys?
Speaker 1: Pep Boys.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Buying some batteries for a portable radio.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: I read your books.
Speaker 2: Well, I think I, you know, I've been plugging away.  I'm still fighting.
Story_ID: 76612
Speaker 1: I'm still trying--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: So let me ask you:  Are you--what are your concerns about the black community?
Speaker 1: Hm?
Speaker 2: Your concerns.  What--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  But--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: What are your concerns?
Speaker 1: My concerns are that we're not, we're losing ground--we're losing our push to get the, you know, a bigger piece of the pie.  Not that I'm a materialistic in any sense.  I've given away to--I've given away over a million dollars in documents.  I got from one, last--year before last, I think I sold about-I know I got 33,000 from one auction.  I got another, $16,000 from my account DiCola papers; I got about $8,000 from somebody else.  So I got about--I gave it all away.  And what I designed a program, which I had ready, and before Kennedy left office.  And was it Betty Cory (ph) to say--she said, "(Unclear).  We want to ask (unclear)."  I said, "No."  That I haven't fleshed it out good.  But it read--it's a--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Rising.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 1: Rise and Wise.  Reading to instill self-esteem, writing to improve self-expression.  Now, the math is essential.  Wise--no.  Rise. Why is it mines.  I've just about fleshed it out, and I'm going to turn it over to somebody to--this fella Green or somebody.
Story_ID: 76649
Speaker 1: You were saying that you have some--what--let me do this, 'cause you did answer that question.  When you look back at the work that you did, because, you know, you majored in sociology.
Speaker 2: Mmhm.  Mmhm.
Speaker 1: And you didn't pursue a typical career, but you used your background.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I got off the campus.  I figured I'd, you know--the campus is just like stirring around your own juices, a friend of mine used to say (laughs).
Speaker 1: But you--what would you--how would you sort of talk about the sum of the things that you were able to accomplish?  How would you, you know--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I was just helping people to get a new start in life, really.  That's what it amount to.  And they thanked me.  I've got--had tons of letters and all kinds--you know, comments from people who I've helped, you know.  I mean, many of them made far more money than I did.  And I've never have gone after money.  My wife will tell you, I just give away--I just give away--in fact, Mary has to handle all my business; my daughter, Mary, because I, you know I just...
Story_ID: 76650
Speaker 1: Now, when did you start--I know you're collecting, but was that something you did the whole time that you, you know, from--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, the whole time I was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: And--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --I bought well, you know.  I bought nice items.
Speaker 1: Did you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I have a poem Frederick Douglass wrote in 1854.
Speaker 1: That's what you told me on the phone.  But can you talk about the things that you've collected over the years?  What kinds of things?  You mentioned the Countee Cullen letters.  I mean, what other things have you collected over the years?
Speaker 2: The Harlem (unclear).  I was in New York when Ella Fitzgerald sang "A Tisket, A Tasket" at the Apollo Theatre, 1935 or '36' [1936], whatever year it was.  And I have, you know, collected--oh, of course, Countee Cullen was my favorite poet.  Countee Cullen, I have every book signed that Countee Cullen ever wrote--signed by him.  A book just sold for two-fifty back in 1925, '26' [1926].  Now you get $750 for a Countee Cullen book signed by Countee Cullen.  Get more than that.  Walter Leonard's [HM] daughter just wrote a piece on Countee Cullen.  I gave her some Countee Cullen material; just gave it to her.
Speaker 1: Did you--when you were collecting, sir, did people think that that was ridiculous?
Speaker 2: Well, listen, you know, yeah.  Let me tell you, that I used to speak 25 or 35 times a year all over the United States until (unclear).  But anyway, I used to say that people said, "Bill, why you collect all them old paper, letters, and so forth?"  I said, "Well, I'm free, black, and 21.  I can collect anything as long as it's not illegal or immoral."  I said, "Now I have a friend who collects beer cans."  Sure enough.  He was a white friend of Anheuser-Busch.  He got a big (mansion?), and he got hundreds and hundreds of different brands of beer from Germany; all over the world.  My wife collects butterflies, ornamental butterflies.  I said, "I told her not long ago she bring another butterfly in that house, I'm going to fly out."  I said, "But we been married for 60 years.  I'm gonna leave not on account of a butterfly, 'cause it may be what she wants me to do (laughs).  And the people would laugh (unclear) half of them, you know, pretty much in the (unclear).
Speaker 1: And then--but when you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: And then I feel that I'm a part of that.  Now, I've got a lot of slave papers, see, you know.  Papers of freedom.  And, you know, I usually tell a story about them.  There was skirmish between some confederate soldiers and Union soldiers; skirmishes, you know, just a few men, caused the in-fighting.  One of the Union soldiers (unclear) saw a black man stand by looking on, "Why don't you get up and take part of this fight?  Don't you know we're fighting over you for your freedom?"  The black says, "Say, Union soldier," say, "Have you ever seen two dogs fighting over a bone?"  He said, "Yeah.  What that got to do with the question I asked?"  "Well, have you ever seen the bone and get up and take part in the fight?"
Speaker 1: (Laughs.)
Speaker 2: Well, I feel like I'm the bone taking part in the fight, see.  I used to tell that story.  That's the one I rationale for collecting.
Speaker 1: Didn't--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I feel a part of it.  You know, every--my daughter Andree spoke at a program in Nashville, Tennessee, to a bunch of hardnosed lawyers and doctors and whatnot, (unclear).  And the white people left there crying and the guy at the desk said, "What that woman saying to make those folks cry?"  She read from a letter I've got here. She breaks down when she reads this and a list of slaves.  In one plantation, it said, "Black Minerva, big Minerva, Middle Minerva, Little Minerva."  Black--"Big Moses, Middle Moses, Little Moses."  And there are two slaves; one woman, seventy-five; now she's lived at that--worked on that plantation for years in Alabama.  Zero.  She's worth nothing.  Nothing.  The stakes were being appraised.  Man named Allie, seventy-five, zero, worth nothing.  Working (unclear).  Andree had those people crying.  Boy, she built that thing up so, as they were just--so the guy at the desk said "What that woman saying that to make them folks cry like that?"
Story_ID: 76651
Speaker 1: Sir, where would you collect your things from?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Where did you collect the things--your items from?
Speaker 2: Where did I collect--all over the United States, mostly from dealers, and some direct from people who owned them.  I never cheated anybody.  I always asked what they wanted for it, and if it was too low, I'll tell them, "No, I'm going to give you more."  I'm very--'cause I've been cheated plenty myself.
Speaker 1: But you were ahead of your time in many ways?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Doug Wilder (ph), I called Doug Wilder--Doug Wilder was supposed to set up a slave museum, see, in Virginia.  I can't hear from him, so one guy told me, "Well," he said, "I'll tell Doug you better get in touch with you."  I said, "No, don't tell him that.  If he won't do it, from what I've, I'm not going to fool with him anymore."  'Cause my stuff is rare.  The dealers are just begging me for stuff all the time.
Story_ID: 76652
Speaker 1: Now, talk about the Boule a little bit, you know, and that organization and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Boule is the first fraternal group of organized, you know, professional--I mean, you got to have a degree, see.  It was before the Alphas.  It was founded in ninety--it'll be 100 years next year in 2004.  We going to have a big shindig then in Philadelphia.  And, you know, the--just, you have to be a leader, you know, and make some real--make a real substantial contribution to advances.  Whatever your profession is, try to have a broad, you know, representation of all the leading professor.  (Unclear.)  And it is the principles of--we've kicked out a few, you know, who were (unclear).  Some--see, you'll be surprised at those who haven't gotten in their because of, you know, the--well, whatever they've done, you know, irregularities, moral or otherwise, see.  But it's just a great, you know, bargain for--at one time, we couldn't--we'd meet in a hotel.  We used to meet in the homes, see.
Story_ID: 76653
Speaker 1: And I--well, what happened with me, my wife [Phoebe Anderson] is a part of me being in there, too; of course, I was a major intervention anyway, but she--her dentist was a member of Boule, Doctor Bailey of Columbus, Ohio, see.  He had to write a paper.  You have to present a paper, see, at least every two or three years, depending on how many members in there.  And he was having trouble writing it.  He said, "I'm having trouble."  She said, "What paper are you writing?"  He said, "My (unclear)."  He said, "Yes."  I wrote this paper for him for his talk, you know.  And then it just started.  Of course, I'd had this first radio program, you know, so forth and so on.  I was getting a lot of notoriety and publicity.  My daughter was the first black on television in Columbus, Ohio; Mary, the one that was here.  It was a children's program, and I'd made so many contacts, you know, downtown.  I was the first black to head up a division in the community chest, business division.  You know, things like that, see.  So I guess I was a pretty good candidate, so they asked me to join.  And I said, "Well, I'll join."  I belonged to enough.
Story_ID: 76654
Speaker 1: I had--I'm an Omega [member of Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], see.  And I was--Phoebe's dad was an Alpha [member of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity].  In 1932, when we started getting serious, I had gone through the Alpha.  I had a (unclear) pin on.  See, I was at Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia].  And then the guy--there was a guy, student there, I won't call any names now, but his father was one of the founders of the Alphas.  I'm talking about [Eugene] Kinckle Jones.  Yeah, I know you not going to put this on.  And so I drove the cars.  He was the B.O.M.C., big man on the campus.  Well, having a car, driving a car, and, you know--and then his girlfriend asked me to take her downtown once, see.  He didn't like that, see.  And then I was on the student government, and he--she was supposed to have been in the dormitory by ten o'clock, and he was locked out, then he--she was locked out one time.  And they kept--he--and then she went somewhere overnight, see; he took her somewhere overnight.  He said he took her to some elderly woman's house.  I don't know where he took her.  Anyway, they said they had--and so they asked what--the university, Virginia Union University officials didn't want to deal with him because he was Kinckle Jones' son, see.  And so I said, "He should be reprimanded.  He should be punished just like anybody else."  Well, he heard about that.  So what I--I paid my money to go through the Alphas, and he asked me to come to his room and then scrub his floors, make up his bed, and he paddled me.  I said, "Hell, I'm not going to take this stuff."  So I got out, and then four or five guys got all the way, including James Jackson, this guy who later the head of the (unclear) worker.  Four or five guys got out with me, and they said I could come in later, see, 'cause Kinckle Jones was the ahead of me, see, and--grade level--I mean--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: In school.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And in--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Sir I want to ask--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --pursuing a degree.
Story_ID: 76655
Speaker 1: Can I ask about your grandson?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, he's a fella who's been greatly spoiled.  His mother, you know, she spoiled him probably more than anybody.  His father spoiled him, too.  He's always had what he wanted, you know.  And--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Can you give his name?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: William Layton Roaf.  He's named for me, see.  And--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: He's doing very well in sports.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  And he married last year, but I don't think the marriage is gonna last.  He built his two million-something dollar house.
Speaker 1: (Laughs.)
Speaker 2: Huh?
Story_ID: 76656
Speaker 1: You know, I'm going to ask you one more question.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you want--what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I want to be the--you know, I once said to a guy who was head of--who was it now?  He was--what was his name?  I was on a flight from San Francisco to Washington.  This man headed up a big company.  Why I can't think of the company's name or what his name was, I don't know, but that's what, you know, old age has done to me.  Anyway, he said, "Bill, how do you want to be remembered?  I said, "Just put on my tombstone my name, the year that I was on this earth and just with two letters, 'He tried.'  'He tried his'--'He tried.'"  That's all I want.  I mean, that's all I want.  "He tried."  I tried.  I've tried to do the best I can.  "He tried."  That's all I want.  He said, "You--".  He wrote me.  He said, "You have succeeded too."  He got to be one of my best friends.  He's gone now.  Oh, yeah.  Oh, no.  He--I tell you, his name was--you remember Nixon introduced his (Deputy?) (unclear) for his cabinet?  Jack Ryan was his name.  He was head the Republican Party at that time, of the money raised every year; he (unclear) brilliant he had.  Well, Jack Ryan, we flew back together.  When he came to Washington, he said, "Bill, come on, go with me to the White House," or wherever he was--to the hotel then to the White House.  I said, "No.  I don't--."  So he--and so I had a review of his company when I was in Agriculture.  And the General Telephone--yeah, he was head of General Telephone, General Tels., second largest phone company in America.  Okay.  He said, "Bill, what position you want in Nixon's cabinet?"  I said, I don't want a position.  I want to keep this job I've got with Agriculture."  He said, "Why would you want to keep that?"  He said, "Dan Edwards, who's Governor of the State of Washington and I along with Nixon are putting together his cabinet designees."  He said, "You sure you don't want it?"  I said, "No."  I said, "Look, I met you through this job."  I said, "I like this work I'm doing.  I'm helping so many people, hundreds of people; thousands of them."  And he couldn't get over that.  So I told him, I said, "That's all I want on my tombstone, 'He tried.'"  We corresponded, but he's dead now.  But we corresponded very--.  That's all I want.  I really mean that.  People think I'm talking a lot of--they have a, you know, some part or something.  I don't know.  But I don't.  I said, this is in me.  That's all.
Story_ID: 76657
Speaker 1: And sir, one last thing I'd like you to recite your poem, is it "My Bridge?"
Speaker 2: "My bridge is not a structure made of stone, nor does it span a stream or river wide.  My bridge is built on hope to see a world where peace and human dignity abide.  I knew my bridge would be a fragile thing, and yet I built it to the distant land, whereon you stood.  I knew the risk I took to build a bridge with heart and not with hand.  But when I reached the shore on which I sought a friendly greeting and a warm embrace, you came to me.  Without a word I read your answer etched across your smiling face.  I did not ask your name nor did you mine; no thought of race or sex or creed.  We knew we shared a common hope or common dream and bore alike the pain of failure, too.  We must not walk another step apart, nor let our dreams like flowers sag and wilt.  We can replace discord and fight wisdom--we can--."  See, one version says, "We can replace discord and fight with love."  The other one says, "We can replace discord and fight with peace.  I know, because that's how my bridge was built."  Let me recite that last verse again.  " We must not walk another step apart, nor let our dreams like flowers sag and wilt.  We can replace discord and fight with peace.  I know, because that's how my bridge was built."  I'm gonna dedicate that one to Jimmy Carter.  That's what Jimmy Carter is doing.
Story_ID: 76658
Speaker 1: And I just--my latest poem, and I'm giving you a copy of my latest poem.  It's called, "God Everywhere."  "Is there a God?  Oh, no, there is Thee God."  Thee is capitalized.  Thee God.  "I saw him in that little Arab baby's smile in that tiny--no, I saw him in that tiny Arab baby's smile, in that little Jewish boy, helping my ailing aunt across Main Street.  God sang to me as I passed that storefront independent church last night.  I know God's presence and I know his voice, because he's everywhere I go."  That--you know, ministers are using that poem?  They have it everywhere I go.  That's the latest one.
Speaker 2: That's wonderful.  Thank you Mr. Layton, thank you.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 76659
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972]--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Could you help him with the photos?
Speaker 1: --when I was a officer of the Board of Governors, Federal Reserve in Washington.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Tell us about this one--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: I don't know what--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  --sir.
Speaker 1: Sir?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's--that picture is at Fort Collier in Northeast Winchester, Virginia, where the last battle of the Shenandoah Valley was fought.  Stonewall Jackson had said, "If we lose, the Shenandoah Valley, which was the breadbasket of the Confederacy, we will lose the war," and sure enough, that's what happened.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  (Unclear)
Speaker 2: So we're restoring that Fort and the William Layton collection of historical papers, Civil War papers will be housed in that Fort.  There's a house on that battlefield where--which will have the William Layton Library and the archives.
Speaker 1: Oh, they're going to have a library named after you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  You know what year this was taken?
Speaker 2: That was taken in this year, and the last year.
Speaker 1: Two-thousand and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: In June of 2002.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  And who are the people on either side?
Speaker 2: Oh, the woman who's standing there is Katherine Whitesell (ph), who heads up this project.  One of the biggest owners--her family owns one of the largest apple orchards in the world, if not the largest.  Winchester, you know, is famous for its applies.  And she and the man my left seated with me is John Morrison, who wanted to be--'cause he's a very wealthy man.  He owned a big company in Winchester.  And he's been a close friend of mine for many years.
Speaker 1: And just look at that.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  How about this one now?  You--we know this is you, but tell us what and where it was taken.
Speaker 1: That's me when speaking to the Negro College Fund here in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: About--
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Was that recently?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  How long ago was this?
Speaker 1: That was back in March or April of 2002.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: What college?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What college?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  A Negro College Fund meeting.
Speaker 1: Oh.  United Negro College.
Speaker 2: United Negro College [Fund].
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  ... the contact information if you have it; phone number and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  I've got it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Let's do this one, sir.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  This one's actually captioned, so I can just --(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  --on that.
Speaker 2: Oh.  The credits went back.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  Did you have a picture of me standing up at my desk in the (unclear).
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  Look it up here (unclear).  Which one? Standing at your desk?
Speaker 1: These are wonderful.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  This is when we'd been married--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  --sixty years.  And I put them all bottom up, so we all got some and mailed them out of town.  Mary, of course, got her--I had prepared to keep this since now (unclear).
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: I have a disc camera, which I can't find.
Speaker 1: Oh, here's one.
Speaker 2: It was somewhere out to Millwood, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Here.  We're gonna put this back in here, okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: So, let's--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  This is on caption, too.  Yeah.  So I shot the borders.  It says, "Seen on (unclear) T.V. Show," July 6, 2000, 60th Year Anniversary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  We got it.  Tell us about this photo.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA GUESET:  Bill.  I can't see it.  What is that?  Is that under--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: This is one of the family, old.  You know, at Andree's--when was that?  Was the swearing-in of the Supreme Court?
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  ... was 80 years old.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's your 80th birthday.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  Yeah.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Can you tell us, starting with (unclear).
Speaker 1: That's our daughter, Mary Layton.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  And then?
Speaker 1: And that's Andrew Roaf; my daughter, the adopted son of my daughter, the Judge's.
Speaker 2: That's R-O-A-L-F?
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  R-O-A-F.
Speaker 2: R-O-A-F.  Andrew Roaf.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  L-O-A-F is popular.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Roaf.  R-O-A-F.
Speaker 1: And that's Mary Ruth's Roaf back of him.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's Andree, Judge Andree Roaf, our daughter, Andree Layton Roaf.
Speaker 2: She has the print dress.
Speaker 1: Oh, no.  Wait a minute.  That's--I don't know whether that's Mary--who is this?  Oh, that's Sheila (ph) Roaf.  That's Andree's daughter right there.  Sheila (ph) Roaf.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  Andree has two daughters in there.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: See, well, that's Mary Ruth Roaf.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's Ben Layton, my brother.  He's deceased.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: He fought in the Battle of the Bulge.  That's Clifton--Doctor Clifton Roaf, Andree's husband, Judge Roaf's husband.  This is Lon (ph) Anderson, Phoebe's nephew, her brother's son.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  Yeah.  That's the only (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's Willie Roaf, the football star.  That's Betty Jean Forrester's (ph)--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  His sister--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --sister's daughter, and that's--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  That' Betty Jean.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) on the right.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  It was left to right.  We went left to right on that.
Speaker 1: And then--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  Moving from left to right.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  We did it.  That's the order that Mr. Layton described it in.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  Okay.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  And I'm saying that next to the mic so they can hear it.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  And that's the adopted son.  That's the football player and his father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  This is Andree and her family.
Speaker 1: Sir?  Sir?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  Bill?  Who is that?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Phoebe's (best half?).
Speaker 2: Oh.  (Laughs).
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  What was the occasion when this was taken?
Speaker 2: That's--what was that?  That's your 80th, Phoebe?
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  That's 70.  I was 70 years old.
Speaker 2: Seventy then.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  We had just come back from (Kansas City?).
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  And that was a surprise party.  (Unclear).  I said, "Oh, that happened to be (unclear) there's nobody in here."  I put the key in the door and I look and here were all these (unclear).
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  (Laughs.)  Okay.  And then for this one.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  That's Mary.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Daughter Mary.
Speaker 1: The younger.  The younger of the two daughters.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  One of our observers that are here.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  That's Andree Roaf.  (Unclear.)
Speaker 2: The Judge.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell it?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  A-N-D-R-E-E (unclear).
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Hold on one second.  Excuse me, sir.  Go ahead and tell us--tell us again what you wanted to say about this one.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  This one is Andree Roaf.  Judge Roaf. A-N-D-R-E-E, R-O-A-F, Roaf.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  And that's one of your daughters?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  That's the oldest daughter.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Oldest daughter.  And where is she?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  She lives in Arkansas.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  In what--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  Pine Bluff, Arkansas.  But she's on the court in Little Rock.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  In which court does she serve?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  She's on the Appeals Court now.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) the Supreme Court.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  And this is Mary Layton and Nigel Parkinson (ph).  Mary and Nigel.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  That's her life partner.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're done.
Speaker 2: ... was in the Battle of the Bulge.  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Who's going to describe this one?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  Bill?
Speaker 1: That's the 73rd (unclear).
Speaker 2: You want to describe it?
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  Let's see.  William Layton and Ben, his brother.  Benjamin Thomas Layton and Civil War documents.
Speaker 2: That was an exhibit that traveled all around the United States.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Do you know about when this would have been taken?  About what year?
Speaker 1: That was taken in 19--oh, about 1992.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  Ninety-two [1992] is a good guess.
Speaker 1: It was done in 1992 (unclear).
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Great.  Okay.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA GUEST:  Um-hm.
