Story_ID: 156300
Speaker 1: Well, good morning.
Speaker 2: Morning.
Speaker 1: We're happy to have the opportunity to interview you this morning.  My name is Edward Anderson.  I'm an interviewer with [The] HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns here is our videographer.  With us in the room also is Ms. Denise Gines as an observer and member of The HistoryMakers family.  I don't know how much you know about HistoryMakers, but let me share this with you if I could before we really start the questioning.  The HistoryMakers is a national, 501(c)(3) nonprofit institution, committed to preserving, developing and providing easy access to an internationally recognized archival collection of thousands of African American video oral histories.  The HistoryMakers represent the single largest archival project of its kind in the world.  Not since the recording of former slaves during the WPA [Works Progress Administration] Movement of the 1930s has there been a methodic and wide-scale attempt to capture the testimonies of African Americans.  Even though African Americans have made significant contributions to American life, society and culture, the world is still largely unaware of these contributions as well as the many personal stories of African American contributors.  Furthermore, existing oral history collections still consists largely of transcribed audio cassette interviews.  Access to them is extremely limited and most of all, ill-suited for easy transfer to today's media formats.  The purpose of this archive is to educate and to show the breadth and depth of this important American history as told by the first person to highlight the accomplishments of individual African Americans across a variety of disciplines, to showcase those who have played a role in African American-led movements and/or organizations and to preserve the material for years and generations to come, creating a priceless collection.  It's goal is to complete five thousand interviews within the next five years.  Finally, The HistoryMakers is committed to creating an archive of unparalleled importance and exposing its archival collection to the widest audience possible using collaborations as well as the Internet and a digital archive that will make the archive's entire holdings accessible to institutions, for example, the Schaumburg Library [sic, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York Public Library, New York, New York], the Library of Congress, Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and other institutions around the country.  Presently, The HistoryMakers have archived more than 1,400 first-person interviews conducted since the organization's inception in 1999.  We do have a website which, of course, is www.thehistorymakers.com which contains a brief history of most of the people we've interviewed.  Just recently, in fact, last week, we had our regular Day of Education here in Atlanta [Georgia], which was hosted by your alma mater, Morehouse College.  We had over three hundred students and teachers from the Atlanta school system [Atlanta Public Schools] and the DeKalb school system [DeKalb County Schools] that participated.  This Day of Education is conducted throughout the country in large cities in an effort to make faculty and students aware of this new source of research and information.  And now, Mr. Lewis, we're ready to find out about your life.  You are our newest HistoryMaker.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Sir, would give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Willard Charles Lewis, W-I-L-L-A-R-D, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, L-E-W-I-S.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth and place of birth, please?
Speaker 2: April 9th, 1961, LaGrange, Georgia.
Story_ID: 156301
Speaker 1: Tell us your mother's name, please.
Speaker 2: Dora H. Lewis.
Speaker 1: Please spell her name and tell here [sic, us] where she was born and where she grew up.
Speaker 2: She was born in LaGrange, Georgia.  Her name is spelled, Dora, D-O-R-A, Lewis, L-E-W-I-S.  But she was born in LaGrange, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And she grew up in LaGrange, Georgia, I think I heard you say.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: What do you know about her background and her growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was a very interesting and loving woman, and I'm pretty sure you have a lot of people that'll say that, and that's really--I feel that deeply in my heart.  My mother had a very tough upbringing.  She was born in 1922 and during a period of time when many of the Southern African Americans were sharecroppers, and her family was no different.  My mother had a good percentage of her lineage rooted in both African American and Native American history.  And beyond that I do know that she was raised by my grandmother, who was born in 1888, I believe and who was also my first caregiver.  My mother was a--during my lifetime, a--and has been and continues to be, a very thoughtful person, particularly--particularly as it comes to ensuring that her offspring received education.  That was number one in her book.  She was a very hardworking person while, during--she's retired now, but during her working years, extremely hard working.  She was a registered nurse.  She received a junior college degree from Columbus College [later, Columbus State University, Columbus, Georgia].  I don't know which year.  I do know that she achieved that, and she became a LPN [Licensed Practical Nurse] and also worked private duty for some families in the region as a nurse and also served as an officer in her nurses' association on a national basis.  She's a member of the Order of the Eastern Star, and has been active and continues to be active, an active participant.  The Masonic Order is, has been, has been a part of my family history.  Her father [King Herndon] was a Prince Hall Mason as well as her brother, J. D. Herndon, as well as myself and my nephew and my oldest brother.
Speaker 1: Very well.  Tell some other things from a son's perspective about your mom.  Describe her to us, please?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that she is a person that--it's so many things I could say about her.  I love and cherish her dearly, but she's a selfless person.  She's not a person that thinks about herself first and those are the memories that I have of her growing up, was that she was all about sacrifice.  She sacrificed things for herself to make sure that we prospered and had an opportunity to have all the things that we needed to have in order to be successful.
Speaker 1: Did your mother share any stories with you about her growing up?  If so, what were some of these stories?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) well, I think that probably the one story that sticks out in my mind had to do with her days in sharecropping as a child growing up in that type of environment and working, toiling throughout a period of months, throughout a season of planting and harvesting crops and to have the owner of the land to come after the harvest and to summarily take all of the fruits of their labor from an entire year of hard work and drive off into the sunset as though that was that person's sole right.  And I think that was a pretty compelling story when you look at the period of time that that occurred and what was going on with African Americans before the Civil Rights Movement and how unjust people were treated during that period of time, during Jim Crow.
Speaker 1: Now, this is in the LaGrange, Georgia area as well?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Would you again, spell your mom's name for us, please, her full name?
Speaker 2: Dora, D-O-R-A.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Lewis, L-E-W-I-S.
Speaker 1: And what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Herndon, H-E-R-N-D-O-N.
Story_ID: 156302
Speaker 1: Let's explore the grandparents.  Herndon is an interesting name for this area of the country.  Who were her [Lewis' mother, Dora Herndon Lewis] grandparents--her father and her mother, please?  And let's spell their names as you tell me.  Let's talk about her grandmother first, if we could, please.
Speaker 2: Her grandmother?
Speaker 1: Yes--I'm sorry, her mother.
Speaker 2: Okay, I can't go back quite that far (laughter).  But my grandmother, her name was Arnell [sic, Inez] Herndon--
Speaker 1: Can--
Speaker 2: --A-R-N-E-L-L, Herndon, H-E-R-N-D-O-N.
Speaker 1: Was that her maiden name or her married name?
Speaker 2: Her married name.
Speaker 1: And her maiden name was?
Speaker 2: I'm, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, tell us a little bit about Grandma Herndon?
Speaker 2: Well, she raised me for the, I guess, for probably the first seven, eight years of my life.  I lived with her during that period of time.  When I say "lived," we had two houses that were in very close proximity to each other.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And my family was so large, I have--I'm the youngest of eight.  And so my sister and I stayed with my grandmother in the house across the way, so to speak and lived with her.  And she was a, I have some very good, fond memories of her.  And she was a, also a disciplinarian.  I'll never forget.  My nephew who is only a few years younger than myself, we were being very mischievous.  I couldn't have been any more than four or five years old.  And he was much younger than that.  He's about three years younger than I am.  So he was a little kid, and I'll never forget one summer, she was keeping us.  And, and I decided I was gonna act up.  I didn't act up a lot growing up, but I did act up that day.  And, and I just knew that I was gonna have my way with her that day.  And I told my nephew that she can't catch me, that old woman.  (Laughter) and I took out running, and I'll never forget, she was in her eighties at the time, and she tracked me down.  She ran me down and picked me up by the nape of my neck.  But I loved her dearly, and there was another opportunity--I loved her so much, in fact, that at one point in time I unwittingly ran away from home because I wanted to go to church with her.  And she went to church, and I think there was something else planned for me to do that day and so I ran after the car, and we called her Ma-Ma.  And Ma-Ma was leaving, and I ran after the car trying to track Ma-Ma down.  And I didn't see her anymore that day.  She probably went visiting out in the country, and seeing, seeing friends.  And so that evening, when it became close to nightfall, I was determined to find Ma-Ma.  So, so I grabbed me a stick, and I started walking up the street, and I couldn't, I, maybe I was three years old at the time, and that actually is one of my earliest memories.  And I got away from the house, and I walked at least a good three or four hundred yards until some neighbors saw me walking up the street and said, that's that little Lewis boy.  They went and got me and they called my mother [Dora Herndon Lewis], of course.  They brought me back.  But that was a special memory that I have of her, that loving her that much to, to follow her regardless of, of the circumstances.
Speaker 1: Great, great.
Story_ID: 156303
Speaker 1: And your grandfather's name was?
Speaker 2: King Herndon.
Speaker 1: And spell that for us, please.
Speaker 2: K-I-N-G, Herndon, H-E-R-N-D-O-N.
Speaker 1: And tell us a little bit about your grandfather, please.
Speaker 2: I never knew my grandfather.  He died a year before I was born, but one thing I do know in talking to my uncles and my mother [Dora Herndon Lewis] and my aunts who were his children, that he was a very well respected man.  He was probably I would characterize from the stories that I've heard of a person that gained or garnered a lot of respect within the family, pretty much the patriarch.
Speaker 1: I see.  Herndon is an important name in this area of the country, Georgia.  Was he related to the Herndons of Atlanta Life [Insurance Company, part of Atlanta Life Financial Group] to the best of your knowledge?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I don't think so, but I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where was--do you have any idea where he was from?
Speaker 2: Troup County [Georgia], I'm certain he was from the rural parts of the county.  I do know that he was born around, either on or around 1882, but beyond that, I'm not certain of his birth place.
Speaker 1: Okay, any further knowledge of your grandfather or grandmother [Inez Herndon] on your mother's side of the family, their ancestors?
Speaker 2: I have none.
Speaker 1: None at all.  And they both were born in the 1880s.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And all are, and both were from Troup County, is that right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: All right, is Troup County anywhere near Social Circle [Georgia]?  That's the origin of the Herndons of Atlanta Life.
Speaker 2: I believe Social Circle is--LaGrange [Georgia] and Troup County is located in the central part of the state on the western border of Georgia, bordering Alabama.  And I don't think that Social Circle is close by there.
Speaker 1: All right.  One last question regarding the Herndons before we talk about your father [Wilbur Milton Lewis] and his ancestors.  Did the name Herndon have any impact on your pursuit of a career in the, in banking or the financial services industry?
Speaker 2: No, it did not.  I recognized that my mother's maiden name was Herndon, but it was never an issue with me regarding anything that occurred in my career.
Story_ID: 156304
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your dad.  Would you give us your dad's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Wilbur Milton Lewis, W-I-L-B-U-R, Milton, M-I-L-T-O-N, Lewis, L-E-W-I-S.
Speaker 1: His date of birth and place of birth, please?
Speaker 2: He was born April 15, 1910 in Chambers County, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Tell us what your memories are?  Tell us your memories of your father, please?
Speaker 2: Well, my first memories of my father, there were so many of us, and I, and my father was a contractor, a brick mason.  And my first memory was seeing him walk by--I saw so little of him because he worked so long and hard, that I saw him walk by, and I knew he was my father, and it was like the president of the United States walking past.  I stood at attention and he gained--he had my full attention whenever I did see him when I was a very small child.  He was a person that believed in giving back to his community.  He came to LaGrange [Georgia] from Macon, Georgia.  He had migrated to Macon, Georgia, and came there with a skill that many of the African Americans did not have during that period of time.  And he could lay bricks.  And he brought that talent to LaGrange and taught many of the other African Americans in the town the trade and then began to employ them and many of them, had taught them how to employ others.  And I think he, he's pretty much unsung for that.  But when you look at the number of people that benefited and prospered and became successful businessmen in their own right as a result of his efforts, I think it's something that's pretty outstanding for the period of time that he was in.
Speaker 1: What are some of the things you remember doing with your dad while you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Well, we started to spend more time later in his life.  He passed away in 1979, and we spent a lot of time together because all of my brothers and sisters had graduated from high school and had gone to college, and so my father and I, we were the--pretty much we were there alone after his retirement, a lot together.  And I probably took it more for granted then than I should have and later came to regret that.  But later in life, we became more like brothers than like father and son.  And, you know, and I probably was not as respectful to him as I should have been because of that and--but we used to talk a lot about different things.  I probably spent more time with him talking about things that happened in his past than any of my brothers and sisters.  They probably knew more about his current state of affairs than I did.  But certainly, a lot of those evenings sitting there, just me and him, we talked about a lot of stuff.  And I wanted to know a lot.  I got some details.  I didn't get all of 'em, but I got a few.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: He was, told me stories about his days as a boxer, and told me--
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us a little bit about that, please?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a very brief history.  And he competed in boxing, but he did a lot of things.  And that was just one of the things that--and every man will do.  But he had a lot of different interests and got in some trouble every now and then.  And I'll never forget the story he told me about he, his stepbrother and stepsister, they were, they were going to hop a train and (laughter), and they ran to hop the train and he, he was the oldest.  And so he jumped on the train and then his stepbrother jumped on the train, and his stepsister tried to grab the train and she grabbed the very end of it, and the train was moving at such a speed it had her, had her laying--had her horizontal in the air (laughter).  So, that was during his childhood.  So I thought that was interesting that this guy I looked at as the, as the, as the pope of the family and as my, as the, as high in esteem as I could possibly put somebody on, would, would be hopping trains and, and boxing and getting into mischief and doing different things than normal people do.
Speaker 1: Great, great.
Story_ID: 156305
Speaker 1: So your dad [Wilbur Milton Lewis] was involved in a lot of things.  What are some of the other type activities that he shared with you during your days of friendship?
Speaker 2: Well, I think we, and, and, and, and to be fair to my family, one of the things that has been most beneficial to me growing up, and one thing that I have--haven't found a real answer for in terms of translation to others that are around me, is the fact that his insight, not just insight into himself, but his insight into world affairs, the discussions that we had on a personal basis about everything from race to religion to politics, you name it.  He was very versed in every subject, very opinionated.  And I was very opinionated also, and but all of my siblings are as well.  And the evenings that--I can't tell you how many countless evenings from the '60s [1960s] through the '70s [1970s] when we would spend countless hours in debate over every issue that you can possibly imagine.  And I'll never forget, 1968, in 1968--actually, not the '68 [1968] election, but the '72 [1972] election when George McGovern ran against Richard Nixon.  That was the hot topic of conversation around the house.  And I did not believe, at that time, and keep in mind, I'm all of ten, eleven years old (laughter), if I was that old, and my point of contention was that--actually, it was Hubert Humphrey [sic, McGovern], I'm sorry.  I got the names mixed up.  But it was Humphrey that ran against Nixon during that year.  But I didn't believe that he was capable of leading the country during the times after the Vietnam War, and I was very adamant in my support of Richard Nixon (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Little did I know, a couple of years later, I believe it was 1974, that he would be shamed out of office as a result of the actions of himself and the Democratic [sic, Republican] Party during that period of time.  And I, in fact, I even saved the press clipping from that.  But those were the types of conversations that we had on a consistent, constant basis during my childhood in growing up.
Speaker 1: Tell me again, the year of your dad's birth?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ten [1910].
Speaker 1: So your dad grew up in the era of Jim Crow.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Did you talk very much about that era and how it impacted his life?
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  My father was a person that obviously, entrepreneurial, that believed in making a difference, that made a difference and was self-employed, was able to cross a few barriers of terms of working for a lot of the very, most, a lot of the most powerful people in the town because he could do something and do it well.  He was very skilled at what he did.  And there was not a lot of conversation about Jim Crow, about the injustices.  I felt personally that, that he could have received more respect when people called the house, but what I didn't realize at the time was, you know, it was business, and when I thought back on it, they weren't as disrespectful as I thought.  And so I probably was a little radical myself.  And if I had thought about it a little differently, then I probably would have come to some different conclusions.  But I do think there was, I do think he was well-received and respected.
Story_ID: 156306
Speaker 1: Your dad [Wilbur Milton Lewis] obviously had an entrepreneurial spirit.  Looking at your career and your life, did that have any impact on you?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, there's no question about it.  I have my entire life believed that the life of an entrepreneur, the spirit, the creativity, the imagination that it takes in creating something new is the spice of life.  And I have always believed that.  So there's no question about that.
Speaker 1: Any words of wisdom from your dad in terms of success in business to share with at this time?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, not so much words, but the way he lived his life was an inspiration to me because I, you know, when I talk to my friends whose fathers he mentored--my father was fifty-one years old when I was born.  So he was older than a lot, much older than a lot of--he was old enough to be a lot of my friends' fathers, in fact.  And so in listening to them talk about him and how, the impact that he made on their family, I think those types of inspirations are the types of things that lead me to constantly want to give back to others.  So.
Speaker 1: Do you still have contact with any of these people who he mentored and do they impact your life in any way?
Speaker 2: Not the people that he mentored, but their, but one of my best friends is Alvin Kimbrough [ph.] and Alvin, he and his father worked very closely with my father when my father was active in the brick trade.
Speaker 1: Yes, and you mentioned that he was active in the Masons as well, I believe, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Well, he was not active in terms of, to my knowledge.  I do think he had became a Mason at one point, but he was not active when I came along.  I believe he was also a member of the Elks Lodge as well, but I don't recall him being active.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: The Masonic Order is more deeply rooted in my mother's [Dora Herndon Lewis] side of the family.
Speaker 1: And you became a member as a result of your observation and interaction with members on her side of the family?
Speaker 2: And my oldest brother [James Herndon Body (ph.)].
Speaker 1: And your oldest brother.
Story_ID: 156307
Speaker 1: I want to ask as we prepare to end this tape and go to the next how your mother [Dora Herndon Lewis] and father [Wilbur Milton Lewis] met and where they met, to the best of your knowledge.
Speaker 2: Oh, they met at a funeral (laughter).  And, nothing, they both at that point had--had had previous marriages.  And I believe my mother saw my father at a funeral and they were somehow riding together and she thought how sharply dressed he was and how good-looking he was and he thought how good-looking she was.  And I think that that started it all (laughter).
Speaker 1: Considering your attire, is that one of the traits that you--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --adapted from him?
Speaker 2: Well, I will say this, when I was growing up, they did make sure that I was sportily dressed all the time (laughter).
Speaker 1: Very well.  They did a good job (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Thank you.
Story_ID: 156308
Speaker 1: Let's just go back and, and look at today's date to firmly establish the time of this interview.  Today's date and the location, our present location in terms of address?
Speaker 2: February 16, two thousand and--2006.  We're located at 1201 Peachtree Street, 400 Building of Colony Square, Suite 200, Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And this is the location of your employment?
Speaker 2: This is my temporary location.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: My, I'm building a new bank and it will--when construction is completed, it will be across the street in the 1180 Peachtree Building which is the new signature in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: And your employment, sir, your voc- your profession?
Speaker 2: I'm president and CEO of One Georgia Bank.
Speaker 1: Very well, sir.
Story_ID: 156309
Speaker 1: And tell us, your favorite food and favorite destination of your vaca- of, of vacations.
Speaker 2: Well, favorite food would have to be lobster.
Speaker 1: Lobster.
Speaker 2: Lobster and crab legs, I'm a big seafood lover.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so if you put a lobster in front of me or some crab legs, it's kind of tough to hold me down on that one.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Destination place, I've been all over the country, but I think the place that I must enjoyed was Puerto Rico.
Speaker 1: I see.  Your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year probably would be spring.  Spring has a certain smell to it.  You kind of open up the house after being tucked away during the winter months.  Now, that I'm a golfer, I get a chance to get out in the open air and play some golf and just kind of really enjoy the outdoors for the first time, and the weather's not too hot.
Speaker 1: And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably blue.  I have no reason for that being my favorite color, but it's probably blue.
Speaker 1: And your favorite expression or adage.
Speaker 2: Well, I think "Do unto others as you would have them do unto you" [Matthew 7:12 or Luke 6:31] is probably the thing that I probably live by when I think back to my life as the number one credo with me, doing some of the things that I've done, being successful.
Speaker 1: Very well.  Thank you.
Story_ID: 156310
Speaker 1: Let's return to our discussion of your family.  We've talked about your mom [Dora Herndon Lewis] and your dad [Wilbur Milton Lewis], and you mentioned earlier that you have several siblings.  The number again, the number of sisters and brothers again?
Speaker 2: I had seven other brothers and sisters.  Two of them have fallen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would you give us their names and where you fit in the birth order and any one or two significant things you may want to say about either, starting with the oldest?
Speaker 2: Now, there's a lot of things I could say about my brothers and sisters because they were probably the most influential components of my growing up to a large degree, beyond my parents.  There's no question that they had a significant and continue to have a significant impact on me and have--and not only when I was a very small child, but all through my life and continue to be.  My oldest brother was James Herndon Body [ph.].  He was my mother's oldest child, my father's stepson, but he obviously, he was, he grew up as my father's son.  So there was no distinction made between him being a--and in fact, this is the first time that's ever come out of my mouth in terms of stepbrother, I mean, not stepbrother, but half-brother or what have you.  But he was my whole brother in every sense of the word.  And he was sixteen years older than myself.  So he was sixteen when I was born.  So he was born in the '40s [1940s].  And they, my father taught him the business, and he became very successful at it.  And he eventually moved to Atlanta [Georgia] where he became a contractor here in Atlanta.  And he was a very fun-loving person up until the time of his passing several years ago.  But my brother had a lot of fun, so his years on the earth were short, but they wasn't--he had a full life, no question about it.  My next sister is, she was the first college graduate in our family, Judith Ricks [ph.] is her married name.  She was Judith Lewis, but now she's Judith Ricks, and she's, she was, Judy was--we called her Judy, call her Judy, Judy was probably the, probably one of the more spirited members of our family and certainly a great role model to follow now.  But she was the first college graduate.  She graduated from Tuskegee Institute [later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], as it was called at that time.  And then she also received, she stayed there and received her master's degree as well and began working in Kentucky for Kentucky State University [Frankfort, Kentucky] where she stayed for a number of years.  And I think she's there now.  My next sister, Mattie, Mattie Arnell [ph.], after my grandmother, Shelly [ph.], is her married name.  She was Mattie Lewis.  She, and she passed away a year after my brother of, she died of breast cancer.  And she was an absolute delightful person.  She was probably the most lightly spoken one of us.  All the rest of us were hard-charging bulls.  And she was too, but she was a, she was not quite as voicetrous and domineering as the rest of us.  We're all very strong personalities, and she was too in her own way, very competitive.  And she, she was first, I believe that she was the first African American to integrate the Medical College of Georgia [Augusta University] in Augusta [Georgia].  And she went there and received her RN [Registered Nurse] in nursing from the Medical College of Georgia.  And so those were interesting times listening to some of the stories that she would have.  They were very subtle things that would occur, but nothing of--I don't think there was any blatant issues that she had to deal with, but there were some definite subtle things that would, would happen that would forge her mental toughness and also helped serve as a, a guidepost for the younger, younger ones of us to keep our head moving straighter f- straight forward.
Story_ID: 156311
Speaker 1: My next sister, Joyce Lewis, Joyce was also one of the pioneers of integration and Joyce is probably the, she--Mattie [Arnell Shelly] was salutatorian of her high school and Joyce topped that.  She was valedictorian (laughter), and Joyce, she was one of the pioneers of integration at Simmons College [Boston, Massachusetts] in Boston [Massachusetts], one of the Ivy League schools [sic] up there.  And she actually later in life, I did learn that a lot of the women in the South during that period of time that went to Simmons College looked up to her as a person that, a person of inspiration, as a person that came before them and a very talented person.  And I'll tell you, she's the, back in--my first visit to the, she took me to the dentist, my first dentist visit.  And we went to a, we went to the dentist's office.  And at that time, it was during the time of obviously, the '60s [1960s], and that period it was a time of segregation.  And I did come along during the latter vestiges of segregation and went through the whole integration process myself.  And, but that was during a period of time when there was a white waiting room and a black waiting room.  And then it was called "colored."  And we were taken back to the quote, unquote the "colored" waiting room.  And, and the entire time I was sitting there with my sister as a little small kid, and she's sitting there, and I didn't realize--she was just as calm as she could be, but I could, I didn't realize that it was eating her up inside to be sitting there in the, in that waiting room.  So for the follow-up visit, I guarantee you she doesn't realize that I remember this, but for the follow-up visit, we went to the white waiting room.  And we waited, and we sat in the white waiting room.  In fact, I think the receptionist pointed toward the "colored" waiting room, but she took me into the white waiting room.  And, and I sat there on the floor, and I played with a little white kid, and nothing was ever said.  And after that day, I don't think that, I don't think that anyone ever looked back on that period.  And I know my subsequent visits there, it was, it was integrated, you know, in every sense of the word.  So I don't know if she was the first to do that, but it certainly caught my attention.  And I remember it to this day.
Story_ID: 156312
Speaker 1: My brother, Milton Lewis, Milton King Lewis, he followed my sister, Joyce [Lewis].  And Milton, after my, after the period of time when, when I stayed with my grandmother and my sister [Carol Lewis] that's just older than myself, we stayed with her and my nephew was there too, off and on there, and then later, full-time there, but after that period then, my brother and I started to bunk.  And he's the guy that taught me how to play chess at a very young age.  I started playing when I was six years old and didn't beat him until I was in the fourth grade (laughter).  So he, from the time I was six until the time I was probably about nine years old, probably every week I took a beating at his hands.  And, but we were and remain great friends.  We've had a lot of discussion and debate.  We look at the future and the past and primarily, the future and current events, and he's traveled the world.  And he was the person that when I decided what college I wanted to go to, I decided on Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] because he was a graduated of Morehouse College.  And I decided to do that because I received, fortunate for me, I don't know what I did to deserve it, but I did have a lot of opportunity to go to a lot of different schools.  And I narrowed my choices down and Morehouse was one of 'em.  And I decided to go there because I didn't know much of anything about Morehouse other than the fact that I respected my brother so much and the fact that he went to that college.  And he graduated from there in 1975, and I followed there.  And my first year there was 1979, and I graduated in '83 [1983].  He later became Colonel Lewis.  He went to the [U.S.] Military and as an [U.S.] Army officer.  He was the, he was the first--he was in the first ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] class that was a joint venture between Morehouse and Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia].  And so he graduated from Morehouse and then that same weekend, went over to Georgia Tech where he received his second lieutenant bars at Georgia Tech.  It was a big deal back during that period of time.  And I'll never forget that he was interviewed by [HM] Jocelyn Dorsey who was his favorite newscaster.  And so I think that had to be a big treat for him.
Speaker 2: As a retired Army colonel myself, I thought I recognized that name, Milton Lewis, and I'll refresh my recollection and perhaps we'll share some memories, the pleasant memories I'm sure that I have had with Colonel Lewis--
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2: --during my military career.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's great, that's wonderful.
Story_ID: 156313
Speaker 1: My next sister probably is the life of the party, Cheryl Lewis [ph.], now Cheryl Jordan Wright [ph.].  And I say the life of the party because she was always, she's always a lot of fun, and regardless of the situation or circumstances, she always has a laugh for you and a chuckle and a big, big, big smile and grin and she's always a whole lot of fun.  And, not that she hasn't had tough times, we've all had tough times.  But she's one person I can truly say that regardless of the circumstance she's always had a bright vision for the future.  And she graduated from Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].  She was at Spelman when my brother [Milton Lewis] was at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and moved to Denver, Colorado where she now resides.  She's been in Denver since she's been out of college, and I know one of the joys that she's had is that her daughter, Davaki [ph.] eventually came back to Spelman, well, came to Spelman to go to college.  And she graduated.  I know she's very proud, very proud of her as I am of all of my nieces and nephews.  I have a, there's a great second coming of us that is incredible.  These are some young folks that are--now the oldest are hitting toward thirty years old and most of them are in their twenties and a few teenagers.  But they are, they're gonna be a force to be reckoned with in the future themselves.  So I think we've, we're leaving a pretty good legacy behind us and I think it's gonna be impressive.  But she, she actually gave me my first trip out of--not first trip out of LaGrange [Georgia], obviously, but my first trip away from my parents [Dora Herndon Lewis and Wilbur Milton Lewis] and my other brothers and sisters.  And she brought me to Atlanta [Georgia] and, when she was in college.  And, in fact, we came through this area, Midtown, it was a much different community back then than it is now, and went to the movies and to Six Flags and did all kind of fun things when I was in my early teens.  And so I'll always appreciate her for that, her and her roommate.  I can't remember what her roommate's name is now, but I do clearly remember her and her roommate taking me out, and a little teenage kid and having a bunch of fun that weekend.  And she's since done that for my son.  She's taken him, he and my nephew, to, she's--in fact, they took their first trip away from home without parents or anybody.  They flew to Colorado and went snowboarding with her out there, so she still continues her tradition (laughter).  My next sister, Carol, Carol Faye Lewis [ph.]--we all call her Faye, some folks call her Carol.  We call her Carol, sometimes we call her Faye.  And she's just, she's about three and a half years older than me.  And she graduated from Mercer University in Macon [Georgia].  And she continues to live in LaGrange, and I'm very proud of her.  Right now she works for the state.  Prior to that time, she became very noteworthy in LaGrange with the board of education.  And she's just done a fantastic job of carrying the mantle for it.  I tell you, I sit in some, I sit on a lot of different boards in Atlanta, and one real treat, I always end up running into somebody that's met one of my siblings.  And I was sitting there in a meeting of the Georgia Council on Economic Education, and the executive director, David Martin, he said, Chuck Lewis, Chuck Lewis, where are you from?  I told him I was from LaGrange.  And, of course, he knows everybody in the state.  So he says, you know, I can't remember whether she sits on his board or he sits on her board, one of the two, but I think he sat on her board, a little board that she was in charge of, and so he recognized my sister.  And after that, it was a lot of interesting conversations.  But she's a very talented person.  Then there's me.  I'm the last.
Speaker 2: You're the last.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) yeah, so there was a, there's a lot of folks in between the top of the rung and the bottom of the rung.  And, and, you know, I came along during the, obviously, during the '60s [1960s] when I was born.  I was born in the beginning of the '60s [1960s] and then throughout the '70s [1970s], I spent a lot of time with these folks, and they're the ones that taught me how to read and write.  They're the ones that taught me how to drive and to, and obviously to play chess, which I, you know, enjoyed some great success in later in life.
Speaker 2: Sure.  You come from a family of high achievers.  My congratulations to all of them as well as to you.
Speaker 1: Well, they--that comes from those first two folks that I mentioned, my mother and my father.
Story_ID: 156314
Speaker 1: What is the inspiration behind such a family, such a successful family?
Speaker 2: Well, I think primarily, the inspiration comes from the desire of our parents [Dora Herndon Lewis and Wilbur Milton Lewis] to achieve and to want something different for us than they had to endure when they came along.  My father wanted to be a doctor.  But because of his family circumstances, he had to drop out of school in the tenth grade.  So he didn't finish high school, but he was absolutely one of the smartest people that I've ever met.  But he wanted to complete, so education was a very important thing to him.  If he couldn't get it because of his circumstances, he wanted to make sure that his kids got it.  My mother also from the sharecropping background and herself having attended a two-year institution, also wanted higher educational aspirations for herself.  But because of the circumstances during those times, she wasn't able to realize those dreams.  And they all recognize the fact that, and most, I think most African American families during that period of time recognized the fact in order for our survival in the future, that a significant amount of interest had to be placed on the education of our kids.  And so they worked as tirelessly and as hard as you can imagine in order to ensure that their kids had an opportunity.
Speaker 1: Sure.  They passed their dreams, their educational aspirations onto their children and their children received that vision and grasped it and moved forward and have achieved as your family has.  I think there're many stories to be told regarding that.  How important is it for the first children in the family to grasp the dreams and aspirations and visions of the parents to ensure the success of the rest of the children of the family?
Speaker 2: I think it's hugely important because you also, especially coming from a large family that, you always look to the folks in front of you for inspiration because they are you.  They came from the same place that you come from.  They endure the same things.  They have the same set of general circumstances that you have.  Now, my brothers and sisters might argue that I might have had it a little easier than they did (laughter) coming along later, and I'm certain that's absolutely the case.  I'm pretty sure I probably had the best of the lot.  But I think it's extremely important because those visions that you have of people growing up, are the people--are the visions that you have that will help mold and shape you as you go throughout your life.
Story_ID: 156315
Speaker 1: You speak from the youngest sibling's perspective and we hear how you give praise and honor to your older sisters and brothers.  If James [Herndon Body] or Judith [Ricks] were speaking, what would they say in terms of the challenges they had to ensure that they played a role, or were role models for the younger sisters and brothers?
Speaker 2: Well, from James' perspective, I'm pretty sure it would be something on the social aspect of life and, cause I tell you, it's so important to, not only to achieve, but also it's important to have a strong sense of family and belonging.  And he probably maintained one of the better archives of any of us in terms of our past.  He was the one that had an opportunity to really know my grandfather [King Herndon] and to really know my mother's [Dora Herndon Lewis] brothers and sisters almost as a younger brother to them.  He also had an opportunity to see some of the, and be with some of our relatives that were long passed before I ever came along.  And he honored that.  So honoring that is, was big, important for him.  Judy, Judy was probably our disciplinarian (laughter).  She ran the house, and she made sure that we all fell in line.  I don't think she could do much with some of our brothers and sisters, but certainly, me and my sister, Carol, we had to fall in line with her (laughter).
Speaker 1: I stand in James and Judith's shoes as the second oldest of nine children in a family where all went to high school and college as well.  My oldest sister passed away less than thirty days ago, and for just hearing the stories from the eldest and even the youngest, I think these are stories worth hearing by people all over the world, especially in our community because a price had to be paid; people had to receive the vision.  They had to understand the importance of them performing to ensure that the rest of the family did well, and the older ones did well, and you've given testimony to that today.
Story_ID: 156316
Speaker 1: Let's return to talking about your grandparents on your dad's [Wilbur Milton Lewis] side.  Tell us the name of your grandfather, then your grandmother and tell us something about them, please?
Speaker 2: I don't know the name of my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandmother's name was Nettie Doyle.
Speaker 1: Please spell that, please.
Speaker 2: N-E-T-T-I-E, and last name, Doyle, D-O-Y-L-E.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But obviously, I never knew her.  They were long past years before any of us were born, I think.  I think my oldest brother [James Herndon Body (ph.)] may have been around, but my--and my grandfather, all I know is that he was very old when my father was conceived and a very old man when my father was conceived.  So he was born probably, probably not--I would imagine either around the time of slavery or just after that.
Speaker 1: And where were they from?
Speaker 2: Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Any stories from the Doyle side of the family that you recall?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't get much of that.  As you can imagine with so many brothers and sisters around and my father's family was very small.  And I'm just now getting an opportunity on, to spend a little time with one of my cousins from his side of the family that, even though we went together, we didn't spend a lot of time together.  And so his side of the family was very small, and there aren't a lot of stories.
Speaker 1: Do you have any knowledge of the history of the Lewis name, which came down through your dad, of course, and his father?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  And that's unfortunate that my history is cut off so short.  But keep in mind the times that, even though my history, it's long.  But during the times that, that--the times of my grandparents, were during a period of time when a lot of African American history was not well documented.  And that's why I applaud you for what you're doing now.  That was during a period of time when, if you came from the rural South especially, and if you came from the farmer-type background, generally you came from a background that had some cross-section with slavery.  And because I was born at the end of, where I was born and my father was--where we would be considered middle aged now, back then it was fairly, fairly old to have kids.  And the same was true for himself.  And so my timeline in terms of grandfather goes back well into the 1800s.  In fact, all of my grandparents were born in the 1880s.  So, it becomes much more difficult.  I'm sure if my mother were here she probably could give you a much better rundown that I can.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Any knowledge Grandma Nettie Doyle's ancestors?
Speaker 2: I have none.
Speaker 1: But you know that Grandma Nettie Doyle started off in Alabama, and your dad started out in Macon [Georgia], so apparently, there was some movement north and then onto LaGrange [Georgia].  Any knowledge of that migratory trail that brought, that made LaGrange your place of birth?
Speaker 2: All I know is that my father left Macon and moved to LaGrange.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And I'm not sure of the time period.  It had--would have had to been in the 1930s--
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: --or early '40s [1940s], late '30s [1930s].
Story_ID: 156317
Speaker 1: Mr. Lewis, what are some of your earliest memories of growing up in LaGrange, North Carolina--I'm sorry, LaGrange, Georgia?
Speaker 2: Right.  I'll tell you one of the most vivid memories.  I think I talked a little bit about following my grandmother [Inez Herndon] up the street, but one of my, my most vivid memories was the summertime.  And I don't know what age I was, but I had to be somewhere around three or four years.  That was before I'd ever gone to either nursery school or to kindergarten so it would have had to have been in the two to three year old, to four-year old range.  And it was summertime, and my brothers and sisters were all having a good time.  And we had a big watermelon and we were eating it.  And I can, I'll never forget it.  I was about to take a bite out of my piece and a wasp landed on it.  And I couldn't stop myself.  I was in the middle of taking a bite (laughter).  And I bit into the wasp, and needless to say, I got stung on the tongue.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And my sister, Judy [Judith Lewis Ricks], she picked me up and carried me in and laid me on our freezer and pulled the stinger out of my tongue.  And I went and got in bed with mother [Dora Herndon Lewis] and I cried all night.  So I was a pretty small tyke then.  And after that, well before that, I have very few memories of it because I was only two years, but I did have a kidney ailment that put me in the hospital and threatened my life and I have very few memories of that, other than the pajamas that I had on.  I remember those, and being in the hospital bed.  But beyond that, I have very few memories of that.  After that I had, went to nursery school and spent a short time there.  I'm sure of the circumstances, but I didn't spend a lot of time there.  And I went one of my lifelong friends whose mother was one of the teachers in the nursery school, Michael Meredith [ph.].  And we remain friends to this day.  And so, which was a interesting little thing 'cause I was pretty skinny and Michael's a big, husky guy.  And in kindergarten, I don't know why it was the case, but somehow we were, we were tagged as the little actors in all of the plays.  And from kindergarten through third grade, I can't tell you how many plays we were the stars of, but it was a lot.  And I think the first one was 'Little Red Riding Hood,' and I think I played the--I can't remember what role he had, and I can't who was the wolf and who wasn't, but I know we were both in that play.  And then after that came, came my big smashing hit in first grade that was, 'Here Comes Caesar Higgins' (laughter).  I played Caesar Higgins, played the guy that--it was, the theme of the play was about one student being jealous of another.  And so I played the guy with the tuxedo on and the stovetop hat and the walking cane.  And he was the guy that had all of the lines.  All I had to was walk out there and look cool (laughter).  And that was a big success.  People got a lot out of that, and, and I think we did several performances of that for the, I think even the board of education.  There was several things we did with that and the, we did one play, I don't know, something about a rambling rose.  We were both two roses, and that night we both forgot our lines and, and the teacher had to sit in the back and call our lines out to us (laughter).  But everybody took, had a big blank that day for some reason.  I have no reason, I don't--people were just burnt out.  And--
Speaker 1: Sounds like an acting career was an option as well.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Nah, not really.
Story_ID: 156318
Speaker 1: Tell us, what was life like in the Lewis household, on a normal school day and on a holiday, a special occasion?
Speaker 2: Well, on a normal school day, I think everyone was, you know, pretty much off to themselves and doing their own thing, one was reading, studying something all the time.  And, and my early years, I was pretty good at that.  And actually, I ended up, I could make a good grade without trying terribly hard.  That hurt me later, but for the most part, everyone studied, read books and novels.  I know my brother had a fascination with chemistry.  He had molecules that he put together and later got his degree in chemistry.  He had a fascination with model rockets and planes, and so I think everyone had different hobbies.  Mattie [Arnell Lewis] read a lot, a lot of novels, and so we all did different things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we did them all with gusto.  We all worked hard on whatever it was we were doing.
Speaker 1: What special holidays do you remember and how did you celebrate at your house?
Speaker 2: All of our holidays were very special.  They were always a lot of fun and a lot of family and a lot of laughter and jokes and board games.  We were board game fanatics (chuckle).  So I can't tell how many games of Monopoly we played, how many games of bid whisk, obviously, chess, you name it.  We, if there was a board that was coming out, we were playing it.  And, and it was always plenty of food, and we were always having a good time doing it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 156319
Speaker 1: What street did you live on?  And give us a description of your block and your community please.
Speaker 2: My street, I grew up on Dora Street [LaGrange, Georgia], named after my mother [Dora Herndon Lewis].  The, the street was called Lower Big Springs Road.  And there were, at the time that I grew up, there were only three houses there.  One of our immediate neighbors, Eddie George White [ph.] and Daisy White [ph.], and the house that I grew up in and the house that belonged to my grandmother [Inez Herndon].  I can't remember the year, but I do remember when my father [Wilbur Milton Lewis] got the permit to have the street changed to my mother's name, and I remember walking up and down the street with him when he was working on it.  And it was a little dirt street at the time, and it came off a major street.  But I thought it was just so impressive that he thought so much of my mother that he took the, he was thoughtful enough to have the street named after her.
Speaker 1: Great, great.  Who were some of your friends in the community?
Speaker 2: Friends?
Speaker 1: Yes.  It sounds like family was the main source of friendship.  But did you have any other buddies in the community?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) well, I mentioned Mike Meredith [ph.], Tim Andrews [ph.], and I'll tell you, you know, that I would be remiss without mentioning Kenny and Stanley Jackson [ph.] because they were a big part of me growing up.  They were some really good friends of mine, and we used to go to the movies together and go to each other's houses and play and so some of my earliest memories were of Kenny and Stanley.  And their mother was a nurse and worked with my mother.  And their father was in the [U.S.] Military, and so sometimes they would travel.  They would move around, and then they would always come back, obviously, with their grandparents living not far from where I lived and all of their relatives.  And some of the, I did some of happiest moments would be in the summertime, not expecting to see them, but them coming back for the summer and just seeing them show up walking down the, walking down my street coming over to my house, little small fellows.  They're all middle-aged men now and doing well with their families.  But that was big fun.
Speaker 1: Now, was your community in a rural setting or inside the city?
Speaker 2: Rural setting inside the city (laughter).
Speaker 1: Rural setting inside the city, both, huh (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) exactly, exactly.  We were kind of tucked away in the city.  And so all around where I lived, I grew up, was a wooded area.  And when you went up a hundred yards up the street, and you came onto the main thoroughfare, it was in the, inside the city.  So, so it was kind of unique, very unique.  There was a lot of adventure down there for a little kid (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, great.
Story_ID: 156320
Speaker 1: What are some of the other sights and sounds and smells that remind you of growing up?  Even now.
Speaker 2: Probably, I'll tell you one thing.  When you, whenever I go home, it's like going onto sacred ground or hollow ground because you always--whenever that happens, at least for me, I regain a little bit of myself, a little piece of myself that the world and the travels and the adventures that I have, and the paths that I've crossed as an adult, are kind of chipped away at.  And whenever I go home, it's a special time for me because it takes me back to where it all began, and I think, you know, anybody that has an opportunity to go back--and unfortunately, for me, I didn't, even though I lived in Atlanta [Georgia], pretty close by LaGrange [Georgia], I didn't go home as often as I probably should have while I was building career.  And I put everything I had into building my career, everything that you can possibly imagine.  And then the travels came later, and I didn't experience a lot.  So when I did get a chance to go, it was very special.  So I think just making that trip, going down that road, that stretch of highway, just brings it all back.
Speaker 1: Does the family still own the home place?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Great.
Story_ID: 156321
Speaker 1: Other memories of growing up that you want to share?
Speaker 2: Memories of growing up.  Well, I'll tell ya, when the, the later years started to occur and going through the period of integration, I think that was a, that was a period of time that was very unique because, and my community had a sense of pride in terms of what it had accomplished, in terms of the kids that went on to college and the kids that did things--not just my family, but others--and people that achieved; and they were very proud of the teachers, the principals that really kind of dominated the community because they were the professionals.  They were the ones with the shirt and tie on, and they were the professionals of the community.  And they were the ones that were most revered and respected because of their educational background.  And then going through integration and seeing some of these people that you know are some, have some significant talent and have produced significant product in terms of students, kind of relegated to second positions in a lot of instances.  For the most part, that was the scenario.  The principal of the, of the black high school was now the assistant principal.  The teachers that taught the best or the top students were now teaching in the lower levels and the top positions were relegated to or given to white instructors.  So I went from being in a circumstance where I was around a lot of African Americans, almost overnight to being in a scenario where I was in the--they had levels one, two and three, and I was always, from the time I went into that system I was always in level one classes, and so my teachers went from black to white almost overnight with a few exceptions.  I had a fourth grade teacher and I think, just maybe my fourth grade teacher.  But beyond that, all my teachers pretty much were white for the rest of time I was in school.  And all of the, and most of the kids that I was around were from the white community.  Me and Michael Meredith [ph.], Edna Moore [ph.] and a couple of others were in that circumstance.  And I was in it a hundred percent of the time.  And so a lot of times I would, I would see kids that, from the community, I would see them in the morning time, but I wouldn't see them again until--and I would barely see them when I got out of school, and it was time to go home.  So I wouldn't even see kids that I used to see every day.  I went from seeing them to not seeing them almost overnight.  And, and I think there's some things that happen when the world is like that for young people.  I think they tend to withdraw over time.  I didn't, it didn't happen to me initially, but over time, through puberty, I began to withdraw a little bit and became extremely shy and kind of stayed within myself a lot and rarely ventured out.  And, and, and a lot of stuff was happening with me during that period.
Speaker 1: But you maintained your academic prowess.  You continued on level one, with the level one being the highest courses, is that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't know how.  But (laughter)--
Story_ID: 156322
Speaker 1: Well, would you say that your education in a predominantly segregated school fully prepared you to be competitive in any school?
Speaker 2: Well, I would, I would tend to say that it did.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And I think probably because of the leadership aspect, of being put in leadership positions.  In fact, in the second grade, the kids that were not as far along educationally and the kids were, we weren't put into separate classes.  We would go and help the other kids and walk between them and help them to read and to learn the lesson plan.  And that was our role.  Our role was to, we weren't in two different environments.  We were in the same environment, and if you were better prepared than those kids that were less fortunate, then you were given the opportunity to help them.  And they wanted that help.  And it was a, it was a much different environment than the more sterile environment that it ultimately became.
Speaker 1: So your initial environment in the segregated school was a communal and cooperative and helpful environment, and do I hear you saying that it became a bit more competitive and individual achievement once you moved to a larger environment?
Speaker 2: It wasn't, I wouldn't say more competitive.  It became more cold.  It wasn't the same feeling that you got when you were in the different environment.  There wasn't, you know, everything wasn't right with it.  Our books were inferior.  They were old books.  I mean the books that we had in the late '60s [1960s] were books from the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] (laughter).  And so the tools that people had to work then wasn't as good, you know.  I'd always look in the book, and it would always be stamped with the white school on the inside which means that we got the hand-me-down's that came from the white schools.  So you had new stuff.  Everything was new and shiny, you had new books, and growing up before that, we didn't have any new books.  But for that, you had new books, but it was just more sterile.  It wasn't as friendly.  The community wasn't as well known.  The teachers had a history that you knew, especially, if you came from a big family like me.  There was always stories about teachers here and there and that over time, your parents knew all of the teachers in the community.  And that went from there to the lack of familiarity.  So it was different.
Speaker 1: How were your parents [Dora Herndon Lewis and Wilbur Milton Lewis] and older siblings able to help you in making the adjustment as you moved from one setting to the other?
Speaker 2: Well, at the time that I was coming along, my brothers and sisters started to leave home.  They started graduating, one by one from high school and going into college.  And so during that same period of time when I was going through that, many of them were also going through it, but they were also going through it at the tail end of their school career.  And so they were focused on getting in a school, the things that teenagers, going to the prom, doing the things that teenagers do and preparing themselves for the next level.  So that gave me a lot of time of, really to myself, and so I spent a number of years that I didn't have a lot of siblings closely around me except during the holiday period.  So I dealt with a lot of that independently.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your elementary school or schools?
Speaker 2: Kelley Grammar Elementary School [sic, Kelly Grammar School, LaGrange, Georgia], which unfortunately, was burned to the ground by an arsonist.  That was the school that, during the time of segregation that the schools went from first grade through seventh grade and high school went from eighth grade to, through twelve.  And I made it through the third grade before integration, and then I went to Dawson Elementary School [ph.] for one year in the fourth grade.  And then I went from Dawson Elementary to Dudson Elementary [ph.].
Speaker 1: Was busing involved in your educational experience at that time?
Speaker 2: No, our town was really too small.  They would give you--there were buses, school buses that would take you back and forth, but the town wasn't big enough for that to be of any major concern.  So, you know, my father used to drive me to Dawson Elementary School and drop me off every day, and then at Dudson, I think I took a cab.  They had a cab come pick me up or something, but it wasn't a major issue with busing even though kids were bused, but that wasn't as big of an issue as it would have been in a major, major town.
Story_ID: 156323
Speaker 1: I think you've already told us what type of student you were.  What type of child were you overall?  Were you well-mannered?  Were you rambunctious, mischievous?  Mr. Lewis, what type of child were you as a young man?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Probably all of those at some point in time.  But primarily, I was very quiet, and I, I had a talent with art and I could draw very well.  And so I spent a lot of time drawing.  I spent a lot of time playing.  My imagination was so vivid that it would take me off into the wild blue yonder.  And I, and when you don't have a lot of other stimuli around you in a small town, your imagination becomes your best friend.  And my imagination clearly was my best friend, and it proved to serve me well as time went on.  But I would say I was a very quiet, shy person around, especially around people I didn't know and around people that I did know, I had a lot of fun, laughter and jokes and so forth.
Speaker 1: Do you recall having dreams and aspirations even as an elementary school child?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was, I wanted to be--there were two things that I wanted to me.  One, I wanted to be artist, and then I wanted to be a--an architect.  The fact, with my father [Wilbur Milton Lewis] in construction, I was constantly drawing plans and houses.  And I a model, a book of model houses and I used to take that book and create my own versions of the houses.  And I used to read the encyclopedias, draw the pictures out of the encyclopedia, just constantly exploring my imagination through, through those avenues.  So it's an interesting period.
Story_ID: 156324
Speaker 1: Did you and your family attend church during those years?
Speaker 2: Mount Olive Knots Baptist Church was the church my mother [Dora Herndon Lewis] went to, and we subsequent- subsequently started out there.  And my  sister, Carol [Lewis], she, she went to--we used to go to Sunday school at Arbor Grove Baptist Church [LaGrange, Georgia], and she eventually--we would go to Sunday school there, and then we would go to church at my mother's church.  And she eventually joined that church.  And, of course, that was a big fallout in my mother's side (laughter) of the family.  There was, you know, she'd joined another church.  But then I would go and attend that church where she was a good bit and still know some of the people that went to that church.
Speaker 1: Okay, describe other experiences with regard to your religious life, your church life?
Speaker 2: Other experiences?
Speaker 1: Yes, in terms of the family, how close--were you in programs, etc. that were involved in in the church?
Speaker 2: Vacation Bible school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Vacation Bible school was pretty interesting.  I'll never forget the Kool-Aid and the, and the cookies of the vacation Bible school.  And we would, it would be every summer.  Later I, you know, didn't wanna go cause you always figure you outgrow things.  And, but vacation Bible school was always a treat.  Jerome Swanson [ph.], his brother, Marshall [ph.] and the Kaido [ph.] kids and Thol Kaido [ph.] who was the, my family's, my mother and sister's beautician and close family friend.  They were all very intricate [sic, integral] in the church experience when I was a kid.  But I'll tell the, one of the big things though was before that period when I was going to church with my mother and her family at Mount Olive Baptist Knots Church and that was the mother board [ph.].  The mother board was, it was, it was a sight to see back in the old days.  And my grandmother [Inez Herndon], Ma-Ma, she was a part of that.  And so they had some rhythm that they did.  I don't know how or where it came from.  But they would all stamp their foot at the same time during certain portions of the ceremony that, it always just befuddled me.  And whenever I saw that, I was like, wow, how do they know to do that (laughter).  But it was quite an experience because that was a tradition probably that was obviously from a much older period.  You know, my grandmother was born in the 1800s and she wasn't the oldest person on that mother board at the time.  So you can imagine some of the, some of the breadth of distance in time that occurred and some of the oral traditions and traditions of culture that I was witnessing during that period.  So that was very interesting to me.
Speaker 1: What role did your faith play in your development as a child and even now?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think faith is the one thing that we all hold dearly to.  You have to have that, and you have to be a believer.  I'll never forget when I was in college, I was having a particularly tough time of it.  My father [Wilbur Milton Lewis] had passed away, and I was struggling.  It was a big difference between high school and college, and even though I was well prepared for it, I was just so distracted.  And I, my sophomore year, after struggling through my freshman year, my sophomore year I decided it was time for me to turn around my ship and to be what I needed to be.  And so I wrote, I did a mural in my room.  I painted a mural in my room and the central theme of it was believe.  And I've used that as a, as a kind of a rallying cry for myself to become closer to, to my faith.  And I used that to propel myself into a pretty good college career.
Story_ID: 156325
Speaker 1: Where did you attend junior high school?
Speaker 2: Junior high school was the, it was the old high school for, in the segregated community.  It was then called East Depot Junior High School [LaGrange, Georgia], and it was a zoo (laughter).  The school was, the school system separated the boys and the girls in junior high school from seventh through ninth grade.  And so it was an all-boys junior high school.  And it was probably one step above a reformatory (laughter).  It was tough, it was tough.
Speaker 1: You're saying that was not a good idea.
Speaker 2: That was a horrible idea.  It was a horrible idea, and I'm, I hope they've changed that.  I'm pretty sure they have.  But it was, you know, and you get a lot of little boys together at that age and with not being around any girls, and they become nothing but boys and it was just a zoo.  And it was a lot of fights, a lot of bad behavior and a lot of lack of control by the teachers.  It was bad.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your buddies and who were some of the teachers who influenced you, who mentored you in junior high school?
Speaker 2: The time that I came along in junior high school, I really just kind of--I had teachers that I respected, but I didn't spend a lot of time thinking about it.  My influences were the ones that you've already heard about in terms of my brothers and sisters and parents and the, and there were some good teachers there.  I always looked up to the principal, Mr. Moore [ph.].  He was Edwin Moore's [ph.] father, George Moore [ph.].  I always looked up to him as a person of integrity and character.  Mr. Dadell [ph.], a little bit earlier, and I'm still, if he sees this, I'm still gonna play him in golf soon cause he's the avid golfer, and we've had several dates broken, but I'm gonna still come back and beat him up (laughter).  But, he--Coach Jackson [ph.].  I played a little bit of football and Coach Jackson was always there, and I always admired him as a person of high integrity and character.  Coach Russell [ph.], another coach.  There's another coach, Coach Gooden [ph.].  He was also the science teacher.  Now, he was, he did teach, I believe he did teach at one point in eighth grade, level one, science, which was an achievement for an African American.  And so I thought that was pretty good.  But it's amazing after you're sitting down, you start thinking about this stuff and the sort things that come up.
Story_ID: 156326
Speaker 1: All right, Mr. Lewis, let's talk about your high school days [at LaGrange High School, LaGrange, Georgia].  Describe your experience there, please?  Who were some of your teachers, some of your friends, the extracurricular activities, your high school days?
Speaker 2: Well, high school for me, I didn't really spend a lot of time in high school.  High school starts in the ninth grade, but we were still at boys' junior high.  And so the freshman year was there, and so the tenth and eleventh grade were really the two years that I spent any time in high school.  My senior year I spent maybe a quarter--we were on a quarter system, maybe three months in high school.  And I graduated and so I was gone, I was--so I didn't spend a lot of time in high school and didn't spend a lot of time getting involved in any activities.  I was on the track team for a short period of time, and I hurt my knees and I couldn't do that or play basketball because of the pain in my knees.  So, and my shins, and so I didn't really spend a whole lot of time in high school.
Speaker 1: Any memorable teachers?
Speaker 2: I'm sure, pretty sure if I thought long and hard enough that I would remember some of them, but it's, I'm kind of drawing a blank now in terms of--
Speaker 1: All right, what were your primary activities, curricular or extracurricular activities?
Speaker 2: Playing basketball (laughter).
Speaker 1: Playing basketball.  All right, tell us a little bit about it.
Speaker 2: Play a lot of that in between pain.  I experienced a lot of knee pain and knee injuries and I really wanted to excel in that.  And I was always a, you know, pretty leaper, and so I worked a lot on that.  And I was just in LaGrange [Georgia] not long ago and some of the guys that I grew up with on the basketball court used to, they were just chuckling, remember when you used to wear all those leg weights (laughter) and trying to dunk a basketball.  And I said, yeah, and eventually, I could.  I could dunk it, I could dunk it a lot.
Speaker 1: Can you really?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: How tall are you, Mr. Lewis, may I ask?
Speaker 2: Six two [6'2"].
Speaker 1: Are you?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: That's good.  I mean, all right, that's still, to be able to dunk a basketball at 6'2", I never could quite make it.  But go ahead, please, sir.
Speaker 2: Well, actually, when I got out of, when the pain stopped, and I was leaving high school and going to college, I had a traumatic injury, a neck, spinal cord injury, and after recovering from that, I was, I could really, I could really jump then and play basketball.  And it all kind of came together at that point.  But I used to love playing it.  Had a good friend of mine, Tony White [ph.] that we used to play a lot of basketball together.  He and his brothers were all basketball fanatics and fans, and they all played, either on the school team or for somebody at one point or another.  And so we spent a lot of time playing basket--shooting baskets.
Story_ID: 156327
Speaker 1: What were your favorite courses in high school?
Speaker 2: Favorite courses in high school.  I'm trying to remember high school.  I don't remember any specific course other than, I did enjoy my art class (laughter), but I don't remember any specific class that I could say stood out above any one of the others.  By the time I got out of high school, I was ready to leave LaGrange [Georgia].  It was a great place to grow up, but I just saw kind of saw myself doing something different in a different place.  And I spent a lot of time daydreaming about that.  And I had very successful test scores so I was getting, at home I was getting a lot of offers for college from, starting in the eighth and ninth grade.  And so my focus generally would be on where was I going to go, was I gonna be in the next life.  It wasn't, it was, wasn't uncommon for me to come home from high school and in front of my mailbox, there would be stacks of college catalogs from all over the country.  I think I probably have received one--if I'd kept them all, I probably received at least a hundred, hundred and fifty catalogs in the mail from different colleges all over the country.
Speaker 1: Great.
Speaker 2: And so I spent a lot of time thinking about, daydreaming about that.  Where was I gonna go?  What kind of man was I gonna turn out to be?
Speaker 1: Had you decided on a major in college while you were still in high school?
Speaker 2: I did not.  In fact, my thoughts were actually, were to, to go to art and design school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I talked to my mother [Dora Herndon Lewis] about it, and she was okay, but then my father [Wilbur Milton Lewis] was totally against it (laughter).  I could go, but he wasn't gonna pay for it (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: In his world, that was kind of tooty-fruity, it didn't make a whole lot of sense from where he stood.  So, so I eventually yielded to (laughter), pay rather than non-pay.
Speaker 1: I hear you, I hear you.  I don't think I need to ask this, but when did you know you were going to college for sure?
Speaker 2: Oh, all my life.  I never--
Speaker 1: All your life, yes.
Speaker 2: --thought, I never thought of anything any different.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 156328
Speaker 1: Before we take you off to college with this next series of questions, while you're still at home, you experience the assassination of [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.], Robert Kennedy.  Perhaps you're old enough to remember the assassination of John [F.] Kennedy and certainly Malcolm X.  Pick one or all of those and tell us where you were, what you were doing and how those assassinations impacted you as a young man.
Speaker 2: Well, I think the two that impacted me the most was the assassination of Dr. King and the assassination of Bobby Kennedy and both in very different ways.  They were both viewed during that time, period of time as being icons of the modern world.  They were the next generation.  There's no question about it.  They had the vision for the future, certainly Dr. King.  I was in first grade when Dr. King was assassinated.  And my most vivid, vivid memory of that was the strength of Coretta Scott King and seeing her at the funeral with her children while she was the funeral of this very great, powerful man that was revered.  During her funeral, I spent some time with my kids talking about the relevance of that moment.  And we watched her funeral together, as I watched his funeral in school.  The teachers brought in a television set and they played his funeral.  It was being broadcast live during that period of time.  And we sat there, and we watched Dr. King's funeral.  And my first grade teacher, she sat very reverently and quietly by the door, and we all sat very quietly and we watched the entire funeral in the first grade.  So, it had a significant impact.  And when you'd go to the barber shops and the different places in the community and then you'd hear the, the mourning and the sadness of losing such a great leader.  And it was very overwhelming during that period.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Bobby Kennedy came as a shock because I thought Bobby Kennedy was gonna president of the United States.  During that period, I believe Lyndon [Baines] Johnson had decided not to run.  He was the sitting president, and he decided not to run for president.  And I was watching television when Sirhan Sirhan shot Bobby Kennedy.  And I watched there, I was at home--I wasn't alone.  But I was there.  My mother [Dora Herndon Lewis], I think she was sleep and no one else was in the house but me and her.  And I was there watching the news.  And I was watching the blood on him, and the whole spectacle of his assassination played out right in front of me on national television.  And it was certainly a gripping moment because he really embodied in my mind, the next generation of leadership.  He was the future, he was the hope.  And he was struck down before he could ever realize that potential.
Story_ID: 156329
Speaker 1: Would you say you were in time able to--well, how did it impact you in the days and weeks and months and years to come, observing that assassination, the assassination of Robert Kennedy?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, not so--during the period of the, the, well, in the '60s [1960s] as you well know, there were a lot of events that were occurring.  And there were a lot of things that were happening all at once that was changing the fabric of this country.  And all of those things cumulatively made the '60s [1960s] one of the rarest moments and one of the most profound moments in the history of the United States.  And it will always be viewed as a period of time of change.  And all of the events of the '60s [1960s], the Kennedy assassination, Malcolm X's assassination--and Malcolm X's assassination, there was always so much speculation around that, that you used to always hear, and Bobby Kennedy's assassination, man walking on the moon, the modern generation, the colors of the '60s [1960s], the change in dress that occurred, kind of went haywire in the '70s [1970s] (laughter), spilled over into the '70s [1970s].  The '70s [1970s] weren't very pretty.  They didn't accept the culture and the heritage that was passed onto them from the '60s [1960s] very well.  But, but they were, you know, that was a period of fun too, but I think all of those things were things that not only changed my outlook on life, but changed the outlook of a lot of people.  It no longer became, after that period of time, solely centered around the African American struggle and our next, our plight, even though I think that there is a lot of, a lot that can be said that maintaining the heritage of the past and keeping it reverent is absolutely what we must do and I am so appreciative of Black History Month.  And at the same time there was a, it was, it was a period of time when there was a consciousness that we need to work together in all of the communities and I don't think from that period to now we've carried that mantle very well.  I think that there's a lot to be desired.  I think that things have changed.  I think that people's thought patterns for the most part have changed, but there's a lot that needs, that's left undone and that needs to change in this society, in this world.  And, but that work began in the '60s [1960s] in earnest, and I would have hoped that it would have taken a different turn or a better turn than it did, or a faster turn.  But it didn't.
Story_ID: 156330
Speaker 1: How did you feel the day you received your letter of acceptance from Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I was extremely excited.  Again, I, I knew a little bit about Morehouse 'cause my brother [Milton Lewis] went there, and I'd been there to watch him graduate, but I was very excited.  I think that same week I received a letter of acceptance from Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] and from Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], that same week.  So it was a pretty good week for me.  So it was a pretty exciting time.
Speaker 1: What was life on the campus of Morehouse like your freshman year?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was a country boy (laughter).  I didn't realize I was so country til I walked onto that college campus.  And then it hit me all at once.  I said, (unclear), you know, that, but it was fun because I had great friends from all over the country.  My roommate, Brad Cook [ph.] and my roommates Brad Cook and James Bert [ph.] were two characters.  You know, here I am from a little town in Georgia and Bert from Springfield, Massachusetts and Brad from California, and he was every bit of a California boy too (laughter).  And so we just had a, we had a ball.  We were, we had the--we stayed on the floor that my brother stayed in when he was at Morehouse, oddly enough, when he was a freshman in Graves Hall.  And it was a, it was a pretty interesting time.  We had a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: So you had a sense that you were walking in the footsteps of your brother, but you were also walking in the footsteps of legends like Maynard Jackson and [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] and many, many others.  Did you have a sense for that and what did it mean to you if you did, in fact, have that sense?
Speaker 2: Well, I gained an appreciation for it as time went on while I was there.  I gained a significant appreciation for the fact that there were so many people that went to this school that achieved, particularly, Dr. King.  And when I got there, I was also awestruck by the amount of talented other African American guys that I ran into.  It was incredible to me because I'd never seen it in that much abundance and probably most people hadn't.  They probably hadn't either, but, you know, I was in awe that there were so many really smart, talented guys that could do so many different things that--and I was really privileged to be among them after I realized what I was involved in (laughter).  But it took me a little bit of time to really get it, and when I got it, it took me about, I guess my first semester.  And after that my father [Wilbur Milton Lewis] died over the, around the Thanksgiving holiday, my first year.  And so it was a particularly tough holiday season.  And then I, I stopped feeling sorry for myself probably toward the end of that first year.  My brother kind of called and got on my case a little bit, you know, you need to get it together.  And so I spent, spent some time that summer really focusing in on what I needed to do personally to get to the next level.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And keep in mind, it wasn't, you know, junior high school and all of that, that was the last time I'd really worked hard academically.  So for a period of three or four years, I--there wasn't much for me to do academically, and I mean I'm leaving out of the hard work, you know, working construction and eventually working in the mill that we had to do.  And I was a brick mason too growing up and so I spent some time doing that.  And so I didn't really have to work that hard to get where I wanted to go because it was kind of done for me early on.  And so I had to rededicate myself.  I had to work a lot harder and I had to put away some thoughts of some things that I really wanted to do.  I wanted to pledge a fraternity, and that was important to me, but it was more important to me to, to set myself on the right path.  And that's when college became really good to me, when I made up my mind that I had to really step up, step up to the plate.
Story_ID: 156331
Speaker 1: I wanna explore what you majored in and who were some of your instructors and mentors, but first you mentioned your daddy [Wilbur Milton Lewis]--that, that you were a brick mason as well.  Did your dad ensure that his sons at least learned a trade so they could support themselves before he sent you off to college?
Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter), oh yeah,--
Speaker 1: Is that how that worked?
Speaker 2: --yeah, we all at some point were involved in the family business.  And with me it was, they always thought, they always--I was always the little bitty kid, at eight years old, that was my experience on a construction site.  And my first, my first day at work, you know, I was kind of like the pet, you know (laughter), like, I guess I was kind of like a little puppy dog that everybody kind of petted on the head, you know.  They said I was playing in the water, and I thought I was working hard (laughter).  They gave me a job to do, and I was a joint joiner.  And I jointed the joints of the blocks that were being laid, and I'd come behind the brick masons and clean their work up.  And I did that for a few years, and then I got strong enough to become a laborer, where I would bring them the blocks and make sure that they made, they had plenty of mortar, and then eventually, I started laying to align, started laying blocks, concrete blocks to align and eventually started laying some bricks.  And, but my brother, Milton [Lewis], was very talented.  He was talented.  I mean he was good.  And my oldest brother [James Herndon Body], obviously made a living, all of his life doing it, but Milton was really good.  I mean he was good.
Speaker 1: It sounds like you still know the language and perhaps still have the skills of a brick mason?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'll tell ya--
Speaker 1: Hard work never (unclear) lasts (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I haven't, I haven't cut a blade of grass, haven't probably lifted a--the only thing I've lifted up, if I've lifted up a hammer to, to, to, to nail a plaque to the wall (laughter), that's about all I've done in the last eighteen years.  So if I did it, it'll be from memory reflex only (laughter).
Story_ID: 156332
Speaker 1: All right, let's go back to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  You're a freshman, when did you decide on a major and who were some of the people who influenced you at Morehouse?
Speaker 2: Well, my major influence, influences while there was John Williams and Willis Sheftall.
Speaker 1: Okay, and why--
Speaker 2: John--
Speaker 1: Okay, please proceed.
Speaker 2: John Williams and Willis Sheftall were both in the, in the business department.  And I started out with a business administration major.  And I took some, I took a class, some of the prerequisite classes from both of them.  And John Williams talked about accounting being the language of business.  If you were gonna be a business major or if you were gonna be finance major, then it was important to learn the language of business, which was accounting.  And a good buddy of mine, Kevin Briscoe [ph.], and I, we both kind of jointly came to the conclusion that we wanted to be finance majors.  So between the two, I decided I was gonna major in both.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I had a double major for a period of time.  And the workload was tremendous.  And so I was taking eighteen hours a day--excuse me, eighteen hours a semester which was six classes, which was more than a full load.  Five is really what you should take.  I was taking more than the minimum, trying to get the two degrees.  And I found myself drifting more and away from the accounting and more into the finance because my background was very strong in accounting.  When I, by the time I graduated I dropped the accounting major because I wanted to graduate close to being on time.  So I dropped the accounting major later on so I could get out and start working.
Story_ID: 156333
Speaker 1: You mentioned two professors, two of your mentors there.  What impact did Dr. Ben Mays [Dr. Benjamin Mays], who was president, was he not, at the time you were there?  Or was--?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the president at that time was Hugh Gloster.
Speaker 1: What impact did Dr. Mays, knowing that he once was president, and later, Hugh Gloster, Dr. Gloster, have on your life as a young man coming through?
Speaker 2: Well, you cannot walk through the campus of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and not feel the specter and the, and the glow of Dr. Mays on that campus.  There's just no way to possibly do that, and as a freshman, you are taught the steep history of Morehouse and its prior presidents.  And from John Hope to Benjamin E. Mays to Dr. Gloster, during that period of time, you felt the tradition.  You felt it, and you knew it.  You watched film of Dr. Mays as he eloquently discussed the, his matriculation from South Carolina [State College, later South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] into higher education and to his role as a leader of a college that he really brought to the forefront in terms of its stature and the types of graduates that he had.  So, there's no underscore of the influence that Dr. Mays had on every student that went there, whether he was there as an instructor or not.  It was, it was tremendous.  Hugh Gloster was a different type of president than Dr. Mays.  Dr. Gloster was a builder.  He brought the campus from the size that it was at the time that he took it over, from a few buildings that were all built in the '20s [1920s] or 1800s--not 1800s but early 1900s, maybe including some that may have been 1800s.  I'm not sure when Graves or Robert Hall were built, but I'm pretty sure they were very old.  And they had to be repaired.  Hope Hall, Merrill Hall, those halls had to undergo constant renovations.  But he built a lot of new buildings during the period of the '70s [1970s] that transformed the college, including Mays Hall, White Hall, the commons, the educational buildings.  He built Gloster Hall, and he also was the founder of Morehouse School of Medicine [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Any words of wisdom from Dr. Mays or Dr. Gloster or any of the presidents that you would want to leave with your audience as words that impacted your life and the lives of other Morehouse men?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm probably not a--
Speaker 1: [Cough] excuse me.
Speaker 2: --I'm probably not a person that would set any one specific phase of a quote or a snapshot of a person.  But I look at the body of work, and I hope that one day someone can look back at me and recognize that my body of work is what I stand on.  And it didn't just start when, it didn't just start when I had my first few accomplishments.  It's the body of work over a lifetime of work and your lifework is the, to me, the most important portrait that you can paint of yourself when you leave this earth.  So I look back at the lifework of those individuals and I'm always truly amazed at their accomplishments and achievement has been something that's been a part of my family's history and, and seeing others that achieve at great heights and levels such as Dr. Mays and Dr. Gloster are truly inspirations.  So I look at the lifework of a person.
Story_ID: 156334
Speaker 1: Did you have mentors in the business community that affected your development as a young Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] man?
Speaker 2: Later in my Morehouse career, and I've got--I, I received my first shot at banking from Owen Funderberg and he was a person that I was thoroughly impressed with because he was the first African American that was president of a bank [Citizens Trust Bank].  And--
Speaker 1: And Morehouse man?
Speaker 2: And Morehouse man.  And I was truly impressed with him, and he, Alberta Martin [ph.], gave me my first shot in banking business as a banking and finance student out of Morehouse, and I did an internship at Citizens Trust Bank.  And that's where I got my beginnings.
Speaker 1: While still a student, you did an internship.  How long was that and other internships that you had as a student?
Speaker 2: That was one summer, and all of the internships that I--I only did one other one.  That was with a insurance company that I believe now is called Aflac, but at that time it was called something different [American Family Life Insurance Company, Columbus, Georgia], I think.  I'm not quite sure.  It was in Columbus, Georgia and we sold the same type policies that Aflac sells now, and I'd kind of forgotten about it a little bit, but those were the, really the only two.
Story_ID: 156335
Speaker 1: And I did spend a good bit of time in my college career [at Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] doing a lot of things.  I ran for SGA [Student Government Association] treasurer.  I was the school cartoonist for the Maroon Tiger, the newspaper.  I also wrote editorial for the newspaper and also wrote satires.  And I'll never forget--I'm a little bit of the subject, but since I'm thinking about it, I'll get it in. but I'll never forget the time that I wrote a satire in the Maroon Tiger about the business office, which was the brunt of every student's joke.  And I thought it was a witty portrayal of the business office until I was summoned to the business office by Wiley Perdue.  And when I came in, I, you know, people were reading the Maroon Tiger and as I was walking to, after my summons, to the business office to be with Mr. Perdue, I'd see kids reading the newspapers.  They were chuckling and laughing and it was, I thought it was witty.  But as soon as I walked into the business office, all the women that were there, they were crowded around each other and pointing at me, "Oh, there he is" (laughter).  And I went and sat and had my "come to Jesus meeting" with Mr. Perdue (laughter).  And he made sure that I was aware that they work hard in the business office and these, the folks there have the, have to feed their families.  And they are doing the best job that they can possibly do and it wasn't very well appreciated, the humor that I poked at them.  But I did have a pretty good college career.  I was also the, Morehouse's chess champion when I was there.  And I founded the chess club.  I thought it was so interesting that a school of Morehouse's stature didn't have a chess club and so I started one.  And we eventually competed against a few other schools, and I taught a lot of kids how to play chess when I was there.  And I got a lot of business at night from chess masters that wanted to knock me off (laughter).  So that was an interesting period of time.  But it also helped me secure my, my job with Citizens Trust [Bank] at the time because the Atlanta Daily World did a newspaper article on me, 'Chess Comes Back to Morehouse' in 1981.  And I took my little clipping of that and went down there with my little resume and got the job.
Speaker 2: Is the chess club still active at Morehouse?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I do know that it remained active for a period of time after I left.  I do know that it became kind of a folk legend for a while, but then my travels took me off in different directions and I didn't keep up with a lot of it.  But I did hear that, that a lot of people learned the game, played the game, still today as a result of the, the spark plug.
Story_ID: 156336
Speaker 1: Mr. Lewis, you did a lot of things in college [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and you got started on your career.  Who were some of the people who were influential to you, influential with you as a student and then later on in your career in banking and finance?
Speaker 2: As a, as a student, I mentioned John Williams and Willis Sheftall were inspirational leaders, not only to me, but to all of the students that were in banking and finance or accounting or had accounting backgrounds.  And many of them went on to achieve great things.  I received a lot of support from my college classmates.  I mentioned Kevin Briscoe [ph.] and Steve Talbert [ph.] and James Bird [ph.] and other fellows that remain my good friends today.  And so we kind of fed off of each other a lot and kind of carried each other through in the wake of changing circumstances, becoming young men and then going out into the wider world.  So, you know, we were all, I guess, leaders in our own rights, and everybody on campus was.  So it was a great competitive environment and it was a lot of fun, it was a lot of fun.  And so coming out of that entire body of experience was great, leaving college.  Moving into the working world, there were a few things that I realized and some of them, realized being a chess player.  I realized that, that I needed to decide before I started my career what my end game would be, where did I want to end up?  Where's the, the end place.  And I'm entering that phase right now, as you well know, but the, but the beginning stages I had to well qualify myself because I didn't see, beyond Owen Funderberg and some of the other African American-owned banks in the country, I didn't see a lot of black chief executive officers of banks to follow.  There wasn't many.  There are some, but there weren't many.  And they were all in predominantly African American institutions.  I also recognized something else, that for some reason, what used to be a black Mecca on Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia] had somehow died at the time that I was coming along.  And I was very curious about it.  I wanted to know why, why could an area that was so vibrant and so strong at one period, all of a sudden die.  I eventually found the answers to those reasons, but I wanted to get involved in that spectrum and realm, and I took my beginnings portions of my career at financial sacrifice to myself, I took that as a deep learning experience because I wanted to know.  I wanted to know everything about a bank, how to run a bank, how to operate a bank.  I wanted to know every position in the bank.  I wanted to become so competent at it that when my time came, that no one could deny me my opportunity to run a bank and to have a vision of what a financial institution can do in the future.  So my thought process going in was not to go in and to work a job.  It was never that.  It was never about the money for me.  It was all about the end game.  So when I started my career, a lot of people probably thought I was, you know, a little whacky because, you know, I was always excited every day to come in to work.  I didn't like getting stuck behind the teller line at one point, but, you know, that was okay too.  I learned a lot.  I met a lot of great people.  I met [HM] Joseph Lowery from behind the teller line.  I met [HM] Tyrone Brooks.  I met, you know, the [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] family.  I met--the list goes on.  Almost every civil rights icon figure, Hosea Williams.  I met almost all of them right from behind that teller line on Piedmont Avenue, either there or on M. L. King near what used to be West Hunter Street.  So those weren't times that were lost on me.  I met a lot of outstanding people that helped bridge, in my mind, some of the civil rights of the past to the future.  So, but I was also learning the business.  And I was fortunate enough to have the good favor of Owen Funderberg that kind of cast some positive light on me.  But I wanted to take what talent I had and put it into an institution--and I was well received there, in order to give it some of the young talent that some of the majority institutions were receiving in droves.  And so I put myself at, in my mind, at risk a little bit by doing that because it could have, you know, it didn't have to work out.  But it did work out, but it took a lot of hard work and sacrifice.  The training program wasn't a training program.  It was a real job.  And in my mind, it was a training program, and I was gonna learn everything I could.  So I progressed through that--
Story_ID: 156337
Speaker 1: --I was, I was very well-supported from a personal standpoint of, by Dr. X. L. Neal, who at that time was the Grand Master of the Masons of Georgia, Prince Hall Masons of Georgia, and I eventually became an officer in the, in my lodge.  And it was, it happened to be his lodge too, his home lodge.  I'll never forget that he, his hand kind of shined on me when I was maybe twenty-one, twenty-two years old, and had a major, had a major function in a packed house at a church in Savannah [Georgia].  I was given a key speaking role, and a ceremony, and I was overwhelmed by the opportunity that he provided me.  And I stayed close to him up until the time that he passed away.  So he was a major influence with me.  And I saw him administer to thousands and thousands of people and to maintain their respect, and I took a part of that and put it in me.  I took a part of the, a part of the genius, I guess, of Owen Funderberg and made that a part of me.  He was a very intimidating fellow, but he didn't intimidate me (laughter).  And but I saw the way he used that in order to, in order to maintain control of a financial institution that had had the experience prior to my coming there, had experienced some problems.  So I was very impressed by him.  I was also very impressed by [HM] Herman Russell and a part of him is in me.  He is a person that I feel very close to.  He's an outstanding, not only historic figure, but on a personal level, you couldn't meet a finer human being.  You couldn't spend time with a finer person than H.J.  He is absolutely one of the most outstanding influential figures that I've ever come across.  Also, after I left Citizens Trust [Bank] in 1991, I had the good fortune of working under the tutelage of a lot of great people, but most specifically, Greg Baranco.  He's a person that I sat and watched having very difficult public situations with coolness and calm, and be able to demonstrate that regardless of the situation, no matter how difficult it might be, that you can stand proud and you can manage through it.  And you can, not only take a situation that some might view as negative, but make it into a positive in a blink of an eye.  And I saw him do that, and I was extremely impressed by that.  And I was extremely appreciative of both he and H.J. in their support of my career.  And I couldn't do what I'm doing right now if it wasn't for Herman Russell and Greg Baranco, no question about it.
Story_ID: 156338
Speaker 1: I know that you're a student of the banking industry.  Tell me if these names mean anything to you and from these two, others who have made a difference in your life and in the history of what you're doing for a living, [HM] Jacoby Dickens, [HM] Deborah Wright, others.
Speaker 2: Jacoby Dickens is chairman of Seaway National Bank in Chicago [Illinois].  And I first met he and Walter Grady, well, I already knew Walter Grady was the president.  And that was here in Atlanta [Georgia], and I believe he owned a, I believe a bowling alley in Chicago and became very successful as a businessman and had the opportunity to talk with him after I was a part of and had led some acqui--bank acquisitions and he and Walter were looking at doing the same thing in Chicago.  And they came down and talked with me and my then boss, [James] Jim Young, about what do we do in order to, in order to affect acquisitions.  And so he's one of those icons in the African American business community that will always be around.  And he's a true leader.  [Deborah] Debbie Wright is a friend of mine, and she is president and CEO of Carver Bank [sic, Carver Bancorp, Inc.] in New York [City].  And since I've come to know Debbie over the years, I know her to be a very fine chief executive officer and she's a recent adoptive mother and, which I thought was outstanding.  She's Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] educated and trained and went to--she was a part of the, this political machine in New York for a good period of time before she became chief executive of Carver.  Obviously, she ran into some battles with some other friends of mine, Kevin Cohee and [Robert] Bob Cooper (laughter) from then, what was then Boston Bank of Commerce which is now [One]United Bank.  And they, they have, in their travels, they've done a lot of very positive things also.  But they were adversaries at one point, and I think ultimately, it all works out.  I think Carver is a better bank.  I think BankUnited has done some great things by acquiring institutions in Miami [Florida] and Los Angeles [California].  So I think everybody has, has moved in a positive direction.
Story_ID: 156339
Speaker 1: Do you have any involvement with the old insurance companies, the old black insurance companies that have been a staple in the black community, Atlanta Life [Insurance Company], North Carolina Mutual [Life Insurance Company] and other black banks up and down the East Coast, Mechanics and Farmers [Bank] in North Carolina and so forth?
Speaker 2: For a period of a number of years, I was on the board of the National Bankers Association.  I served in various capacities and did all that I could to work within the confines of the organization as a board member to make the association successful.  And it is a historic association.  It's been around since 1927.  It represents the nation's (unclear) minority-owned banks throughout the United States.  And many of my travels have been a result of my involvement with that group.  So I've been all over the country, and I've been to all of, in every major market, I've been to African American communities and other parts of other communities and gotten a sense of the economics of New Orleans [Louisiana] to Los Angeles [California] to Chicago [Illinois], New York [New York], Kansas City [Missouri], Nashville [Tennessee], Memphis [Tennessee], Miami [Florida], Washington, D.C., numerous times, just--Milwaukee, Wisconsin, St. Louis, Missouri, practically all of the major cities in the United States I have had the good fortune of working with other bankers that were doing the same, some of the same things that I was doing.  And I think throughout all of that, I gained a significant appreciation for the struggles of the business model of the traditional African American-owned institution and, as well as the economics, the difficulty in the economics of the model and a view of others of the model.  I think I'm uniquely qualified to, to look at that and to examine it and to look at what's next down the line for, for the growth and success of African Americans in business.  So, I've seen a good bit.  On a micro-level, here in Atlanta [Georgia], for a number of years I was chairman of the Sweet Auburn Business & Improvement Association.  And, of course--and that was, that comes if you remember from my early comments, that comes back from my desire to learn and to want to preserve the history of our culture in historic neighborhoods.  So I had an opportunity to work with the King Center [The Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia], with Ebenezer Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia], with Dick (unclear), with Atlanta Life, with Atlanta Daily World, with Butler Street YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], with the Odds Fellows Building [and Auditorium, Atlanta, Georgia] and also with city and government leaders with regard to the revitalization of that community.  I established a, or helped established with the help of my comraderies [sic, comrades] a Wings (unclear) Festival that received a lot of positive attention to try to help dispel some of the negative festivals that have been put on in that community that weren't very positive.  They were crime-ridden.  So we did that a couple of times and in between the times that the other festivals were operated and the ones that we did were very positive for the city and attracted hundreds of thousands of people over the course of a weekend.  So I've had a lot of involvement.  Ron Brown [HM Ronald Brown], who's the current chief executive of Atlanta Life is a current friend of mine, and a guy that I look up to, fellow Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] man, Class of '75 [1975], a fellow that I look up to and I'm looking forward to seeing him over the Founders Day weekend.
Story_ID: 156340
Speaker 1: Opportunities are greater for blacks in banking nowadays than they were when you started out and certainly for the generation prior to you.  What are some of the challenges you've had to overcome and what opportunities await you and others in banking?
Speaker 2: The first challenge that I had to overcome was right here.  And my perception of--and I never really bought into it, but as you've heard me talk about before, the period of the '60s [1960s] were a special time.  And as a friend of mine, Michael Meredith [ph.] told me a long time ago when we were having one of our many philosophical discussions, that during that period of time a door was opened.  How many of us recognized that that door opened?  How many of us walked through it?  How many of us pushed our way through it?  How many of us were skeptical of it?  How many of us looked at that door and said, you know, I think it's safer on this side.  And I've never been that type of person to always take the safe route.  I've taken the route that helps me to get to the end game, and the game when I look back on my life and when it's viewed as a body of life work and a portrait, it will be a pretty good record or a pretty clear record that my intent is to make contributions while I'm alive to the success of others.  And the opportunities in what I had to overcome and good friends of mine, that are my friends to this day, helped me to, to overcome them, was hidden stereotypes that I had.  I, I did have them.
Story_ID: 156341
Speaker 1: In 1999, I was a part of Leadership Atlanta, and in our study group I got to know two guys that are very close friends of mine.  One now is a federal judge, Bill Duffey [William S. Duffey, Jr.], who was also a U.S. Attorney, and at that time he was a partner in King & Spalding [LLP].  And he's a close friend of mine right now.  And Steve Macauley [Stephen Macauley].  Steve's a good buddy of mine and a visionary.  And Steve owns the Macauley Companies [Macauley + Schmit].  He's a major builder.  I just got a letter from him talking about his successes in 2005.  He's one of the larger home builders in the City of Atlanta [Georgia] now.  And, and we all thought we were just so different.  And we had, they're both from the white community, and I'm from the African American community.  Steve is a Democrat, and Bill's a staunch Republican, and I neither one.  I'm, I'm in the--I'm out, you know, I believe in choosing the best leaders for our time, and whether that's Republican or Democrat, and so we were, we all thought that we were very different, different backgrounds.  Steve's originally from England and Bill grew up a [U.S.] Military kid.  His father was stationed a lot in Hawaii before he came over to the mainland.  And me, of course, I'm from rural Georgia.  And so we were, we all thought we were very different until we started to spend a lot of quality time together.  And then those walls came down, and Steve was longer, Steve, the white guy with the English accent, and Bill was no longer the white guy that loves Newt Gingrich (laughter), you know.  And I became Chuck, and he became Bill and Steve became Steve.  And we wanted others to experience that type of friendship.  So we started an effort in the City of Atlanta to establish a club for leaders, people that are going to the next level and people that are at the next level where they could experience the same thing because we recognized the fact that if this city is going to thrive and survive and it's going to be a major force and if this region needs to grow and be successful, it's gonna take those types of partnerships and friendships that develop over the years in order to achieve that.  And there was no place that we could see where that was being fostered on a continual basis.  The genesis of our beginning was Leadership Atlanta, and they continue to do a great job.  But we wanted to take it a step further.  So we went all over the City of Atlanta and I met some outstanding leaders here in the city, everybody from Jim Ballew, P. Corrale [ph.], John Aldridge, Roger Kessler [ph.], the list goes on and on and on of the most powerful people in this town, and had an opportunity to sit down with all of them.  I had, through this mechanism, I had my first close sit-down conversation with Maynard Jackson.  And he was quite a fellow, (chuckle) but I had had conversations with him before, but not on a personal level.  It was usually that related to business.  But that was a personal interaction there that we all had that was extremely rewarding.  And we talked about this philosophy.  And we wanted to demonstrate it in a very real way.  And we gained a lot of support.  Probably the most important--Griffin Bell, Tom Cousins were also a part of that equation.  Probably the most important thing that happened to us was listening to all of those folks, and they all said, well, you guys need to, you know, the Commerce Club is getting old and it was initially set up for that.  It's kind of gone wayward, and you guys need to bring that same spirit back to the Commerce Club, and we forged a relationship.  And they put us in leadership positions, and we started making things happen there.  And the club has now become younger and the influence has grown and the activity is there.  A lot of our ideas were the ideas that created a new atmosphere and being of that club.  And I'm proud to be a part of that transformation.  So it was very beneficial.  So my life started to change.  My philosophy changed after that in terms of the possibilities that could take place.
Story_ID: 156342
Speaker 1: And so, and the doors that opened to me continue to open to me because I think differently.  And I wouldn't think differently if it wasn't for those long conversations that--my buddy, Tim Lowe [ph.], will probably, if he were here, he would definitely speak to this because we--well, one of my little travels was in a cabin in the, and we were staying at some resort.  And there were four of us in a room, me, Bill [William S. Duffey, Jr.] and Tim Lowe and another guy with us from Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], was Paul Hines [ph.].  And Paul and I started talking about Morehouse and it went well deep into the night.  And we talked about the feeling that you get when you graduate from the school and the walk through the campus and the atmosphere and the cheers that you get of making an historic achievement of graduating from a school like that.  And there's one thing that both of those guys will know right now their subliminal mind, that graduating from Morehouse is a special thing (laughter) cause while they were trying to sleep, that's what we were talking about.  But, but my philosophy, my personal philosophy took a transformation and it took a transformation, in my opinion, for the better.  So as I move into my, the last quarter of my professional career, it's with that in mind that I'm putting my signature project together right now.
Story_ID: 156343
Speaker 1: Mr. Lewis, your family, your education, your partnerships, your relationships, your philosophy took you to the highest levels of predominantly African American banking institutions in this city [Atlanta, Georgia].  But what you're now attempting is quite different from, from those institutions.  Would you tell us about your new venture and, and what we are to see and experience in the future?
Speaker 2: One Georgia Bank, and the name "One" is emblematic of a lot of what I personally believe and I think that, if you look at where the body of the work of a person, you begin to understand that there's more to me than any one particular sector.  And that recent experience in the past eight, nine years that I talk about, has really shown me that maybe there's time for us to have major projects of influence.  Maybe it's time for leaders, if you're a leader, that means you put yourself at risk.  You don't sit back in the back and play it safe.  That's not leadership.  Leaders put themselves at risk regardless of the circumstances for what they believe in.  And I don't view what I'm doing now as having put myself at risk.  Obviously, now, it's working out very well, and everybody thinks it's one of the greatest things since sliced bread, but I knew all along that this was very possible, and this was very capable of happening, taking different people, just as we did with New Century Forum at the Commerce Club, taking different people, business leaders, people that have been successful from various pockets of this community, the entire community and putting them together in a business context to achieve and to create a common vision, one bank, for one Georgia, which is where the name One Georgia Bank comes from.  And if you look at my board of directors, you'll see that they're very diverse, from the Asian community, we have two females.  We have Jewish members of our board.  We have a broad spectrum of people from various walks of life in the city and people that are in different professions.  And we've put together probably what has been known and people have said, it's probably the best organizing group of any new bank in the State of Georgia.  And we're attempting something else that's very unique.  We are putting together the largest capital raise of any start-up bank from individual investors that people have seen in recent memory.  And we're doing it, not from huge million dollar chunks from different individuals, but we've purposely put the dollar amounts in ranges so that we'll have a mass level of support, a big level of support.  And right now, we have over 418 investors throughout the entire north Georgia area.  And it's put me in different scenarios that have been outstanding and very few African Americans have walked into some of the places that I've walked into and talked with people about doing serious business and taking care of other folks' money.  And I feel very proud of that.
Speaker 1: What will really be different about One Georgia Bank (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: One Georgia Bank is the, One Georgia Bank is the, I've--I'm a big bank technology guy.  I'm a big believer in customer service, and I'm, and as you have heard, I'm well rooted in my banking expertise.  And this bank is going to be one, we're putting together the bank of the future.  Everything that we do is going to be--we're gonna have the top-of-the-line technology.  We've put together not only the best, best from a talent pool perspective that's out in the city, but we've also invested the necessary dollars that it takes in order to have the latest systems, the most advanced techniques that you can, you'll find.  But all of that doesn't work unless we have a commitment to individual, personal one-on-one service.  And we have that sincere commitment, and that'll be our highest priority.  But we're also located, we're also building our facilities in the 1180 Peachtree Building which is the signature building in the City of Atlanta right now.  And the new Atlanta Symphony [Orchestra] is going in right behind our location where we're located, in one of the affluent communities in the State of Georgia, the Midtown Atlanta market, where Peachtree and 14th [sic, 15th Street] has now become Main to Main.  So we're located right in the heart of the key business district.  So we've got a lot of unique things about us.  Our whole makeup is unique.  Everything that we're doing and the way we do it is unique.  We are putting together the bank of the future.
Speaker 1: What else would you say to further persuade the listening public that One Georgia Bank is, in fact, the bank of the future?
Speaker 2: Well, I think from the standpoint that our uniqueness, the fact that we have, we're reaching across all sectors and lines of, and philosophies of, and parties and all those things that don't mean a lot, and we're getting to the core and the heart of what it really takes in order to provide a good product and service.  And that's relationships.  And the more that we can promote good business relationships across multicultural backgrounds, I think is the, the absolute right thing that we all should do in everything that we do and not be afraid of what's to come afterwards because what comes afterwards will be the treasure and the legacy that we leave on for our kids and their kids.
Story_ID: 156344
Speaker 1: You've used chess as a metaphor for your life's work and from time to time, you've used football.  What can be said to the listeners about chess as a game to explain life or to look to for patterns of life?
Speaker 2: If you, I've, I've had the good fortune--sometimes not so good cause I used to, you know, I got my share of beatings at the hands of some chess masters.  And if you look at chess and you structure a game of chess, a good chess player will see move many times ahead of the actual moves that are being played and will have worked out strategies long into the middle and end game at the very first move of a chess piece.  And if you are competent chess player, you have that ability to see moves that are gonna be made many, many, many steps in advance.  You train your mind to think about moves, multiple steps in advance, and the more you can do that, and the farther you can reach into a game, the better and better you become at the game and the more you're able to control your circumstance.  And that's the same thing with life.  You have to look at, at least I do, I have to look at my life from a strategic standpoint.  I'm a strategic thinker, and I do dream of visions.  And I try to make those things happen.  But they don't happen just because I dreamed 'em up.  They happen because I can strategize about them and I can see all the moves necessary in order to make them happen regardless of how difficult the circumstances.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 156345
Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Willard Charles Lewis, W-I-L-L-A-R-D, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, L-E-W-I-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth was April 9, 1961 in LaGrange, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June 16, 2006.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: Professional banker.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in my small conference room, One Georgia Bank, at 1180 Peachtree Street [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, and we're completing an interview that we started several months ago for The HistoryMakers, correct?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 156346
Speaker 1: Now, when we were, I think we left, where we left off, we were talking about how you got involved in banking and we talked about the importance of chess in your life, and we talked about, a little about the history of Citizens Trust [Bank, Atlanta, Georgia] as a black bank.  And how did you get involved as, with Citizens Trust Bank?  Were you majoring in finance or a finance-related field at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Correct.  My major was banking and finance.  And the program at Morehouse, as it was structured, during that period of time really geared you toward commercial lending for a major bank.  I really didn't have a lot of knowledge about community banks until a friend of mine was in senior seminar and he talked about his experience over the summer.  And he had worked for Citizens Trust Bank, and he borrowed the notion that it was a black bank, that it was a community-based bank.  And he got to learn at the very base levels.  And I thought that was really interesting.  So I started to do a little research on Citizens Trust, and I really fell in love with the idea of having an opportunity to start at the ground floor of a bank and learn every operation, everything about it because one day I wanted to eventually be a bank president and at some point start my own bank.
Story_ID: 156347
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did you, was there a special internship or something or how did you get involved with Citizens Trust [Bank, Atlanta, Georgia]?  Did you go over as an intern?
Speaker 2: They had a sum- they actually called it internship, but it was actually a summer help program.  And you went there in the summer, and they taught you how to be a teller.  So I worked as a teller at the bank's West Side office.  And I was pretty good.  I only needed a couple of classes to finish Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and I completed those that following semester.  And the bank management came to me and asked that I consider making Citizens Trust a career.  And it was what I wanted to do and I was very appreciative of that opportunity.  And I was eventually transferred to the bank's main office when I started working full time there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, where was the main office?
Speaker 2: Seventy-five Piedmont Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, who was at the bank in those days?  Who was the chairman of the bank and who did you work with when you started?
Speaker 2: Well, when I started there, Herman Russell was the chairman of the board.  Owen Funderberg was the bank's president.  The two executive vice presidents that really ran the day-to-day operations were Ed Wood and John Turner.  I worked for, when I initially started working there, I worked for Allen Bachnight [ph.] who was the branch manager at the West Side office and Julia Edwards who was the assistant branch manager.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when I was transferred to the main office, I believe my first manager there was Linda Webster and Eloise Hill.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you, I mean was there any specific person that was a mentor to you when you first--
Speaker 2: Well, I really looked up to Owen Funderberg.  I thought that he was where I wanted to be one day, and I watched him.  Periodically, I would go and sit in his office and talk to him, and I did that pretty much on a regular basis.  So I adopted him as a mentor.  And also there were a few others, but he was the primary figure that I looked toward to get some insight in terms of what it took for me to win my ultimate goal.
Speaker 1: This is like 1983, '84 [1984]?
Speaker 2: This is 1983.
Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983], okay, all right.
Story_ID: 156348
Speaker 1: Atlanta [Georgia] was, was really booming in those days from what I understand.
Speaker 2: Well, Atlanta was a different town then than it is now.  It was much smaller.  It was, in the African American community, it was, it was still coming, kind of coming down from its heyday which would have been actually before integration.  And so it was a, it was a pretty good time.  The bank [Citizens Trust Bank] that I was working for had, it was poised to grow, I think there were about $64 million in assets when I got there.  And they were poised to grow, and they eventually did grow.  So we got a chance to see everybody that was in the Civil Rights Movement, everybody back there.  So it was a good time to be a banker in that spot and you got a chance to see a lot of very famous people from the civil right era.
Speaker 1: Okay, who were some of the people that you are talking about?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, of course, the King family [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King--
Speaker 1: Did they bank at Citizens Trust [Bank]?
Speaker 2: Mrs. King, in particular.  You had Hosea Williams was a customer of the bank and a very interesting customer of the bank.
Speaker 1: Do you have any stories about Hosea Williams--
Speaker 2: Ah, I do--
Speaker 1: --he's really a firebrand and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, actually--
Speaker 1: --and a lot of things.
Speaker 2: Actually, he was a very good businessman.  Later in, later in his life, he came to my office, and I had a chance to really sit down and interact with him one-on-one, and I found him to be a very humble business person that was very astute and looking for the right deals.  And I was able to accommodate him.  At that time he was had gotten into the bail bondsmen business.  And he had his manager of the business there, and I was very impressed with him, sitting down talking to him about his business and his business needs.  And he was older, he had been through a lot of trouble that was very well chronicled.
Speaker 1: And he had that march across the Edmund Pettus Bridge in [Selma] Alabama where they all got, Bloody Sunday, they called it, yeah.
Speaker 2: And then later the march in Cumming, Georgia, and I think they were stoned in Cumming, Georgia.  And so he was, I thought he was a very astute businessman.  You know, and I would see him there, and then I'd see him on his television show with [James] "Alley Pat" [Patrick], and he'd make some outlandish comments about the bank and things of that nature.  And I just thought it was kind of funny.  You know, he was an entertainer too.  So I think a lot of the comments that he made were for entertainment value.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he kind of used his gift of oratory there to--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: That's exactly, right.
Speaker 1: Any other figures from, did [HM] Joseph Lowery bank there?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.  And you could probably go on and on and on and then, and everybody felt a great sense of pride in banking at the bank.  And I thought it was a great time to be there.
Speaker 1: Was Citizens Trust then the only black bank in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: At that time, it was.  Well, actually, it was the only commercial, black commercial bank, African American commercial bank.  Mutual Federal [Savings Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia] was a savings and loan.  It was an African American savings and loan that was there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was around the corner from the bank.
Story_ID: 156349
Speaker 1: Now, I don't know if you might have any insight about this or not, but know in the late '60s [1960s], all over the country, places had not had a black bank before, certain towns, you know, developed black banks and some--and new banks seemed to pop up in places like Chicago [Illinois] and other places.  In my hometown, Dayton [Ohio], we had a Unity [National] Bank.  All of 'em had a freedom kind of a name, Freedom Bank in another city.  You know, a lot of banks popped up but they didn't all stay afloat.  Chicago now is, I guess, down to Seaway [Bank and Trust Company].  It's the only one left and a savings and loan.  But at one time they had like quite a few, you know, black banks, had five, Drexel [National Bank] and there was a bunch of them.  But is there, do you have any sense of the demise of these banks and why--
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I do, and it really all boils down to asset quality and management.  And management starts with the board of directors.  I think some of the banks' boards were probably not as well equipped to adapt to a business model.  You had, a lot of the banks had the local religious community involved on the board, the academic community.  And some had the business acumen and some might not have had the business acumen that it takes to properly oversee the bank and ensure that management is performing properly.  I think from an asset quality standpoint, I think the loans that the banks made were reflective of their marketplace.  And a lot of times, you would hear people say, well, you know, it's wailing wall.  You go there for a loan and you have to stand there and cry and beg to get one.  But the truth of the matter is a lot of the applicants that came to those banks came there as a last resort.  They were typically turned down at some other bank, and then they would come there as a last resort instead of making those banks the primary option.  So the support from the strong, the strong borrowers probably wasn't there early enough to help 'em.  And so you have a management issue and then you have poor credit quality, and then you end up losing your bank over it.  So those are the things that typically happened.  And that's not just in African American banks, but any bank, but it was particularly difficult for African American banks because the communities in which the banks tried to serve, they were economically depressed.  So they really needed additional assistance outside of a pure banking model in order to make it viable.
Speaker 1: Right, that leads to the question, in Chicago, but with all the--they had five black banks at one time, but there was a sixth bank, South Shore Bank, was a development bank, I think, which was actually assisted by the federal government as a development bank and could take more risks, you know, than Independence [Bank] or Seaway or some of the other banks.  I just wondered--I didn't know, I mean I didn't know this, didn't know anything about business when I was, you know, in my early days in Chicago, but now after interviewing a lot of people I (laughter) found this out.  But I just wondered why some of the black banks didn't try to, and it seemed like they were fighting a losing battle by not being able to subsidize what they were doing with federal money.
Speaker 2: No, I think that some of 'em did try.  I mean there were some pretty good programs that were, that were offered and used primarily through the National Bankers Association.  It was the, well, it is the trade group for the nation's women and minority-owned banks.  And they came up with some pretty good programs.  But the programs weren't sweeping enough in order to protect the assets of the banks.  And so some of them ran into trouble.  There were some, never discount the mismanagement factor.  For example, Freedom National Bank in [Harlem] New York [New York].  I'll never forget the day, I was at work when the word came down that Freedom at that time, which was the largest African American-owned bank, had failed.  It was very shocking.  And, you know, you scramble to look for anything to read to find out what happened to Freedom and call your friends to find out what happened to Freedom.  Eventually, I found out, you know, it was, there was mismanagement involved in it.  There were a lot of newspaper articles written in New York about it.  So it was a very tragic story, a very--I think that day African American banking took a hard hit.
Speaker 1: Was it innocent mismanagement or deliberate--
Speaker 2: Well, as I understand now, I can only go by what I've read in, you know, the newspapers and there were some investigations.  There're always investigations when banks go under.  And I don't really recall the result of what the investigations yielded.  But I'm pretty sure that I do recall that there was some, some significant mismanagement of funds that occurred there.  And they're not the only bank that has, that's run across that, but, but, but certainly, it was the largest one.
Story_ID: 156350
Speaker 1: Well, what kind of things did you learn from your mentor at, Mr. [Owen] Funderberg at, at Citizens Trust [Bank, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Well, I learned probably that, that, as, as a bank president, that I only need one document to management the bank on a daily basis.  And that's a balance, a general ledger, which includes a balance sheet and an income statement.  That's all he read.  And he could read that document and he could tell you everything that was going on in the bank.  And that, in fact, is how I manage the bank now.  It's through that one document.  Every morning, that's the first document that I wanna see.  And I can tell you pretty much everything that occurs in the bank by reading that one document.  And so I think that was the biggest lesson of the importance of being able to read the accounting information.  And he gave me an opportunity to move into the accounting department at the bank.  That was my next move from the teller line.  I moved into the accounting area of the bank.  And that move really taught me a lot about all the inner workings because when you're in the accounting department, you learn where every nook and cranny, where every pencil, pen, where everything is.  And that move really catapulted me forward in my banking career.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you're saying it's really, it's--you have to know that balance sheet, I mean and I mean it's, it could be--people can make it more complicated, but that's the bottom line when you go through that.
Speaker 2: That's correct.  That's correct.
Speaker 1: And to the extent you know that, you know what's going on.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You have to be, when you read it, you have to be able to look behind the numbers.  And if you can look behind the numbers, you know that if you have, for example, the Federal Reserve balance on your balance sheet is $2 million, well, and it can only be one of two things.  And you only need $200,000 in that account, either someone didn't run the entries properly to the account or too much money was left in the account from that night.  And you had $2 million that could have been invested in the overnight market that wasn't.  So it's those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's significant.  That's significant information (laughter).
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So, anything else?  I mean that's a--you know, I imagine it, and I always know, I'm a business ignoramus as I said before.  I don't know a lot about it, but people, you know, watching this in the future, you know, are gonna wanna know.  Is there anything else that you, you know, that's real significant that you learned from Mr. Funderberg?
Speaker 2: Well, one thing I had to learn later was that probably--well, that was a different day and time.  He was a very fair man, when you sat and talked to him, very fair and very insightful.  It was always a pleasure sitting down, and he would always make the time.  And that's one thing that I've always tried to do is when someone wanted to sit down and they thought it was important enough for me to talk to them about either my experiences or get some advice from me, I think it's, I think it's important to make the time to do it because if someone thinks that you have something that is of value that is gonna help them in the future, that's a pretty special thing for someone to seek out from you.  And I think if there's any other lesson, it would, it would have been that, to make the time.
Story_ID: 156351
Speaker 1: But you, you rose pretty quick at, at Citizens Trust [Bank, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Not as fast as I wanted to you.  I'll tell you.  I was the biggest pain in everybody's side 'cause I was young and aggressive, and I wanted to move, and everybody had to get out of my way.  And I had a--I was pretty aggressive in trying to get information.  And the main thing for me was to get the information.  I wanted to learn.  I wanted to know.  I was a sponge.  I wanted to know everything about it, and I wanted to get there quickly.  I didn't wanna wait.  And so I had to wait at times.  So while it appears, when you look back on it, that it was quick, for me it was a very slow process.  But it was the way that it should have been.  I should have gained the experience.  I wasn't ready as fast as I thought I was ready.  And I'm, and even after some years when I gained a lot of knowledge about the business, I still wasn't ready.  And at times I knew it, and so as I started to mature, I started to really think about, I started to really thing about the things that I needed within myself in order to prepare myself adequately for my next challenge.  And so I've, I started to realize more and more about myself as life started to, as things started to wear on in my life.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were there, how long initially, when you started out?
Speaker 2: I was there from 1983 up until 1991.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was there for eight years.
Story_ID: 156352
Speaker 1: Okay, and then you moved on to [First] Southern Bank [Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: First Southern Bank, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) First Southern Bank, okay.
Speaker 2: In 1989, First Southern was, it was the, it was another African American-owned bank that started up.  It was well-chronicled in the newspapers.  And it had some appeal, and I was living not far from there.  The president of the bank came and met with me, Herbert Orlease [ph.], and we had lunch.  He decided that--or we decided, I can't remember which, that it wasn't a good fit at the time.  I was, I was in my twenties at the time and I was acting CFO because the acting controller, which was the same position there, was out on maternity leave.  And it just really wasn't a good time for me to move.  And so I would have left where I was in a bad way and that's just not me.  I like to leave things good and positive and not leave people struggling.  So I decided to wait.  And it would have been a move up for me, not necessarily a lot in the way of money, but it would have been a move up in position which was more important to me so that I could be in another position to learn.  And eventually, in 1991, the, Owen Funderberg was retiring.  And they came back again.  This time a good friend of mine, Phil Cunningham [ph.] was there as CFO, and he needed a right-hand guy, and Owen Funderberg was retiring.  And so he came back and offered me a vice president position at First Southern.  And I was, I was very flattered.  And I thought it was a good time for me to do something different.  I had good support from the board.  I had no reason to leave, but it was an opportunity to grow.  And I had a good career at that point at Citizens Trust.  I, after I got in the accounting department, I was given the opportunity to convert the telecommunications system to a new system.  I did, I led that bank wide.  I was maybe twenty-five years old then.  I implemented the PC in the bank, in the account department, which PC's were, sounds crazy now, but new then (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, to put it in perspective, yeah, they were new then.  And I think in the early '90s [1990s] people were still using the kind with the green screens on.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: It was really just coming into the--yeah.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.  And I was able to implement Lotus spreadsheets in the accounting department and made the accounting department much more efficient.  We were using big antiquated accounting machines that were just totally out of date.  So I helped move the ball forward while I was there, and automate some things and improve some processes.  And so I felt really good about that, but it was time for me to move on because I had pretty much gone as far as I could go there.  There was no growth, there wasn't any growth room, and I was just too young and too aggressive to sit there.  So the timing was just right.  I went to First Southern and I fell in love with it from the day I walked into the bank.  They weren't making a whole lot of money, but the atmosphere was great.
Speaker 1: Was it younger than the other, I mean--
Speaker 2: First Southern?  Yes--
Speaker 1: --younger people?
Speaker 2: --younger people.  You had, it was a diverse group of people which was refreshing because you learn from different people and their experiences.  And it was just new.  The air inside of a start-up bank is fresh and clean and there's no issues that, you know--well, there were issues.  They had gotten in some trouble on some things, and, but it's something special about the start-up bank.  It's really something nice about it.  So I really enjoyed it.  I spent a lot of time working there, and I stayed late to try to get the bank and to build the infrastructure of the bank out, to get it in shape.  Sometimes I worked, you know, Phil would be right there with me, and you know, we'd work til all kinds of hours at night, you know, trying to make sure the bank was in good condition.  And we eventually got it there, and it started to work there.  Then Herbert Reese [ph.] ran into--he and the board and the regulators didn't see eye-to-eye and he left the bank.  And that changed over the leadership there and gave me an opportunity to actually learn more because along with him leaving, there were some others that decided to leave around the same time.  The senior lender left, and so, so we were pretty busy.  And, but it gave me an opportunity to really move even that much further to the top in terms of overall administration and management of the bank.  So it gave me an even greater opportunity.  Eventually, [James] Jim Young came in and replaced Herbert Reese and he and I worked very closely together for a number of years through First Southern into, back to Citizens Trust.  So, that was a good, good pairing as well.
Story_ID: 156353
Speaker 1: So First Southern [Bank] eventually merged with Citizens Trust [Bank]--
Speaker 2: That's correct--
Speaker 1: --at some point?
Speaker 2: In 1998.
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998], okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you were there about seven years before the merger?
Speaker 2: That's correct.  So I had a seven-year stint at First Southern, and during that time I had an opportunity to negotiate on the bank's behalf, the purchase of a mortgage company.  I converted the bank from one bank, a stand-alone bank to a holding company that owned the bank.  So we moved from First Southern Bank to First Southern Bank Shares, Inc. which owned First Southern Bank.  And then eventually, it owned the subsidiary, the subsidiary that we acquired, FSB Mortgage Services, Inc.  So it was a pretty good time.  I opened up two bank branches.  I've opened up (unclear), a bank branch on, the South DeKalb branch [Atlanta, Georgia], that was my first branch project.  It was my first start-up branch that I actually put together myself.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: That was 1994.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was 1994.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I started the Rock Bridge branch [Atlanta, Georgia] in, I believe 1996.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we started to grow, and we were doing very well.  After I left Citizens Trust, another gentleman, Bill Gibbs [William Gibbs], came in, and apparently--I wasn't there during the Bill Gibbs years, but apparently it didn't work well between he and the board.  And so he, he left the bank in 1997.  And First Southern was approached by Citizens Trust to merge, and that would bring the First Southern management team into play at Citizens Trust which had lost its president and had had some problems.  And so we put the merger together.  I was asked to be the coordinating person to put both the banks together, and which I did.  And it was, it was a lot of fun.  It was very difficult decisions that I had to make during that period.  But I made them, and we consolidated the banks.  We downsized.  The bank made a lot more money than it had before.  And I think everybody was pretty happy.  So, with the result.  It came with some very painful decisions of layoffs, but--
Speaker 1: Personnel and layoffs.
Speaker 2: Personnel, but I try to do that with much, being as humane as possible, and during that period.  So it was a difficult time, but at the same time, I tried my best to be empathetic with, and tried to have outplacement services and those type things for the displaced.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were like, so you were chief operations officer of the--
Speaker 2: Chief operating officer.
Speaker 1: --officer of the bank?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was the number two guy.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's up until I guess, what, 2004?
Speaker 2: Two thousand five [2005].
Speaker 1: Two thousand five [2005], okay, so but you, you'd always--always dreamed of starting your own bank, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 156354
Speaker 1: Okay, well, you're gonna tell me some of the stories about these twenty-one years of banking in a black bank, in a black town, political control is in the hands of black people.  The town [Atlanta, Georgia] is booming, biggest airport [Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport] in the country, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I was kind of young when a lot of that was going on, so I was really more or less observing a lot of things that went on because I wasn't a player in any of it at that time.  But I was there when a lot of things happened that a lot of which I've long forgotten about, but there were some interesting times over the course of those years where in the '80s [1980s], I think that that was the time when there was euphoria during the Ronald Reagan administration that somehow the economy was doing so great, when, in fact, that we were building up the biggest deficit the country had ever seen.  And, in fact, things weren't as rosy as they might have seemed, but there was a kind of euphoria.  So people had a good time during the '80s [1980s].  Adults had a good time during the '80s [1980s].  They were discoing and all of those things.  And in the African American community, it wasn't any different.  So you started to see some fallout from that.  You started to see some professional athletes started to fall by the wayside with drug usage.  You saw business people doing the same thing.  It was pretty prominent back then.  Newscasters were getting defrocked.  A lot of that went on back during those days, but also there was some cultivation of new leadership that began to emerge as well.  I think you saw the Greg Baranco's of the world started to take a leadership role in the business community.  You saw a number of people that, Bill Campbell started--he was a councilman at the time, started to gain power.  And a lot of that was a result of the changing of the guard so to speak.  A lot of the civil rights leaders and a lot of the leaders from the before period began to get old, and so there needed to be new leadership and there was.
Speaker 1: When you started Maynard Jackson was mayor, right?
Speaker 2: Maynard Jackson was mayor, and actually, I wanna say Maynard, that was Maynard's--it was Andy Young [HM Andrew Young] and Maynard.  When I started, I believe Andy was in office.  I think Maynard came back for a brief period, and but he didn't make the entire term.  So I think it was Andy Young for the most part when I first started.  And he did a great job while he was mayor.  And there were a lot of challenges that he had, and I can remember seeing him drive around the city and he passed by me one day and he waved.  He didn't know me from Adam, but he passed by and waved, and I could see that he had probably left some council meeting (laughter) or something, and you could see the stress on his face from probably not getting what he needed to get done or not getting the cooperation that he needed for something.  I don't know what it was, but I thought he did a great job.  And so, but the nightclub scene was big back in those days.  It was huge, and the Atlanta Hawks were doing, were playing great.  You know, everybody wanted to go to the Hawks--
Speaker 1: They had Dominique Wilkins and--
Speaker 2: Dominique Wilkins and Spud Webb and Doc Rivers and Kevin Willis and Twan [ph.] and all those guys were on the team, and it was fun to go watch them.  They won fifty or sixty games.  Well, they--I don't think they ever won sixty, but they used to average about fifty-six wins a season and it was always very exciting.  Tree Rollins and always very exciting to go watch those guys.  And they were pretty much the only game in town in terms of success in Atlanta [Georgia] sports during that period of time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Braves [Atlanta Braves] were kind of sorry in those days.
Speaker 2: Oh, the Braves were horrible back then.  The Braves had, that was before they, that was before they went on their stretch run, and the [Atlanta] Falcons, which I'm a lifelong Falcon fan, and they were, they weren't any better either.  And they made a lot of decisions that were very questionable in terms of coaching and philosophies.  They took a strong (unclear) quarterback in Steve Bartkowski and put him in a, a H-back type offense during the Dan Henning days that just didn't work out.  It was, that was a system more for a mobile quarterback, and [Steve] Bartkowski was heading toward the end of his career.  So it just, a lot of just things that just didn't work out for whatever reason.  And so, so the Hawks were really the only game in town.  Everybody, everybody gravitated toward them.  You loved to see the Hawks out, you know, about town, and they were a pretty big deal back in those days.
Story_ID: 156355
Speaker 1: Okay, and Atlanta [Georgia] really jumped ahead in the music business too here with--
Speaker 2: That was during the period of time when, during that same period of time was when, in the '80s [1980s] when you started to see major labels started to move--well, I wouldn't say major labels, but you started to see some pretty popular musicians start to move to Atlanta during that period of time as well.  So yeah, and that was during the same period.
Speaker 1: I think during hip-hop era, you know, the strong Atlanta group of hip-hoppers and--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, one person I forgot to mention that I waited on as a teller, and that was Bubba Knight [HM Merald "Bubba" Knight, Jr.], of Gladys Knight and the Pips.  That was--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, he's the brother with the personality--
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly (laughter).
Speaker 1: If you ever see him live, he's (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's exactly right, that's exactly right.
Speaker 1: He's her brother, one of the Pips, the comedian of the Pips.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's exactly right.  That was, that was pretty interesting.  But, yeah, the '80s [1980s] were, you know, it was, it was its own special time--
Story_ID: 156356
Speaker 1: Now, I'll tell you, reality set in the early '90s [1990s] set in.  That was during the period of time when there were record bankruptcies.  People that were spending and having a good time during the '80s [1980s] became cash poor in the early '90s [1990s], and there were record bankruptcies being filed in the early '90s [1990s], especially 1991.
Speaker 2: Were they particularly, particularly in the black community, would you say?
Speaker 1: The black community was hit hard, but all communities were hit hard.  The bottom fell out of the economy, and the economy was--economies are all cyclical.  And that, and during that particular period of time, I think that there was some pretty difficult times ahead for the economy, and people suffered.  And a lot of people were, I guess they got overly extended in real estate.  And as a result of being over extended in real estate, they couldn't make repairs to the facilities.  There were just all kind of problems that came up in the early '90s [1990s].  And that really precipitated the ousting of [President] George [H.W.] Bush and that is the reason why [President William] Bill Clinton the White House '92 [1992] is because of the economy being so poor in '91 [199].  So there was a change, and we felt it in the bank community.  And we felt the bad economy because our past-due ratios started to swell.  People in the African American communities, I would have people come to my office and they would come there and, you know, they would just, you know, just--you couldn't help 'em.  Their situations were so desperate, there was nothing you could do to help 'em, and they were too far behind.  And so they were left with no choice but to file bankruptcy.  You couldn't refinance them.  They, you had no opportunity to assist them.  So a lot of people lost out in the early 1990s.  But under the Clinton administration, things began to turn around.  They began to get stronger.  And then you started to see people prosper, and this time, it was not euphoria, it was real, it was really happening.  Our bank started to grow.  This was at First Southern [Bank, Atlanta, Georgia].  We started to grow and started to put on a lot of good quality assets, a lot of good quality loans.  That's why, that's one of the reasons why we were able to able to expand the bank during that period, is because the economy had begun to take off.  Now, toward the end of the '90s [1990s], that's when we started to see the quote, unquote "new economy" start to emerge which had made no fundamental sense whatever to think that you can just raise capital and not make money and somehow that was gonna translate into these great profits down the road, that they were gonna have these great earnings at some point, some time, whenever, with no real plan.  And people were buying into that.  And after, after the people bought into that, the bubble burst on it, and you saw, you saw a lot of fallout from investors losing money.  It was a real shame.
Story_ID: 156357
Speaker 1: Also, during the '90s [1990s], that's when you really started to see Nigerian fraud schemes start to surface.
Speaker 2: Were they pretty predominant here in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 1: Everywhere, all over the country.  Now, these were schemes that--and they're still prevalent today, they--they change in variety, but it's the same--or version rather, but it's the same scheme tried over and over again.  Pie in the sky if you give me money now is the basic theme of it, and you're starting to see that now.  I saw some people lose some money, big money, hundreds of thousands of dollars believing that they were gonna get gold Krugerrands.
Speaker 2: And last year, it was announced in one of the magazines I was reading the other day that this year's--there's a group that gives out the Ig Nobel Prize, (laughter) and gave it out to the Nigerian princesses and ex politicians who send the email letters, you know.  But nobody showed up to accept the award.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But he said, you can't find 'em though they're ubiquitous in the world now.  They send more emails out than everybody else.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But that's, well, was that--did that have a lot of impact on the Atlanta, I mean in terms of the black population here and people's affinity for (unclear) around the world--
Speaker 1: I think, I don't--
Speaker 2: --were they taken advantage of more around here?
Speaker 1: I don't think any more than anybody else.  I think anybody, you know, that thinks pie in the sky, well, I think that African Americans were hurt by it, but I don't think any more than any--than in the general population.  I don't think was (unclear) the case.  But I did see that start to take hold.  And we as bankers, we try to get as much education out there as possible too.
Speaker 2: Did you know of any, or do you know of any stories of people that really--you don't have to give their names, but who really got taken for a ride with this kind of thing?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I did know, I did know of a guy that was a builder that was really, you know, hot to trot on getting a wire transfer done.  I mean he had to send this wire $100,000 to Nigeria so that he could get this million dollars back.  And, you know, we talked to him and tried to tell him not to do it over and over again.  And he still did it, and it really cost him in his business too.  And he struggled after that because he didn't have the liquidity that he needed in his business to really operate because he had tossed away all that money.
Speaker 2: I could imagine if my banker told me not to do it, I'd really have to be--
Speaker 1: (Laughter)You would think--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--
Speaker 1: --you would think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's something.  You know, I could see, you know, somebody sending maybe a couple hundred dollars or something or maybe a thousand dollars on their own just not thinking about it, but if your banker--that kind of money and your banker tells you not, hey, don't--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, you would think.
Speaker 2: That's incredible.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's, it's unfortunate.
Story_ID: 156358
Speaker 1: But I, I left, actually, I didn't leave First Southern [Bank].  We merged with Citizens Trust [Bank].  And we, when we merged with Citizens Trust, it gave me an opportunity to, yeah, I had my--a guy I learned a lot from, Greg Baranco, watching him operate a crowd and operate with, with a shareholder group as chairman of First Southern was really something special and to lead a board meeting, you know.  He was very smooth.  I picked up a lot from him, but the merger brought two guys that I really respected a lot together.  And that was [HM] Herman Russell and Greg Baranco.  So it gave me the best of both worlds pretty much in having those two guys sitting at the table.  While those two guys were at the table was really something special for me.  So the merger with First Southern and Citizens Trust was a real special time.  And right after the merger, we started to make money.  It was a good time in 1999 for us to do something that very few African American banks had done, and that's make the stock available on the public market, that being the [James] Jim Young's vision.  And I executed and pulled it off, and we started to trade the stock publicly which really was a great thing from a liquidity standpoint.  For years, you would hear shareholders say, well, you know, I got this stock in, and you know, well, I should have invested in Home Depot (laughter).  At least I can realize some value in my Home Depot stock, but I can't realize any value with this.  What am I gonna do with this stock?  And so putting the stock on the public market gave them liquidity.  They can look at their shares and see their shares, their equity positions grow, and they could sell it if they didn't like it as an investment.  So that was really helpful.  And that was in 1999.  And in, about a year or so later, 2000, Mutual Federal [Savings & Loan], which was the African American savings and loan that I mentioned earlier, experienced significant trouble and it failed.  We had actually, I had given a lot of presentations to Mutual Federal's board of directors prior to its failing in an attempt to do a business transaction to combine the banks.  This was when I was at First Southern.  And our goal actually was to give ourselves a downtown Atlanta [Georgia] presence because we were a suburban bank.  And we were going to outgrow Citizens Trust which was the larger bank at that time.  And so we were gonna compete against them.  They, I don't think they realized it, but our goal was to, we were gonna pony up and grow as large they were and compete against them then and, for business.  You have to have competition in business to make it, make things fun.  So we kind of viewed them as competition at some point.  Initially, when I first got there, we didn't.  We were, we looked at it, we looked at ourselves as a different type of bank that just happened to be majority owned by African Americans, but we had, we were a diverse bank.  Eventually, we morphed into the quote, unquote "black banking concept" as time went on.
Story_ID: 156359
Speaker 1: And also our--as our market changed, when we were at First Southern [Bank] our market went from being a diverse market to almost a solidly African American market.  So during the period of time while I was there, I saw that big shift in the south DeKalb County [Georgia], south DeKalb County market.  The whites moved out, African Americans moved in and created one of the more affluent areas in the country for African Americans.  So Mutual Federal [Savings and Loan] was a disappointment to see them not make a business transaction, but stayed there with the bank until it failed.  And I was very disappointed to see it, but it gave me a chance to do a transaction that I'd not before and that was to buy a failed thrift.  And so I prepared the bid, worked with consultants, made some decisions for the bank and, and acquired Mutual Federal on March 10, 2000 from the FDIC [Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation] which was a very sad day.  On that date, we walked over to the bank to take possession.  We were introduced to the staff.  The regulators were there.  The staff was unaware that they would be, that they were going to close the bank that night.  So at the end of the day, close of business, they gathered all the employees of the bank together and the regulators told them, they invited some board members, and the regulators told them that they had failed.  And Jim [James Young] and I, we walked over from Citizens Trust [Bank] to Mutual Federal on a very, very sad day, but it was a good day for us cause we were about to grow.  And we addressed the employees as much as we could.  It was very difficult, a very difficult time, a very difficult conversation.  And but we tried to be as sensitive as we could to their plight.  And that weekend, that entire weekend was spent settling up that bank.  And they deposited the bank in our hands on, I believe that Sunday morning, and by Monday, we had reopened the bank as Citizens Trust by that next, by that Monday morning.  So Friday it failed, our team worked all weekend, and on Monday, we reopened as Citizens Trust.  So that was a very difficult transaction.  And it taught me, it was a very sobering experience because I had not, had not been that close to a bank failure ever.  And to see the attitude of the FDIC when they came to, came down to the bid process.  You could bid on insured or uninsured deposits or both.  We did a whole bank bid and we salvaged the entire bank.  But we could have bidded only for the insured deposits, and they were very serious about the uninsured deposits which were those deposits in excess of $100,000 being taken to offset the losses that the bank had incurred.  And they had a customer that had over $900,000 in the bank.
Speaker 2: So they stood to lose all that?
Speaker 1: Eight hundred thousand dollars.  So that transaction happened--
Speaker 2: That was one happy customer when you all completed that.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, and he was an elderly gentleman.  He was in excess of ninety years old, and he had a belief that somehow he wasn't going to lose his money.  And to be honest with you, that belief was--I, you know, the only reason that he didn't lose it was because I bumped up our purchase price a little bit more to make sure we got all those deposits, but I was really afraid for that guy.  And he eventually passed on and his wealth was transferred to a family member who's a developer now and doing well.  So that was, you know, that transaction, I'm really kind of proud of it because it saved a lot of wealth in the African American community that could have gone away.  So, pretty proud of that transaction; not happy to see the bank fail, but happy to see that we were able to help.
Story_ID: 156360
Speaker 1: And we were growing, Citizens Trust [Bank] was growing at the time, and then we ran into a few bumps in the road.  There were some legacy loans that had been there and, during the prior administration, that--one in particular that was very large went bad.  So we had some bumps, and we had to recover from 'em, and we did, did some of the right things.  It was difficult, but we did.  And then my next transaction was one in which I was pretty happy--along the way, I've implemented Internet banking and all those things in the bank and along the way, I put a proposal on the table to acquire a thrift in Birmingham, Alabama.  And the acquisition of the thrift, Citizens Federal Savings Bank [sic, Citizens Federal Savings and Loan Association] which had been the bank of [Arthur George] A. G. Gaston, that was an interesting transaction.  Just before that, we started to experience a little turmoil on the board.  I think there was some, a few personality clashes that resulted, that were very--I mean they were public in nature between Greg [Baranco] and [HM] Herman [Russell].  And I sat there and watched all of that, and I was just really disappointed in the way that that turned out, and eventually, Greg left the board.  And Herman retired from the board and another gentleman, a guy from corporate America, [HM] Ray Robinson, took his place.  And, you know, I think Ray's a really super smart guy.  He is a super smart guy, but the bank, being a community bank, it was a little different mix.  And so having a corporate type board over a community bank, it's a little different mix.  But prior to that occurring, I was able to make presentations to our board, also woo another board which was an interesting courtship.  And we were able to make a business deal with Citizens Federal Savings Bank to acquire them.  And so we moved across state lines into Alabama.  And that was a very fruitful deal also.  I, my whole premise in putting that plan together was for Citizens Trust to take advantage of the core, stable core deposits that were in Citizens Federal and to inject into it a lending function that it didn't have, a commercial banking lending function, and also give it all the products and services because we had every product and service, give it the products and services that it needed in order for it to expand and capture market share.  And so we were able to do that.  And I was able to acquire a, the services of a really neat guy to serve as president over there, [Robert] Bob Nesbitt, and I really respect Bob a lot.  And I think he's a talented banker, and he's gonna do well in that market.  So, so and along that, along the way, we developed additional bank--I developed more bank branches, closed some and changed the mix of assets and liabilities of the bank and it was a good ride.  I enjoyed it.  And I got, had a chance to work closely with board members and, and, and the president of the bank.  And it was a good ride for me.
Story_ID: 156361
Speaker 1: You told me to remind you of the Leadership Atlanta program, yeah--
Speaker 2: Leadership Atlanta, yeah.  I started in Leadership Atlanta just after the Citizens Trust [Bank], First Southern [Bank] merger.  I don't know who nominated me or how I, somehow became the, became a part of that class.  But it's very difficult in Atlanta [Georgia] to get involved in, to get into a class.  Now, people really work hard and lobby to get into that class, and I didn't do any of those things.  And I got an invitation to join the class.
Speaker 1: Now, what is Leadership Atlanta just for the record (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: It's a leadership program.  It brings together executives and community leaders to, together for a year-long program, very time-consuming, very demanding.  You learn all aspects of the environment, the culture of what is Atlanta.  And it is, it is designed to help foster leadership in both the business community, the religious community, the non-profit community, the healthcare industry, you bring all of those professional together that are diverse, truly diverse, and you bring them in and you give them an experience to really understand and to know each other, to really understand and know the city.  So we had a lot of different projects that we all worked together on.  We spent at least a, we spent one full day a month together at our Leadership Program, and then we have to spend an evening rotating between each other's homes for study group sessions.  So there were about maybe seventy or eighty of us in a class.  Then we were broken down into a smaller study group, sized group so there would be about seven or eight of us in a group.  In my study group--and we did all kind of things.  We fed the homeless.  We had race day which if you were Caucasian, you hate it, and if you were African American, you know, it made you mad, but it was insightful for everybody.  And it's really shock therapy is what it is, but it was a really great experience, and it really broke down some of the--it really broke the ice.  But there was a lot of pretty difficult times there, but--
Speaker 1: They go through the history of race relations in Atlanta or--
Speaker 2: Well, actually, actually, not in Atlanta, more so than the individual themselves, their attitude, how they approach race, and how and why do they have some of the thoughts that they have about race.
Speaker 1: Like an encounter session type thing?
Speaker 2: It is a very difficult, shock therapy where you have to face your thoughts and fears about race.
Speaker 1: There was a, I know there was a psychologist, another, his name was Dr. King--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --as a matter of fact.  Was that the one that led this?
Speaker 2: It's his program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He had passed away, and actually, I used to bank him when I was in the, back in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: But it was his program.  He had passed.
Speaker 1: Was his name Ed or William King?
Speaker 2: It'll come to me, but a very deep voice, very big guy, you know.  He did the show on, 'The Phil Donahue Show.'
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: He did it several times, yeah.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: And, so, yeah, he was, it was his program, but at this, at that point, [HM] C. T. Vivian and his son had taken over the program, and they were administering it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were the ones that administered it to us.  So it was pretty interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, well, tell us a little bit--we have a little time before the tape runs out to talk about that a little bit.  So C. T. Vivian is one of the great civil rights heroes, lives here in Atlanta.  So he and his son took over the--
Speaker 2: Al Vivian, and I actually went to, we were at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] together.  I didn't really know him at Morehouse, but we were at Morehouse at the same time.  And he was really leading the discussion, Al Vivian was, rather than his father.  His father was kind of there making notes and feeding information to his son.  His son was the one that was leading the discussion.  At the end, there was a time for healing.  So everyone came and got a hug and (laughter), and so, and tried to heal after the, all the wounds were opened about people's innermost fears and thoughts about race.
Speaker 1: What was the most surprising?  Is there anything that was the most surprising thing about what people actually thought about each other?
Speaker 2: I think the most surprising thing was the number of people that didn't believe that they were racist and then for them to be confronted, I mean truly believed that they were not racist and then to be confronted with their innermost racial fears and to see that exposed before your eyes was pretty dramatic.
Story_ID: 156362
Speaker 1: Okay, so Leadership Atlanta, you were telling us about what, what it was and what it did, but you said it changed your life at a certain point.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum.
Speaker 1: And how did it change your life?
Speaker 2: Well, I tell you, on the very first day--and I hope he doesn't see this, on the very first day that we had our introductions where you had to go out and you had to meet another person that's in the class that you don't know.  And then you have to come, go up and do a entertaining introduction of that person.  And me and Bonnie Barclay who was with, general manager at one of the televisions stations, we introduced each other.  But a guy got up, he was an attorney at King & Spalding [Atlanta, Georgia].  And he got up and he introduced himself and the other person that was there introduced herself.  And he introduced himself by saying, you know, the first thing that came out of his mouth was, "I'm Bill Duffey [William S. Duffey, Jr.].  I'm a Republican."  And then he said--which was fine, you know, but to introduce yourself, you know, the first thing you say about yourself is you're a Republican.  And then he started talking about that he was the only attorney to cross examine a sitting president of the United States in the history of the country.  He was Ken Starr's, when Ken Starr was appointed special prosecutor to investigate the Monica Lewinsky incident, it was Bill Duffey that he brought in to do the interrogation or the cross examination of the president, [William] Bill Clinton.  And at the time, I said, you know--at the time, I thought the Monica Lewinsky thing was a total waste of time.  I thought it was just a propaganda thing because the economy was good--you know, I'm an independent.  So I didn't, you know, you can be a Republican, you can be Democrat as long as the economy's good I'm happy (laughter).  And I thought to myself, you know, the economy is good and this is just pure, pure (unclear).  Who would really, really care about this if this guy wasn't president of the United States?  Nobody would really, really care.  And so I said, you know, yeah, so what, you know.  And so I thought that whole Monica Lewinsky thing was just a tactic by the Republicans to regain control of the White House because, quite frankly, Clinton had done such a good job that it was no way that they were gonna ever get back.  I mean the guy was popular.  He was one of the most popular presidents we've ever had.  And everybody liked him.  You know, I liked the guy, you know, then see the guy go through something like that to me was, you know, a big waste of time.  And so, you know, a few people booed Bill.  I might have said a little jeer (laughter) and whatever.  But to see him and to hear him, and so my mind associated him with all of those guys like Henry Hyde and all of those guys that just to me was just doing this or this, the impeachment process just so that they could knock him down in history so that their side can win, which I think is counterproductive.  And I really felt that way at the time.  And so I associated him with all of that because of the way he introduced himself, and my feelings about all of that.  And so he was the poster boy throughout the Leadership Atlanta as far as I was concerned for that.  And we ended up in the same study group, me, him and another guy, [Stephen] Steve Macauley.  And we'd had--there were others, but we would go and we'd have these very insightful conversations.  And we did one of these personality studies.  And me and Bill--you know, very early on in that, to look at the dynamics of our group and how we were gonna interact.  And me and Bill was like total opposites (laughter).  And I don't remember what the criteria was or whatever.
Speaker 1: Was it Myers Briggs--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure which one it was.  I'm not sure.  It dealt with the dynamics of a group.  So it was not only, I think Myers Briggs deals primarily with the individual, but this deals with the individual in a group.  And so there was a chart that you could move the little dots around.  So, so Bill and I started interacting, and as the experience went on, and I removed those preconceptions about him, and got to know him, all of that went away.  I didn't see Bill as this blonde-hair, blue eyed, big-time corporate attorney that was a Republican and interrogating my idol (laughter).  I didn't, I didn't see him as that anymore.  I saw him as a really good guy with good values, good person and a friend, a true friend.  And it became very apparent to me during that experience, and the same type of thing with Macauley, it became very apparent to me that--and he had the same experience with me.  It wasn't just me feeling that way.  He felt the same way.  So it was reciprocal.  So during that experience, it really taught me something about life, and it taught me something about where we are right now as a society and where we really can be.  I think too often we relive--I went through the '60s [1960s] like everybody else, but I felt we were getting caught in a time warp, and I, I felt that way for a long time, that we weren't moving the ball forward.  We weren't living up to [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King's [Jr.] dream.  And we were failing at it because we continued to say the same things over and over again and ex- and expect different results.
Story_ID: 156363
Speaker 1: Back in, I wrote the history of Citizens Trust Bank [Atlanta, Georgia] and when I wrote the history of Citizens Trust Bank, I did a lot of research.  I read old newspapers from the '20s [1920s], from the 1900s before the bank was founded.  I found, I uncovered another African American-owned bank, Atlanta Savings Bank [sic, Atlanta Federal Savings and Loan Association, later First National Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia] which failed just after Citizens Trust had opened.  When I read the editorials and the articles in those newspapers, the kinds of comments that the people were making about the state of the black economy and the African Americans doing business with each other, growing wealth, those were the--this was from 1919, and when I wrote that history in the early 2000s, people were saying, people were saying the same things.  And I thought to myself.  Something is wrong.  How can it be that as a people, all this time has passed?  We've made no material advancement and we still feel the same ways about ourselves.  Others feel the, feel the same way about us, after all these years.  How can that be?  So for me, it was a, it was an experience to go through that and to see those barriers come down between people.  And I thought to myself, what could happen, what could happen if--and maybe we're afraid of society.  What would happen if those barriers truly came down and there was true inter-commerce between the races, and we no longer could, had to look at Johnny Joe and say, well, Johnny Joe is white first or Johnny--or Sally Sue is black first, but we see Johnny Joe for Johnny Joe and we Sally Sue for Sally Sue.  What would happen if everybody was like that?  And so we all got together, we all felt the same way, me, Steve [Stephen Macauley] and Bill [William S. Duffey, Jr.].  We all felt the very same way, that that experience was so powerful that we had to translate it others.  And so we set out on a quest in this town, and, to prove our theory was right.  And so we created, and this is a long, long story made short, but and we had our knocks and ups and downs, but we continued to meet after the Leadership Atlanta was over.  And we decided that we were going to start a club, and we were going to translate our passion for what we felt and our experience.  We were gonna translate that to others.  And so we were gonna build a club.  And we were gonna do it independently.  And it was gonna be a, you know, kind of a modern club, not (unclear) like some of the older clubs in town.  And we were gonna do it.  It was gonna be fresh.  It was gonna be based on our Leadership Atlanta experience.  So we went and tested our theory throughout this city with some of the largest players in town.  We sat down.  We talked to Tom Cousins, who's a major developer.  We talked to Judge Griffin Bell, and we talked to [HM] Herman Russell.  And we asked them all, you know, very candidly, can this work?  Is this important?  And they all, every one of 'em, to a person, said, hey, I believe in what you're doing and I'll lend my name to it.  Everybody that we talked to signed onto that because they wanted to see it happen.  They wanted to see others have that type of experience.  They, themselves, had had that type of experience personally, but it wasn't widespread.  And it needed to grow.  And so we, we met with the [Metro] Atlanta Chamber of Commerce, Regional Leadership Institute, you name it and some of the top players in town.  We had a major corporation, Georgia Pacific to do our brochures and graphics.  Everybody felt that we were doing the right thing, and they gave us a lot of respect.  And we were talked about all over town for what we were doing.  So it was a major thing for us, and it was a major thing for, to open up people's minds.  Along the way, we grew.  We grew from the three of us.  Then it was twelve of us.  We had our first event, and there were fifty of us.  And so we began to grow it.  And we came to the attention of the Commerce Club which is the, the--I guess at that time, it was a dying private club for, that was initially built to be what we are, but the way that it turned out, it became an old white boy social club.  And it wasn't doing its true mission from 1960 that was our same mission today.  And so the leadership there, Jim Malone and others decided to court us and they sent an emissary, Stephen Opler [ph.] to court us to get us to join or merge with the Commerce Club because they were going out.  They were going nowhere where they were headed, and they knew it.  So they needed to infuse new talent into it.
Story_ID: 156364
Speaker 1: So, so this club was, was formed, the Commerce Club was formed back in 1960, you said?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960].
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's like one year before you were born.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Right, so they were formed--it's been said by a lot of people that we've talked in this project that the white business establishment really suffers from, you know, hardcore segregation, I mean financially.  It's just, it wasn't profitable.  The old ways of doing things, you know, were not profitable for the, weren't--I mean they could make more money if they opened things up in cities like Mobile [Alabama] and Memphis [Tennessee] and Atlanta [Georgia] and places where the, you know, in Louisiana, especially near the coast and that sort of thing.  They could really a lot better if they opened up stuff.  Was this the, is that why these--was that the mission of these guys when they first founded the Commerce Club and--
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think it had a lot to do with where they eventually ended up.  But, yeah, they wanted, they wanted better relations.  You know, it was a place where African Americans could, the African American leadership could be welcomed to come in and have a meal and talk about the issues of the city.  Richard's Department Store [sic, Rich's Department Store, Atlanta, Georgia], it was behind those doors where the plan was launched to integrate Richard's Department Store in town.  And that was by the white establishment in the city.  So, yeah, absolutely, no question about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so it was dying out and you all--had you all chosen a name for your group at this point or--
Speaker 2: We did.  We were gonna call ourselves the New Century Club.  And that was after a lot of studies and so forth that we did.  We were gonna call ourselves the New Century Club.  And we began to meet at, well, we were meeting on a regular basis.  We incorporated.  And we became a legal entity.  And we had attorneys and so we decided to, and probably by much cajoling from me, we decided to merge with the Commerce Club, which was a major coup.  Here are a few guys sitting around a table with nothing (laughter) but an idea, merging with the most well established private business club in the city with every Fortune 500 CEO sitting on its board (laughter).  So, yeah, it was real coup for us.  And we did interject some energy, and we did interject some talent in it.  And the place is vibrant and is making money now.  And people are going there and they're enjoying a level of programming that is built on diversity that they'd not seen before.  And it was because of a lot of the ideas that we came to the table with that caused that.  So when you go there, there is that same spirit that was created amongst us that, that permeates through those walls right now.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So that, that's, that was in what year?  What, what year did you all merge with the Commerce Club?
Speaker 2: That was, I think '01, 2001.
Speaker 1: Oh one [2001].  Okay.
Story_ID: 156365
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, yeah, well, it seems like it would have to on some level in a city like Atlanta [Georgia] with old money being in the hands of white people and all these young entrepreneurs, black entrepreneurs and stuff, coming into the city, growing at a phenomenal rate, that at some point there'd had to be some kind of interaction on, you know, based on the economy, if nothing else.
Speaker 2: Well, I think the, I think the thing what we found was that people, they might work together, the barriers still exist, but at the end of the day, the white goes his way, the black guy goes his way.  They all, they both go home.  And they live and exist in their own worlds up until the time they see each other again on Monday morning.  They don't spend any down time with each other.  They don't build real, true relationships, so there's no real trust that's built.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that hurts business then.
Speaker 2: That hurts business.
Speaker 1: Yeah, cause we--
Speaker 2: It's not good business.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: It's not good business.
Speaker 1: I hear the stories of black executives who really can't play golf and can't get in the, women that can't get in the clubs that men get into and how that hurts them.  And they say it hurts them business wise because they're not, you know, a lot of business--
Speaker 2: Business is all about relationships, and building relationships.  That's what my bank is all about.  It's about relationships.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there another, is there a flip side of this where you, where people have, has the old-guard business culture changed, been changed by the infusion of black people in the--I mean has their philosophy of doing business changed?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think there was a philosophy against doing business with African Americans.  I just don't think the opportunities were there because the groups were separate.  So it wasn't a philosophy or permeating thought that, you know, I'm not gonna do business with black people.  Well, if there's no black people that I'm around.  So I'm around some black people, I'll do some business.  I think that was more of it than anything else.  I think being, having people to build real relationships, then you think about those things.  You don't think about 'em if you're not, if it's not available for you to think about.  If it it's not there for you to think about.  And for a number of years, I saw a lot of African Americans with great ideas that needed partners, partners with capital, and I saw, you know, I have seen where people from the white community that have capital, but there's a (unclear) of really good ideas to do certain things.  And so if you could merge or marry the two together, you've got talent, you've capital, you've got different thought processes.  Everybody wins.
Speaker 1: So, I guess in a nutshell I hear you saying that business is based on trust and trust is based on familiarity on some level and goes beyond just the work day.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.  Montrell Kimbrough [ph.] used to be the president of the Federal Reserve system in the '70s [1970s].  I had a chance to meet him.  He's passed away now, but he, he was a gentleman that was very insightful.  I went out to see him at his lumberyard.  He actually did specialty woods and he had a big lumber place and came and sat and talked with him, had a private conversation with him.  And he said to me, Chuck--this was back in the early 2000s, I think, he said, Chuck, you know--actually, it was probably closer to '98 [1998], '99 [1999], that timeframe.  That was before I had the Leadership Atlanta experience.  He said, Chuck, you know what, when you walk into a white man's office to do business, when you walk into that office, you are on trial.  When a white man walks in, when one white man walks into another white man's office, he's Bob, he's Joe, he's Larry.  For the first few minutes that you're sitting in front of that desk, you are on trial with this guy to see what does this guy want from me?  What kind of person is this guy?  Who is this guy?  That comes from a lack of familiarity.  If people were, I wouldn't be a mystery as to where I was coming from or what I, what my intentions are or I was trying to try something, something, God knows only what.  That wouldn't be the case if whoever that person was that was sitting on the other side of that desk, if that person had an understanding that I, I might be African American, but I'm also a business executive that happens to be an African American.  Then that's good for business, when you, when you create that.  That's good for business.  That's good business for me, and for that person sitting on the other side of that desk.
Story_ID: 156366
Speaker 1: Commerce Club.  Now, what activities has the Commerce Club been engaged in?
Speaker 2: All kinds.  I mean we've had debates.  We've had, we even produced a CN, a show of CNN [Cable News Network] Live--this was through the New Century Forum.  We've put on plays to, to, to discuss the difference in African American and Jewish relationships in the, during the 1960s and during the Civil Rights Movement.  I can go on and on and on.  We've had debates.  We've examined and studied the relationship between transportation and race and how transportation and race--transportational systems and race in Atlanta [Georgia] were developed.  We've had forums on the emerging market, the emerging Hispanic market, how the emerging Hispanic business community interrelates with the African American and white communities.  We've had, you name it, we've run the gamut.  We've had very powerful politicians come speak to our group.  The club itself has been the venue for people like Ted Turner, for people like [HM] Colin Powell, for some of the major players of our day.  So it is a very big thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now, that brings up almost up to the establishment of One Georgia Bank.  And you dreamt of, when you were young, of establishing your own.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So how did this take place, and I mean and you--we can see that you're ready for it--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: But what happened, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess in 2004, I really, I was at Citizens Trust [Bank].  I wasn't happy anymore.  I didn't know I wasn't happy.  But I knew something was wrong.  I didn't feel myself, and I was acting out of character on some things.  And it really, all that really boiled down to was that I had really outgrown where I was.  I can look back on it now and see that.  But I couldn't see that then.  I didn't know, I knew something wasn't right with me and the way that I felt about, the job wasn't fun anymore like it had been.  I really enjoyed it.  And the bottom line was I had changed.  I was, I wasn't the same person that I was ten years earlier.  I wasn't growing, trying to gain the knowledge of how to be a bank president.  I had gained the knowledge.  I had long gained it.  I had put every piece that I needed it.  I had the courage to do something more than what I was doing, and I just, I just needed something different in my life.  I wanted to get things in order for myself, and I really felt like if I continued to serve in the same role that it was diminishing returns for me.  And so I needed to do something different, and I felt that it was time for me to do something different.  So I started thinking in the back of my mind, you know, about the timing was right for a start-up bank.  And I wanted to start thinking about it, and the patriarch of my hometown, Charles Hudson, I saw him at lunch at the Commerce Club.  He introduced me to Billy Lovett who had been the chair of the Republican Party and also a former candidate, gubernatorial candidate, served on the Public Service Commission for a number of years and a prominent, from a prominent family in Georgia.  And he had the same thought.  We got together for lunch one day and his, he had invested in community banks for years.  And so he and I started talking, and he had tried to do it earlier himself, but didn't, didn't have a person of that--like myself, with the talent.  So Billy and I started talking about it, and I went downstairs and Steve Opler [ph.], if you remember that name from the Commerce Club negotiations, I saw him that same day, and I told him about the idea.  But I told both of them--they didn't know each other at the time, but I told both of them, I am going to wait until--this was maybe in the, 2004, maybe it was like August or September.  I said, look, you know, if I think about this too much, I am going to do it.  So I need to make sure, and a couple of things, one that I really wanna do this cause I'm going to put my entire career, leverage, everything I've ever created in my entire career and I'm gonna put it all on the table for this.  That's one thing, and two, I need to make sure that where I am is going to be in good shape if I decide to leave the, leave that bank.  And that was really important to me because I care about Citizens Trust Bank.  I mean I spent a lot of time there.  I helped build it, and, you know, it's important to me.  It'll always be important to me.
Story_ID: 156367
Speaker 1: And so, I went through the holiday season.  I, you know, sat and thought about it and prayed about it, and just really went through a very introspective period throughout that Christmas holiday season.  And in January of--they were both calling me during all of this, and are you we gonna do it, are we gonna do it (laughter)?  And in January of 2005, I called both of 'em, introduced them to each other and said, this--let's do it.  And so we started putting the business plan together, mentally putting it together, nothing in writing, but mentally putting it together.  And all of those lessons that I've learned throughout my entire life, all came to bear in putting our business plan together.  And the thought processes, how do you build it?  I went back to the same principles that we used to establish the board of New Century Forum, diversity, but not only diversity.  We talked a lot about having as much diversity as possible.  In this business model, I wanted to do the same thing.  I wanted to create as much diversity as possible, both not only from ethnicity and a race, but also from the standpoint of business.  What types of businesses people were involved in.  And so we sat and we strategized on the right people to put on this board.  And then, and then primarily through Billy's contacts, because Billy--I couldn't approach anybody because I was still working for Citizens Trust Bank.  And I never did any of this stuff while I was working.  I went to work every day and gave 110 percent because my whole purpose was if this thing works, that I'm gonna have to prepare myself to leave.  And so I need to prepare everybody around me for me not to be here.  And so I started reassigning projects, started giving things to people, giving them more opportunity to shine and pretty much divorcing myself as time went on from being so hands on involved in different things.  But I was also making sure that I coached them, helped--I was trying to help them prepare for that day because I had been so intricately involved in everything that the bank did.  So all of these things were occurring at the same time.  Nights, weekends, that was my time to work on this business plan and the thought process that we were gonna undertake.  And I would spend that time on the phone with Billy [Lovett, ph.] and Steve [Opler, ph.] and we'd have three-way calls.  Then we just, and it got to a point where we were at the stage where we needed to bring in our organizers.  We needed to actively talk to those people that would be the organizers of the bank.  And we started setting up meetings.  And we set up a meeting.  The first one I think was with Gordon Sherman and Gordon Sherman signed on.  In fact, after Gordon Sherman, came Sonny Park [ph.].  These were guys that were friends with Billy in the USO [United Service Organizations], on the USO board.  And, and after the first couple ones, you know, I started to say, you know, this thing is gonna work pretty good cause these guys, they were enthusiastically signing on.  And they said, yeah, this is the right thing, and I believe in you.  And they all did research on my background, everybody did.  I was probably one of the most researched people that you'd ever want to imagine.  And so we continued to meet and everybody that we talked to, every single person that we talked to said, yes.
Story_ID: 156368
Speaker 1: You felt you were trying to do two things at the same time and to make sure you left Citizens Trust [Bank] in good shape.  And that was--
Speaker 2: It was difficult.  But probably on Wednesday of every week, I was completely tired.  I was drained.  And I had to get my second wind just to get through the week because I worked as I could to make sure things were moving forward at Citizens Trust, and they were.  You know, things were changing and things were getting good.  And we had some issue with the regulators that were clearing up, and I was happy.  And then at night, I would leave and it would, you know, my phone would ring on my way home (laughter).  And we started talking about organizers and we started talking about the business plan.  We started talking about the new bank and all of the excitement that was starting to build around the prospects of One Georgia Bank becoming a reality.  It was starting to build momentum.  And so, so it was good.  You know, I was having a good day at work during the day, and at night I was having a good night at work (laughter) worrying about the prospects of One Georgia Bank getting started.
Speaker 1: It just struck that the name of the bank, One Georgia, seems--does it come out of that experience, the Leadership Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The idea of one Georgia instead of two, you know.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) yeah, exactly.  And One Georgia instead of many Georgias.  So the concept is that very same concept.  And instead of it being, I think--and Billy [Lovett, ph.] actually came up with the name of One Atlanta Bank.  And I think he may have been given me a choice, and he had this, one of these epiphanies.  I don't know what, driving home from one of our meetings, and he called me on the phone, and he was so happy.  He's like One Atlanta Bank.  And I said, ah, it just not quite grabbing me.  And then One Georgia Bank seemed to be the answer.  And so we went with One Georgia Bank.  And it does say that.  Now, keep in mind, early on, which is, was to my disappointment, we really did not have any African Americans that signed on.  We had one young man that did, but he didn't last through the end of the process, but we, it was my desire to have another African American board member besides myself.  It didn't materialize.  So the real story about all of this is that all of my initial support came outside of the African American community.
Speaker 1: So you, but you tried to get some people but the, just--why didn't, is there a reason, you think, as to why they didn't come on?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I go back to the 1900s, and during--let me say this.  Before I left Citizens Trust this was not public information.  This was done on a very selective, quiet basis.  And let me back up and finish that story.  And then when it became public, that's when I did try to actively get some people involved and sometimes my phone calls wouldn't be returned and things of that nature.  But after, after we got enough organizers together, it was time to have what's called the organizational meeting.  And along the way, I had actually turned away some potential organizers because I didn't think they would be a good fit.  We needed to have a good culture in our organization.  And that culture has to start with the top of the bank.  The tone at the top had to be right.  We had to have a good, cohesive culture in our organization to permeate throughout.  And we would be more productive.  I learned later how right I was about that.  I learned later that a company that plans its culture will have a 700 percent higher productivity rate than one that doesn't.  So it makes great business sense.  So if you didn't fit from a personality, from a, you know, desire for the same types of goals, then, you know, we might have approached you, but it, you know, we really couldn't use you.  And I had to turn some people down.  And so leading up to the organizational meeting, I actually had, had a guy trying to force his way into the organizational meeting.  He was gonna be a part of this deal (laughter).  And so it was kind of funny--
Story_ID: 156369
Speaker 1: What kind of guy, can you describe what kind of person would not fit into the culture of this new bank [One Georgia Bank]?
Speaker 2: Well, a person that is gonna be divisive from the standpoint--not from necessarily a business standpoint cause we all diverse ideas and we think differently, but a person that is not gonna be a team player and not gonna pull--tow the wagon with everybody else in order to achieve and accomplish goals or a person that's gonna be disruptive.  We don't need any disruptive forces to influence our karma (laughter).  So that was the, and that was what--I had heard some things in the conversation, I was meeting with this one particular gentleman on, and that's what I surmised that he was going to be a problem later.  And, 'cause he had been a problem on another bank board that he was on, and I didn't wanna cause any problems for ourselves.  So, we went to the organizational meeting.  We had our board members there.  I gave a presentation on the bank.  We had our contracts and agreements drawn up by that time.  We had our regulatory consultant.  We also had our attorney, and we met in the law office of our attorney.  I was, I left Citizens Trust [Bank] after work, came over--actually, I crossed the street the street Persenian [ph.] Building and we met at the law firm of Miller & Martin.  And then that's where One Georgia Bank was born that day at the organizational meeting.  The organizers signed a partnership agreement.  They signed a line of credit for in excess of a million dollars.  I signed a contract to work for them to create the bank, and I was given the leeway to make my assistant an offer to come with me.  We signed the agreement on my temporary office.  So we ordered computers, all of that stuff happened that night.  So the next day, obviously, I've got a situation here.  I have agreed under contract, I wasn't under a contract at Citizens Trust.  So, you know, maybe some of the questions people ask, well, why, you know, this guy is that good, everybody's saying he's that good, why don't they have him under contract?  I just don't think they thought about, you know, to be honest with you or, you know, they--
Speaker 1: You think they kind of took it for granted that you--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --where could you go?
Speaker 2: --probably so.
Speaker 1: You were at the top black bank in Atlanta [Georgia], and you're one of the top black bankers, where else you're gonna go?
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably.
Speaker 1: You think that--
Speaker 2: Probably.  That probably had something to do with it, but I'm not that kind of person to just, you know--if there's not a way, I'll make a way.
Story_ID: 156370
Speaker 1: And this was a perfect opportunity for me to start a bank and to do what I wanted to do and to create what I wanted to create and to do it in, with my philosophy, my new philosophy of how I wanted to see things change in the future.  So I did all of this to set an example for others that it can be done, that no one can tell you that someone from the white community won't bank with you because you're African American.  I heard that so many times in meetings that I can't tell you, people say--it's an excuse as far as I'm concerned.  The real deal is, it's not just banking.  It's business in general.  We can create new partnerships that, from the African American's perspective will bring in additional capital that that person may not have the ability to obtain, that can be viable and real and profitable.  People didn't invest in this bank because of the business plan.  People invested in this bank because they believe in my ability to achieve.  That's why they, that's why every person invested in this bank.  No one, and don't let anybody fool you that somehow people, they invested in a bank just because it's a bank.  No.  No one invests in anything like this and put this much money behind anything unless they believe the CEO can deliver.  And that's why I'm sitting here today.  But going back to that period, so we signed the agreements.  I go and I talk with my, I played golf with my boss, Jim Young [James E. Young], and I wanted to break it to him easy, you know, it was time for me to go.  And we had--we used to play golf all the time, and so it was, you know, it was really kind of fitting to go to the club that we play at every weekend, and every week and, you know, play a round of golf and talk to him about it and show him the respect of, I'm not just walking out, to get him a resignation letter.  So I told him that I was thinking about it, but I had already made up my mind.  And the following Monday, I'm sure he had conversations with the board and some other folks.  By the time Monday rolled around, I told him that I had made up my mind.  I was going to leave and I was gonna move on, and I was gonna head another institution.  And, and he was very gracious.  I thought I was gonna be let go that day because that's typically what happens in banking.  But he asked me to stay on for another couple of weeks, which was flattering.  By the same token, on the other side of the coin, I had a office, I had phones.  I had business, I had stuff to get to, and I had to start working on a formal business plan.  I had to do a whole lot of stuff to start the regulatory process because the clock starts ticking as soon as you organize.  And so it was, you know, so it was, that part of it was, you know, I didn't count on that, but I appreciated it.  And after my last board meeting, I was surprised that the entire bank had turned out and they gave me quite a send-off.  It was very emotional, and I cried the entire time on my last day at Citizens Trust Bank.  So it was a very emotional experience for me.
Story_ID: 156371
Speaker 1: In retrospect, I mean did they have, did Mr. [James E.] Young say what they would have done had they known you were doing what you were doing or, I mean, you know, that you were starting another bank and then, did they have any kind of--
Speaker 2: I, I don't know.  I mean we never had a discussion like that--
Speaker 1: You didn't talk about that, okay--
Speaker 2: --and I wasn't, it, it, you know, it wasn't anything that came up.  They didn't have knowledge of what I was doing.  No one did.  So it was kept very quiet.  And only the people that needed to know, knew.  But I was surprised that no one, that no one knew because by the same token, it was building a lot of momentum.  And so by the time I walked out of there, I knew that I had a lot of support to do it, a lot of support.  So I was a little surprised that no one--but I think everybody knew what the stakes were and they were careful not to mention anything, mention it to anybody that was connected with that bank.
Speaker 1: Now, another question just about those who critiqued what was going on and said that, well, you know, you never go into business with white people like this, they're not gonna let you and all that sort of thing.  I mean historically, I guess no one had ever really done it before you did it, right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And maybe some had tried it and really couldn't, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hum--
Speaker 1: --I mean it might have been--
Speaker 2: I don't know if anyone tried--
Speaker 1: But you think it's because people didn't try because there actually was a barrier?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know.  I don't know.  I don't know.  All I know is, is that it was a burning and desire and passion of mine to do it.  And it was, and one of the things that spurred that passion was because I kept hearing over and over again, it can't be done, that nobody can do it.  And I wanted to demonstrate that it could--on my last day at Citizens Trust [Bank], I said to them that I was going to do something, I said, you know, I would never leave this family if I wasn't gonna go and I wasn't gonna make history.  And I said that that is what I'm going to go do because that's the kind of person that I am.  I want to have the ball in my court.  I wanna take the last shot.  I want to throw the last touchdown pass.  That's just me.  And they know that about me, and they knew that whatever I was going off to do, they didn't know what, whatever I was gonna go off to do, that I was gonna do a good job at it.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, how did things, were things real smooth from the very beginning or--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, now we get into the part that's, you know, the, my highlight, so far of my life, and a lot of fun.  I mean I was, you know, after leaving the other bank, you know, I decompressed a lot.  You know, I didn't realize I had so much, I wouldn't say baggage, but I--I could say baggage, you know, from the stress and rigors of doing this, doing that, that related to that particular job.  And so when you leave the job, you know, it all goes away and you've got a whole fresh new set of dynamics to deal with.  And so I had a whole fresh, new set of dynamics to deal with.  And it was refreshing.  I was starting to have fun again.  And so I let go anything that was causing me not to make this one of the enjoyable experiences of my life.  And I started working on the business plan.  And we had a meeting of the organizers every two weeks.  Every two weeks I have a board meeting.  And so I had to prepare for it, had to prepare my budget, had to review the budget, had to, you know, show the progress of moving forward, had to explain the business plan.  So I worked with our regulatory consultant, build out the business plan, the--whenever you start a bank, when that clock ticks, the clock ticks on expenses because you have no ability to make money.  So you're only spending money.  And so you wanna, you wanna like finish that--start and finish that project as fast as you can.  You don't want anything to get in your way in it.  So I started working with the regulatory consultant, started putting some pro formas together.  He listened to my vision.  He wrote some things down.  I took his plan and I began to tweak it, and, and put together my best case scenario for--and the board was, you know, they were, they were forcing me to really think through it deeply, all the way to the end of it.  I knew it, but I had to demonstrate to them on paper exactly how this was gonna be successful.  They really wanted to know how and why and so we ended up developing a business plan that's probably ten times more comprehensive than any business plan for a start-up bank this state's probably ever seen.
Story_ID: 156372
Speaker 1: You think it's, well, once again, I have to ask this question.  Do you think like race was a dynamic in that, in them, you know, making sure that you--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.  Now, these are detailed-oriented very successful that have never done this before.  And they didn't know each other for the most part before.  Some knew each other, but they had never worked in a business context like this before.  So I brought in some, to make sure that we were a team and that we stayed a team, and that we were positive, I brought in a corporate psychologist and to interview that group and to make sure that everybody was gonna pull on the same page.  But it had nothing--they were very supportive of me.  I mean every person was extremely supportive.  I didn't have a single day's--well, you know, sometimes, you know, I'd be, people, you know, my buddy, Steve [Stephen Macauley], you know, we're friends.  So he took a little more liberty and stuff and a little bit more animated, but at the end of the day, we'd go and have a drink and laugh about it (laughter).  So, so it wasn't, you know, no, race didn't have anything to do with any of it.  And everybody was extremely supportive.  I didn't hear anything, I only heard one comment about race throughout this entire project.  And I was sitting down with an investor at the Four Seasons Hotel [Atlanta, Georgia].  We were having wine and appetizers.  And he was an institutional investor.  And he said, we had a, glossy brochure with all the organizers in it.  And he said, "Chuck, I've gotta ask you, you're a black man with a powerful white board.  Are you intimidated?"  And the chairman of the board, Skin Andrews [sic, Arthur B. "Skin" Edge, IV] was sitting there, and Skin has seen me in action in dealing with the board.  So he almost he gulped on his glass of wine (laughter).  He was like, are you kidding me?  This guy (laughter).  And so I thought it was kind of comical that he mentioned that, but I told him no, I said, everybody's supportive and I, and we work really well together.  So that's not a issue.  There's no issues with me.  I have no reason to be intimidated by anybody and we, you know, everybody is, everybody is moving towards the same goals.  So that, you know, after that he invested a million dollars in the bank.  So (laughter), actually, no, actually, $750,000.  So, so he was happy.  He said he was only gonna ask me that once, and he was never gonna ask me again.  And that's the only time anybody's directly said anything to me about race the entire project.
Story_ID: 156373
Speaker 1: What is the focus of your bank [One Georgia Bank]?  You said, I think when I came in, it's a boutique bank or for--how, how do--?
Speaker 2: Well, when I say boutique, I mean we cater to businesses that are $3 million to $50 million.  We're in a high net worth area.  This, our bank, one of the things that was important for us was to find the headquarters for the institution that would be the very best possible place to put a community bank.  I started looking at the downtown market because quite frankly, someone offered a building to me.  They were gonna build a signature building for me and put a private club on the top for me to hold court in.  And so I looked at that, but the marketplace of where he wanted to do it wasn't a dynamic marketplace.  And I had always sought out midtown as a place that I knew was growing dynamic marketplace.  I knew about, I knew about it.  I knew about this particular building that we're sitting in right now from its inception, even before this one--this was nothing but grassy knoll.  And I had it in my mind that this is where I wanted to come, but the numbers had to prove out.  And the numbers proved out that this was a dynamically growing area.  And so it became the area where we headquartered versus downtown.  We looked at downtown as a branch, possible branch site, but we ended up passing all together when we couldn't get the right location.  So, so now I am going to look for another site, but I don't know where that's gonna be at this point.  But this area, fast growing.  The income levels are 47 percent higher than the national average.  We were looking at, the other day within probably a five-block area, there's about four thousand people that live here in about a five-block radius, all making in excess of $100,000 a year.  So you've got a very explosive marketplace that's growing.  Condominium towers are going up.  There're about five new condominium towers going up including Donald Trump is building one within a five-block radius of where we're sitting right now.  So this is a high-growth area.  The income levels of the businesses are stout so the business, so the incomes of or the revenues of our businesses, and we're looking for businesses that need financing of three to $50 million range, and that's a lot higher than a lot of community banks.  So we needed a lot of capital in order to accomplish that.  So it was the goal, the goal we gave to each of the board members was to themselves invest a minimum of $150,000 and then raise from their family and friends at least $1 million.  That would get us, if everyone did their part, that would get us to our minimum, or close to our minimum of about twelve to thirteen--actually, it would get us pretty, about $13 million.  And our minimum to open the bank was $15 million.  And that would get us close.  So when I say, "boutique" I mean that we're a boutique from the standpoint that we've got a very specialized, a very specialized approach to dealing with small to medium-sized businesses which we're not going out for general retail.  But that's not the way that we're looking at this.  We're looking at this from a business standpoint, and there's a reason for that because in the business, in our business model, we're able to grow our assets faster by going after businesses.  First, it's going after individuals and individuals are more expensive to bank.  So if I'm gonna make money for the shareholders and investors, then I have got to create the best business model that's going to make them the most money.  And that is going after businesses in a certain size range.  We're gonna bank individuals, or we are banking individuals also.  But it's important to center the bank around business.  So 80 percent of our balance sheet is gonna be to business and 20 percent to consumers.  So that's what I mean by, by boutique, very specialized and focused in nature.
Story_ID: 156374
Speaker 1: And when you see our facilities, you'll know that this is a very high-end product.  We spared no, we haven't spared anything on having the best facilities.  We've had, we didn't spare anything on having the best technology in the industry.  We're the highest tech bank starting out probably, certainly in this region.  We have the latest in bank technology, and we--I've brought in private, from overseas in order to ensure that we have the greatest and latest.  So we're high tech.  But the other component created in this bank was to make sure that we were high touch.  And that meant having the right kinds of people on the bus that don't mind serving the customer, that don't mind getting up and going out to the office and seeing somebody and close a loan or go see somebody and pick up a deposit.  We have those kind of people that work for One Georgia Bank and so we're high tech and we're high touch.  And we have a very supportive board that works consistently to make sure that we provide the right kinds of service and they're happy right now.  Now, getting into the capital raise, after going through the regulatory process which was, you know, major hurdles, a major hurdle to get through that, then it became time to raise capital.  On the December 2nd, we received our charter, December 2, 2005, we received our charter.  And remember, the year before, I was, in December, I was thinking about, I was introspective, I was reflecting on my life and I wanted to go after this.  By the following year, at December 2 I had a bank charter.  And by December 29, I had FDIC [Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation] approval for insurance.  And in January when I was making this decision in 2005, in 2006, in January, we were issuing our prospectus to potential investors.  We had early indications of interests of over $22 million.  Our maximum capital raise would have been $25 million.  We started at--the minimum was 15 million [dollars].  I was doing road shows a mile a minute.  I probably did about a hundred investor meetings where I talked about the bank and the bank stock as an investment.  And so I've been all over.  I've been places where African Americans have never been invited, to some of the real bastions of the good ole boy clubs and where I've seen people put together tens of millions of dollars in fifteen minutes over breakfast for private equity funds with no problem.  Then I see the, within a two or three week period, see the fund launched.  And those are things that I never would have had an opportunity to see if I had stayed at Citizens Trust [Bank].  So my world expanded.  I've seen so much more than I would have ever seen if I had stayed in my comfort zone or stayed where I was.  I probably could have played golf and did some things, but I would never have seen some of the things that I've seen and been to some of the places that I've been.  And it's, it's, you know, it's--it puts us in the ballgame.  Somebody's in the game, you know, somebody is really in the game.  I'm not there through some government program, not there from set-aside program, somebody's in the game for real.  So I think that's important for our people.  The other thing is that all of this was working perfect, you know.  I was working, I was speaking, you know, we--me and my assistant, Anika [ph.], we'd run to the mailbox every day and get subscriptions and the checks out and everything was--board members were happy.  Some was working harder than others.  And we had to get some to work a little harder.  But it was working.  Everything was going along.  And then the eye of hurricane came.  In the midst of everything moving forward with a lot of thrust and momentum, we went over $14 million.  I sent out a daily email to the board members, say, hey, look, you know, we passed $13 million.  You know, here we go.  We got to $14.1 million, all of a sudden the mail stopped.  There were no checks in the mail.  My phone quit ringing.  I needed fifteen [million] was my minimum.  And I became concerned.  And so I, I had--earlier than that, I had already put in the, into motion, having institutional investors come in, but only after we filled out our investment with individual investors because it's important to have individual investors because they're gonna be your first customers.  So that part was important.  So the eye of the hurricane came, and that was a very, very interesting period, but it's also an interesting story too.
Story_ID: 156375
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is the eye of the storm here.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: This is the--
Speaker 2: Yep, the eye of the hurricane, and my, that's my fond reflection of it anyway.  And I had a lot of things working, but, but for some reason things slowed down.  And what I, later what I found out was another bank was getting started, and they were approaching a lot of the people that were gonna invest in our bank.  And so, and so I had competition for investors, which I didn't have before.  I had a great story, received a lot of great press.  Everybody was fired up, you know, a great business plan, and we were moving down the aisle.  And then, then, of course, things slacked up.  And I had, you know, I had gone to my hometown LaGrange [Georgia], to Highland Country Club which was a great experience.  I had a chance to bring my mother [Dora Herndon Lewis] there and for her to see me give a presentation in Highland Country Club in LaGrange when years before African Americans could only enter the club through the back.  So that was really special for her to see that and to see me be invited there by the top business and professional and civic leaders in my hometown to come talk about the bank as an investment.  One of the individuals that were there--I was invited by the way, that reception was hosted by Charles Hudson and Stewart Gully [ph.].  And one of the individuals that was there was Mike Patton, and he's a, in fact, it's kind of ironic.  Mike Patton is the guy that sold me my first car (laughter).  And he was, he was a highly successfully automobile dealer, owned several dealerships.  He came to see me during the eye of the hurricane.  He didn't know it was the eye of the hurricane.  I knew it.  But he came to see me, and he talked about the bank.  He wanted to find out more.  He had heard my spill on the bank and how we were gonna be successful and promote high-tech, high touch service and a very high-end profit.  And he was intrigued.  He had more time on his hands than he'd like, and he spent most of his time with his investments.  And we talked for a considerable amount of time.  And at the end of that conversation, he asked me if he could be on the board.  And I told him, you know, we've already established ourselves and in order for you to get on the board, I mean, you clearly have to do something significant.  You know, in the back of my mind, I knew I was gonna get the money.  I didn't really, but I was still (unclear) [thinking?] I didn't have it yet.  And so I said, I can't promise you anything.  But, you know, make a significant investment and then we'll talk about it.  So the next day, very next day, he said, okay, very next day, I get a subscription agreement for him for $500,000.  Then he calls me.  He says, you know, Chuck, did I move the ball?  I said, yeah, you moved the ball.  I'm still $400,000 away and, you know, and that kind of thing.  He said, well, I just might take you over the top.  I said, I'll let you know if I need that, but I knew I had it.  I had that in my back pocket.  And so that restored my confidence cause I was beating myself up over this 14.1 thing cause every day my number had been moving and then all of a sudden it wasn't moving.  And so we started to get in other investment and we got down to $14,980,000 and I called Mike, I said, Mike, if you wanna take me over the top, I'm $20,000 a way.  The very next--he said, okay, Chuck, the very next morning $50,000 on a wire transfer comes in, sent me over the top.  It was a happy day.  Now, after that, of course, we blew past $15 million.  I mean, by momentum, picked back up.  It was like it was before, and all of a sudden things, it was just a moment in time when it was, it was really a two-week period, but after we picked back up and we blew past $20 million and the amount went up to 23.5 [million], and that's when we opened the bank.  And then after we opened the bank, we went up to 24.2 [million].  And we continued, if we wanted to, we could have raised a lot more than that.  We could have continued to raise if we wanted to and keep going, but at some point you have to stop and start making some money.  And that's what we did.  I said, look, you know, we've got enough, $22 million was the sweet spot in our business plan.  We achieved it and showed, you know--I didn't, I don't need the additional investment.  Now, I need to make some loans and get some deposits in here and start to really make this thing hum.  And we're doing that.  We're off to a great start.
Speaker 1: Now, was that some of a record, that 25 million when you--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, it was the first time a state chartered bank had ever passed the $20 million mark in its initial capital raise.  So, and we capitalized at, when we started at $23.5 million and at that time, it was the largest in the State of Georgia.  It was the largest in Georgia's history.  I've lost that record.  It didn't last long, but, you know, I can say that I was the first one there.  It's like the first man to walk on the moon (laughter).
Story_ID: 156376
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you've been in operation now for--
Speaker 2: A little over a month.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: This is our fifth week.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: That's something.  So you're still in the midst of the excitement of all this.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, these are very exciting times.  In fact, we're bringing on new people all the time, and we've got some very talented bankers that we've built our core around.  And now we're starting to add other pieces to the puzzle to fit in with the business plan.  Another thing that, two things that I'm very proud of that we achieved in the preopening phase, one, the majority of the start-up banks in this state, which there're a lot that have gotten started because the timing was right, we have major bank consolidations.  So that's when I knew back in '04[2004] that the time was right to do it was because when you have a lot of major bank consolidation in a area then what you have is an opportunity for community banks to serve those niches that they leave behind.  And so I knew the timing was right.  That's why I had to make a decision if I was gonna continue to do what I was doing or if I was gonna get in the game and play ball like everybody else and demonstrate that, although I'm African American, I'm a professional banker, and I can do the same thing anybody else can do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was the bubble that existed.  So as a result of us taking advantage of the opportunity and time, we were able to, we were able to put a good product together, and also, I'll tell you something else--I kind of changed the subject a little bit, it also enabled us to get good people.  And our staff reflects diversity.  And so if someone says that, you know, you can't have a, you can't be an African American CEO and have a truly diverse staff, then, you know, they're blowing smoke because we've got some great people that work for us and no one is working for us because I'm African American.  They're working for us because this is a really great place to work, and it's a really great business model, and everybody can see that it's gonna be highly successful, and everybody's glad to be a part of it.  And they work hard.  I have people that, for example, when we first moved into this location, had a young lady, she didn't say anything to anybody, but she'd made arrangements to test our fire alarm system at 5:00 o'clock in the morning.  And she had the fire department here.  She had the building management here, and she was here at 5:00 o'clock in the morning.  Those are the kind of people that you want working for you.  You want people when you're not around, you want them doing the right things all the time and even going the extra effort.  That's why that culture piece and making sure that we had the right people on the bus was so important.  That goes back to what I was talking about, about 700 percent increased productivity.  That's what you get when you talk about having the right culture.  That's an example of it, greater productivity, not somebody saying well, you know, I only work from 9:00 to 5:00, you know.  Those kind of people don't (unclear).  Those are nine to fivers.  You know, and that's fine.  You can't work for me, but it's fine to be a nine to fiver.  I don't have a problem with it.  And the good part about all of this is you wanna really successfully reward those folks that do go the extra mile.  And every time people--people don't always want money, you know.  I've tried that in the past, you know, people, it's not money.  They want recognition.  They want you to care that they were there at five o'clock in the morning when they didn't have to be and when you were sleep.  They want you to care about that.  That's what people want.  And I missed that early in my career.  I didn't have that in me to be empathetic to others.  I just worked hard and I expected others to work hard, and I was unyielding on anyone that didn't see the way that I saw things.  And that was, that was, that was a part of what I had to grow out of in order to be a CEO.
Story_ID: 156377
Speaker 1: I did notice a significant number of African Americans here [One Georgia Bank, Atlanta, Georgia], and they are experiencing, along with you, experiences, I guess, in finance and stuff that they would never have had otherwise, with, with, with the kind of money that's being generated around here or passing through here.
Speaker 2: Well, I think that, you know, we have people that have a lot of experience, a lot of 'em have performed these jobs in other banks before.  And so it is not necessarily that they wouldn't have experienced it, but it does give them a great growth opportunity, not only for the African American employees, but we have our white employees and we have Peruvian employee, and we're about to hire an Indian employee.  But everyone here has an opportunity to grow and personally experience personal growth as a result of their working hard and caring about and helping make this all a reality.  I'm the guy out front, you know, I'm the guy who's picture is in the paper all the time.  I'm the guy that people talk about on television.  I'm that guy, but behind me, these folk--all of these people, they are experiencing that same euphoria of creating something new and taking a piece of ownership in everything that we do, as well as our board of directors.  Everybody, I'm the guy out front, but there's a lot behind me making all of this happen, a lot behind me.  You mentioned, getting back to the African American issue of me building a bank and having that support, I wanted the support, and I primarily wanted it from some certain places.  It was important to me.  I got some, but it wasn't what I thought I would get, to be honest with you.  So I was a little bit disappointed because I knew, I saw this as a great opportunity for--this isn't an ego thing for me.  This, I didn't want it for ego's sake.  I wanted it because I know that there's money to be made in what I was doing.  I know that there's money that's going to be made in what I'm doing.  And I wanted to see African Americans take a part in that.  And some did.  But not at, not to the level I wanted.  But it goes back to those, and I think I kind of skipped over this before, but it goes back to some of those conversations about the early 1900s and things not changing, some of the attitudes.  I think it might have been some people that probably thought that I wasn't gonna make.  I had a friend of mine tell me, it was so funny, I said, you know, I was complaining about not getting more African American support.  And he said, he said, Chuck, you just don't know.  Folks around town [Atlanta, Georgia] probably think that you're supposed to have your, you're supposed to be passing out your resume, looking for a job right now (laughter).  And I thought about it, and I laughed.  And I said, you know what?  God bless 'em and, you know, let's keep going forward and we'll hope to do some business in the future and I'm not gonna worry and stress myself out about it.  I'm just gonna keep working to produce a great business plan and, and then that will produce the results, and people will believe.
Story_ID: 156378
Speaker 1: Okay, what are, what, what are your--I don't know much about bank goals, I guess, other than, than you know, you know, being financially successful, but what are your, I guess, short-term and long-range goals for the bank [One Georgia Bank, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Well, a great question.  In a year from now, we're gonna take our $24 million in capital and we're gonna leverage it and grow the bank to about $70 million in size.  It'll be about a $70 million bank in about a year.  After that year, after the first year, going into the second year, we will start to head towards the $200 million level, being 160-some odd million dollars, million-dollar level, and then we'll go past that into the $200 million level in the third year.  And at that point, hopefully, prior to that point, that's when I'll have a secondary capital raise, and hopefully, at that point, I'll be able to raise even more capital.  And if we raise--the second we go to market, and if we raise $50 million at that point, that's when I'm gonna, I'm gonna truly expand the operation significantly.  And I'm gonna bring in a lot of, a lot more lending teams.  I'm gonna bring in a whole lot of folks, and I'm gonna try to get us up to half, half a billion dollars, and then I'm gonna take the company public.  And once we take the company public, it'll give the shareholders an opportunity to not have wall paper.  It'll give them an opportunity to have publicly-traded stock, and they can experience liquidity at any point that they choose.  And they'll have an opportunity to see their bank grow, and see their stock value grow.  And so my goal is to make this a billion dollar bank and in the near term.  So I'll be working real hard to accomplish that.
Story_ID: 156379
Speaker 1: Okay.  When do you project that you'll retire out of the--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'm kind of--
Speaker 1: --or, or do you, or do you even think about that at all?
Speaker 2: I think about it.  You know, I'm not gonna be day-to-day in ten years.  That's for sure.  I'm not sure, you know, what I'm gonna do, but I know there's a lot of things that I'd like to do.  I'd like to replicate the feeling I just had over and over and over again.  And so at some point, which I guess you'll have to come back and make another tape because at some point, I've got a vision for a private equity fund that will primarily be focused on the African American community, that I intend to, intend to work on.  So, it'll be--I can't say any more about it now, but it'll be significant.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 156380
Speaker 1: Now, you're involved in quite a few, or have been involved with quite a few volunteer efforts.  You sit on a lot of boards and I know YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] is one, talk about some of your board activities.
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, volunteerism.  It is a great way of establishing yourself, if you've not been established in terms of getting involved in the community and getting interaction with other people outside of your work environment, expanding your opportunities, volunteerism is a great way to do that.  And I've been a volunteer, first, I was a youth volunteer, basketball coach for about six or seven years.  And I eventually started coaching men and women, which was less rewarding than coaching kids, but I enjoyed that.  Some of my kids, you know, went on to play NCAA [Division] I basketball ball and eventually became engineers and business professionals in their own right.  So that was extremely, it's an extremely very rewarding experience when you can give back.  And I got pressed into board service at the YMCA and I did that.  And another one of my early mentors, Dr. X.L. Neal, he was, I was heavily involved with the Masonic Order for a number of years and served at a very high level there and got an opportunity to do some things with them that added to my experience.  That was early, much earlier in my life, back in the early '80s [1980s].  But, but I went from there, and, of course, the Sweet Auburn Business and Improvement Association was a passion of mine, to help revitalize the Sweet Auburn community.
Speaker 1: And Auburn Avenue, that's the historic black community here in Atlanta [Georgia]--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --the business district, historic.  I mean there's been so many books written about it.
Speaker 2: And I was totally immersed into making that, making that different.  And there was a lot of politics involved in all of that stuff.  And I tried my best, during my time there to kind of push the politics aside and let develop happen because develop couldn't happen because of all of the politics surrounding that community.  It was so thick that it was viewed as being such a cesspool of, with so many issues, that I tried to do it in my own little way as chairman of that association and give it a cleaner image.  And so that's why I was the chairman of it, and that's why I tried to pull together the parks service, the King Center [The Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia], Big Bethel [A.M.E. Church, Atlanta, Georgia], Atlanta Daily World, Week Street Baptist Church [sic, Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] as well as the Sweet Auburn Curb Market [Atlanta, Georgia], Integral Group [Atlanta, Georgia], Atlanta Life Insurance Company [Atlanta, Georgia], I tried to, as best I could, use the power of those entities to keep the negative influences away so that develop could happen.  And now it's being revitalized, so I can't take credit for that, but I can say in my own little way, I helped in that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, any other volunteer--well, yeah, there's more, I know there's a lot more.  I (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I'll tell you, my level of volunteerism probably could fill up all the rest of your tapes, but I will say this, being an active person and being a person that really cares about the community and really has tried to make a difference, serving on the DeKalb Medical Center Foundation [sic, DeKalb Medical Foundation] where I was a trustee, was a great thing.  I hated to leave that because I, when I--I had to leave that because I started the bank, and I had to focus 100 percent of my time on this.  But I was really enjoying being a trustee there, to really great people, and we were really doing some, making some decisions over needs for the hospital that were really great, you know.  And Judy McMahan got me initially involved in that, and I took the ball and ran with it for about ten years.  I started as a trustee.  To a lesser degree, you know, Berry College [Mount Berry, Georgia].  I haven't spent as much time with them.  I'm on their Campbell School of Business advisory board.  I would like to spend more time with them, but I don't have the time.  But I am gonna try to spend a little bit more time with them than I've done in the past.  Jersey Council on Economic Education [sic, Georgia Council on Economic Education] which has the stock market game that teaches economics education to teachers throughout the State of Georgia.  It's a very worthwhile organization that I sit as a trustee on that council as well which is, my fellow trustees are some of the most prominent people in the State of Georgia.  So I probably could continue to go on and I'm pretty sure some folks will feel slighted that I didn't mention their organization, but, but there's just so, it's so many of 'em.
Story_ID: 156381
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, my main concern is, my main concern right now is our young people.  I think our young people are headed down a path.  We were all young once, but they're headed down a path through their music, through the things that they listen to.  Their fashion, their style, what they believe to be the things that make them hip or cool, they're heading down a very destructive road.  When young men wear their pants below their bottoms because it's a fashion statement, and is modeled after people that are in prison because they don't have belt, I think that in and of itself, tells you where our young people's minds are.  If they are idolizing prisoners, then where does that tell you that their mindset is.  You can look at it all day long and say well, because they pants (unclear), it's just a fashion statement.  No, it's not.  It's destructive behavior.  And the things that they listen to, the things they see on television, the music videos that they watch, all are suggestive of young black people, this is what your worth is.  This is what you do.  And it tells the world, this is what our young black people do.  This is what they are.  They are drug-addicted.  They are whores.  They are, they are criminals.  And this is what those messages send to our young people, and it's not just African American kids that look at it, white kids too.  And they, they're growing up the same way, but it's more destructive for our kids because our kids, there's no capital in our marketplace.  So it's much more destructive, and so that concerns me.  It concerns me that these young people are not out there thinking about jobs.  You're smoking weed, you can't get a job, not a, not a legitimate job.  So you limit your choices, you limit your opportunities.  And so it concerns me greatly that our young people are not taking advantage of all that they have, all that God gave them.
Story_ID: 156382
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think, you know, there're a lot of things I would do differently on a, from a personal standpoint that I don't, I'm not gonna go into, but it is what it is, and I'm happy with where I am right now.  And from a business standpoint, I don't think there's any more I could have done to achieve what I wanted to achieve.  I set in motion what I wanted to do, and I'm doing it.  And so I probably would have thought that I would have done it sooner, but I really wasn't ready.  So, and so everything happens in its own time.  So I'm very--if I were to die tomorrow, I would feel very comfortable with what I've achieved.  And so I, I think I've made my family proud.
Story_ID: 156383
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a natural lead into this question.  Who, who is your family now?  I mean who--are you married with children or--tell us about your family?
Speaker 2: Well, I've got two kids, my son, who's about to turn eighteen, and so he's got a lot of, he's got a lot in front of him.  And I'm trying to work as hard as I can to make sure that he gets the best and most out of life.  And so it's kind of interesting when you're reliving your moments, when you were eighteen and what you were thinking about.  And I look at him, and I think, you know, man, this is me all over again (laughter).  And how can I do anything possible for him not to have some of the bumps in the road.  But, you know, there comes a time in kids' lives where you've got to trust them and you've got to let them experience life.  And I'm at that point with my son to have to trust him, and have to let him experience life and learn from life.  And I'm there if he needs me.  My daughter's just about to enter high school, and so I'm looking at different options for her.  And, you know, I talked early on about my brothers and sisters and my, my affinity and love for them and, and how they've helped me grow to this point.  And so those are the things that make me happy.
Story_ID: 156384
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done up to this point, today, what would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, this is my signature project, creating this bank [One Georgia Bank].  So right now, this is my legacy.  If it had been before me doing this, you know, it would have been some of the things I did when I was at Citizens Trust [Bank], but to be honest with, One Georgia Bank is all I've ever hoped for and dreamed for in a project.  I mean this is, this is great stuff, and I've got a great opportunity to continue to grow it and to build it and to continue to bring in great people into a great environment.  So I'm very happy with what I've done.
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we haven't asked you about that you think is significant that we need to talk about before we--
Speaker 2: Well, I think you've pretty much covered a whole lot of stuff in my life (laughter), between the other interview and this one, I'm not sure if I left much on the table.  But I've had a lot of, I've had a lot of fun along the way.  I've, you've had life, I've had a good life, you know.  And I'm still young so, I'm looking forward to forty-five more years of goo- of good stuff happening and it's all been good.  So I think, I think I've left pretty much all that I have on the table.
Story_ID: 156385
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, it's gonna be interesting to see what I'm remembered for.  One thing I didn't mention that I'm gonna do when I turn twenty--when I turn fifty-five, is I'm gonna re-explore my artistic ability and I am going to, at some point, after fifty-five, I am going to take up art very seriously.  And so it'll be another transition in me.  So that's why I was telling of the day-to-day is probably not gonna be my thing anymore, but I'll be, obviously, closely involved in the banking business, but it'll be a definite transition to do something new.  So I wanna keep doing new stuff.
Speaker 1: I wasn't here for the first part, so what kind of do you do?  I mean or did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, I grew up with an ability to draw and, anything.  And I was, I would say very good at it.  But I don't practice anymore.  I don't practice it.  My son's very talented, and he can draw very well.  But I don't practice it anymore.  And that's what I wanna get back to.  When God gives you gift, you wanna, you wanna explore it.  You wanna see what, you know, why did he give you this gift, and that's what I wanna do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, well, thank you.  It's been a pleasure talking to you.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Thanks for taking this time.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 156386
Speaker 1: This was May, 1962, Easter, and--it was either Easter, no, I don't think it was Easter--well, it could have been Easter.  And, it might have been developed in May.  So it had to be April, and that's my, I'm in the middle and my sister, Carol Lewis [ph.] is my right and on my left is my sister, Cheryl Lewis [ph.].  And they're the two, my siblings that are just older than me.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is me graduating from college, from Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], and that's me and the president of Morehouse College at the time, Hugh Gloster.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  Okay, ready.  Go ahead and tell us about this photo, please?
Speaker 2: This is me in the first grade at Kelly Grammar, Kelly Grammar School [LaGrange, Georgia].  So that had to be circa, 1967.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, ready.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is me at twenty-five years old, a dashing, debonair youngster (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, let me think how old I was then.  I was ten years old, and that was my favorite bike at the time.  I think that was Christmas.  I had just received that bike.  That was at home in LaGrange [Georgia].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.  And ready.
Speaker 2: This is another mid-'60s [1960] photograph.  I would say this is probably 1967.  The youngster that you see running toward the camera is my nephew.  He was running toward the camera, and behind him my sister, Carol, Carol Faye Lewis, with the hat, holding my hand and behind her is my brother on his bike, the now, colonel, retired Colonel Milton Lewis.  And my nephew's name is Clayton Body [ph.].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my parents [Dora Herndon Lewis and Wilbur Milton Lewis], myself, my grandmother [Inez Herndon] and my siblings, all except two.  My oldest brother, James [Herndon Body (ph.)] and my sister, Mattie [Lewis Shelly (ph.)].  This was at the time of Mattie's college graduation before we left and went to--actually, I think when we came back we took this picture, when we got back from Augusta [Georgia].  She went to the Medical College of Georgia [Augusta University, Augusta, Georgia].  On the far, on my left--she's on my right if you were me in this photograph, on my far right would be my sister, Judy, my oldest sister.  Next to her is my father and next to him is my mother.  You see my brother, Milton in the back, Carol Faye is standing in front of my brother.  Cheryl is standing next to her, and my [grand]mother Inez Herndon is the last person in the photograph.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: I was in my early twenties in this photograph.  I had just started my banking career, and I was taking my, one of my first vacations as a working adult, down in the Keys, in the Florida Keys with my good friend, Michael Meredith [ph.].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready for the next.  And go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is my great-grandfather, Nelson Greer.  I don't know a lot about him.  Right now, my brother and I are renovating his house which is in LaGrange which is in excess of a hundred years old.  I don't know much about him, but that is my great-grandfather.  He had to have been born in the middle 1800s.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: These are my kids, Camille Lewis and Charles Alexander Lewis and they were much younger.  My son is, just graduated high school.  My daughter is about to enter high school now.  So they are young adults themselves, but they were very young.  This picture was actually taken so that it could be inserted in an award that I received, a national award that I received as a surprise.  So this picture was actually made into a trophy that I now possess.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next one.  Ready.
Speaker 2: This is a Commerce Club golf outing that I had with some great, my great friends at the Commerce Club, and I was playing with a really great team.  On the far left is [HM Herman] Jerome Russell.  In fact, at that time he was a board member of, he still is a board member of Citizens Trust Bank, and I was, had the pleasure of serving while he was on the board, serving as management while he was on the board.  Next to him is [John] G. Aldridge, his father, John, is right now the president of the Commerce Club.  And G. and I are good friends.  Brown Edwards who's also a shareholder in our new bank [One Georgia Bank] is standing next to him, and Brown is my real estate agent that helped me secure a lot of the real estate deals that I've done over the years, and then myself.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.  Ready.
Speaker 2: This was me coaching youth basketball.  I mentioned that I spent about ten years, excuse me, six years, coaching youth, and this was one, this was my very first team.  The very next year after this year, this team didn't win a single game.  The next year we went to the championship.
Speaker 1: That's the way it works (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This is me having a laugh with Governor Roy Barnes who was probably poking fun at me at the time, and I had to laugh at myself.  So I was with the governor at that point and this was in the middle '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This is me in San Juan, Puerto Rico.  I was at a National Bankers Convention.  You see me there with Ann Scott who at one time was my boss at Citizens Trust Bank.  She was the controller and I was the assistant controller back in my middle twenties.  I had left Citizens Trust at that point and I was working for First Southern [Bank] at the time as the chief operating officer at First Southern.  To the far left is [Edward] Ed Williams, and Ed was the person that I ultimately replaced when I came back to Citizens Trust.  He was the chief operating officer of Citizens Trust at the time, and to the far right is his date.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: My daughter and I have gone to what seems to be probably a number of father-daughter dances.  This is the very first father-daughter dance that we went to, and she was in the--it was for the Girl Scouts.  So this is our very first father-daughter dance.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next one.  All right, ready
Speaker 1: Well, you can never say I'm not camera ready (laughter).  This is, this picture was actually taken at a reception for CAMA, which is Cable Access Television, it's actually cable television, the cable television system in Atlanta [Georgia], and they had a reception, and they played a pretty good joke on me.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Ready.
Speaker 1: This is the 1984 Citizens Trust Bank Christmas party, the Christmas party that they had back in those days were always very special and very elaborate.  I'm actually sitting on the floor in between two very lovely ladies and with a bowtie on at the bottom, near the bottom right corner of the photograph.  Owen Funderberg is standing in the middle.  He's the older gentleman standing behind the lady with the green dress with the black, yes, yes, with the black tie.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And you were where?
Speaker 1: I'm here.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  All right, I'm ready.
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken for a magazine, the Atlanta Tribune.  They ended up not using this particular photograph.  They used another photograph in its place, but the, obviously, it was a photograph that wanted to portray me as a successful banker.  So it was pretty interesting, but they actually used a different photograph other than this one.  The photograph they ended up using had me sitting on, using a laptop with my feet in slippers.  And the title of the article was, "you can bank with your, you can bank at, you can bank with your slippers on."  It was a story on Internet banking.  And so they ended up not using this one.  They used another one.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  When you're ready.
Speaker 1: This is me and my daughter at another father-daughter dance.  You can see she's very lovely.  And she's growing up and becoming a young lady.  So this is actually one of the last ones that we've gone to.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is the board of One Georgia Bank.  These are the folks that had all the faith and trust in me and allowed me to pull this successful venture off.  So these are the guys that stand behind me and making sure that we're a success, a great group of people.  To the far left is Jeff Kerker, next to him is Ron Kirschner, second--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Sorry, and that's starting here, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: From the left going right, Jeff Kerker, Ronald Kirschner, Sam Banjee, Maxine Burton, Steve [A.] Opler, of course, myself, Billy Lovett, Dr. Betty Siegel, now our chairman, Arthur B. "Skin" Edge, Greg Shumate, Sunny [K.] Park, and Gordon [M.] Sherman.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on a moment.  Okay.  All right, ready.
Speaker 1: This is our celebratory toast for our first day of operation of One Georgia Bank.  And this is, this was my initial staff.  And we don't have [Richard] "Dick" Carlton in this particular picture, but you have, in fact, because he's taking the picture, but you have from the left to right, you have Jim Thomas [James M. Thomas], our CFO, Deidre Pinkert [ph.], staff accountant, standing behind her is Todd Jabensky [ph.], our financial center manager, but underneath him and next to me is Anika Thomas [ph.], my executive assistant, and she's also our corporate secretary, and, of course, you have myself, you have Shawn Boyd [ph.] who is the young lady that I mentioned that came in at 5:00 o'clock in the morning.  She's a super person.  Next to her is Charmaine Bryant [ph.], and Charmaine is our loan care specialist, and, of course, my good buddy, Billy Lovett who is our marketing director.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: And this is also from the first day of operation of One Georgia Bank.  You see Nicholas Hoffman, the gentleman that is performing a transaction.  His two kids are actually behind the telepod.  I'm not sure they were supposed to be back there.  Then there's Todd and Shawn again.  So this was our first day and one of our first new accounts that was, in fact, I think it was probably our first customer account that we opened.
