Story_ID: 21219
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interview today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm Andrea Jeanne Williams Lawrence.  A-N-D-R-E-A, J-E-A-N-N-E, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S, Lawrence, L-A-W-R-E-N-C-E.
Speaker 1: All right, and ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Ashville, North Carolina on October 6, 1946.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a college professor.  I teach computer science at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is March 19th, 2012.
Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in a conference room at Spelman College in the science center.
Story_ID: 21220
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as kind of a warm up.  And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite food, but I have a favorite category, and that's shellfish, lobsters, crab, mussels, clams.  It doesn't matter.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is orange.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I think I like the summertime the best.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The place I've been most often and enjoyed is Orlando, but I also would really love to be able to go to Hawaii, very frequently.
Speaker 1: Okay, now the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I think I do, and that favorite phrase is the motto, actually, of Atlanta University [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta Georgia] where I got my Masters.  It's, "Find a way or make one".
Story_ID: 21221
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  But I'm gonna ask about 'em separately, and then put 'em together at a certain point.  So, so we don't get 'em confused.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Jeanne Coles Hayes Williams, Allen, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's--
Speaker 2: J-E-A-N-N-E, Coles, C-O-L-E-S, Hayes, H-A-Y-E-S, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S, Allen, A-L-L-E-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was also born in Ashville, North Carolina on January 1, 1929.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: I guess I go back to my great grandparents.  My great grandfather, they used to tell a story, was a slave, and when freedom came, he was a teenager.  And he got up and started walking because he hadn't been able to leave before.  He kept walking and kept walking until he got to West Virginia.  And there he settled down and married my great grandmother who was, I believe one fourth Indian, Cherokee.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, where did he start from?
Speaker 2: Somewhere in North Carolina.  We don't know where.
Speaker 1: And so he just started going North?
Speaker 2: Apparently.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and--
Speaker 2: Ended up near Horse Pasture, West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Horse Pasture, okay.  H-R--
Speaker 2: Like a horse that you would ride (laughter).
Speaker 1: Horse Pasture, West Virginia.
Speaker 2: Which I believe is near Spencer, which is a town that's still there.  I don't know if Horse Pasture is still there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was your--
Speaker 2: And I think that was in Virginia, not West Virginia, that he ended up.
Speaker 1: Oh, in Virginia, Horse Pasture--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think he went to West Virginia, and then went over to Virginia.  Horse Pasture, I believe is in Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  It's near Spencer, West Virginia.
Speaker 2: Spencer, Virginia, I guess, I guess it's Virginia.  I think all of them were in Virginia, and I just got a little mixed.
Speaker 1: All right.  All right, now, what was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Alon--ooh, you know, it's left me.  Chester Hayes, I believe.  I believe my grandfather was named after him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, okay, now, are there any stories about, did he tell any stories about what it was like during slavery or?
Speaker 2: I was, I was not alive when he, at the time, so all I know is the story about him leaving and starting out.  He actually was a butcher, and they said he was so strong that he could take a hammer, a mallet and hit the cow, and it would just, and kill it.  He could butcher it by just taking the hammer and hitting it in the head.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was a butcher.  Okay, now, is there a story about how your people got to Ashville?
Speaker 2: Well, the family eventually moved to Winston-Salem, North Carolina, and there were 10 children, I believe.  And my grandfather was one of the older brothers.  And he moved to Ashville, which was a little extraordinary at the time because the rest of the family stayed in Winston-Salem.  But he moved, and he married my grandmother who he met in Winston-Salem when she was a school teacher.  She was teaching school.  She was actually from Albany, Albany, Georgia.  But she met him in Winston-Salem [North Carolina].
Story_ID: 21222
Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Ella Mae Coles, E-L-L-A, and then capital M-A-E, Coles, C-O-L-E-S.
Speaker 1: All right, now, she was a school teacher, okay?
Speaker 2: Yes, she taught elementary school.
Speaker 1: And where did you say she went to school?
Speaker 2: She went to Atlanta University which at that time I think was a Normal school.  But later she finished, went back and got a regular Bachelors degree at Winston-Salem's Teacher's College [now Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and a Masters from Columbia University [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, she, now this is--so did she teach, did she go on to teach on a college level with her Masters degree or--
Speaker 2: No, no, she just wanted it.  She taught sixth grade for as long as I can remember.  And, in fact, taught me in the sixth grade, which was a little awkward (laughter), 'cause I didn't, I wanted to call her grand--she didn't want me to call her grandma, and I didn't wanna call her Mrs. Hayes.  So I didn't call her anything at all for a year in class.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did she, was she able to take advantage of the segregation laws in North Carolina to go to Columbia to get her Masters degree?
Speaker 2: I don't know who, how that was paid for.  I just know every summer, she would go up there and take courses until she finished.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know it is well known in the Southern states that if you finished the state system that they had for black people and got your Bachelors degree, rather than have you go to graduate school some place in the state, they would--which would mean integrating the school, they would send you, they would pay your way to go somewhere else (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm aware of that in North Carolina--in Georgia and South Carolina.  I never heard anything about it North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, maybe it didn't happen that way, but, you know, that's interesting.  It might have been--
Speaker 2: It would make sense thought that she would, that she was able to afford to do it by getting some kind of help.
Speaker 1: I've heard stories of other people going to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] and University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin], you know, and Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], you know, a lot of places, from the South because the state refused to pay the, you know, didn't want them to attend, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, I've heard of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she taught sixth grade, and so, now, was she typical of the teachers in elementary school in those, in that area?  Did quite a few of them have Masters degrees?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I know some did, but I would think the number was small.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The percentages were small.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, that's a great story though.  So, now, so did she pass down stories in the family of her educational experiences?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she used to talk about how when she left Albany, Georgia, that's where she was from, that going away to school was pretty much an adventure 'cause she wanted to be a teacher.  And the Normal school was the way.  It was interesting to me that she said that when she was finishing her Bachelors at Winston-Salem Teachers College [now Winston-Salem State University], she took my mother with her for the summer.  And since we had relatives in Winston-Salem, it was easy for her to, for them both to go off to school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this must have, she must have been in school say in the 1930s, I guess, right, 'cause your mother was born in '29' [1929].  And she was a little girl--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --while (unclear) was in grad school.
Speaker 2: Yes, right, but she didn't finish her Masters until around 1949 or '50' [1950] 'cause I remember her going up for the summer to take her last few courses.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so she took a little bit at a time until she finished.
Speaker 2: Until she finished.
Story_ID: 21223
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did your grandfather do for a living?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was first an insurance salesman, and then he was head bellman at the Vanderbilt Hotel.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then head bellman.  Now, that's, it seems on the surface, that might be a drop in status, but it may not be in terms of income, right?
Speaker 2: In terms of income, it was not.  You know, the insurance policies around there, the people would put in a nickel a week, and a dime a week and pay on their insurance.  And going around collecting all that, I don't believe was a very easy job and probably wasn't that profitable.
Speaker 1: Now, you say he was at the Biltmore Hotel or--
Speaker 2: The Vanderbilt.
Speaker 1: Vanderbilt, okay, I got, getting the bilt's mixed up.  But just, just tell us a little bit about the Vanderbilt's and the Biltmore and all that in Ashville.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, the Vanderbilt's, of course, were well known as the richest family around.  And they built the famous Biltmore House which was the site of many school excursions.  It's huge.  I believe it was--he wanted to build a castle in the, in America.  He had gone abroad and seen some.  So he came back to his home area and built the Biltmore House, which is available today for tours.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's the largest house ever built in the United States, they say.
Speaker 2: They say, yes.  So, we were able as children to go there for field trips.  And I remember once in high school going there for a retreat, overnight retreat.  We got to swim in their indoor swimming pool and wander around the rooms.  It was quite exciting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so the Vanderbilt Hotel, is that in downtown Ashville?
Speaker 2: It is.  And at the time, of course, it was segregated.  And he was head bellman, which meant he was in charge of the whole staff of bellmen at the hotel.  And the interesting thing about that was he, all my life, as I recall, he worked a split shift because he would have to work say 8:00 to 12:00, and then he would get off, and he'd go back and work 4:00 to 8:00.  So he handled the busiest, was there for the busiest parts of the day.  And he was also very active in the church and worked with the YMCA, on their board.  So he did a lot of civic engagement as well.
Speaker 1: Was he a Mason?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Story_ID: 21224
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so your mother, so she grew up in a pretty stable environment, I would guess?
Speaker 2: Definitely.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she have a lot of brothers and sisters or--
Speaker 2: She was an only child.  She was an only child.  I'm an only child.  My father was an only child.
Speaker 1: All right.  Did your mother have any stories of growing up in Ashville that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: She, more she had stories of when she was in Atlanta [Georgia].  Her grandparents were in Atlanta by that time.  They had left Albany and moved to Atlanta.  And, in fact, lived a few blocks from where I'm, we're currently set in the, because when they started building housing projects, they took people's houses.  They took the houses and tore them down, and then they gave them a space in the projects.  So that's how they ended up living in the projects, but more or less on the spot where they had had a house.  And she would tell, talk about walking, her grandfather walking her to the nursery school here on Spelman's [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] campus.  She was in school with Martin Luther King, Jr., for one.  They were born in the same month.  So--
Speaker 1: Same year, too, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So they were in the same class at the Spelman nursery.  And she would talk about her, her grandfather and how much her grandmother spoiled her to the point that once when my grandmother went to get her for the break, she carried on so that my grandmother got on the train and took her back to her mother (laughter), to her grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay, took back to Atlanta (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was like, oh, no.
Speaker 1: So she spent a lot of time, okay, with her--was she basically raised by her grandparents?
Speaker 2: No, just, this was just until she was old enough to go to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, and actually, she started school at four because there wasn't a lot of daycare.  So my grandmother put her in the first grade class down the hall and said, "Okay, we'll see if you learn anything.'  And actually, she progressed through school from age four.  So she finished at 15.  She finished college--she finished high school at 15.  And we always used to ask her why didn't she go to Spelman because she had the Spelman history.  But it turned out, Spelman wouldn't take you if you weren't 16.  So she had to go, so she went to Fisk.  She started to school at Fisk [University].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is where she met my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So did she have any stories about Dr. King that she shared, about what he was like when he was in preschool (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Not really.  She just commented on the fact that she remembered him from that time.  When he became famous, she said, "Oh, yeah, I went to nursery school with him."
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So did they live, they lived near the campus, you said, of Spelman, they lived near the Spelman campus?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were the projects.  They lived in the projects which I believe were called University Homes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, just kind of explain, what was the difference between, say projects then and projects now?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a lot of families in the housing projects then.  Now, I think it's mostly single parents, whether single mothers or single fathers, who are living there.  But at that time, families lived there, stable families lived there.  And it was often a place where people would go and save up to buy a house.  They lived there for a while till they could buy a house.  I know my stepfather's brother, two of his brothers, that's what they did.  They lived in the projects for a while, saved up and then bought a house.  So there wasn't the kind of worrying about drugs, everybody on welfare feeling that there is, seems to be today.  It was not a dangerous place to be.  There was not a lot of crime going on.  It was mostly families or older, single people, older people, you know, widowed grandmas or, who might live there.
Speaker 1: Okay, just one more question about your mother.  Now, what did your mother major in at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennesee]?
Speaker 2: English.  She started, she was, actually had thought about being a doctor and majoring in biology.  But she decided to settle on English.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then when they finished at North Carolina College, which I think now is North Carolina Central in Durham, [North Carolina] she finished her English degree.
Story_ID: 21225
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me go to your father.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Emory Wardell Williams, E-M-O-R-Y, W-A-R-D-E-L-L, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 1, 1925.  So they had the same birthday.  And he was born in St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, I actually did a little bit of a family tree on his side at one point.  So I know that they came there from Arkansas.  My great, great--my great grandfather was named William Henry Hall.  But they always called him Bud.  And my grandmother, his daughter, was Scottie Hall, and they moved to St. Louis.  Several members of the family moved to St. Louis.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do they have a story about the end of slavery or Reconstruction or any of that, on that side of the family?
Speaker 2: They don't have too much to say about it, no.  I did hear of one relative who was a slave and she was brought to Arkansas.  That's how they got to Arkansas.  This ancestor was brought there, this female ancestor was brought there.  I don't know where they came from, but they came, ended up in Arkansas because she was brought there as a slave.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So are there, did your father talk about how it was like to grow up in that part--he was born in St. Louis and grew up in St. Louis?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: So he didn't have any Arkansas stories or--
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So there are no other stories from that side of the family about Arkansas or what was going on there?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Just about my great grandpa who had, I think three wives and several sets of children.
Speaker 1: That's quite a story.  [humming]
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  That's my cell phone buzzing.  But he [buzzing], he--should I--
Speaker 1: No, go ahead. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  It (unclear) stop--
Speaker 2: Okay, so they were, he didn't tell a lot about Arkansas, about growing--they mostly talked about up as kids and going to church, spending all day Sunday at church because they would get up in the morning and go to Sunday school and service, and then they would, they--my grandmother would pack a picnic basket.  And they would eat at church and go to the afternoon service before they came back home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was one of the younger ones so they tell stories about him.  They were holding him by the hand and saying, "Walk, baby, walk" 'cause he, they didn't wanna carry him, but he was sound asleep (laughter) on his feet.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right, so--
Speaker 2: So one of the things he did that was kind of interesting was that he worked on one of the riverboats.  Before they had the gambling on the riverboats, they had restaurants on some of the boats.
Speaker 1: This is your father?
Speaker 2: My father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he used to work there to get his money for college.
Speaker 1: So would the riverboat have a regular route from up the Mississippi, you know, from St. Louis to--
Speaker 2: They, some did.  I think the one he was on was tied up.  I think it was just serving as a restaurant.  But they, yes, there were some, and there still are some that go from Cincinnati down to St. Louis down to, I believe as far as New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Okay, but his, the one he was working on was tied up.
Speaker 2: I think it was tied up.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, let's see.  What did his father do for a living?
Speaker 2: His father was a mailman, a mail carrier.
Speaker 1: Okay, and his mother?
Speaker 2: His mother was a housewife.  She stayed at home.
Speaker 1: All right.  So after he went to high, he went to Fisk as well?
Speaker 2: He went to Fisk and that's where they met.  And after that he was drafted.
Speaker 1: All right, now, did he have, what was his aspiration at Fisk?  What was he--
Speaker 2: They were both thinking they were gonna be doctors at that, at the beginning.  They both, I think, started out as biology majors.  My mother switched over to English, but I think he stayed with biology.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he was drafted then, right?
Speaker 2: He was drafted.
Speaker 1: Now, did they meet and get together and get married before he was drafted?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 1: No, I just think, you know, slightly older fellow meets girl who's taking some of the same kind of classes.  And the rest is history kind of thing.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so they don't have a story about, you know, first met in the library and at a party?
Speaker 1: No, they don't, but they, but they did have a story about while he was in basic training, near Atlanta, my mother coming down and staying here so she could visit with him when he had some time off--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because they had married before he went to the service.
Speaker 2: So he was drafted in, let me see, well, for World War II, right--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --it would be like the early '40s [1940s], I guess.
Speaker 1: Mid-forties [1940s], I guess it would be, just before the, not too long before the end of the War.
Speaker 2: Okay, 1944, you think or '45' [1945]?
Speaker 1: Yes, I guess in '45' [1945].
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So did your father go overseas?
Speaker 1: He was stationed in Hawaii actually.
Story_ID: 21226
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now when you think about your parents' personalities and their talents and their looks and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My mother.  We both are readers.  I mean we want to read.  We read anything that's between covers basically.  We both have the same kind of curiosity about new places, both very much like organizing things.  I think I take more after my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, you don't have any brothers and sisters.  And so, when you grew up in your household, it was your mother, your father, you and any grandparents live with you or other relatives?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, when they--when my parents finished school in Durham, they moved to Philadelphia.  And both my parents went back to school to get their Masters, my mother in English and--went to, they both went to Temple [University] and my dad in psychology and counseling, counseling, guid-- psychology for counselors.  He wanted to be a counselor, and did become one eventually.  But when I was about eight, they separated.  And my mother moved back to Ashville with me.  Then she got a job here at Spelman [Spelman College] as a personal secretary to the new president, then, Albert Manley.  Now, the story behind that is Albert Manley was her high school principal in Ashville [North Carolina].  And so when he was drafted to be president of Spelman, he happened to find out that my mother was in town in Ashville.  And he said, why don't you come and be my secretary.  And she, he said, learn some shorthand and typing and come on down.  Well, she knew how to type, but she didn't know shorthand.  So she learned shorthand by listening to, by taking lessons from a lady, a neighbor, and practicing by listening to soap operas on the radio because they have the, they don't speak really rapidly like a new commentator.  And she could take it down.  It's more like normal speech, and it was, they were there.  She could practice every day.  So we would listen, she would listen to 'As the World Turns,' or 'My Gal Sunday,' and practice her shorthand.  And then she moved to Atlanta to work here at Spelman.  And she was living on campus at that time.  So she left me with my grandparents.  Well, later on, when she got a house and wanted--my grandparents were like, "You can't take her now."  "You know, it's better," my grandmother was like, well, you know, "it's much better for them to be in a two-parent household, for children."  That was the, what my grandmother said.  So my mother left me, and I would come down here in the summers.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were--
Speaker 2: So I grew up with my grandparents from eight on.
Speaker 1: Okay, but in the beginning your parents kept you with them when they were married, and they went to Durham--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --I guess--
Speaker 2: I went to nursery school, and they went to college.
Speaker 1: Okay, and they were at North Carolina Central [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in Durham.  And, and, okay, now, this is, that would be in, say early '50's [1950s], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Probably not because, I think my dad released from the Service in like, late '46' [1946], maybe or early '47' [1947].  I was here, and probably '47' [1947].  He was released.  They went back to school, probably then.  They probably finished around '50' [1950].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then they went to Temple [Temple University], to Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: Right, then they moved to Philadelphia.  My dad got a job working for the Navy in the boatyard, Naval yard.  And my mother stayed at home with me and started back to get her Masters once I was in school all day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then my dad started taking evening classes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and around 1950, about '54' [1954], when they split up, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, '54' [1954], '55' [1955], something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, we're gonna pause here for a break.
Story_ID: 21227
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory is having chickenpox because I was, remember scratching and scratching and they're telling me, "Don't scratch, don't scratch."  But my other one is of being in the apartment in, in Durham [North Carolina].  And the fact that we, they had rented a room and a half, I guess from this lady.  And they didn't have a bathtub.  So there was a big tin tub for my parents, and a little white enamel tub for me.  So we had to take baths in those.  So I can remember being in that apartment.
Speaker 1: Okay, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Growing, I think about mountains.  I'm more comfortable even now if I'm in a place that's hilly or mountainous because of being in Ashville [North Carolina].  We lived right at the edge of town near Beaucatcher (ph.) mountain.  That's the name of the mountain, that the tunnel goes out of town on.  We lived maybe a block or two from there.  So when I think of growing up, I think about the mountains being around, always in the background of my life.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, that's a beautiful part of the country, and the Smokey Mountains (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, it really is.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did you, well, you left there fairly early though, right?
Speaker 2: When I finished high school, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you actually went to high school there?
Speaker 2: I did.  I went to high school in a all-girls' school.  It was mostly a boarding school.
Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute.  I don't wanna get too far--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  I'm--
Speaker 1: --as you're growing up.  So, you started school in--
Speaker 2: Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Philadelphia, okay.  And what was the name of your school in Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: I have no earthly idea.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  But you were there, it's an elementary school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was there through the, in first--kindergarten, first and second grade.  And the third grade, we came to, came to Ashville.  But in between that, I had been down for the summer when I was smaller.  My grandmother would come and get me and take me down on the train.  So I was very, Ashville was a very familiar place to me, even at that point, when I was living in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Okay, Ashville or Atlanta?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Ashville?
Speaker 2: Ashville.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: Ashville.  Atlanta didn't come in until my mom went off to work for Dr. Manley here at Spelman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so, then you, so in third grade you're in a school here in Ashville?  I mean--
Speaker 2: In Ashville, I went to Hill Street School.  Now, that one I do know.
Story_ID: 21228
Speaker 1: Hill Street.  Now, you say you like to read, and did you like school?
Speaker 2: I did.  I really enjoyed school.  I think I was a bit of a problem with some of my teachers because I read a lot, so I read very rapidly.  And sometimes they couldn't find enough to keep me busy.  And that goes back to my getting a library card when I was four, which was a bit unusual.  My mom liked to read too.  And she would take me to the library.  We had to take two buses to get to the library.  So she didn't wanna go all the time, and they wouldn't let her get out but six books.  So she got three for me and three for her.  She was through in no time.  She said, we gotta get you a library card.  So she took me in to the lady, say, "She needs a library card."  And the lady looked down at me, and I was a very small four.  And she says, "Well, she has to be able to sign her name.  She can't have a library card."  I could read.  So my mother said, "She can sign her name."  And that was the only thing I could write in cursive.  My mother had had me doing that to keep me busy.  So she had taught me how to write my name, not knowing this would be called for.  So I signed my name, got my little library card.  And my mother said, "All right, you can go get you some books."  And the librarian said to my mother, "Well, aren't you gonna help her pick out her books?"  And my mother said, "I'm not going to read them.  She is."  So, the librarian was really put out with us, but after that she just let me alone.
Speaker 1: So, you're a four-year old, coming in and you were--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I learned to read early.  I don't know why.  Maybe because my mother was always reading and reading to me.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite set of books that you would read?
Speaker 2: I did.  I liked the 'Oz' books, and I liked the fairy books.  Everybody knows maybe about the blue fairy book or the red fairy book.  But there's like 15 of those books that people don't know about.  There's a violet fairy book and a, so, I used to get those.  And they were full of fairy stories from different cultures.  So there might be one full of Russian and one full of French.  So I loved those.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm not familiar with those.  But they have colors?  They're--
Speaker 2: The books were different colors.  And there was one that was fairly popular at the time.  I'm not sure if it was the red or what?  It had most of the Grimm kind of fairytales in it.  But once I discovered that one, on the shelves next to it were all these others.  So I just read my way down the shelf.  When I was a little older and in Ashville [North Carolina], the librarian really had a hard time with me because after I had read everything I could find to read at my level, I wanted to start on adult books.  And she didn't want me to read the adult books.  I was maybe 12.  So I had to get a note from my mother saying it was all right for me to check out some of the adult books.  Actually, I wanted to read the 'Iliad' and 'The Odyssey' because I had heard the stories.  And she says, "Oh, no, you can't check those out.  Those are for grownups."
Speaker 1: Now, that seems odd because, you know, I think sometimes middle school, the early part of high school, they have you read those in class.  But they were considered, you know, adults only reading?
Speaker 2: Well, they happened to be on the adult shelves.  It wasn't the content.  She just had a thing that I should not be on the adult shelves.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she restricted you to the children's section?
Speaker 2: To the children's section.  And I was through with that.  I had read everything, "Asamova Ed" (ph.).  I had read all the Black Stallion books and the Island Stallion books.  No, there was really not much else for me to read.
Speaker 1: That's a lot of reading.  You're doing a lot of reading during the course of a day?
Speaker 2: I did, I was, I read rapidly.  I don't read as much now because I'm not home like I was then, but I still read a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21229
Speaker 1: It was really exciting for me when they integrated the library.
Speaker 2: Now, when did that happen?  How old were you when the library was integrated?
Speaker 1: I'm thinking around 13 or 14.
Speaker 2: About 1960, '61' [1961], something like that?
Speaker 1: Before I went to high school then, so maybe 13 'cause I could go there when I was in high school.  So I was able to go there and check out books.  But before that, if you wanted something that was over there, you had to request them to send it.  And sometimes it came and sometimes it didn't.  And Ashville Colored Library [Ashville, North Carolina], as it was called was pretty small.  You know, it was a room as opposed to the general library which was stories and multiple rooms.
Speaker 2: Was it near the regular library?
Speaker 1: Yes, it was.
Speaker 2: The Colored library?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, it was.  But over, the regular library was more downtown.  This was more off in the neighborhood--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --where there were black businesses and that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: Okay, so at a certain point, they integrated the library.  And were you, so this is like '60' [1960], '61' [1961], I guess, right?
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: You were like 13 or 14.  And so you were in your early teenage life when Ashville was integrated, I guess?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So what was it like seeing these barriers fall and did you take advantage of any of the other integration opportunities other than the library?
Speaker 1: Movies, we went to the movies.  We didn't have to sit in the balcony of the one theater that would let us in.  I remember when the, when the 'Wizard of Oz' came out.  It was a big deal.  And they actually let us go to see it if our school took us in the theater where we normally were not able to go.
Speaker 2: So it'd be a day trip during the day--
Speaker 1: It was a day trip.
Speaker 2: --and then you all could sit anywhere in the theater or did--
Speaker 1: I think so, yeah, at that point.  But typically, you were in the balcony.  I remember seeing 'Gone With the Wind' from the balcony.
Speaker 2: What did you think about that in those days?
Speaker 1: Well, I mean, to me it seemed like it was describing what was, so I didn't have the kind of reaction that sometimes people are having now, thinking, you know, they're making them look this way or that way.  I had no real conception of what it was, except what I read.
Speaker 2: So by the time you saw it, I guess, 'Gone With the Wind' was 20 years old, I guess, right or a little older, you know.  Like it was made in 1939, so, you know, that's--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --you saw a re-release of it.
Speaker 1: Probably so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, same for 'Wizard of Oz.'  They were made the same year actually.  So that was a re-release of, and those movies have both been re-released again and again.  So, now, was, you said your mother listened to soap operas on the radio, right?
Speaker 1: Right, to do her shorthand.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean was she a big radio listener and did you listen to the radio a lot around the house?
Speaker 1: Oh, we did because we didn't have a television at this point.  I had seen televisions.  Some people we knew in Philadelphia had a television.  And we used to go to their house to watch Milton Berle or something, once a week.  But it wasn't something we had at our house.  So you listen to stories, 'The Phantom,' 'I Love Lucy,' I believe was on the radio, 'Our Miss Brooks,' that was what it was, was on the radio, 'The Phantom,' 'The Shadow,' that's what it was.  The Shadow knows, and, of course, music and ballgames, baseball games.  I was a baseball fan because my grandfather, having given up on having any boys to teach baseball to, decided to teach it to me.  So I had to, when we did get a television, I had to watch the games with him.  And I had to learn how to keep score with a scorecard and how to compute a batting average.  He thought that's what you should know.  He was, played in--when he was in World War I, at the end of the War, he played, he was on an exhibition ball team that toured around in France.  So he was very much into baseball and knew some of the, some of the players in the Negro Leagues at that time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did he ever play on a Negro League team?
Speaker 1: No, he didn't, he didn't, but as I said, he knew some.  So he used to go to the ballgames in Ashville, and they would let him in.  And I kept wanting to know why he wouldn't take me, why he wouldn't take me.  Well, I found out later that they really were supposed to be segregated.  And black people couldn't go, but everybody in town knew him, apparently, so they let him in.  But they, he couldn't go and take me.
Speaker 2: That'd be taking too much advantage of a privilege.
Speaker 1: Um-hum, so he couldn't take me.
Speaker 2: Now, we he, what team was he a big fan of on television?
Speaker 1: Oh, he liked the Braves--well, first he liked the Dodgers.  Then when the Braves moved to Atlanta, he became a Braves fan, and he came down for the--the first time they were in this World Series, he came down from Ashville to go to a game.  And that must have been '67' [1967] or so, that he came down to go to the World Series game.  So he was really excited about going to that.
Story_ID: 21230
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now did you, what was your first, I guess, exposure to the concept of a computer?  Can you remember?  Was it in movie or was it at school or--
Speaker 2: On a TV show, when they used to have the $64,000 Question, and they had the computer, Anyac (ph.) or something was supposed to be computing the answers.  That was the first time I ever saw a computer.  And when I came to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Geogia] , we didn't have computer science classes, but my mother had encouraged, was interested in them.  So when they came out, she was one of the earlier buyers of computers.  She bought a computer back, before anybody else did.
Speaker 1: About what time period are we talking about?
Speaker 2: Seventies [1970s].  She had, she bought the kids a Commodore 64.  She had a Radio Shack computer, and about that time, they started having computers in the office, had Wang's, which were --
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --more word processors than computer.  So she had that in the office, and she was by that time, registrar.  And she had that one.  So she was very interested.  She, as I said, went and bought the other computers.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just wondered what your impression of computer was when you were growing up, you know.  Did you ever think that you would be working with computers (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No I really did not.  I love math, and my grandmother encouraged me in that.  That was her favorite subject, and she would give me puzzles to do and that kind of thing.  But I never thought of transferring that to computers.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you're in Ashville [North Carolina] in grade school from age, from grade three to--
Speaker 2: Through high school.
Speaker 1: Through high school, okay.
Speaker 2: I did do one thing as a child that they said was a good predictor of wanting to be a computer scientist type person or engineer.  I could take things apart.  I used to take things apart and put them back together, and one day I took my grandfather's alarm clock apart, and I couldn't get it back together.  I was supposed to be taking a nap (laughter).  So I was lying on his, so I, he said, so we're gonna take a nap on grandpa's bed.  I'm lying there, said, I think I'll take apart the clock.  I had taken it apart before, but this time, I couldn't get the spring back in.  So they found out that I was doing that.  That was not a good, a good day (laughter).  My grandmother was not thrilled to the fact that I had broken the clock.  But in terms of other things to take apart and put together, she did provide me with, she knew I liked puzzles, so I would get those little wood puzzles, different kinds to take apart and put together and that kind of thing.  And I had, my dad thought girls should have the same toys as boys.  So I had an Erector Set, you know, with the, the ones you had the little gears and what not in, which most girls didn't have.  And since I was the only child, I played with it a good bit.  And he made sure I had a chemistry set, an electric train.  So he thought just because the toys were labeled as boys, there was no reason I shouldn't have them.
Story_ID: 21231
Speaker 1: Now, did your dad stay involved in your life even after your parents broke up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, very much.  He would come and get me in the summer, and I would spend some time with him in St. Louis [Missouri].  And then he also came to visit a couple of times a year.  He would come down and spend a week or so around Christmas break 'cause he was teaching by that time.  So he had Christmas break.
Speaker 1: Okay, was he teaching high school or college or--
Speaker 2: High school.
Speaker 1: High school, okay.  All right, so did he finish his Masters degree too?
Speaker 2: He finished his Masters at Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and later on did teach at a college.  He taught at Tennessee A and I.  Is it Tennessee State now?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yes, right.
Speaker 2: So he taught there.  He taught psychology there.  He had the Masters, plus some hours past.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my stepmother was also teaching there.  She wasn't, I believe she was, I can't remember her field.  But, and then they left there and went to, moved to Chicago [Illinois], which was actually my stepmother's hometown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And from there, my dad was a counselor or teacher in high schools from then on.
Speaker 1: Okay, in public schools.
Speaker 2: He spent most of his career at Evanston Township High [Evanston, Illinois] which is one of the largest high schools in the country because it's the only high school in Evanston.  And it actually was divided in five separate high schools, with five principals because it was so big which seems to be a concept that's coming back to schools, dividing up into groups, subgroups of high schools.
Speaker 1: Smaller schools.
Speaker 2: Inside the main school.
Story_ID: 21232
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you have a favorite teacher in grade school?
Speaker 2: I'm supposed to say my grandmother, and, actually, I think she was.  But I also was taught in grade school.  In grade school, I would like to say it was Ms. Logan who taught me in seventh and eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was, I mean what did she, how did she impress you?
Speaker 2: I think the reason she (unclear) because she was full of these sayings that I later found out were pretty accurate.  She would say things like, all right, there are two friends and one is, I've never the good one to raise the other one up, but I've often known the bad one (laughter) to pull the other one down.  And she had some more classic sayings that she used to say to us, but she was very much interested in us, encouraging us to do our best and telling, you know, pointing us toward college in the future, even at that age.
Story_ID: 21233
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you went to a special high school, right?
Speaker 2: I went to an all-girls school that was mostly a boarding school.  And as it happened, it was right next door to my grandparents' house when I was growing up.  We moved away before I went to high school, but most of my years, it was part of the neighborhood.  And the reason for that high school was segregation.  At that time, many, many places in the South did not have schools that would prepare you for college, for the black students.  So parents would send their daughters or sons off to boarding school so they could get a good education and get ready for college.  And there were some in Augusta, there's one in Augusta.  There was, this one in Ashville [North Carolina].  There was a Catholic set in Powhatan, Virginia because, this was right after the time when South Carolina shut down their whole school rather than integrate.  So, there were often people, if you lived in a small town, you might be bused 50 or 60 miles to a high school.  And it may or may not have the college prep things.  So that school was founded by the Methodist church.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Allen High School.
Speaker 1: So it's named after Richard Allen, I would guess, right?
Speaker 2: I suspect so since Methodist (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, is this the AME [African Methodist Episcopal] church of the regular ME, Methodist.
Speaker 2: I think it was the regular ME Methodist.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it may not have Richard Allen, I don't know, yeah, since he was a--okay, well, Allen High School.  This is in Ashville [North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Right, they may have named it after him because the school was for black people.
Speaker 1: Could be, yeah.
Speaker 2: They might have taken that.  But it was in Ashville, and it wasn't a huge school.  I imagine we had 150 students, maybe, to 200.  And as I said, most of the students lived on campus.  In my class, there were six out of 36 who were town students.  One of them took the bus every day from a town outside, Hendersonville, which was about 15 miles, I believe.  And she came over every day on the bus to go to school.
Speaker 1: And that's (unclear) chimney rock ride, yeah.  So, did you stay on at the school?
Speaker 2: No, I lived at home.
Speaker 1: Okay, a lot of students actually lived there?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, and they were from all over.  They were from Tennessee, all of the South.  They were from Tennessee, Georgia, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what kind of activities were you involved in, in high school.  Did you, were you a part of clubs and organizations at high school itself?
Speaker 2: I didn't do a lot of clubs and organizations.  I think I, oh, I worked with the newspaper.  We had a newspaper.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was the newspaper, and I continued that when I got to college.  I also was in a glee club--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which was pretty, which was nice because my junior or senior, my senior year I think it was, we took a trip.  We went up to Vermont and New York and sang in different Methodist churches which was pretty exciting for those of us who had never, many people had never been that far away from home.
Story_ID: 21234
Speaker 1: Okay, I wondered, now, did you get a chance to travel very much yourself when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I did.  My dad [Emory Wardell Williams] thought that you ought to see things.  So what he used to, he used to do, I had three male cousins, all of us only children.  So there're four of us.  So they used to pack up three or four of us and send us off on a trip, whoever, whichever parent wanted to do it.  So one year they took us all to the World's Fair.  One year, we all went to Denver [Colorado] and went to the men, and up to see the old ghost towns and all that.
Speaker 1: Oh, Denver, yeah, that's a (unclear).
Speaker 2: Another year they took us to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to see the Liberty Bell and all of that.  One year we went to, did New York [New York], the Empire State Building, all of that kind of thing.  So, and Washington.  So they wanted us to see and experience different things.  So I did do a good bit of traveling and by car.  My uncle who lived in Dayton [Ohio] was one of the ones who--and he was the, my oldest cousin was his son.  And they paired us off because we were the closest in age.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, yeah, 'cause I was wondering when you were saying "we", who the other person was since you're an only child.  Now, this is your cousin--
Speaker 2: My cousin, I had a cousin from Dayton, and a cousin, one--two in St. Louis.
Speaker 1: What was your cousin's name from Dayton?
Speaker 2: His name was David Larry Williams.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess third.  And he's a little over a year younger than I am.  So they used to pack us up and send us places so we would educated.  My uncle had a habit of stopping on every state line, and he would stop the car, pull over.  We would jump out and go pose by the "Entering" such and such a state sign.  So we could see where we had been and remember.  Or if we were passing through something, and there was an attractive, he would side trip to it.  If it said, "Birthplace of Lincoln", we might side trip to see where he was really born.  So it was a fun way to travel.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so he was really trying to explore and not just trying to get from  Point A to Point B.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so my uncle and my dad were both like that.  They wanted us to see things.  So he put us on the train and sent us back and forth, put me on a plane to send me to them whenever.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the stopping along the way like that is sort of unusual in terms of travel in those days 'cause a lot of people, especially black people, didn't wanna stop because there was so much segregation, and didn't know if they'd be welcomed in one place or another.  So.
Speaker 2: We had some issues like that.  This particular ship, the birthplace of Lincoln, of course, was a little further North.  But I can remember my dad and I driving from Ashville [North Carolina] to Nashville [Tennessee]or to St. Louis [Missouri], and he, whenever I, if I had to use the restroom, before he bought the gas, he would always ask them if I could use the bathroom because some places wouldn't.  So then he would go somewhere else.  So that was, you know, first check on the bathroom, and then buy the gas was--I can remember one trip we were coming back from somewhere West through Kansas.  And my uncle could not get a room.  He stopped two or three places and none of them would rent us a room.  And this was after things were supposed to be integrated.  And he had to drive all night, and we had to talk to him because he couldn't get a room for us to stay in.
Speaker 1: Yes, that's, yeah, that's typical in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, we expected it when we were in, you know, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi.  We didn't expect, we didn't think that Kansas, for instance, would be like that.  We had no reason to think that.  We thought it was a Southern phenomenon.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause here again.
Story_ID: 21235
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you doing a lot of travel when you--you went to the World's Fair in--
Speaker 2: In New York.
Speaker 1: New York World's Fair in '64' [1964]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, did you see any evidence of computer technology there?
Speaker 2: Not that I recall.  I'm sure there was, but I wasn't on the lookout for it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, those were the days, I know, the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], they would always just talk on television about what is gonna happen in the future and everybody expecting these flying cars and a telephone where you can see, with a TV in it.
Speaker 2: And now we have that telephone (laughter).  You can get on your computer and talk to people and they can see you.  In fact, my grandmother, my granddaughter does it every day.
Speaker 1: Okay, but we don't have the flying cars yet (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, I'm really wishing for the flying cars (laughter).  I think that'll be a good one.  I want the, what I want is the cars that you hook on the track and they take you somewhere, so people don't crash into you.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, that's something that, yeah, they talked about that too.  And I think that's coming along, I think.
Speaker 2: I think we need it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so then were you excited, I know those were the days after the astronauts were going, they were like doing space flight, and that was, NASA was big and people were talking a lot about the future in those days.  Did you think a lot about that when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, when the first Sputnik, I guess, went up, I was probably in about the sixth grade.  And I remember thinking then, yes, we might actually see of the things that I read about in the SciFi I read, the science fiction.  The, iRobot kinds of books.  And I'm thinking, okay, if we can do this, then we probably can begin to build those robots.  So that was (unclear) the connection I made with it.  The next time I, but I didn't really come in contact with computers at all at that point, that I knew of.  And I'm thinking, yes, there probably were, but they were behind the scenes.  And I really didn't know much about them.
Story_ID: 21236
Speaker 1: Okay, now, and you say you were good at math and problem solving.  Now, how advanced were you, say in high school in terms of mathematics?  Were you satisfied with the pace of the instruction?
Speaker 2: I was, yes, I was okay.  Remember, we were a small school.  So the classes were small, and they could kind of work--they were good at keeping us busy.  But I mean, I didn't have the "I'm bored" 'cause they're behind me (unclear).  They figured we were all, they expected us all to go to college.  So they were teaching at that level, and I did not find that the pace was wrong for me.  I did have one issue in high school math, and that was, I wanted to take Geometry.  We had done Algebra I and II, and I wanted to take Geometry.  And there were not enough of us to make a class, and then when they got them, the person who was supposed to teach it didn't come back that year.  So we had sort of workbook approach.  They found these workbooks you got.  And you worked through the workbook, and there was a teacher in the room with us.  But she really didn't know a lot more than we did.  So it was sort of a self-paced thing, which I suppose today would be on a computer where you work the problems, and then you find out whether, what you did wrong.  So my Geometry course was a little unconventional.  I don't think there were many places doing that kind of thing at the time.
Speaker 1: So I take it you didn't have Calculus or Trigonometry?
Speaker 2: I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when I came to Spelman, at that time, they were starting everybody--all math majors had to take this pre-Cal [Calculus] course.  It was the first course in the major.  So the only hole I found was when we got to the trigonometry section, I didn't know it.  And I had to go back and sort of teach it to myself.  And I, I could ask my teachers, but I'm saying I really--some of the other people did know about it, and I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If they'd gone to larger high schools, they might have seen it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, back in high school, did you concentrate on science and math?
Speaker 2: Not really.  We basically all took the same kinds of things.  I really, I had a choice.  We only had to take two math's, I think, so I had a choice between taking the Geometry or not.  Everybody took biology and chemistry.  Everybody took two math's.  Everybody took, pretty much religion.  So, nah, I didn't have a concentration.  One of the things I did differently was that I wanted to take a, pick up a second language.  And most people didn't.  they had a study hall at that time.  So I decided, I had learned some French.  I wanted to learn some Spanish, and I picked up Spanish.  But there wasn't an opportunity for me to do extra math or science beyond the Geometry.
Speaker 1: Okay, how were your grades in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, I was Valedictorian.  So I think they were pretty good.
Speaker 1: Okay, I would guess so (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was kind of funny because we had someone to come to the school sophomore year, no junior year.  And she was very bright.  And I was like, okay, for the first time, I might have some competition on this.  So I said, you know, Gaynelle may beat me out, but as it turned out, I was Val [Valedictorian] and she was Sal [Salutatorian].
Speaker 1: Okay, after high school, now, did you--when did, what were you thinking career wise when you were a senior in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, I was thinking I wanted to major in math, but I wasn't sure what I wanted to do with it.  I just knew that was what I was good at and what I liked doing.  So I also thought along about that time, I heard about science writing, being a science writer.  And I found out that science writers had to know science and they had to be good writers.  So I decided I would minor in biology and minor in English so that I would have math and biology as my sciences and English to help me be a good science writer.  And so that's what I ended up doing when--so I came, took extra hours when I came to college so I could fit in both minors.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a, were there any special teachers in high school that stand out or really, you know, connected with you?
Speaker 2: My English teacher, and I don't remember her name now.  But she had me for three, three of the years.  And she was really good about encouraging me to expand my reading, to not just read current novels.  She gave me a book one time, she came me a copy of 'The Sound and the Fury,' when I was in, maybe in the ninth or tenth grade.   And I got to the end of it, and I said, okay, it really is a tale told by an idiot because the quote is "Life is, you know, full of sound and fury, told by an idiot, full of the sound and the fury, signifying nothing".  It was a quote from a play we had read, and I said, oh, okay, I see why you gave me this now because the narrator is an idiot.  So she gave me books I would never have picked up on my own and encouraged me to expand my reading.  So that's why I remember her.
Story_ID: 21237
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you graduated from Allen High School in what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty four [1964].
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty four [1964], okay, and this the same year you went to the World's Fair.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And the exciting thing though about that year was I was a Lyndon Baines [Johnson] presidential scholar.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that meant that I was one of two students selected from my state based on PSAT and SAT scores to go and meet the president.
Speaker 1: So the president who won in a landslide in '64' [1964] was Lyndon Baines Johnson, right?  So you were a Lyndon Baines Johnson scholar?
Speaker 2: I was a Lyndon Baines Johnson scholar, but that was before he was elected.
Speaker 1: Oh, that was before the election, he was the interim president after the assassination of John Kennedy (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Kennedy, right.  So we got to go to the White House, and I was able to take one person, and my grandmother went with me.  And it was interesting because my godmother, I decided she was going with us.  But they only gave me one ticket.  And she went to the house and told them she needed to get in because she was my godmother, and she wanted to see me get the medal.  And they let her in.  They said, only one, no more than one.  And they let her in.  I don't know what she said to the secret service, but they let her in.
Speaker 1: They didn't know she was not the only one probably (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, no, she would have had a ticket if she was--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --the only one.  But it was interesting because there were a few of us who were black that were at the, that were chosen.  And one of them had been in my grandmother's sixth grade class with me.  And he had moved away to Ohio, I believe.  So he was selected from there, but I had known as a, eleven, twelve year old.  So I saw him again, and I met one of the girls who was one of the first to integrate in Little Rock [Arkansas], one of the early integrators in Little Rock.  And she had a lot of stories to tell about that experience.  So it was, it was quite a--I met Leonard Bernstein, and I said to him, I read your book.  And he said to me, "Which one?"  (Laughter)  But, of course, I did know which one so I was able to answer him, but he was, yeah, I guess, seventeen year olds gush up to him all the time.  But I was like, "Ah, I read your book."  (laughter)
Speaker 1: Did you meet him in D.C.?
Speaker 2: I met him at the White House.
Speaker 1: At the White House, okay.
Speaker 2: At the tea, they had gave a tea for us.  And then we were, received our medals.
Speaker 1: Yeah, at that time, he was a popular conductor of the New York Philharmonic Orchestra and they tell about his young people's concerts.  I remember--I grew up about the same time, on TV with him leading the orchestra.
Speaker 2: Yes, so I was glad to see him.  I'm thinking Thurgood Marshall was there.  So it was just really an occasion.  I mean, and the funny thing that came out of that was my grandfather--and while I was there, you know, several people said, well, will you come to my college?  I got letters, you know, can you come to this college?  We'll give you this much money and that college, we'll give you such and such.  And my grandfather looked at 'em, and people were saying, oh, you should let go this place, that place because going to the majority institutions was sort of a new thing, you know, still.  And he said, she's going to go to Spelman [Spelman College].  And they said, well, so and so.  You know, reason, reason, reason.  He said, when it comes to a question of judgment, I choose mine.  So that was the end of that.  No more discussion need be held.
Speaker 1: Now, this is your grandfather--
Speaker 2: The one I lived with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Chester Hayes.
Story_ID: 21238
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so, okay, so in 1964, you start school at Spelman.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: And how did you like Spelman[Spelman College]--
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved it.
Speaker 1: You already knew a lot about it.
Speaker 2: Right, I knew, and, right, because I had come down in the summers, and my mother was working.  And I had, in fact, spent one summer mostly on the campus, living in--when she had a dorm room on the campus.  They had faculty, female faculty housing at that point and male faculty housing.  A lot of single faculty would live on campus for a couple of years.  So I felt right at home.  I knew the names of all the buildings because I found out as a child that if I could name all the buildings, people--when, say I was nine or so, people would be impressed and give me a nickel.  And I could buy an ice cream cone in the snack shop.  So I had learned all the buildings.  And I moved into Packard Hall, which is no longer a dormitory.  It's now administration.  And I really had a great time.  I joined the glee club.  I was on the newspaper staff.  I took a overload in classes most years.  After the first semester, I took an overload, and I loved being here where you could, where there were dances and remember, I was just coming from an all-girls school that did not have a all-male school across the street.  So, I said, "This is really nice."  I can, you know, I don't have 'em in my classes, but they're right over there.
Speaker 1: Now, you took an overload of courses?
Speaker 2: Most time, after the first semester because I was trying to do two minors.  So the average load was fifteen hours.  I generally took eighteen.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're, you described yourself as a speedy reader?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean not like the ones that come out of their courses that claim they can read, but I read very rapidly.  I also type rapidly, which has been very handy.  It came in very handy when I started writing those computer programs.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now were you exposed to computer science at Spelman?
Speaker 2: I was not.  A few years later, they had computer science.  The only computers I knew about were, as I said, the ones my mom used in the office, in the registrar's office, the Wang's and the, she brought me a computer.  But that was later.  No, I was not exposed at all.  My first real exposure to computers was when we left Atlanta and went to West Lafayette, Indiana.  I dropped out of school when we got married.  And my, when my ex-husband finished Morehouse, he went to graduate school at Purdue.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let's, moving very fast, back up and go back (laughter).  We've got a lot of ground to cover.
Speaker 2: Okay, I was trying to figure out where the computers, when I ran into computers and like that.
Speaker 1: Yes, okay, so now I know.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'll hold--
Story_ID: 21239
Speaker 1: We'll (unclear).  Okay, so at Morehouse, 1964, what was going on at Morehouse?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, I mean standard stuff, but we were all into what was happening with the integration.  So it was not uncommon for us, they had a call to go out, "Let's go picket this, that or the other place."  And we would get signs and go off and picket something.  It was not uncommon, but we were not in the first wave.  So we didn't meet with the ax handles that Lester Maddox had or anything like that.  It was, generally, we didn't get arrested.  Occasionally, somebody would get arrested.  So, it was--and SNCC [Student Non-violent Coordinating Committee] was big--
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, SNCC was operating out of Atlanta from what I understand.
Speaker 2: Right, down there on 100th Street, which is now Martin Luther King.  \
Speaker 1: Ruby Doris Robinson, right, was the, one of the head people in there in terms of logistical stuff.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so.  But they used to hang out down in one of the restaurants.  You could find 'em down there.  So that was a big thing, the whole Movement idea.
Speaker 1: So what institutions did you picket in those days?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  That's awful, isn't it?  But I would, you know, get my little sign and whatever they said was wrong, we would get our little signs and go.
Speaker 1: For instance, was Riches integrated by then?
Speaker 2: Riches was.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know about the lunch counters and the Woolworth's and those kind of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think they were by that time.  We were on the, we were on the back end.  We were too young to be out Freedom Riding when they first started the Freedom Rides.  I wasn't old enough to go to Washington for the March on Washington.  So, we were a little bit behind the curve of that.
Speaker 1: Now, was the housing issue big in Atlanta in those days in terms of integrating neighborhoods and--
Speaker 2: Not really, not really.  It was more places that people felt had treated people unfairly that we'd go to try to picket.
Story_ID: 21240
Speaker 1: Okay, so, what, so you took--so now, you're taking higher math now for the first time?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Calculus and trigonometry?
Speaker 2: Yes.  So the pre-calculus is college Algebra and Trig rolled up into one.  So I did get some trig there, and then I went into the Calculus sequence which is Calculus I, II and III.  And then, of course, into the other high math's.  And I was taking also biology courses.  And one of the ones that was really interesting was comparative anatomy because Dr. Leflore was noted for not giving an "A".  He said, the author of the book gets an "A".  They  know the most.  I get a "B" because I have  a PhD and I'm your teacher.  He said that tells you what's left for the rest of you.  So, but he taught me something important, to go beyond where you are to get resources.  We were reading the textbook, reading the textbook, looking at the notes, and we weren't getting everything.  And we went to the library.  And we found some books on comparative anatomy.  And my little group checked them out.  We kept that book all semester.  You know, we'd take and turn it in and then somebody else would check it out.  We had a copy of copies.  And we think that's where he was getting his notes from.  But by studying that, we were able to do, do well and learn and try to get ahead.  I did get a "B" out of the course, one of the two B's I got at Spelman.  And I was proud of it.  I was glad to have it 'cause most people didn't.  The night before the final, the weekend before the final we came up to this building and snuck our cats out.  We had the, it's comparative anatomy.  So the final, he was labeling all the different parts of the cat, and you had to walk around to a different station and right down the name.  So these cats were in embalming fluid, you know, in the formaldehyde.  We put something in the window on the first floor of the lab so it wouldn't shut tight.  And then we lifted Maxine Hayes, who is now a medical doctor in through the window.  And she passed out our cats.  And we took them down to the basement of our dormitory and studied all weekend.  Then we crept back early in the morning and put 'em back in the formaldehyde.  So, you're talking about cramming for the exam, if the dorm mother ever found out we had six dead cats in her basement, she probably would have had (laughter) a stroke or something.  But it all went well.  Maxine and I both got B's and we went on to do our other biology courses.
Speaker 1: So they wouldn't let you have access to the cats, outside of normal classroom period?
Speaker 2: They wouldn't let us in the building, a deserted building at night, and that's what it would have been.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well, it's not cheating.  You all really were studying something that--
Speaker 2: Right, it was a safety issue.  And classroom buildings were locked--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --over the weekend.
Speaker 1: But it wasn't a matter of cheating either in the sense that--
Speaker 2: No, we were supposed, no, we were studying--
Speaker 1: --when you're actually learning something.
Speaker 2: Right, I never even, the word "cheating" never occurred to me in connection with it.  He said, study those cats till you know everything about 'em, and that's what we were doing (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you followed the motto of Atlanta University (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, (laughter) "find a way".
Speaker 1: That's right.  Okay, so, any other stories about Spelman?  Who was the president then?
Speaker 2: Albert Manley, who, of course, knew me because my mother was his--
Speaker 1: Was your mother still here then?  Was she here then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was here.  She lived, worked here until she passed away.  At that time, she was his, I don't know what you call it, chief secretary or head of the secretary group?
Speaker 1: Administrative Assistant.
Speaker 2: That's what it would be now, I think.  Executive Secretary, maybe, that's the term.  Anyway, that's what she was.  So he knew me.  So he thought it would be really good if I read all the magazines that he got and marked articles that he should read.  So I would get like a stack of like six magazines.  Freshman year, it was fine, but by sophomore year, I really had some other things I would have preferred to be doing (laughter).  But I didn't tell Dr. Manley that.  And I met my husband-to-be freshman week.  So,
Story_ID: 21241
Speaker 1: Well, how did you meet him?  What--
Speaker 2: They had an event, they had a dance where all the freshmen from Spelman [Spelman College] and the freshmen from Morehouse [Morehouse College] would come to this dance in the gym at Morehouse.  And they had a saying.  The fellows would sing, "Let me call you sweetheart".  And we had to sing, "I'll be loving you always" (unclear).  Well, I met him at the dance, and we danced a few dances.  And then we sort of separated, and I was talking to some other fellows.  And he came over and invited me to go and have punch and cookies with him.  And I, so I was really flattered at the time.  I didn't, found out later, they wouldn't give the fellows anything unless they brought a young lady up there (laughter).  But he did pick me of all the ones, so, and after that, we had a joint church service together.  And he walked me back from the joint church service.  And we just went on from there.
Speaker 1: Well, that's a clever way to do that.  I never thought of that, that they, you know, fellows couldn't have punch and cookies until they went to ask a young lady to, social engineering?
Speaker 2: Yes, it worked quite well (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, so by, so did you graduate with honors from Spelman?
Speaker 2: I did not graduate.  I dropped out when we got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They wanted us to give a year's notice to get married.  And we didn't wanna give a year's notice.  So I dropped out.  And we stayed in Atlanta.  He finished Morehouse, and then we went away to Purdue [University].
Speaker 1: Now, how did you both decide, was he ahead of you or something?
Speaker 2: No, he was, I was out for a year or so.  And we were the same age.
Speaker 1: Okay, so after you got married, were you pregnant or something at that time or what?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So I was wondering why you didn't finish too.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  So was your mother upset that you dropped out of school?
Speaker 2: A little bit, but she remembered that she had been out of school and gone back and finished.  And my father also, so she didn't see any reason why I shouldn't.  So she just impressed on me that I needed to finish at some point.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she just encouraged you to just go on and finish as soon as you could.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, this is what 1965, '66' [1966]?
Speaker 2: Sixty seven [1967].
Speaker 1: Sixty seven [1967]
Speaker 2: 'Cause he finished in '68' [1968].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Did you have a boy or girl?
Speaker 2: A little girl.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: In fact, I have three daughters and three granddaughters.  Little girls run in the family, apparently (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 21242
Speaker 1: So we went up to Purdue [Purdue Uiversity] and that's kind of a story in itself.  We really wanted to go to, for him to go to Tech [Georgia Tech].  And then I could have gone back to Spelman [Spelman College] or gone to Clark [University] or wherever.  But Tech would not admit him.  Now, he was able to get into Purdue.  He was able to get into UCLA.  He was able to get into several other places, but Georgia Tech would not admit him.  So we packed up and went to, went to West Lafayette.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, what was West Lafayette [Indiana] like in comparison to, you know, Atlanta?
Speaker 1: Okay, there's nothing much, there was nothing much in West Lafayette but the school.  And I think there was one restaurant and a Dairy Queen, one real restaurant and a Dairy Queen and a Sears.  You could go over the river to Lafayette, which is a little bigger.  But West Lafayette was most of the college, and the college was only about five percent African American at that time.  So that's what the town was like.  It was so, we were very much not--it was not a large group of people.  They did start, at the time we were there a black students house, which recently, a group, a place to go.  But I never went.  Malachi would go, and he, they would assign him to do things like meet speakers and, you know, be host to speakers and that kind of thing.  But I never went.
Speaker 2: So this was a black student organization?
Speaker 1: A black student organization, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, in those days, in '68' [1968], we would have still been Negroes, I think or just making, getting ready--
Speaker 1: I think we were into, we merging into the Black is Beautiful--
Speaker 2: Sort of, but I think, yeah, we were making a transition from being Negroes to being black, I mean in the media too.  The media was still referring to people as Negroes.
Speaker 1: So, yes, it's kind of interesting.  You're born Colored, you grow up a Negro, and then you become black, and then, now they want you to be African American.  I think I stuck at black.  That's what I've been.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it was an interesting setting.  There were very few women.  And there were almost no African Americans.  I knew one other couple.  So it was very, it was very much mixed up.  There were some people from India.  There were some people from Utah who were Mormons.  So it was, a very good chance to learn about other people's culture.  We were grocery shopping with the Indians, and they bought 50 pound bags of rice, and I'm like, okay, that's a little different from what I would have thought.  And the Mormons had a two-year supply of food in the basement.  And that's when I learned about that custom that they have of that.  So we met a lot of different people.  It's a good experience in that sense.  But that was my first chance to take a computer science course because some of the electives at Purdue at that time, for math, were computer science.  So I learned programming, I learned numerical methods using computer.  And it was kind of, it was fun.  The fun thing, part about it was, though, one course I remembered, we had punch cards for our programs, which most of the people who are hearing this now will not know what this is.  But a punch card, you'd type the programs with this special typewriter that made holes in the punch card to represent the letters.  Well, I used to go to the lab to work on my programs, and I would take my daughter with me.  So she used to sit on the floor between my feet with her little bag of things.  And if people messed up a punch card, they'd give it to her, and she would color on 'em or cut 'em up with her scissors.  So she, she didn't quite cut her teeth on them, but she really was exposed to them at a very young age.
Speaker 2: Okay, we have to pause here.
Story_ID: 21243
Speaker 1: So I was once offered a job working in the computer lab at night.  I didn't take it, and I said, I don't wanna be a computer scientist because the computer is down in the basement.  It's a huge machine, takes up the whole, half a floor, and you're in a little booth behind glass trying to feed it punch cards all night long because you would have your deck of punch cards.  You'd leave 'em off to be processed, and then you come back in the morning, and they would have been run by the computer operator.  And I could not see me spending my life in a room by myself trying to work with a big ole machine and nobody to talk to.  So at that point, I could not possibly see myself becoming a computer scientist because that was my perception of what a computer scientist did.  I learned Fortran, and I remember some of the fellows stayed home from Christmas break 'cause the semester ended after Christmas.  And their Fortran program wasn't working, their final project.  And they gave up their Christmas vacation in order to spend time in the lab to get those punch cards right 'cause they can only run them once or twice a day.  So if they made a mistake, they had to wait until the next batch to correct it.   And that meant you had to start in advance or you would never get finished.  I also took a, what we called an assembly line, which is very basic.  It has things like add x, subject y, but none of your fancier statements.  And I had a study group for that.  It was the only two other girls in the class, who, in this study group.  And we got together and figured out our assembly line which, it was not the kind of thing that would make you think that computer science would be fun.  It wasn't until later on that I thought it might be fun.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you took that, now, what were you--you were trying to finish your Bachelors degree?
Speaker 1: In mathematics.
Speaker 2: In mathematics, okay.
Speaker 1: So at that time, Purdue was just beginning a computer science major.  I don't think anyone had graduated yet as a CS major.  The people had gotten PhDs.  You could be a PhD in computer science but the undergraduate program was later.  I'm told that Purdue had the first computer science department, major in the country.  So, but at that time, those courses were still math courses.  And many of the textbooks were written by the instructors.  They were a bunch of mimeographed pages held together with brads that you were learning from.  So I took those in conjunction with my mathematics courses as--and I had an interesting experience there because when I went, enrolled in Purdue, they had a program so that the wives of the graduate assistants could go to school cheap, on in-state rates.  I just had to go and get my driver's license and register to vote.  I didn't have to have a waiting period.  So I was on in-state rates.  And I wanted to pick up my math.  Well, the first course I took, I had been out of school by this time for a couple of years.  And it was really, I spent all my time crying.  That book swelled up from the water till it was twice as thick as it had started out.  But I got through it, and I got an "A", and I wanted to go on to the next course.  Well, they wanted me to retake a course.  And I said, I don't have time to be retaking a course because whenever he leaves, I've got to leave.  So I convinced them that I could pick up on the second semester of modern Algebra which is the, the sequence beyond Calculus.  And I actually did fine in it, but it was a lot of work.  It was a lot of work.  So really the computer science classes where everybody was starting from Ground Zero were easier for me than picking back up with the mathematics.
Speaker 2: Okay, so did you end up finishing with a mathematics major?
Speaker 1: Yes, I did.  I finished my mathematics major, and the English minor.  I never did finish the biology matter that I started out.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Just didn't have time.
Story_ID: 21244
Speaker 1: Now, while you were at Purdue, Dr. King was assassinated.
Speaker 2: No, he was assassinated while we were still in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: In 1968.
Speaker 1: Right, April 4th.
Speaker 2: Right, well, that was before graduation.  We didn't go till the fall--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because Malachi, my ex-husband went to the funeral and walked in the procession.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He and his younger sister.
Speaker 1: All right, I always like to hear people's stories about where they are, they were when that happened.  So you were--how did you find out?
Speaker 2: I think it, I think my mother called me and had come to the campus before, before I heard about it at home.  I was at home.  And everybody was just so shocked.  You know, we had rioting here in Atlanta.  People were out breaking windows and just, it was pretty bad.  It was pretty dangerous.  People were getting into fights on the street.  It was, no one could believe it.  It was just a shock.  And then everybody was just really angry.  We did get to see, Dr. King's body was laid in state here at Sister's Chapel.  So we did get to go by and view the body when they brought him back here.
Story_ID: 21245
Speaker 1: Okay, so, when you graduate from Purdue, this is 19--
Speaker 2: Seventy [1970].
Speaker 1: Seventy [1970], all right.  And what did you do next?
Speaker 2: Well, my ex-husband had finished his Masters and got a job at General Electric in Cincinnati [Ohio], outside Cincinnati.  So we moved to Cincinnati, and he went to, he went to work as an aeronautical engineer.  He was a physics major, but he later went to University of Cincinnati and got a degree aeronautical engineering.  At first I was mostly at home.  By this time, and then we had a second daughter.  So I was pretty much at home.  Then I decided I wanted to teach, but I hadn't been thinking of teaching when I was in college.  So I had to go back and take courses to get my teaching certificate.  So I went to the University of Cincinnati and took courses to get a certificate and from there went on to teach mathematics in Cincinnati.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how did you like teaching school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved it.
Speaker 1: Was it high school or--
Speaker 2: Middle school, junior high, they called it then, and then some high school.  I loved it, but I could, when I got ready to come South, I thought about the fact that new teachers always get the worse placements and that it helps if you have a Masters.  So I decided I would get a Masters before entering the Atlanta or Decatur school system.  And I went to Atlanta University [Atlanta University Center Consortium], and there's one of those happenstances that you don't expect.  My brother-in-law used to be chair of mathematics and computer science at Atlanta University.  So he said, well, you know, you can probably go to the program there.  So I went over.  And I met the then chair, Benjamin Martin, and he was talking about the opportunities.  He said, well, now, if you wanted to get a degree in computer science, we have some money.  And I said, well, you know, it's been a long time since I took a math course.  If I did computer science I'll probably be starting closer to the beginning in most of the computer sciences.  So I decided to do the Masters in Computer Science.  It was really a question of somebody talking to me, the money being available, and me being in the right place at the right time, that started me into computer science.
Speaker 1: Okay, so since you were like, had these pioneering courses at Purdue, and they were one of the first schools doing this kind of thing, did that place you ahead of the curve at APL?
Speaker 2: I think it did because I understood the concepts of programming.  When I, I was able to do things very easily.  And I think we had, we had one course in the teaching program that used computers.  And I really was able to ace that with no effort because I had the background courses.  And most people didn't.  So, yes, when I came, it was very easy for me to do the computer courses.  The course I had the most trouble with actually turned out to be mathematical logic which was a required course in the Masters program, which was taught by somebody who was another one of the rumored never to give a "A" people.  And he would give you a test, he would give you homework, and he'd give you a test, but he wouldn't give it back to you.  So you didn't know whether you were doing well or not.  And you were just hanging in there, hoping for the best.  But I did come out fine.  I got an "A" in the course, but that was the hardest.  Computer science, as you say, I sort of had some background in.  So I was able to move pretty well through those.
Story_ID: 21246
Speaker 1: Okay, now what year did you come back to Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-three [1983].
Speaker 1: Okay, 1983, and the year that you finished your Masters degree?
Speaker 2: Eighty-five [1985], 1985.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, okay.  So who were some of your mentors, I guess, at Atlanta U [Atlanta University Center Consortium]?  Were there any special teachers in there that--
Speaker 2: Dr. Martin really was.  In fact, we became friends and have maintained a friendship.  But he always encouraged me to go and do my best and let me know that it was possible for me to succeed in this.  And he encouraged me also with the teaching because I was a teaching assistant while I was at Atlanta University.  So I got to teach at Spelman.  They had an agreement at that time with Morehouse and Spelman that some of the grad students would earn their keep by teaching at the undergraduate schools.  The other person who was a mentor that I met at that, re-met at that time, was Dr. Etta Faulkner, who was at that time, I believe, chair of the department of mathematics.  But, and she had taught me Calculus when I was in, at Spelman, and she had since gotten her PhD and become chair person and later became chair person of the division of science and mathematics.  And she spent a lot of time encouraging me, you know, helping me, telling me I could do things.  In fact, she's the key person who encouraged me to go on to get further training, to get the PhD.
Speaker 1: So where did she advise you to go?
Speaker 2: She didn't really advise me where to go at that point.  I was looking around, I was thinking I need to do this.  And I was looking around at some of the schools in North Carolina since I was from North Carolina.  The University of Tennessee, one of their branches had offered me a fellowship in housing, which if you had three girls, they were gonna find me a place big enough for the three girls.  And I would just have to teach one course and go to school.  So that was looking very good.  But my daughters, I thought about Georgia Tech because it was the only school in the State of Georgia at that time that had a PhD in computer science.  Georgia State didn't, the University of Georgia didn't.  So only Georgia Tech, but I had heard some bad things about Georgia Tech because they had--and it goes back to my ex-husband not getting in there, and other things like that.  But I didn't really wanna go to Tech.  I had taken a course or two over there, and I just really didn't wanna go there for a full-time PhD.  But my daughters had a family meeting without me.  And they said, okay, they came and they told--we voted, and we decided that it's okay if you get your PhD, you know, we'll do our homework.  We'll support you.  But you have to go to Tech 'cause we're not moving again.  I said, oh, so I went over and applied to Tech (laughter) for the PhD.
Speaker 1: Now, how old are these daughters now?
Speaker 2: Oh, they were like elementary, middle school and high school, I guess.  So they weren't moving.
Speaker 1: That's an impressive report from the meeting then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they voted.  Well, we used to have a voting system.  And I said, I got two and a half votes.  So if one girl wanted something I really thought was for the best, I could vote with her and the other two would be overruled.  But I didn't have three votes (laughter), so I lost.  But it turned out to be a good thing for me to do.  And Dr. Faulkner wrote and got me a scholarship, a fellowship that enabled me to go to school.  United Negro College Fund/IBM and I was thus able to go to school, have a salary so the girls could keep eating and not have to worry too much.  Things were a little tight, but it was doable.  Before that, when I was taking occasional courses at Tech [Georgia Tech], they had encouraged me to come to get my PhD.  And they wanted to offer me a fellowship, and I think it was like $12,000 a year which is what, a lot for a grad student at that point, but not enough for you to keep a household.  So this other was more money and I was able to do it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, where is your husband during this period of time?
Speaker 2: Oh, when I moved South, we separated and later divorced.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did he stay in Cincinnati?
Speaker 2: He stayed in Cincinnati, and still there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, 'cause I didn't hear him in the equation there.  Okay.  So did he stay in contact with the children?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, he does.  He comes back and forth.  His sister made a joke.  She said, he drives to Atlanta like some people go to Kmart, (laughter) you know, like just get in the car and go.  So.  He kept very much in touch, and he actually has a brother here who has, was very helpful, Ronald Lawrence who was very with the girls.  When they needed a male figure, you know, father-daughter, this or that, and Malachi couldn't be here.
Story_ID: 21247
Speaker 1: All right, so you finished, earned your PhD in 1988, right?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-three [1993].
Speaker 1: Ninety-three [1993], okay.
Speaker 2: I started school in 1988 probably.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In 1993, what's the state of computing in 1993?
Speaker 2: Okay, by 1993, we were close to where we are now in the sense that the Internet was alive and well.  The Web had, World-Wide Web was just beginning to be known.  Not every place, I remember I came back from Tech and started Spelman's [Spelman College] website 'cause we didn't have one at the time.  So, but they were beginning.  More and more people were getting on the computer.  More and more people had email whether it was AOL or some other type.  Typically, people would dial up from home instead of use some kind of fast line.  The computers we had here at Spelman by that time were, we were pretty much up to the state-of-the--a reasonable state-of-the-art situation.  We had, our computers here on campus as opposed to when we--at first when Spelman got computer science, it was a joint program with Atlanta University [Atlanta University Center Consortium], Clark Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University], Morris Brown [Morris Brown College] and Morehouse [Morehouse College].  And the computers were housed in the library.  So all your computers, most of your computing was done remotely through modems and by going down to the lab and using the terminals there.  When Spelman split off from that program, we got our own computers here.  So by that time, Spelman was pretty much at a good point.  We had some help from Boeing who came and helped us get on the Internet and become active on the Internet  And we were able to offer the same language--it's the same courses, that the larger schools were offering.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, oh, tell me about Albert Bodrey (ph.).
Speaker 2: Oh, Dr. Bodder, he was my advisor, my PhD advisor.  It was interesting because when I went to Tech, I wasn't quite sure what area I wanted to specialize in.  I know I wasn't much on hardware.  But I could have done something like databases or operating systems.  But I decided I wanted to do human computer interaction.  And at the time, he was the only one who was advising in that area.  So I, I asked him if he would be my advisor, and he looked--I had already taken some courses at Tech.  So he looked at those and felt that I was a decent student and I would be able to do the work.  So he said, yes.  So I worked with him for all the time I was there.  And he was very helpful.  Our officemate also got a degree around that time, and she was one of the few other women in the program at the time.  But she was also interested in that area.  So we were able to form a little mini study group and help ourselves, help each other through.
Speaker 1: Okay,--
Speaker 2: He has a psychology background rather than computer science background, which is interesting when you think about it, that the psychology of how humans interact with computers is just as important as knowing about how the computers work.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, expand on that.
Speaker 2: Well, when you're using a computer, and you're trying to set up the interface, the connections between person and computer, you need to know what does a person think when they see a certain color, when they see things arranged in a certain order, whether it's better to put a large amount of things together and let them choose or whether it's better to offer them one choice at a time, whether it's better to have them fill in the blanks or just click on things.  So there are many psychological aspects to that, to how, whether the computer gives you feedback.  So if you don't, if you don't get feedback, you often think it's not working.  So then you start hitting random keys.  And that can mess up the, make a mess of the program.  So his psychological insight was very helpful in trying to figure out how to build interfaces and how to set up the interactions between the person and human, between person and computer.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, let's see to put this in, PCs, I guess, had been out, what do you think?  About 10 years at that point?
Speaker 2: The PCs came out in '77' [1977], and my mom, my mom had one, I guess around '82' [1982].  It was a Commodore 64, and the Radio Shack, but they used to joke and they called it Trash 80, TRS-80.  And, but when the Apples came out, Apples were probably the early '80's [1980s] too.  The first Apples, and we had them in the lab here at Spelman, and I was in charge of the math lab for a while.
Speaker 1: That's the little Mac Plus.
Speaker 2: No, this was before Mac.  This is an Apple2e.  This is before Mac, the Apples became Mac's.  We also had in that lab at that time a IBM PC that had been donated.  So this would have been '84' [1984], wait a minute, '84'-ish [1984-ish], that we had a math lab with computers at Spelman.  So by this time, we were, we had a whole lab full of PCs.  By the time I finished school, we had a whole lab full of PCs, and then we had another lab that had terminals that were hooked to the main computer in the basement below them.  So the people who were programming worked on the terminals.  The people who were doing regular computing, word processing, and, etc., worked on the PCs.  So we had a lab full.
Speaker 1: Now, what did you prefer in those days in terms of the PC and the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I liked my Unix machine, but in terms of using the software, it was easier to do it on the PC.  So typically, I had both and still do.  I have a machine where I can use Unix and a machine where I can do, just do standard PC kinds of things.
Story_ID: 21248
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so 1993, you became an assistant professor here--let me ask you this before we get into teaching.  What were some of the struggles that you had as a woman, you know, in computer science?  Was there any problem with that at, here, even at Spelman?
Speaker 2: Not at Spelman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But at--
Speaker 2: At Georgia Tech.
Speaker 1: At Georgia Tech (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: At Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology], the percentage of women in the PhD program was very small.  I would say less than 10 percent.  So we knew, of course, all the women, other women, and I will have to say that they got, used to get together some times as a group and give each other support.  They might have a brunch or something, give each other support.  But it was difficult because many times, you would be in a class, and there wouldn't be any other women.  And some of the men might not want you to be in their group.  And you had to make groups or partner up.  So they just really didn't wanna be partners with me.  Now, whether that was because I was as old as their mothers or because I was African American or because I was a woman, it was hard to say.  But I did find that.  My best bet for getting a partner was to either find someone who has been sent back to school by some company or the Army, Armed Forces or another woman.  So it was really a situation where if a woman--I'll give you an example.  One of the women PhD students had a baby.  And she was married to a male PhD student.  And I heard someone say, they didn't know I heard them, well, she can't be serious about her degree or she wouldn't have had this baby.  And I later heard someone say about one of the male students whose wife had had a baby, "Well, you know, we need to hurry up and get him out so he can get a job."  And I know one of my friends who was asked to teach a course over here in the AU Center part time, was told that she shouldn't be doing it because she was taking away something that some man might need.  So it was, and she was a single mother with a teenager.  She really needed it.  But perception was, as a woman, she shouldn't be taking the mouth out of the--the bread out of the mouth of the breadwinner, so to speak, taking the money away from the breadwinner.
Speaker 1: So were you involved in any efforts on the part of women to organize themselves against this kind of thing?
Speaker 2: We didn't really.  Tech actually formed, offered us a support group through student services where we could get together.  And those weren't all computer scientists.  They were from different areas.  And we got together once a week, and we would talk about situations and advise how to handle situations we ran into.  The computer science women, as I said, sometimes would have meals and get together and encourage each other, but no formal organization.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so at Spelman, now, you were already teaching at Spelman, right, while you were--
Speaker 2: Right, I was teaching math until I got the CS degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I had enough graduate hours in math to, from getting a teaching certificate to be a, to be able to teach.  But once I graduated with the Masters, then I started computer science.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you just moved right over to another--
Speaker 2: Seamlessly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so they had a department, computer science department right here or--
Speaker 2: They had a computer science department by '93' [1993], but they did not have one in the late '80's [1980s] when I was working in the department.  The, it was part of mathematics, the mathematics department.  So they said we had to have, I think five faculty members and had finished the graduating class before we could become separate.  And I believe, that happened under the auspices of Dr. Martin.  While I was in grad school, he was able to bring the department out of mathematics and into a separate department.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, oh, now what was your--I'm sorry.  I didn't ask you what your dissertation was titled?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was "Empirical Studies of Using Algorithm Animations to Teach Algorithms.  So I did, basically, it would look like little movies where I animated things going through a different processes on the computer.  It might be putting things in order, sorting, or it might be some other process that you could carry out.  Most of the ones I did were based on sorting.  There're probably 12 ways to sort numbers, and the best one to choose depends on the problem and the computer you're using and the data.  So in computer science, Algorithm courses, you teach several methods.  So what my work was about was trying to figure out ways to teach these methods more effectively, and I created these algorithms.  I did experiments at Georgia State and Georgia Tech with students to see which ones worked best for them.  So that was, it was pretty interesting, especially, my final conclusion was that the animations were good, but they were only good as long as the students interacted with them.  If they just watched them, this TV generation, it didn't really have an effect.  They had to do something with it like choose the data to be sorted or choose the next step.  They had to do something with it for it to be effective.
Speaker 1: Okay, we have to pause here again.
Story_ID: 21249
Speaker 1: All right, so, and so the computer science department, this is the beginning computer science department at Spelman [Spelman College].  And you just--
Speaker 2: Right, right, because I was here when the department began as a program; in fact, helped right some of the first courses that were taught here in computer science.  We also had, developed at that time, a computer literacy course which is still taught for the non-majors.  And that has changed a lot over the years.  It used to be Basic and Word Perfect.  Now, it tends to be all of the Office Suite, plus building web pages and that type of thing.  So it's interesting how courses do, keep the same manuals, but the content is very different.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so, when you started, I guess, people were still using Word Perfect, right--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and that was the major thing and computer screens were mostly green with--
Speaker 2: Right, they were for the PCs.  I remember buying my first computer.  I bought a Apple for my kids because I thought they should be exposed.  And, in fact, my youngest daughter, I used to have her do her homework on it because her handwriting was atrocious.  So I used to get her to write her papers on the computer.  She could word process more legibly than she could write.  And I used to teach courses to many of the faculty members here at Spelman because they were coming onboard with using the computer to keep the grades or the word process.  So we would have special courses where they would come and take the courses.  And I believe Dr. Stewart was president then.  And the first one I did, and I remember going back and saying to him, he was doing something to his diskette.  And I said, "Don't do that to the disk," and then I realized, oh, that's the president you just tapped on the head and told stop (laughter).  So I didn't do, that might have not been a good thing, but we rapidly progressed.  I think our major step forward was the Unix machines that we used for programming, we were able to get a contract with Sun Microsystems to supply us with very nice Unix stations so that we could keep up and be very progressive.  And they have, over the years done a good job with providing us special educational discounts, sending people to help troubleshoot if we had big problems, that kind of things.  Currently, however, we have switched over to our Apple products for the programming piece because the Apple operating system underneath is Unix which is the operating system used by most mainframe kinds of things.  And so we're able to have a computer that will do both the PC kind of applications and the programming type things.  That's what we have currently.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so how far can a person go in computer science now here at Spelman?
Speaker 2: Well, we only have a undergraduate college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's as far as you can go.  Atlanta University [Atlanta University Center Consortium] is a member of the consortium, and you can go over there.  It's Clark-Atlanta University now because Clark merged with Atlanta University.  But you can go there and get a Masters.  I don't believe they have the PhDs yet. In fact, one of the issues with minorities in computer science has been that the minority institutions have not had the PhD.  Now, North Carolina A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] and Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] are currently on track to have a PhD in computer science.  But for years there was no such thing in a minority institution.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there an organization of HBCU computer (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: There is a organization of HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities], historically black colleges and universities.  We have an organization called ADMI, A-D-M-I, which is an association of departments of computer science and engineering at minority institutions.  And this organization somewhat mirrors one that the math associations have, MAA, and AMA are the majority based, but they have an organization called MAM that's for minorities, that minorities have started and maintained.  So the ADMI works to ensure strong preparation in computer science for students to help them get into jobs and computing careers, to encourage them to go on to other degrees whether or not at their institutions.  And we have an annual conference where students present papers, where faculty present papers on generally educational topics or grant-related topics, and where we network to try to get these students into summer opportunities, graduate programs, career opportunities that will be good for them.  So it's mostly set up to keep the department strong and encourage the students.  And I've served for some years as president of that organization.  Now, I'm the immediate past president, and I'm head of the program committee for this year's symposium which will be held in April in Washington, D.C.  It's really good that we go around to different locations because that way schools that are too, may not be able to afford to come if it's way, far away, will be able to come.  So we try to move it around the country from year to year to allow different people to get there easily.
Story_ID: 21250
Speaker 1: Okay, you became assistant, associate professor in '95' [1995].  Then you became the department chair in 1996.  And in '97' [1997], you were associate director of the NASA Wives and the scholars program.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So what is NASA Wives Scholars program?
Speaker 2: Okay, the Wives scholars program is a combination of scholarships and internships, some internships, funded by NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], that are, embraces students in the sciences and engineering.  So you could be any of the science majors, well, math, chemistry, engineering, physics, computer science.  These young women receive scholarships and then in the summer, they have opportunities to work at NASA.  So, now, the program has since closed down, but it was active here for, I believe more than 20 years.  And we were able to graduate a large number of students who succeeded in their scientific careers, scientific and technical careers.  Many of them went on to get terminal degrees or Masters degrees.
Speaker 1: Why was the program curtailed?
Speaker 2: Oh, NASA decided that it might be better to try to reach students at a variety of institutions rather than concentrating on a few institutions.  So it's more restructuring of how the funds are used.
Story_ID: 21251
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, have you been, have you ever used your writing skills to, combined your writing skills with our computer science skills to write manuals and such--
Speaker 2: I haven't done much in manual writing, but I tell you it really comes in handy when you're trying to write a grant.  If you know how to string those words together.  And so it's been helpful in that, but I think it's also been helpful in teaching because the kind of planning, you need to do to be a writer is probably also the kind of planning you need to do to present a topic to students.  Well, I think that that English background and that practice has been helpful to me, day-by-day in teaching as well as, and when I'm trying to write a grant or a paper.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, all right, you're also involved with the, a, I guess we just discussed this ABMI seminar on increasing diversity in research and education, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 21252
Speaker 1: Now, you did publish a book here in '98' [1998] on "Visualization Programming as Multimedia Experience".
Speaker 2: Actually, I have a chapter from that book.
Speaker 1: Chapter, okay.
Speaker 2: It's a chapter.
Speaker 1: And what was this about?
Speaker 2: It was really a description of the kinds of things you do with animations, and how visualizing that affects people's learning of material.  If you can see something as well as hear about it, then it makes it, it makes it appeal to different kinds of learning styles.  So it mostly talks about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know one thing that they've stopped doing with PCs I is have the little--at least I haven't seen it in a long time, the little assistant that would pop out, the animated assistant.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that was so irksome.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I think people, they found out that people were finding it annoying rather than helpful.  And that's another place where the psychology of the thing comes into play.  Does this help the person?  Does it make them feel like they have an assistant on hand or does it make them feel like they're being treated as they're dumb and something has to tell 'em what to do.  One thing people need in using computers is to feel like they're in control, whether they are or not.  It's important to their speed, their perceptions.  They need to feel that they're in control.
Speaker 1: Would you find that youth more and more are, you know, computer ready these days than they used to be?
Speaker 2: Well, that's interesting because one of the questions has been, do we still need a computer literacy course?  And the fact is, that, yes, I think we do because students come here now, and they know all about Facebook and email.  And they can use a word processor sort of like a typewriter, you know.  They know how to do some basic things.  They don't know how to put in footnotes or anything like that.  But the fact is that if you're gonna be using a computer, you need to know things like how to work with numbers and charts on the spreadsheet.  It's good if you understand how databases work because you're in a million of them around the country. It's good if you understand what's behind the scenes in a computer so you can make the best choices when you pick one.  So more and more students come with their own computers and think they know all about computers.  And it's really generally the case that they are web searching and Facebook experts.  So we try to teach them some of the other things that they need to know as they interact with computers as time goes by.
Story_ID: 21253
Speaker 1: Okay, in terms of computer specs, as a, do you, are certain kinds of specs more useful for certain kinds of applications in a computer?
Speaker 2: That's true.  That, if you're, if you are a graphics person, you're gonna want a big, you're gonna want a big powerful, it will be, it will say engine, well, CPU.  You're gonna want special graphics cards.  You're gonna wanna be able to render or show many millions of colors, perhaps, whereas if all you're gonna do is word processing and Facebook, then a minimum machine will do for you.  There's no point in spending all that money on getting something high powered.  You just need something that will let you connect to the Internet and do your thing.
Speaker 1: Now, some of the programs, even like Microsoft Word has so many features that I know that I don't even know, I don't even know what the features do.
Speaker 2: Well, most people do not know.  And, in fact, when we teach them in the literacy course, we try to expose them to some of the ones that you would not normally use.  So we teach them some of the things like, oh, I'm just throwing out one, WordArt or how to put things in columns and how to make pictures, use pictures as backgrounds, all kinds of little things they need.  But also the things they need to write a real research paper.  How do you do a table of contents easily?  How do you do footnoting and referencing?  How can you do that kind of thing correctly according to whatever standards your English teacher gives you, but also with ease.
Speaker 1: Okay, you think that that's the core mission of the course is really to tell, to show students how to use computer for scholarship?
Speaker 2: I think the core mission of the course is just tell them how they're gonna be using it in life.  So we use the courses because that's the next thing.  But we also want them to think about--we know they're gonna be exposed to computers.  Every job there is these days seems to have some aspect of computing.  If it's only that you're in a database for the human resource people.  So we want them to understand what goes on so when they're misused or somebody says, well, I can't change it.  The computer says so, then they'll know whether that's a real thing or whether the person is just brushing them off.  We want them to interact with the things we do on the computers like graphs and charts and tables that you see in the news all the time.  Pick up 'USA Today.'   Nine times out of ten, you'll see a chart or a table or a graph.  So we want them to understand what those are, how they're created, what they mean and also how you can turn them around to mean something different.
Story_ID: 21254
Speaker 1: Now, is there, now, I've heard in the past, and I know the scholars have discussed culturally biased testing and that sort of thing.  I just wondered if there's any cultural bias in computer programming in terms of how easily one culture or group can use a program or another?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't think so.  Because it's a new language to both, to any group, the bias, I think, is not cultural in this case, but more gender based.  I think there's some issues with gender in that many times young women are not encouraged to do anything behind the scenes.  Someone might teach 'em how to do a webpage or how to make their "Facebook" page pretty, how to upload some pictures.  But they tend not to teach them what's really going behind the scenes, how the computer works, how they can use it to solve problems.  So you'll hear, and I have girls comes, and they'll say, well, we had a computer in the house, but my brother didn't let me use it much.  Or I'll hear parents say, well, you know, I'm not sure that computer science is good for her to go into.  Will she be able to get a job?  You know, or this only people who wanna stay up all night?  That kind of thing.  So I think it's more of a gender issue and maybe even an economic issue than cultural because many schools now are requiring computers.  I think that's a step forward.  I have a friend who moved to Virginia.  And she said her middle school and high school children had to have a computer.  They got 'em through the school.  I don't know what the financial setup was.  But in another 10 years, students in that area are gonna be way advanced.  They're gonna be ready to use them.  They've got, already gotten used to using them as part of their everyday life.  So I think as we get more and more students exposed earlier and earlier, we'll begin to see a shift in who does it, who does computer science?
Speaker 1: Now, I guess what I was trying to get at, is there a difference, I guess a cultural difference in how people perceive or how they react to certain computer programs or like they claim that certain standardized tests are geared for Minnesota white men or something like that, and so you can't get the same, you can't look at the result given to black people in a urban situation and compare it side-by-side with that other test because of the cultural bias inherent in the writing of the test.  Is there any truth (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: There have been some people who say that there is some cultural bias and try to set up programs that will appeal to different groups.  Sometimes, I don't think they know what they're doing.  They think if they put a strip of Kinta down the side of the screen that will, or if they make things pink, all the girls will like it.  So I think there probably is to some extent.  I think part of it goes back to the wording that tends to be used in talking about computers.  You know, you're gonna kill this bug.  You're gonna kill the program to make it stop.  You're gonna abort it.  You know, there are vocabulary involved that I think may have an effect.  But in general, I think if you give somebody a word or tell him the is C++ I think the only cultural bias you're gonna have is, they're bringing a different background experience.  And that could be from any culture.  It just depends on where you happen to be.
Story_ID: 21255
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now what do you as, what's the future the department here at Spelman [Spelman College]?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope that we will continue to turn out top-notch students.  We have been able to do that in the past.  We have companies that recruit here that do not recruit at some of the other, smaller colleges around because we have a reputation for turning out strong graduates.  So my hope is that we will continue to do that and that for the things like the literacy course, we will continue to upgrade it, keep the kids, so the girls, when they leave will be ready to meet that computer in life.  I've had students call me in the summer and say, you know, I'm doing this internship and I'm so glad you made me learn x, y, z thing in the computer literacy course.  I didn't wanna take the course, but it's really paying off for me now.  So that's the kind of thing, remark I want them to still be able to make.  I want our courses to stay alive and vibrant and changing so that they will still be able to say that in the future.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I, I have a note here that you have a special interests in artificial intelligence.
Speaker 2: Well, not so much in, it's one of the things I used to teach, and I was interested in it.  I, and I actually have a paper or two on it, but right now, I'm more concentrating on beginning a project with the cooperation, with the University of Kansas on Antarctic ice.  The (unclear) center is, has evolved, ADMI and some of the ADMI schools as well as Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] and Indiana in this multi-university grant.  And they're, what they do is they send people actually to Antarctica and Greenland to measure ice and they study about how the ice is changing, what temperatures are changing and that type of thing.  Now, my role in this project is, as we get further down the way, figuring out how to take these gigabytes, just huge amounts of data and make it more useable.  So I'm trying to figure out ways to take the data and turn it into something that the average person can understand as opposed to having tables and tables of millions of millions of numbers.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So it's a translation job in (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In a sense, in a sense.  But it's also, again, making the connection between the human and the computer.  The computer has all this data.  How can the human understand it?
Story_ID: 21256
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, we always ask this question.  What are some of your concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I wasn't expecting that.  My concerns for the African American community.  I think I'm very much concerned about the number of students I see who are not even finishing high school.  And by the fact that the small percentage of males are making it through college.  I think that as prices of education rise, it's gonna be harder and harder for many of us to go to college at all, and it's gonna be harder for the colleges to fund the students who need to go, who, in the past, maybe waited tables or worked in the dining hall to get through school.  They're not gonna be able to provide for as many of them as need to.  So I'm very much concerned about the limiting of education in the African American community and how that's gonna affect us down the road.
Story_ID: 21257
Speaker 1: Now, when you look over your career and what you've done to this point, you know, you started as a prodigy.  And you're in this field that's on the cutting edge of what everyone is trying to do, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think my legacy is the young women who have, I've taught, who have gone on to have careers in computing and computer-related disciplines and those who have gone on to teach others about computer science.   So I think my legacy is gonna people who refer to me as that favorite teacher or that teacher who made the difference.  That's what it will be.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, when you look back again, you had so many ways you could have gone in the beginning, is there any major thing that you would go back and do differently now if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that a lot of things I did in life I did sort of by accident.  I mean I got to a point and I made a decision, but it wasn't a decision I had planned way in advance, like going to Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology], like deciding to do computer science instead of mathematics for my Masters.  So I think that if I had known what I was going to be, I might have taken some different courses.  I might have done some different things.  But all in all, the only thing that I often wish I could change is the fact that my girls didn't get to finish growing up with both parents in house.
Story_ID: 21258
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about your girls.
Speaker 2: Oh, now, you have to shut me up about that.  I have three daughters.  They are Deidre, Allegra and Valerie.  Deidre is now a consultant, scientific consultant for a firm in D.C. [District of Columbia], well, it's in Maryland, actually, the D.C. area.  She has a undergraduate degree from Spelman [Spelman College].  She has a Masters in Public Health from Harvard [Harvard University] and a PhD in Toxicology from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology].  So our family motto is going to Spelman.  You can go anywhere you want after that because you'll be able to get in.  So that's been our family theory, and we, we're sticking to it.  The, she worked for the NIH, National Institute for Health for a number of years as a cancer researcher, and has since switched over to consulting work, which she's finding interesting.  And like me, she loves to travel.  She just got back from Hawaii.  And she's already planning her next trip.  My middle daughter is Allegra Lawrence Hardy, and she's been married about six years now.  She's been an attorney with the firm of Sutherland, Ashford and Brennan for, since '97' [1997], I believe.  And she's a full partner and she's on the management committee.  She's one of the youngest people ever to be on the Executive Committee at her firm.  And she does, has handled some really big cases, but I think she's most proud right now of her daughter, Madeline Grace, who is a year old, 15 months old, and they waited a long time to get, for her to get here, so.  But she keeps really busy.  She has reached out to students at Spelman and other HBCUs by getting her firm to establish a boot camp program, a summer boot camp for students from HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] who want to go into law school because they found that when she went to hire, many of these students would take a semester or so to get on track.  So their first semester grades wouldn't be good.  They would pick up after that.  They'd be fine.  So her boot camp is designed to help them with their transition so they can hit the ground running.  So she's been doing, she's done this for several summers.  They moved it also to the Washington office.  And some of the young women who've been through it say it was just such a lifesaver.  It's not limited to women though.  I just talk to the women, say it's been really a lifesaver that teaches them how to approach a brief, how to study, how to really do law school.  And she's also the diversity partner at her firm.  So she's been able to do, effect a lot of changes in that role.  My youngest daughter is Valerie, and she is what we call a PED scholar.  Now, that's a Paul E. Drake scholar, and those are students who come back to school after they've been out of school, and they're over 25, and they want to finish up.  And she's doing her student teaching this semester, and we expect to see her walk across the stage on May 20th.  So that would be the third of the daughters through Spelman.
Speaker 1: Is there a secret to raising academically successful daughters?
Speaker 2: Well, the PED student is successful now.  It took her a little longer, but I'll tell you what my oldest daughter said.  She said, I watched you go back to school to get teaching certification.  I watched you go back to school to get your Masters.  I watched you go back to school to get your PhD and try to raise us at the same time.  And she said, I decided any degree I ever got I was gonna get before I stopped.  So watching me, I, they both have said, my older children said that watching me go on and get these degrees, even though it was difficult, made them feel like they wanted to go and get another degree.  So the middle one went to Yale for her law degree, and they just felt like, so I guess this example helps.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause here again.
Story_ID: 21259
Speaker 1: What have your support systems been over the years?
Speaker 2: Well, the most important one, I guess, is my family.  My father [Kennie Jackson] who would not retire until I got my PhD in computer science because he felt he might be needed to help with the girls.  So he turned his retirement letter the day after I walked across the stage at Georgia Tech [University].  My girls, my daughters, who've always--who've been supportive and helpful, the fellow students at Georgia Tech and Atlanta University were also a blessing.  It was, going back to school as I did, it was good to be working with someone who had maybe stayed in school a while and was more into the, I mean school mode than I was and kind of helped me get into that mode.  I've also found the people here at Spelman [College] to be just wonderful family.  And they encouraged me to go back and get my PhD.  They kept paying tuition for my daughter while she was in school, even though I was on leave.  They encouraged me to try to do things, to do different things.  But I don't wanna forget about my church members because I think a lot of times people who were in schools where there're not a lot of people who look like them are looking for a support system.  And I had a group at my church.  We used to meet every Saturday morning and talk about things.  And they were really instrumental and encouraged me to continue to keep on going.  And they didn't know anything about what I was doing in school.  But they would help me focus on things, try things.  So they were very important to me.
Speaker 1: What is the name of your church?
Speaker 2: Oh, I go to St. Paul of the Cross Catholic Church here in Atlanta [Georgia], and I've been a member there since I moved back to Atlanta in '83' [1983].  But ironically enough, the reason I chose it was because my oldest daughter was baptized there in 1967.  So when I got ready to move back, it was natural for me to just go over there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we were talking during the break that you actually enjoyed being department Chair?
Speaker 2: I actually do.  I know a lot of people don't like being department chair because of all the reports and all of the organi--all of the setting up schedules and doing this and that.  But I actually kind of enjoy it.  I think the same reason I enjoyed being editor of the newspaper when I was at Spelman, because I got to organize things and assign things out and collect 'em up and put them together and see the finished product.  I like being chair because I have a lot of reason to organize the courses the girls take to see how things work, to keep things going.  I like being, keeping the wheels rolling.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything I haven't asked about that we need to mention before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, no, I can't think of anything.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as an excellent teacher, a strong computer scientist and a good parent.
Speaker 1: Okay, (unclear).  Thank you.
Speaker 2: All right.  Thank you.
Story_ID: 21260
Speaker 1: (PHOTOS)
Speaker 2: So, as I said, give the name of the person, not just mom or dad, and then say what the relationship is.
Speaker 1: Okay, name first, all right. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead and tell us about this.
Speaker 2: This is Chester Hayes, my grandfather, with whom I grew up.  And it was taken around 1960. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is Jean Allen, my mother, and it was taken around 1975. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: These are, this is Emory Williams and Jean Hayes Williams, my parents.  And it was taken around 1954. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: This is Andrea Williams Lawrence, and it was taken around 1951. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is Andrea Williams Lawrence, and it was taken, I would guess, in 1948.
Speaker 1: The gentleman with the long ears (laughter)?
Speaker 2: With my friend, the Easter bunny (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is my--this is Ella Coles Hayes, my grandmother, with whom I grew up.  And it was taken around 1960.
Speaker 2: This is Valerie Lawrence, Andrea Lawrence, Allegra Lawrence and Deidra Lawrence.  And it was taken at my--Allegra's bridal shower, which would have been six years ago.  It must have been 2006.
Speaker 1: Okay, in the front, we have Alexandra Lawrence, Avery Lawrence and Emory Williams, my granddaughters and my father.  The top row, left to right, is Deidra Lawrence, Allegra Lawrence, Andrea Lawrence and Valerie Lawrence, and it was taken in 2002. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: In the front row we have Valerie Lawrence, Allegra Lawrence and Andrea Lawrence, my daughters and myself.  And on the top row, we have Deidra Lawrence and Malachi Lawrence.  Malachi is my ex-husband.  This picture was taken around 1981. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Here we have Emory Williams and Andrea Williams Lawrence.  And it was taken at my daughter's wedding in 2006.
Speaker 2: Okay, here we have Emory Williams, Andrea Williams and Jean Allen, my father, myself and my mother taken at my high school graduation in 1964.
Speaker 1: Here we have my mother, Jean Hayes, and it was taken in 19--around 1934. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: Here we have Emory Williams, my father.  And it was taken around 2002.
Speaker 1: Here we have a cutting from "Black Issues in Higher Education" that featured me.  And it was taken--I'm the person in the picture, and it was taken in 2002. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: All right.  It took just about the time you all said.  You said about three hours after we got started.
