Story_ID: 86194
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're ready. Can you tell us about this photograph?
Speaker 1: This photograph is a photograph of my great-grandmother, which is Taxican Moore.  I don't know a lot about her.  This was just a picture that my father gave me of her.  And I never met her.  So, that's about all I know about her.  You know, she's just my great-grandmother.
Speaker 2: Okay, do you know when this photograph was taken?
Speaker 1: No, I really don't.
Speaker 2: And how do you spell her name?
Speaker 1: T-A-X-I-C-A-N, M-O-O-R-E.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.  Okay, this is?
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my adopted father.  I was adopted when I was around ten months old, and his name is Mack Goins.  We, I mean, I'm originally from Arkansas, and he was originally from Mississippi and moved to Arkansas, and that's where I was raised.  And so, this is Mack Goins.  He is my adopted father that raised me.
Speaker 2: Okay, ready?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my adopted mother, Annie Goins, you know, that also raised me.  And I say, she and her husband adopted me at age... approximately ten, ten and a half months old.  And so, she is Annie Goins, originally from Grenada, Mississippi and moved to Arkansas.  And Round Point and Forrest City is where I grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you know when this photograph was taken?
Speaker 2: No, I would think that they were probably in their twenties.  I think they told me that they were in their twenties when they had this photograph taken.  It was taken... but I know that they would be... if they were alive today, they would be somewhere around about 125, I guess, years old.  Because actually, when they adopted me, my adopted father was 65, and my adopted mother was 63.  So, (Laughter) they would be a hundred and something years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, ready?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Okay, this is a photograph of my mother, my biological mother, which is Florina Sanders.  And the baby that she's holding is myself.  That's me at age three months.  So, this is my biological mother.  And she, well, I think originally she was from Oklahoma, this is what I was told.  Naturally, I didn't know it.  And they were transported, she moved at a very early age to Arkansas.  I think her mother died, which I don't... which would be my grandmother, but I have no information on that.  And then she moved to Arkansas to live with an uncle.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is my biological father.  His name was Lawrence Clemmons.  Originally from Mississippi, then Arkansas, then Pueblo, Colorado is where I met him, where he passed.  Approximately he passed about five years ago.  I had never met him until I guess about now... since... at the time that he passed I'd known him for eighteen years.  I had never met him until, you know, back in the eighties.  And I found him, and he and I became very, very close for the eighteen years that we did know each other.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself, Jerline Lambert. I'm president of Lambert's Realty and Management here in Chicago at 5361 West Madison Street.  I opened the business in 1968, and I've been at the same location since 1969.  And so, it is a family business and I'm the president there.  And I do, I am a state certified appraiser, real estate broker.  And we specialize in property management.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, ready.
Speaker 2: These are the pictures of my children.  From right to left, Virginia Barbara, Patricia Steen, Herman Lambert, Kemp Lambert, and Charles Lambert, Jr.  And they work in the office with me.  Virginia and Kemp is vice-president of Lambert's Realty, and Virginia is my administrative assistant.  And Charles is supervisor of management.  And Herman helps me with, he's in appraising.  He helps me with appraising.  Patricia just kind of fits in, when we call her when we need her to do something.  But she is an artist in her own right.
Story_ID: 86195
Speaker 1: And we're going to get started by slating.  My name is Julieanna Richardson, I'm the interviewer.  And Matthew Hickey's the videographer, and Trina Daley is the observer.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us.
Speaker 2: Okay. Now? Jerline Lambert, J-E-R-L-I-N-E, L-A-M-B-E-R-T.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your date of birth?
Speaker 2: July 16, 1938.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is April 21, 2003.
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: Here?
Speaker 1: We're at the History... the location.
Speaker 2: Okay, 1900 South Michigan.
Speaker 1: The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: The HistoryMakers, okay.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: A real estate, I'm a real estate broker and an appraiser, state-certified appraiser.
Story_ID: 86196
Speaker 1: Okay. I ask five questions of everyone.  They're a little People Magazine-ish... just short answers.  But I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Well, I try to eat healthy.  I eat chicken and fish, that's the only meat that I eat.  And I eat a lot of vegetables and that's about it--chicken, fish and vegetables.  I try to stay away from red meats, and I don't eat pork.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple, purple is the favorite color.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: You know, I travel a lot.  So, I don't have any one place that I go.  I just, I like to go to a lot of different places.  I've traveled pretty extensively.  I've been to Africa about two, three, four times.  I've been to Egypt, I've been to India, Haiti, Jamaica, Nassau [Bahamas].
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite?
Speaker 2: Out of all of them I guess, I guess I would say maybe Jamaica.
Speaker 1: And a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I always liked warm weather, so summer, spring, or fall.  Winters... I don't like winters too much.  So, you know, spring or fall.  I guess, I guess summer.  Summer would probably be the favorite time of the year.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Um, I don't know.  Favorite phrase... I guess it could be--over the years with me--and also say to my friends, is "Keep on pushing."  (Laughter).  I always try to stay positive.
Story_ID: 86197
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to get started.  And I'm want to start out by asking you about your mother.  And if you could tell us her name and what you know about her growing up.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My mother's name was Florina Sanders.  And I don't know a lot about her.  In fact, I know mostly what someone told me, because I was adopted when I was about ten and a half months old.  And the only thing that kind of like... looks like a memory in my mind...  See, she died when I was three years old.  So, you know, I was so young.  So, you know, I do remember in my mind, seem like I remember her once taking me to the store.  And they always, I always called her Sister.  I never knew that she was my mother.  And so, I think I remember her taking me to the store once.  So that's about, that's about it as far as memories.  Oh, I... I do remember.  I remember when she was, when she was dying; when they took me to the house where she was.  She was in my aunt's home, and I took her a sandwich.  And I went to the bedside and I gave her this sandwich.  And she took the sandwich and she laid it on top of her head.  And I said, "Well, Sister, why don't you eat it?"  And she said, very low, you know... she said, "I'll eat it later.  I don't want to eat it."  So, when they took me out of the room, she still had the sandwich on her head.  And my aunts and all told me later that she died with the sandwich on her head, she never ate it.  So, that's my memory of her.
Story_ID: 86198
Speaker 1: Now, who raised you then?
Speaker 2: I was raised by Mack and Annie Goins.  They legally adopted me, and I was raised by them.  They were very, very, good adoptive parents.  I really couldn't have had better.  And so, you know, as I said, they were good.  They were educators.  My father was a retired professor, and my mother was a retired schoolteacher.  At the time that they adopted me, my father, my adopted father, was sixty-five.  My adopted mother was sixty-three.  So, they had a little kid running around. (Laughter).  I know I drove them crazy.  (Laughter).  But I had, and I had... you know, and being educators, they, you know, started educating me when I was, way before I went to school.  So, when, you know, and I was... my father always taught me about my blackness, and taught me--you know, I knew like about...  They had little articles I would read about Mary McLeod Bethune and Booker T. Washington and, you know, all of the black... great black people and what they'd done over the years.  You know, W.E.B. DuBois, all of those people.  He taught me information about those people before I went to school.  So, I knew all about that.  He taught it to me as I grew up.  So I knew all about, all about--well, not all, but a lot about black history, you know, about... you know.  And I don't know where he got these books.  He probably--and this is just by summation--he probably taught it kind of like in a... secretively when he was teaching school.  Because it most certainly was not allowed to be taught in the South where we were in Arkansas.  It was not allowed.  And in school, the whole time going through school, I never ever had black history.  I never knew anything... you know, that was taught in the classroom.  It was never, we never had black history taught.  But I knew black history because he had taught me.
Story_ID: 86199
Speaker 1: Can you--now where in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: We were in a little town called Round Pond, Arkansas.  And the closest place we would go shopping would be Forrest City.  But it was, you know, quite a distance.  It was kind of, it was like in the country.  My father [Mack Goins] owned his own farm, and he had the nice-sized farm.  And he had what you would call sharecroppers; black people there would sharecrop for him, you know.  And so he had his own farm.  And so, now one thing that I do remember--I noticed that in the book it had some little sayings that would really inspired people.  And I think the one thing, I guess, is that I've always been driven, you know, in a very positive manner, which my father was always...  But he told me once that he was very, very disturbed.  And I said "Why?"  See, and he had, as I said, he had his own farm where he would gin his own cotton.  And he was totally independent, and he didn't have to ask, you know, the whites for anything.  He could just do, you know, what he wanted, you know, with his own stuff.  So, anyway he had, he had gin... he had his cotton bale.  And they told him--he wanted to, he wanted to sell it to a buyer in Forrest City where he could get a better price.  And he wanted it ginned somewhere else and then sent, you know, there.  But they told him he absolutely could not do that.  They told him where he had to gin his cotton, and then they paid him what they wanted him to have.  And he was very disturbed about that.  He said, "You know, it's just because, you know, I'm black that I can't... and I'm independent.  I own my own farm and my own cotton and everything, and I have to gin it where they want me to gin it, you know, and I have to get a much less price, because they would take it and give me the small amount of amount of money and then they would take it and re-sell it for the amount of money I normally would re-sell it for."  But he had to gin with them, because they told him if he didn't, they would... you know, it's no telling what they would do.  And he had no choice, and he had to do that.  But he didn't like that at all.
Story_ID: 86200
Speaker 1: Now, were you the only child growing up at that point?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Or were... did they have other children--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --who were older?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: They had... never had?
Speaker 2: Well, they had one child.  I remember the name was Commodore, was a boy.  And I... they had that, you know, like way... I guess right after they got married.  And, and, and I think Commodore lived for about two weeks or something like that.  And that's the only child that they ever had.
Speaker 1: So, they had been childless for all that time?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Well, what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, just playing with the neighborhood children, you know, I always had... kids would come over to play and all of that.  And also, as I said, I studied a lot.  I had to, you know, like even as a child I had times that I had to come in and study, you know, before I went to school.  And when I went to school, when they did take me to school I went--they gave me like... at that time we had like pre-primer, primer--all that, and then first grade.  So, I read through the primer... I read through the pre-primer... I read through the first grade right then and there.  It was like zoom, zoom, zoom.  So, they started me off in the second grade when I first went.
Speaker 1: And you were what, five?
Speaker 2: I guess I was about... no, I wasn't six.  I was about five years old, yeah.  You know, and I was really smart in school.  A couple of times they put me back a grade because they said I was going to--which I wish I had been--(Laughter) said that I was going too fast.  And then after, you know, after I got up to maybe the second, third, or fourth grade, you know, I had to repeat it to stay in the same grade with my peers, you know, age group.  Because I... but I was still one year ahead of my age group anyway.  I was still always one year ahead.
Story_ID: 86201
Speaker 1: Do you remember--now can you describe the school you went to?
Speaker 2: I went to, at the time when I first started to school, I went to a little school called Rosenwald, and it was in Round Pond [Arkansas].  And so, I went to school there.  It was just like a little white schoolhouse just sitting, you know, right off from the town.  And all the classes was, everything was taught in the same room.  Everything we had was taught in the same room.  I had very, very, good teachers; teachers that were very, very conscientious.  And I had to study; I had to do my homework, and it was a must.  And at that time, if you didn't do what the teacher said, you'd get your behind spanked.  (Laughter).  And then she'd call me and tell my parents, or write a note home.  And we didn't have the telephones and everything... write a note home to my parents and tell them what I was--what I did and what it was all about.  And there was nothing done about it unless I got spanked again at home, because I did what I wasn't supposed to do.  So, I, you know, I had to really do the, you know, good.  Other than that, I knew what was coming.  And I couldn't run home and say, "Well, Mama..."  Miss Robinson was one of my teachers, I remember that.  And I couldn't run home and say that, because Miss Robinson and my parents were on the same wavelength, and I'd just get it again.  (Laughter).  So, you know...  And then I had another teacher that was very inspiring to me.  And her name was Sederi Cox.  And I've stayed in touch with her all the years.  In fact, I just sent... we send off annual calendars, and I always send her a calendar.  And this year, it came back.  So, I don't know what has happened, but I said I was going to have to try to find out what happened to Sederi, because this was the first that that her calendar...  If she passed on, I don't know.  But she was very inspiring to me growing up, because she--I guess after... she was in college.  And for whatever reason during the summer, she came.  And... I guess it was the summer.  Maybe it was... well, anyway I know she came and she taught.  And I had never seen a young person... she was about 19 or 20 years old.  And she came and she taught us.  And I just said, "Wow, she's so young, you know, to be teaching."  You know, I was used to older teachers, you know.  And to see this young, nice-looking young lady, you know, come in and teach... you know.  And that was always very inspiring.  At that time I decided, "I want to be a teacher.  I want to do what Sederi is doing."  (Laughter).  You know, so, but I never taught.  But you know, she was really inspired.  And you know, all these years I've always been in touch with Sederi.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Sederi?
Speaker 2: I really don't know.  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 86202
Speaker 1: So, when... are any other memories you have of, you know, growing up in sort of that time that period, you know, with school or family life?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, well, see I got married very, very young.  I got married at age fourteen.  In the meantime, you know, I left and I was, we went to...  In the seventh grade, our school closed, the Rosenwald School was gone.  And then I went to high school.  I went to high school at age seventh.  You know, we hadn't graduated, but we started going to school at Lincoln High School which was in Forrest City, Arkansas.  We were bussed in to there.
Speaker 1: Ok, so, you're saying you were going to a Rosenwald School?
Speaker 2: In the beginning.
Speaker 1: In the beginning?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you know it to be a Rosenwald School at that time?
Speaker 2: Yes, I knew it was...  They said, "What's the name of your school?"  We all said, "Rosenwald School," yeah.
Speaker 1: And then, and but high school you say started in seventh grade?
Speaker 2: Well, see, our school closed.  And I was... so all the seventh graders... and, you know, I don't really know what happened to the kids beneath us, because they didn't go.  But all the seventh graders went to, were transferred at that time to Lincoln High School, and we went.  So, we didn't graduate, we didn't go like to the eighth grade and graduate.  We were transferred to Lincoln High--then we were bussed into Lincoln High.  And we never really graduated, we just was promoted.  You know, promoted from seventh to eighth, and from eighth to ninth, you know--and from ninth to tenth.  And when I was in the tenth grade I got married then.
Story_ID: 86203
Speaker 1: And what was your husband's name?
Speaker 2: Charles Lambert.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you stay there?  How old was he?
Speaker 2: At the time that me and my husband got married, my husband was somewhere...  I think he was around about twenty, and I was fourteen.
Speaker 1: Did your parents approve of him?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.  And a lot of people were asking me why I thought they did that, being educators and everything?  And I really hadn't thought about it, and began to really think about it.  I thought it was their own mortality they were thinking about.  You know, because being at the age that they were, you know, when they got me... you know, they know that probably wouldn't be around too much longer.  And if something happened to them, what was going to happen to me, you know?  So, I guess that that was why they agreed.  (Laughter).  I can't figure out any other reason.  But they did, they agreed for me to get married.  They naturally had to sign for it and everything like that.  And they did that.
Speaker 1: So, where did you and your husband live, as a new bride?
Speaker 2: We lived in, at first we moved off.  And my husband's parents was doing sharecropping for a white sharecropper.  And I moved, you know, with them.  And we stayed with them probably around about maybe a year at the most.  And then my father [Mack Goins] asked that we come back and stay on his farm.  And we did; we moved back and he gave us a home, a house.  And so we stayed, we stayed there on his farm.
Speaker 1: And what was life like then as a young bride?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I was busy... immediately got pregnant. (Laughter).  And but you know, it was okay.  I had to, once I got...  See, I never worked in the fields or anything before I got married.  But what I did do, was that all of my friends had to work in the fields, you know.  And I was the only one that didn't have to work in the field.  This was before I got married.  So, I used to slip off.  Sometimes I'd slip away and leave as if I'm going to school, and slip off and go the fields with them.  (Laughter).  You know, just to be in the crowd and in the group, you know.  So, I used to do that.  But, and that was a fun thing to me at that time, because I didn't have to work in the fields, you know.  But after I got married, I did have to work in the fields.  So I used to chop and pick cotton, you know.  So, I remember, you know, we used to have to chop cotton for three dollars a day, you know, and pick cotton, you know.  And I got to be a very, very good cotton-picker.  I could pick about three hundred pounds a day, you know.  So, that's what I had to do.  And in between having babies and... you know.
Story_ID: 86204
Speaker 1: You know, if you could take yourself back to that time, can you tell me what sights, smells, or sounds remind you of that--you know, of growing up, or... you know?
Speaker 2: Well, the sights I can remember was the hog killing, you know.  We used to have, I think it would be in the fall of the year when they'd fatten all the hogs, and we're getting ready for winter.  And so, therefore they would kill the hogs.  And I would always watch.  They would have a group of people that would go from house to house, you know, that was going to kill the hogs.  So, you know, I used to watch that, and watch them knock them in the head and the hogs squealing and everything.  And then they'd put them... and they had a great, big, can... big thing, you know, they would shove them in there.  They'd build a fire around and put the hog in there, and then until, you know, the hair would get soft and everything.  Because they'd have to skin him, you know, with the hair... and pull the hair off and, you know, and everything, and then cut him up.  So I watched all of that gruesomeness, as a child.  So, that's one of the sights that I'll never forget, you know.  And then, you know, just the regular hogs and the regular things of the farm.  Smells--we used to have a, we used to have an orchard right out from the rear of our home.  And we raised a lot of peaches, plums, pears, everything.  And I guess I liked the smell of the orchard and all the fruit as it was growing.
Speaker 1: And sounds?
Speaker 2: Sounds... sounds could be the railroad train.  We had a train that came not too far from the house.  And I used to watch the, I mean, listen at the sounds of the train all the time, you know, as they came in, came and went through.
Story_ID: 86205
Speaker 1: So what was, what was the community like then?  You know, people, the community, life?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My, my adopted mother [Annie Goins] was very religious.  So, they had a community of people that were very, very religious.  My father [Mack Goins] never joined church.  That, that, bugged her, you know.  (Laughter).  He always said that he thought that he was saved already, he didn't need that.  (Laughter).  So, he never joined the church.  And, but I had to go to church.  And I had to go to church sometimes through the week at night, and she'd take me.  And every Sunday I had to be there for Sunday School.  And I had to stay through Sunday School, through everything--then service, and then BYPU [Baptist Young Peoples Union] and, you know.  And I really just, "Oh, God, why?"  (Laughter).  But I had no choice; I had to go to church absolutely every Sunday.  And then Mother would have, a lot of times she would have people to come over from church.  They would come over to convert my father, you know.  So, and they would tell me go to away.  You know, I had to go away and go out and play, you know, and everything while they were going to do this.  And I used to come and sit right...  See, the house had, you know, legs kind of up, you know, so I could hide.  And I'd come down and I would go under the porch so I could hear everything they were saying. (Laughter).  I was...  So, they'd have him in there telling him, you know, like when he passed on that he was going to hell, and Mother was going to heaven, and they wouldn't see each other and everything.  So, if she wanted him to go... wanted him to be in heaven with her... so they tried to convert him, you know.  And he would just sit there and listen at them, you know.  And one thing about it, everything Daddy did--I guess I was more of a daddy's child than a mother's child.  Everything Daddy did, I did as I was growing up.  If he said, "I'm not going to eat this, I don't eat this," you know... for dinner.  And Daddy never ate okra, so I don't eat okra now.  (Laughter).  And whatever he didn't eat, or what he didn't do, I never did.  I said, "I'm not doing it."  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 84538
Speaker 1: So, what thoughts about your--you know, I'm trying to understand what was forming you, as a person.  You know, we talked about--
Speaker 2: Okay.  I think that--okay, first of all when I, when I got married the first thing I told my husband [Charles Lambert] before I got married was that I wanted to continue to school.  I mean, I have always just loved school.  Nobody had to, you know, encourage me to go.  I couldn't wait to get to school, because I was a good student, and I always made A's and everything, and I was always, you know, smarter than most of the kids.  And so, you know, that was like... (Laughter).  So, I always... so, anyway I said that--I asked him if he would, you know, allow me to go back to school.  And he said yes.  So, then I started having the babies, one right after another.  And then I had my last child when I was in my early twenties.  And I told him then, I said, "Well, I'm going back to school."  And he said, "No, you don't need to go back to school."  I said, "Oh, no, I am returning to school.  I need an education."  You know, I started--you know, I was in tenth grade when I dropped out.  And so, he most certainly didn't like it, but I was determined, and I went back to school... and I went back to school.  Then, you know, first of all, I think I went to Wells High School and I studied there for a while. And, you know, because I'd been out of school a long time, I had to repeat a lot of the stuff that I had had already.  So, I went to Wells, and then left Wells and I went to Jones Commercial.
Story_ID: 84539
Speaker 1: Oh, we were talking about how did I get here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: We came to Chicago in the late fifties [1950s].  My husband's [Charles Lambert] parents had moved to Chicago.  And so, they wanted us to come, you know, to Chicago.  They said, you know, the father came up here and was making really good money and all of that.  So he was--my father's--I mean, my husband's father was a carpenter.  And he came and he was--so they encouraged us to come.  Because my husband had a brother that had come up here and he had gotten a job at Schwinn Bicycle Company.  And he said, "Well, you know, can you come to Chicago?  I can get you on at Schwinn, okay."  So, we came, we came to Chicago.  We came on the train, and we got off at the 12th Street Station, where they talk about everybody getting off.  (Laughter).  And I never will forget when I got to Chicago and they were driving us down through the Loop, you know, the circle where all the traffic is going.  And I was like flabbergasted.  And I said, "Oh, my God."  Because I'd been driving down South, you know, besides my husband had a truck.  So I used to drive the truck, you know, around the dirt roads and, you know.  But when I saw all this traffic, I said, "It's no way that I'll ever drive in Chicago.  (Laughter).  There's just no way I will ever drive in Chicago."  So, you know, we moved in with... when we first got here we moved in with my husband's parents.  We didn't stay there too long.  It was an apartment next door that was a basement, and we moved in the basement there.  And you know, my husband was working at Schwinn with his brother at the time.  And then Schwinn laid my husband off and he started working then at a place called Amalgamated Roofing Mills.  And he stayed there until he retired.  But in the meantime, we would kind of like look for basements, basement apartments.  That's another encouraging thing that was in--in that particular apartment we had a lady there--the landlord's name was Mrs. Ophelia Rogers.  And she did income tax.  And she was also another person that really encouraged me to go back to school.  She said, "You've just got to go back to school. You..."  You know, she said, "You know, you just need more education.  There's no way you're going to do very much, you know, with the education you have.  You've just got to go back."  But you know, I mean I was determined to go back anyway.  But that was an encouraging saying for her to say that... thing for her to say.  And I did, you know, went on back to school.
Speaker 2: How old were you at the time?  You said you had your last child at (unclear) twenty?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: But how old were you when you moved here?
Speaker 1: I was eighteen, I believe, about eighteen, yeah (unclear).
Speaker 2: And did you, and where were you living?  What was the address?
Speaker 1: Where we lived when we first moved here?  It was 1315 South Millard.  And that's where my husband's parents were.  And then we moved to 1311, which is like right next door to where they lived.  And this is where, you know, I met Mrs. Ophelia Rogers, the lady that encouraged me so.
Story_ID: 84540
Speaker 1: So, describe the community and, you know, and how that community differed from the community you had come from?
Speaker 2: Well, when I got to Chicago, you know, we had a lot of gangs, you know.  And the community was rundown, you know.  It had pretty nice buildings there but it was, it was beginning to really become rundown and infiltrated with gangs.  It wasn't... drugs was not too much then.  I didn't know anything or too much about drugs.  But they would have gangs.  But the gang fights and stuff that they had then were not as serious as they begin to be later on.  Because these kids was fighting--you know, they would fight with knives, and they would fight with fists and all of that kind of thing, which was bad, but it wasn't a gun thing as much.  I mean, they didn't really kill each other, I mean other than... if they got stabbed with a knife...  They would fight with knives way more than they would with a gang, I mean with a gun.  So, the neighborhoods were depressed where we were living.
Speaker 1: And were you, what were the people... the people... well, a lot of people, had they come from places in the South?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Most people--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)
Speaker 2: No, most of the people that I was around and that I knew--because I mean they was, it was just a lot of people coming from the South at the time, you know.  So, most of our friends that we knew down South... and relatives... all of my husband's people--all of his sisters and brothers eventually moved to the, moved up here to Chicago.  So, you know, the family was around, so we knew that he had a, you know a pretty large family.  So, the family was around, and all our friends basically--not all, but basically, the majority of our friends that we knew in the South, they came here.  So, you know, we had a pretty good social group, you know.
Speaker 1: So, did you find that there was a large group from Arkansas?  Or were there people from Mississippi, Alabama--I'm just trying to get a sense--
Speaker 2: Most of the people that we socialized with were from Arkansas.  They were mostly people that we knew from there.  And they would introduce us to other people that they knew, you know, that was from Arkansas.  We did run into some people that was from Mississippi, you know.  Alabama, no.  You know, so it was very, very few.  Some people from Mississippi.  But it was really Arkansas and a few people from Mississippi that we socialized with.
Speaker 1: Did you ever regret moving or miss, you know, miss Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  I never regretted leaving Arkansas.  (Laughter).  Not at all, no, I didn't.  Because, you know, when I came to Chicago, the only thing I hated about Chicago was the winters.  Now, the winters would always get me.  And I always had a thing of getting so depressed in the wintertime.  And, but that was all.  Other than that, you know, I was fine with Chicago.  But the winters, that--I mean I'd never been so cold.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Even though you say the area was depressed--I mean even though you said--or is that in hindsight that you're saying that?
Speaker 2: I never regretted coming to Chicago.  I know, you know, we did kind of pull ourselves out of that later on, but that's where we were.  And I was young, and all my friends were young and, you know, we just--it didn't, you know, I guess it didn't register too much with us, you know.  But as I began to grow older, you know, I recognized, you know, what it was, and I didn't want my kids growing up in that kind of situation.  But when I first... when I first came, though--and I don't think that had I stayed in Arkansas I probably wouldn't have succeeded as much as I did here.  So, I've never really had a regret--any regret.
Story_ID: 84541
Speaker 1: And, now, tell me what... were you busy really raising your family in those early years of being here?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.  I was... now, let me tell you.  But we needed an extra income.  So when... okay, when my... it was like in my... I guess I didn't go back to work until...  I went back to work, yeah, I went back to work when my baby was about three months old.  I went to work, rather.  When I left Arkansas I used to--my husband [Charles Lambert] at the time worked at the gin, cotton gin.  We had a house of our own, and he had started working at the gin.  And I would clean houses for the lady I guess who was the owner of the gin--the owner, you know.  I cleaned her house.  She had this fabulous house.  And I used to go clean for her, and I would serve dinner for her.  She had all her friends coming over.  And they would be talking about they were going to travel--they were traveling all these places--about going abroad and da, da, da, da, da.  And I was listening to these conversations.  And I said to myself, "I'm going to do that."  (Laughter.)  "One day I'm going to travel to England.  I'm going..."  You know, they were always talking about traveling to England, traveling to Paris, and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  And I said, "Oh, I'm going to do that, you know."  And in my mind, you know, I was determined.  So when I left, she gave me a letter, a referral letter, saying that, you know, I was a real good person to work, you know, in the houses and stuff.  When I came to Chicago--and so after, when my baby was about three months old, I started doing day work.  And I used to work up in Skokie, Wilmette, and around like that.  You know, and I was doing this day work.  And one day--and the people were not that nice, you know.  I mean, in their mind I was a maid who was like getting down and... "Scrub the floor. You didn't clean that clean enough," you know.  And one day I was scrubbing the floor, and I said to myself, this is not for me.  I am not--this is the last day that I will scrub anyone's floor.  I will never scrub another floor unless it's mine. (Laughter).  And I was determined to get out of that.  And from that day on, I never went back.  I just, you know, that was it for me as far as day work was concerned.  And you know, that was also another inspiration in getting back to school, because at that time I had not started back to school.  And so, I didn't do that.  And I went to work for a friend of mine; he's still a very good friend of mine.  He still, he lives in Los Angeles [California] now, he and his wife.  And he had a place. I was looking for a job.  He had a place called, it was called The House of Trees.  And it... where we made Christmas trees.  And I went to work, I was hired.  He hired me and I went to work.  And he was (unclear) he was black.  And he was an attorney.  But he decided he didn't... I think he hadn't passed the Bar or whatever.  But anyway, so he was the head of this House of Trees.  He was the total supervisor, and he was supervisor over everybody.  And he hired me.  And I was out on the assembly line making trees.  And one day the secretary that he had quit.  And he came over, out to the assembly line, just like walking down the assembly line looking at the ladies that was making the trees.  And he came up to me and he said, "Jerline," he says, "I don't have a secretary."  And he said, "I'd like for you to come and work in the office."  And I was, like, flabbergasted.  And I said, "Mr. Anderson, I cannot work in a office.  I don't, you know, I have no office experience."  I had not went back to school yet.  I had no office experience.  "I can't type, I can't do any of that.  So, I just, I can't.  I would love to do it, but I can't," you know.  And he said, "Well, Jerline, you really should go back to school."  (Laughter).  So, that was another encouragement, you know.  And so, he and I are still friends.  In fact, I saw him.  He and his wife were here last fall.  They came to Chicago and I went out and had dinner with them.  So, that was another, you know, encouraging thing.  So--
Speaker 1: I want to ask you, why did they call it day work?  Do you know why?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Why it was called day work?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I guess it's because you got paid by the day, I suppose?  We got paid by the day.  I remember when I was working there, I made ten dollars a day.  That's what they were making at that time, ten dollars a day.  So maybe that's why they call it day work.
Speaker 1: And how did you get out there?
Speaker 2: I would take, I would take the bus or take the "L," yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, so he encouraged you--back to Mr.--
Speaker 2: Anderson.
Speaker 1: Anderson.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, he encouraged you.  Did you become his secretary?
Speaker 2: No, I never did become his secretary.  But I remained friends with him after I left, because I did go on back to school and just kind of kept in touch with him, you know.  And he, well, then after I got in real estate and everything, he moved, he had moved to California.  And the group I was with, you know, he would come around the real estate groups and all of that.  So, I kinda kept in touch with him all that time, yeah.
Story_ID: 84542
Speaker 1: And what, so when did you actually end up going back to school?
Speaker 2: I went back to school when I was about twenty-two.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's nineteen fifty [1950] what?
Speaker 2: Oh, what is that?
Speaker 1: Ninety-Sixty [1960]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about 19... uh-huh.
Speaker 1: About 1960.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I went back to school.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMER VOICE: Rolling.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you, we were talking about, you know, when you actually end up going to school.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it was 1960?
Speaker 2: About that, 1960, maybe '59' [1959], something like that.
Speaker 1: And where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went back to, in the beginning I went to Wells High School--back to Wells, up on the North Side.  That's where I started.  I think it was around Ashland and something, and I went there for a while.  And in the meantime I started--I wanted to do something in office procedure, so I used to go rent office machines.  I never will forget the name of the place I used to rent them from, it was Craft Office Machines.  I used to go rent office machines.  I would rent a typewriter, take it, you know, typing and everything.  And adding machines... you know, just a regular machine, just so I could learn how to do, you know, office work.  Then I went to Jones Commercial. And you know, that's where I really got into--you know, you go to Jones Commercial High School [currently Jones College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois], which is not--they tore down the one that I was going to.  It was an older building, it was on Plymouth Court.  So now it's moved over on...  But I went to the Jones over there at Plymouth Court, you know, doing... studying office procedure and everything.  So that's...  Now, I went to Jones Commercial and, you know, you graduate from there and get hired.  And, but I decided that I didn't want to stay in school that long.  So, in the meantime, you know, I'm raising five children and all, you know.  And so I eventually--what I did was I went to Jones for a few years, I guess a couple, three years.  And well, coming up pretty close to graduation--you know, I guess about a year before graduation--then I didn't want to do that anymore.  Because all the time that I was going to school, I was going part-time.  It was just no way that I could go full-time with doing all the things that I was doing--raising the kids and everything.  So, so I didn't want to go, take that any further.  So I just went on and took the GED.  And you know, I passed that with one try and it was over.  And so, that's, that's, how I finished the high school.
Story_ID: 84543
Speaker 1: And then did you go directly on, or did you take still some time, more time?
Speaker 2: Well, then I got into, I got into real estate.  I, I, I wanted to, I wanted a better place to live for my children.  Because at the time, we were living still in-really we moved over on Christiana at 1620 South Christiana.  And I had a little job working in a little restaurant on the corner, right there on Christiana and 16th Street.  And it was not a good area.  It was worse than where we came from.  And I wanted something better for my children.  But we did move back on Drake, 14th and Drake.  But I was just determined to have something better for my kids.  So, my, my parents had passed by that time.  And they had left me a small amount of money, which I was getting around about five hundred dollars I guess a year or something.  It really wasn't a lot of money, you know.  They left about ten thousand, but it was kind of issued out.  And I called the man that was the administrator, and told him that I needed some extra money because I wanted to buy a home.  So, he sent me, I think he sent me a thousand dollars.  And I bought my first home with that.  I put five hundred dollars down and then paid the closing costs, you know, and I had a couple of hundred dollars left.  And that's how I bought my first home.  And I bought it on a contract, you know, a land contract.  Because, you know, we couldn't get a mortgage, and they were not giving mortgages to blacks at that time, you know.  And so, I bought this house.  I think that we must have bought the house in about 1963.  And so, when I was--the man was showing me through the house and everything.  We bought it, it was the first house.  It was at 4010--
Story_ID: 84544
Speaker 1: So, you were saying--so you bought...  Where was the house that you bought?
Speaker 2: I bought--the address was 4010 West Van Buren.  It has now been torn down.  But at the time it was 4010 West Van Buren.  We bought this, it was a two-flat with a basement apartment.  The man that sold us the house, actually, I found out later he paid $10,000 for it.  He sold it us for $23,500.  (Laughter).  And I put down five hundred dollars and, you know, and was just making monthly payments.  But what I did was that--when we bought the house, included in with--you know, I'm thinking how can I afford this house, you know, and make sure that I make my monthly payments and everything?  And I had... it had, at that time it had a basement apartment.  So, I guess we must have lived there about two years, and I rented out the basement apartment.  I rented out the first floor and we lived on the second floor.  And as I said, I wanted to get into a better neighborhood for my children.  And at that time, that particular area was much nicer than where we were moving from.  It was basically at that time Hispanic when we moved over there.  But you know, like overnight most of the Hispanics left.  You know, they were in the process of running.  But it was still--it was just a nicer area.  You know, everything was much nicer at 4010 West Van Buren at that time.  So, we moved over there.  And as I was getting--well, I'm kind of getting ahead of myself.
Story_ID: 84545
Speaker 1: What I should say--what encouraged me to go into real estate was when I--the man that was showing me the property, his name was Roosevelt Bass.  And his brother had a real estate office, a real estate company.  And so, I said, "Wow, this sounds like a really easy job, you know."  He said, "Well, no, it's not easy.  You really have to work at it."  He said, "But you're interested in real estate, why don't you, why don't you take some real estate courses?"  And I said, "Oh, that's interesting."  I said, "Where do I go take them?"  You know, so he told me and everything.  So, I went and investigated that, and it was at the Central YMCA.  And I went down and I decided--it was, you know, like you could just take them.  But I didn't know anything about real estate, so I didn't feel that I would be qualified just to take the information--take the courses for the exam and pass the exam.  And I didn't want to just pass the exam and not knowing what I'm doing.  So, I took, I just went to school for real estate.  I took everything in real estate they had to offer, you know, before I decided--before I took the exam, you know.  And then I took the exam, the salesman exam and passed it, and that's how I got into real estate.
Story_ID: 84546
Speaker 1: But getting back to the contract... the contract.  What happened was that we, I had figured that we could survive paying everything along with renting the basement apartment.  We'd been in the basement apartment not too long, maybe a year or so.  When... although... you know, nobody ever said anything about the basement, because when we bought it somebody was living in it.  But then they came down, the City came in and said it was illegal, the basement apartment.  And that you know, we had to, you had--it did have two ways out.  But whatever the... the ceiling was too low or too high, or whatever.   I think it was too high--no, it was too low.  Anyway, we could not use that basement apartment.  And without using that basement apartment with the amount of money, you know, we were bringing into the household, it was just no way that we were going to succeed with that building--I just couldn't.  And by that time I was working in real estate.  And we did have to give up the basement apartment.  And we struggled I guess with trying to pay the payments for about a year.  But it just got, it just got to the point that we just couldn't deal with it anymore.  And by that time, I'd saved about five thousand dollars.  And at that point the lady that I was working with in the real estate--I did go with the Basses, but I just worked with them for a few months.  And then the brother was closing his office.  He had another brother over on 22nd Street that had an office, because they were into real estate and contracting and everything.  And so, they asked me to come with them there. But it was another lady by the name of Geraldine Wells.  And she was very, very well-known on the West Side, had a real estate office.  And I decided that I wanted to--I had kind of been trained by guys, you know, like that.  So I kind of got the men--had already gotten the man's point of view.  But I wanted to be trained by a woman.  Because I decided at that point that I wanted to go into real estate, and I wanted to see how a woman did it.  So, I approached Miss Wells and explained to her that I would be interested in coming in to work for her in real estate.  And I also explained to her at the time that I was not coming--you know, I'd heard the stories about people coming in and they train you and then you move off and you go somewhere else.  So, I told her at the time when I first went in, that I planned to open my own office.  I said, "I definitely would like to be trained by you.  I want to work here with you.  But I do plan on opening my own office."  So, she understood that, you know.  So, I went to work for Geraldine Wells.  So, she found, she--I told her, you know, she knew about the problem we were having with the basement apartment-the fact that we just couldn't, we couldn't hardly make the payments.  And so she said, "Well, you just have to get yourself out of it."  She said, "I'll find something else."  And she found a place where we could move... 4930 West Washington... that we could move there.  And we could kind of like just buy--I mean, rent it with an option to buy.  And just of kind of like, you know, do the maintenance of the building--kind of keep the building; the managers let us do that.  And so, so we moved there with a lease with an option to buy.  So that was in--and by the time we stayed there for about a year or so, I'd saved about five thousand dollars.  And I wanted it, so we bought the building there, and had to put down about five thousand dollars closing costs.  So, that's how I got that building.  But in the meantime, getting back to...  So, I just very honestly went to the guy that had sold us the house on contract.  And I just told him, "You know, since I been, you know, we'd been struggling here for about a year.  But since, you know, we can't... the basement... you know, we can't get the income from the basement, we cannot make it.  So, I just want to turn the building back over to you, period."  So, he was really nice about that.  He could have said no, and messed up my credit and all of that, but he didn't.  He said, "Okay, if you can't make it you just can't make it."  You know, so he just let us totally out of the contract, which I thought was pretty good with him.
Story_ID: 84547
Speaker 1: Can you... because we were off-camera at the time.  Can you explain what buying on contract, how it works?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Buying on contract means that--you know, as I was saying, blacks at that time, or very few blacks--unless you had a lot of money--had to have, you know, thousands of dollars.  Then maybe you could get some kind of mortgage.  But it means that if you couldn't get a mortgage, then the owner that owned the building would sell you the building on what you called a land contract.  And that meant that you did not get a deed to the property.  They would normally give you... they would take your down-payment, and if you missed a payment or two, they could throw you out, you know.  But you'd be on a land contract, and you may--you'd pay a down-payment and then you would make these every payments every month.  But you didn't really own anything.  I mean, you know, you were there, but you didn't own the property until it was half paid for.  And most contracts, when you got halfway with the deal, then they would give you a deed, and then you would own it.  But other than that, the man still owned it.  You didn't, you didn't get a deed as you do now when you first buy at first.  So, you couldn't borrow on it, you couldn't borrow money, you couldn't do anything.  It was just a little more than renting.  It really wasn't a lot of difference.  In fact, you know, it was a little more than leasing, that's about it.
Story_ID: 84548
Speaker 1: At that time, when I was working for Mrs. [Geraldine] Wells, I really was not that much into any politics or anything like that.  I was busy trying to work, trying to raise five children, and I just really was not that aware.  I know that Mayor [Richard J.] Daley was the mayor.  And I remember when Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] came, you know, came to Chicago around that time and he stayed on the West Side and all of that.  I remember driving by to look at the building where he was staying over, I think it was around 16th Street over there, 16th and Ridgeway somewhere... Hamlin.  I remember that.  And I remember going to...  Dr. King would give some speeches, you know kind of like...  Once I know... I remember he was doing a speech and had a, I guess, a platform built.  And he was standing on this platform, and a lot of people were all around just... you know.  And I went to that, just in the audience, you know, in the group--the crowd, you know, standing back, you know, just to hear him speak.  At that time that's about it, you know.  Now, I did join Operation Breadbasket and I've always, I've been involved with Breadbasket.  Because it was a little earlier than that.  I joined Breadbasket in 1967.  That's when--and I did get a chance to meet Dr. King before he passed, just the one time, and that was it.  And I was active in, pretty active in Breadbasket during the whole time that it was Breadbasket.  And then I've always, I've been active ever since.  Now, during--oh, right after I opened my office it was really a hard struggle, and doing the things... I was not as attentive as I would have liked to have been.  Because Saturdays were the days that I had to show properties.  So I could not really attend.  So, I would attend--the Saturdays that I could, I would attend.  But most Saturdays, truthfully, I was working and I could not attend a lot of... was not that active.  And I always--as I was coming up in real estate and doing all of this, I'd say, I always used to say, "I want to go home."  And they'd say, "Where is that?"  And I'd say, "Operation PUSH."  (Laughter).  "I want to go back to PUSH."  So, I actually... and after coming up doing all these things in the seventies [1970s]...  And then in the eighties [1980s], well, 1980 I guess, I, I was elected president of the Dearborn Real Estate Board, and I served two years.  And in 1982 when my tenure as president ended, then I went back--I really got very, very active with Operation PUSH, and I've been active ever since.
Story_ID: 84549
Speaker 1: You know, I want to ask you, did you know immediately that you liked real estate?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, I did.  Right after, you know, when I went with the Basses, and going out and showing houses and, you know, I knew then that I was interested in real estate.  But I also knew that, as I sat and I watched real estate--and I had a lot of my peers that was in real estate who laughed at me, and thought it was a big joke.  But I said... now when sales are good, great.  You know, you make nice money.  You work hard but you make good money.  But what happens when sales are not great?  You know, what you going to do then?  I mean how are you going to make money, you know?  And my thing was--because when I first, even when I was with the Basses and when I first started with Mrs. [Geraldine] Wells--I was working at Alden's.  This is, I was at that time working at Alden's.  And I went there--one of the reasons was naturally to make the money.  But one of the main reasons I was--I could get all my kids' clothes there.  I could get all their Christmas stuff there at a very reasonable price.  You know, because we could get our discount and all of that.  So, that helped tremendously, that I could get all my little girls' dresses and my little boys... and all that stuff.  You know, and I would always get it at Alden's.  And even after I went into real estate, I worked at Alden's.  And even as I said, part of it was when I was with Miss Wells, I would go back to Alden's in October of every year.  For about two years I did that.  And then I would, I would, they would... in about February... and I would work at Alden's.  You know, and other than that, I would work full-time real estate.  So, my thing was like, "What's going to happen to me?"  You know, and my thing was focusing on that I wanted to own my own office.  So, what's going to happen?  How am I going to support this business if sales go down and I can't do anything else?  So then I thought about property management.  So, I said, well, if sales go down, at least if I have property management then that is going... it may not put a steak on the table but it'll put a hot dog.  (Laughter).  And it also, you know, helped pay the bills, you know, your overhead.  So, I started getting involved in--still doing sales--but getting involved with property management.  So over the years, you know, as of today I don't do a lot of selling.  We do sell a little something, but I don't really solicit a lot for sales.  But I'm very focused on property management.
Story_ID: 84550
Speaker 1: Now, what was your husband [Charles Lambert] thinking about all of this at the time?
Speaker 2: Well, my husband was absently positively not interested in anything that I was doing, not at all.  He was not.  So, he has never been involved with me in any way in my business.  So, you know, he thought--you know, like you just go on out there and... you know, he just wasn't interested.  He was, whatever.  (Laughter).  And you know that was, eventually that was what led to our divorce.  He was not interested in what I was doing at all, and I guess, a bit resented it.  But it was something I had to do, and I could see a better way of doing it because I wanted my kids to have a better life.
Story_ID: 84551
Speaker 1: Now, the other thing, you had said that there was a difference between--well, you weren't sure.  You weren't sure if there was a difference between the Bells and Mrs.--
Speaker 2: The Basses?
Speaker 1: The Basses and Mrs. [Geraldine] Wells.  I mean, between how men approach real estate and how women approach real estate.  And I'm wondering, did you learn any difference?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I, you know, men--well, basically I guess you sell real estate the same way.  But I guess I just wanted to be taught by a lady, just to see how she did it.  Because she at the time was very, very, successful.  You know, she was the talk of the town on the South Side and the West Side.  You know, and my thing was, "Wow, you know, this lady's doing this great."  They were doing fine, you know, but if she's doing this great, let me see what she's doing.  So, then when I went and worked with her--and you know, and I, today, you know, I still go--in my real estate practice today I still refer back to a lot of things that she taught me.  One thing that she taught me--and the other salesmen laughed at me--was that she would say, "Jerline, I got a closing downtown."  Or, "I need a title searched."  She said, "You want to go down and search it?"  And I'd say, "Yes, Ma'am, I would be glad to go down and search it."  And the other salesperson would say, "What's she going to pay you to go down there and search the title?"  And I'd say, "She's not going to pay me anything."  "Girl, you go down there and you may for your parking, and you pay for your gas, and you do all of that, and she's not going to pay you anything?"  And I said, "No, I'm not expecting a thing, because I'm learning."  And to me, it's like education.  You go to college, you've got to pay, you know.  And to me, that's the way I thought about it.  It's that I'm learning here, so I don't mind going down doing these things.  So, anytime basically she had something to do downtown that she didn't want to do, or didn't want to take the time to do, or she was busy doing, she would ask me.  Now, she had taken me down before, being with her.  So, I knew, you know, about the title company and who to go to and all of that.  So, it wasn't like I was going, you know, just not knowing anything and not, you know, being advised how to do it.  So, then eventually she would send me down to do her closings.  She'd say, "Well, you know, I got a closing going on and I mean, I'm busy.  Do you want to go and do this closing?"  Fine, I'd go down there, and I started closing.  Now, she had taken me before with her on closings, so I knew how to close.  So, I go down and do the closing.  And it would be her closing.  A lot of times when I would always--when I would do my closings, naturally, you know, I would go and I could close my own deals, you know, through the Title Company.  But whether it was hers and I wouldn't get any commission, it was fine.  I went out and I closed hers, too.  So, then when I opened my office, one of the guys there was working with Miss Wells' also.  And he said, "Well, I'm going to leave and I'm going to open my office."  And so, he did.  I think he--I left in 1968, and he must have left in 1969 and maybe the latter part of '68' [1968].  And when he opened his office, I was doing really well.  And he did not know how to close deals.  He didn't know how to search titles.  He didn't know how to do any of that--because she would have given him the opportunity to do it, too.  But see, he was one of those persons that said, "Oh, you crazy.  There's no way I'm going to spend my money to go down there and do those things."  (Laughter).  So he used to call me and say, "Lambert, would you... would you... I need your help here.  You know..."  So I would go down with him to try to show him and show him around.  But I'm just showing... I'm just... I mean my point is that it was a learning process to me.  And that's why I did it.  You know, it was no problem.  I had no problem with going, and didn't expect any pay.
Story_ID: 84552
Speaker 1: Now, when you say she [Geraldine Wells] was very successful, can you tell me how successful?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she, at the time, she--I remember she used to deal with Illinois Federal Savings and Loan.  That's where she would get most of her...  She was getting then--that was a little bit later on, after the contract--just before the FHA [Fair Housing Act], okay.  But she would sell, and she would--she was selling... she was able to get people mortgages if they had enough money.  She would get the mortgage, the Illinois Federal Savings and Loan was where she got her mortgages.  And she basically, I mean, she sold like the West Side, I would say from Cicero all the way to Austin Boulevard.  We all, we were selling really good.  I mean I would be out--you know, at that time they allowed solicitation, so we just solicited.  You know, we would go and we would solicit... see people... you know, they'd call it blockbusting.  But we would just solicit.  Nobody had to sell if they didn't want to.  But she would also--and then we also would get a lot of referrals from people we sold buildings to.  They would recommend that we sell somebody else's building, and we'd sell somebody else's building.  So, she was very successful in that area.  And she just, she just did a tremendous, a tremendous amount of sales.  And she was one of the persons that brought--kind of helped bring the people out from the contract buying--by being able to get the mortgages in Illinois for sale, so that they would loan to black people, you know, that were buying then.
Speaker 1: So, what you're essentially saying is that she, she was able, because of that relationship, to allow blacks actually to own property?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And was it--do you remember the case, the Contract Buyers League case when it was brought?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I remember it but I wasn't, I wasn't that involved in it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I'm not that familiar with it.  But I do remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But then the thing is, how many properties did she own?  I mean, do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't if she--well, actually at that time she--I remember she lived in Skokie.  And she used to travel, you know, come to the office every day.  But her residence was in Skokie, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Was she black?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  And now, what was your question again?
Speaker 1: No, I was just saying, how many properties, pieces of property did--
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't think that at that time, other than her home in Skokie, I don't think she owned anything.  If she did, maybe a couple of two-flats here and there.  I do remember she did buy a couple of two-flats.  And then later on she bought a larger building.  But she kept that building.  I think the building was round about eighteen or twenty units.  She bought that, it was on Cermak Road.  And I think she kept that about five years and she sold it.  You know, because she said it was really a big headache trying to keep it.  She may have owned a couple of two-flats or something, you know.  But other than that I don't know of her owning a lot of property.
Story_ID: 84553
Speaker 1: So, really the property management is what you started to do?
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: You didn't learn that from her [Geraldine Wells]?
Speaker 2: Not from her at all.  She was not in property management at all.
Speaker 1: Now, did you, what other things did you learn from her, though?  Any, like, things that have stuck with you about, you know, how--either how to deal with people or you know, how to close--you know how to close the sale?  I mean, those--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, you know, as I say, she taught me the closing.  And also how to deal with people, how to make the sale, you know--how to, how to put the sale together.  You know, at that time we had to work what we called "work our own deals."  You don't necessarily have to do that now.  You know, the mortgage companies take the buyer and go from there.  But at that time we had to work those deals from beginning to end, from the time that the contract was signed until the time we sat at the closing table.  We had to work that deal all the way through.  So, that was a big help, in learning how to work the deals.  And also, I had a mortgage broker by the name of Michael Willis.  And I used to work with him.  He was working for some--I forget the name of the company, but one of the mortgage companies at that time.  And I was out one Saturday showing a building and I happened to run into him.  And so, he said, "Oh..." that was after I opened my own office.  And he said... "I said, "Well, I'm out here you know."  And he said, "Well, Jerri..." you know, he said, "Do you want to, you know, work with me, you know, at the mortgage company I have?  You know, I'll help you put in..."  So, I also learned a lot from him, because I began to put my deals through with him.  He was, you know, black.  And I started doing that.  I had known him for a long time.  I knew him from the time I was with Mrs. [Geraldine] Wells, because he used to come by her office all the time.  And so, I started working with him, and he would help me, you know, put the deals together.  Or if I had a real problem, help me solve the problem and, you know, we worked it out together.  So, he and I have remained close for all of these years.
Story_ID: 84554
Speaker 1: And tell me, when you said, you know, "I engaged, we were engaging in blockbusting."  Can you just talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we solicited.  Now, later on they said it was blockbusting, because they said, you know, we were running the whites out.  But we were not.  You know, we just... if they, you know, because they used to...  I mean, they... I remember, getting back to the Basses, once we went out and we were soliciting and, you know, the whites came out.  They were a little bit hostile.  And you know, this white man harked and spit on him, you know.  You know, but he just wiped the spit off and just kept on.  But, you know, we were just asking if you're interested in selling your house.  And if they said, "No, we're not interested," we said okay and we moved on, you know.  So, we used to do just do that.  So, later on they called it blockbusting.  You know, so we couldn't solicit anymore, you know.  And we couldn't... it came to where we couldn't solicit even through the mail anymore.  Because we used to send out the letters, you know, "Are you interested..."  And I even get them today, you know.  But, you know, I guess in some areas it's okay, you know.  But, you know, we used to say, "Are you interested?  You know, just let us know, you know, give us a call."  And we used to get a lot of calls, and that was one way we got our business.  But later on they called it blockbusting, then they instituted laws that we, you know, we definitely couldn't go out and solicit.
Story_ID: 84555
Speaker 1: And now, how did you know you were ready to go out on your own in 1968?  What made you decide?
Speaker 2: Well, I just decided that I wanted to go out on my own.  It really wasn't anything--I guess, well, one thing that I told Mrs. [Geraldine] Wells--once I became a broker, I said, "Well, you know, I got my broker's license, you know, and so I wanted..."  So, I kind of like figured I should have got a little higher percentage.  And she said, "Well, broker or not, I'm not paying you anymore."  So, I said, "Okay," and that was it.  I just immediately started looking for a place to go.  And I found a little place, a little office down at 2116 South Pulaski, 2114 or 16 South Pulaski Road.  And so, the man rented me a little bitty space, you know.  And I went there, and this is where I started my real estate office.  And then a year later I bought the building where I am, and I'm there today.
Story_ID: 84556
Speaker 1: And what, what was that first year like?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you know--and I hate to say this, in a way.  But right after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, that's when the markets just opened up.  And it was, it was--you know, anybody could say--I guess I could say I was at the right place at the right time then, you know.  Because that's when the government allowed FHA [Fair Housing Act] for blacks to be able to... so, you put down a small down-payment and you could get a mortgage, and you didn't have to deal with contracts... because you know, like Miss [Geraldine] Wells was doing with was Illinois Federal.  But you had to have a substantial amount of money down with Illinois Federal.  And you had to have, you know, very, very good credit.  Now, once it opened up with the FHA, your down-payments were small, you know, like three percent for the first... up until $25,000, and five percent after, you know, for whatever you're buying.  But the buildings were selling at that time, you know, around about $20... you know, $18-$25,000 for a two-flat, you know.  So, that really wasn't a lot of money down.  And you found a lot of people that were interested in buying but they had bad credit, or they had a blemish on their credit--not necessarily really, really bad credit.  But it was nothing like people I see today.  Because then you didn't have the credit cards, you know.  Maybe they bought some furniture somewhere, you know, at some sub-standard store and didn't pay for it, and they had a blemish on their credit or da, da, da.  But at that time, FHA would allow you to write a letter if you had a blemish, you know, and explain why you did this, or why this happened to you, or why you lost your car.  You know, why was... I mean, you know, you lost it or it was repossessed and all of that?  So, if it was good enough and it sounded good enough, you know, they would kind of like give you leeway and let you go ahead and buy the property, you know.  So they, you know, at that particular time they made a good... a lot of leeways then for black people to buy homes.  And that's what I kind of capitalized on at that time, because I was beginning to sell a lot of homes through the FHA.
Speaker 1: So how many homes were you selling, like, a month?
Speaker 2: Oh, I guess at that time, for the years 1968 and '69 [1969], I would say at least two or three a month, you know.  I was closing pretty often.  (Laughter).  I was doing pretty good.
Story_ID: 84557
Speaker 1: And did you start seeing the immediate results?  Were you, I mean, at the same time were you getting into property management?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was still doing--I had began to get... start property management then.  Because even in 1968, at that time with the riots and everything, then we had a skirmish of people just moving, they just moved.  And you know, the whites, Caucasians, that had big buildings on the West Side and stuff, they just kind of ran off and left them, and they wanted somebody to manage them.  And so, you know, I was in property management and everything, so then they knew it wasn't a lot of people in property management.  You know, it was a lot of property managers with the big, white firms.  But the white firms were getting ready to move out of the area also.  So, I--especially... you know once I started property management, even in 1968.  But then when I moved to 5361, now in the Austin area where I am now, then I began to get a lot of property management there.
Speaker 1: And, and so you were managing mainly--were you  managing your own properties, or were you managing--
Speaker 2: I was just managing for other people.
Speaker 1: For other people?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And so, how did it work?  They paid you--how did you know how to, how to--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I--see I got the management part because that's the one thing that the Basses were doing.  That is one thing that I learned from them.  They were really into it.  They were doing sales, but they were also into property management a lot.  And that's where I got the idea of property management.  And another thing that really helped me--in 1968 the Basses decided that they were going to do more investing.  So, they were buying a lot of property and they were keeping it for their own.  So, and they were managing their own property.  So at that point they did not want to be bothered with a lot of the property management for people, they just wanted to do their own stuff.  And so Wallace Bass at that time, the brother that had the office on 22nd Street, called me to talk to me.  He called and said, "Jerri, I need to talk to you."  I went down there, and he said, "Look, you know, we're going in strictly for our investments.  So, the property manager we have, you know, we're not going to... Would you be interested in it?"  And I said, "I most certainly would."  And he said, "Okay," he said, "I'll talk to the owners and see if they would like to turn the property management over to you."  And I said, "Great."  So, he did.  And most of the owners turned their property management over to me.  So, that's how I kind of like really got a nice portfolio in property management at the time.
Speaker 1: Now, how, how were you paid?  Were you... how, how is a property manager paid?
Speaker 2: I was paid--whatever my percentage of the gross income is, I would take that off.  You know, that was one of the first things I did, was got paid.  So, I would take a percentage of whatever amount I collected.  And then they would get a net share less any repairs it had that I did, any bills that was paid, and my commission.  Everything... my fee, my management fee.  Everything would come off of the... subtracted from the total amount.  And then they would receive a net check.
Speaker 1: Now, did you... at this time, how many properties were you managing at the, you know, in the early years?  You're selling, you say, about two or three---
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: How many properties were you managing at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, now, when I was on--in 1968 basically I did pick up a few pieces.  I really began to pick up a few pieces when I was on, after I moved over on Madison Street, okay.  Basically, what I had in 1968 was what the Basses turned over.  So, maybe they, maybe I'd say that they must have given me ten pieces.  But some of them were large buildings, some was smaller buildings.  So that was basically about it, that I had in 1969, okay.  Now, when I moved, when I moved over on Madison Street, that's when I began to pick up, you know, more pieces.  And I guess, you know, depending on the size of the property.  You know, as I said, a lot of people were moving then.  So, I guess twenty-five or thirty or more.  But some of them were really large buildings, and I began to take them on, you know.  Right now--a few years ago I noticed that the one thing that people are not doing--the large real estates refuse to take smaller buildings.  And I talked to my children about that.  I said, "You know, they don't want these smaller buildings, so we can capitalize on that."  So, our motto today is "No building is too small for us to manage."  We'll take a house, a two-flat, or whatever you got.  (Laughter).  And we began--we began to, you know, get that.  So, we got volume now.  You know, it may be a lot of buildings, but they may be just like a house or a two-flat or something like that.  So, yeah, because... you know, and we got some larger properties.  But, you know, a lot of people were retiring and wanted... they didn't want to sell their property right then or whatever.  Maybe they wanted to rent to a relative, or they wanted to move out of town, or they wanted to retire or whatever--didn't want to be bothered.   So, they would go to the larger real estates and they would have--they didn't want them because they were just too small.  So, we began to take those.
Story_ID: 84558
Speaker 1: Now, how did you build up your support system?  You know, because that's a big thing with property management, is that, you know, you have to have someone to do the repairs.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, my children, my sons take care of that at this point.
Speaker 1: But did they, but at the beginning?  Not at the present.
Speaker 2: At the beginning, at the beginning when I moved over there, I was able to go to the hardware stores and get a line of credit, you know, at the hardware stores in order to do that.  And then I had, I had someone that was--the man that rented me the place--the building was being sold.  And so, it was two guys.  One was in insurance and taxes, he did taxes.  And he moved over with me.  Another man was in the trucking business.  So, they moved over and they rented space from me in my office.  So, that was a way of helping me take care of the overhead and everything and pay the mortgage note and da, da, da.  And both of them kind of got involved with the property management and helping me.  Because the guy who was in insurance, he wrote insurance for everything that I had, you know, which helped him, you know, in his business.  And then the soliciting and sending the men out and checking stuff--then I had the other man that was in the trucking business, he helped me do that.  And then later on they did both pass away.  And, but even before--the man that was in trucking--before he passed, my son, Kenneth, had decided he was going to come into the business.  And so, he came into the business.  And so my sons--I have two sons, Charles and Kenneth.  They operate that basically themselves, you know, with the property management.
Speaker 1: And at that time, was your daughter--
Speaker 2: Yes, my daughter started with me even before they did.  And once upon a time, I had two offices.  I had an office on the South Side and an office on the West Side.  So, my daughter always worked--when I opened the South Side office, she started working in the South Side office.  And so, I had--you know, so she's been with me.  My daughter's always--she's been there all the time.  I think that she went away one time and got a job at the post office and worked about a year and then she came back.  (Laughter).  So she... other than that, she's never been away from Lambert Realty.
Story_ID: 84559
Speaker 1: And you make it seem so easy.  There must have been some difficult times.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we had difficult times.  There were times that I wondered--you know, even with the property management.  You know, we had some really lean years back--you know, like I say somewhere around in the mid-seventies [1970s], you know, when they put moratoriums on the mortgages and the interest rates were sky up, like thirteen or sixteen percent.  You know, and the people had to, you know, with the FHA [Fair Housing Act] they had to pay points, and the owners would get really upset.  They don't have to do that now, you know.  They can, but you can divide it with the buyer.  At that time, you couldn't divide it with the buyer.  The seller had to pay all of the points, you know.  So you know, we're talking about this high interest rate, we're talking about these points, you know, and everything.  So, it was a lot of very lean years.  And the only way--to be very honest with you, had I not had the property management, I could not have survived.  That is what really made me...  But you know, I had to live out of it, too.  When I'm selling--at the time I could--the property management would take care of the office and the overhead, and then I could have, you know, most of the sales.  I could save, you know, it was kind of...  But once the sales went, then I have to live off of the property management and it has to support the office.  So, there was a lot of very lean years that we had, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're going to change tapes.
Story_ID: 84923
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were saying--were, the early years--did they sort of go up, or did--there were some difficulties.  Was it good one year and bad another year?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  The years--but I tell you, in the seventies--and I should also say that my other daughter came in years later, the younger girl.  And she worked part-time and, you know, and helped me out a lot, too.  And then the boys were there.  But yeah, during the seventies, that's when I'd say, around '74 [1974], '75 [1975], maybe '76 [1976], was really--that was during the time they put moratoriums on mortgages.  A lot of people went out of business.  I was fortunate that, you know, I was working with someone that I was able to transfer the mortgages I had--or the deals that I had at the time--to another company that had not gone on a moratorium at the time, and was able to close them all out.  So, I didn't lose anything.  But I was very fortunate in doing that, because I had friends that just lost their businesses.  That's all they had, you know, and they just lost... they couldn't close their deals.  And so, they lost their business.  So that was a really lean time.  And then, you know, the interest rates went up so high till nobody wanted to buy.  So, yeah, that went on for I guess at least two to three years.  So, it was pretty bad.
Speaker 1: And then when did things really sort of start taking off for you, then?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: Well, it really took off for me in 1968.
Speaker 1: Sixty-Eight [1968].
Speaker 2: So, you know, in 1968 and the early seventies, I was doing fine.  You know, but then I, then we hit this part of the moratoriums and high interest rates, and high points and, you know, points went up to thirteen percent.  So, and the interest rates were up there.  And then we got the moratoriums, you know, so it was like, wow, you know, who's going to buy?  You know, and so that was bad on everybody.  So, we had a really, really lean period at that time.  But then it began, you know, to pick up somewhere around the latter seventies.  And then I went--also then at that time I had started, I went back and got my appraisal license.
Story_ID: 84924
Speaker 1: I wanted to start doing appraisals, so I started appraising.  So, you know, I still appraise today, I'm a state-certified appraiser.  So, I've been appraising--I think I started appraising in 1979.  So, along with that--
Speaker 2: What made you decide to start appraising?  Why did you think that was important?
Speaker 1: I just thought it was another way of making money.  Actually, we, at that time as blacks they had no idea that appraising was as lucrative as it truly is.  We just didn't have any idea.  Because at the time when I first started in real estate, the appraisers would come out and, you know, they would do this appraising.  And I remember when the price was thirty-five dollars at the time.  We'd go like, "Huh, who wants to--you know, we selling, we getting commission.  I mean, like, who would work..."   (Laughter).  But what we hadn't thought about was the fact that it was very little that they did.  The forms at that time was one little half-sheet, you know.  And they would go--and it was nothing as complicated as it is today.  It's complicated today.  But we do get paid more, naturally, a lot more.  They would get thirty-five dollars, but let's face it, they were doing five and six and seven a day.  So, when you add that up compared to our commission--and we had to work at least ninety to sixty--I mean ninety to a hundred and twenty days before we got paid--they was making way more money than we were.  But we weren't looking at it that way, you know.  So once I--and I had some friends--all guys, that were in the appraisal business.  And I decided to come and do the work.  And I had one guy, I'll never forget.  His name was Ripley Mead, very, very well-known here in Chicago.  And he said, "Oh, Jeri why do you want to go into appraising?"  Because he got, I think he just kind of saw it that as a lady, I shouldn't.  Because, you know, when you go on an appraisal, you know, you got to go in those basements and it was water in them... you got to... you know, do all of that.  But I was determined.  So when we saw I was determined, he helped me in every way that he could.  I had a lot of people that really helped me.  So, that was one of the reasons that I went into appraising.  And you know, I just didn't want to be dependent on sales anymore, after that slump.  I was looking for--I still wanted to stay in real estate, but I wanted something else to go along with the property management to kind of help subsidize everything.  And sales--and you know, and also then my sons and I, we started kind of like investing.  You know, we'd buy a piece of property and rehab it and sell it, and stuff.  So, you know, that's why we got kind of away from sales.  I say we still do some, but we're more into the property management and into the appraising and into the buying, you know, than we are into the sales.
Story_ID: 84925
Speaker 1: Now, when did you become a certified real estate manager?  When did that happen?
Speaker 2: I became a certified real estate manager about 1970, '71 [1971], I became a certified real estate manager.  It was way back in the early seventies.
Speaker 1: And it says that you were the first black--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh--
Speaker 1: --female.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And why was that?  Was it just that people hadn't--you know, what--?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, let me explain to you between--you may not know the difference between the realtors and the realtist.  Have you heard of that before?  Okay, okay.  I was certified under the group for the realtists.  The realtors, years ago, did not allow blacks to join.  We could not be realtors.  You know, that was before my time in real estate.  But a lot of, some blacks tried to join the realtors--to get into the group with the realtors--and they would not allow us to join, as blacks.  So, we had a gentleman that was a broker by the name of Elmore Baker.  And he was determined--he said, "Okay, they don't want us.  We will form our own."  So, we formed our own organization, which is the realtists.  And so, the group that I was associated with as the president of the Dearborn Real Estate Board and all of that--and the group there--which is basically a black group of realtors--realtists.  And I worked with them, you know, and I trained under these people.  And they, I have to say, you know, they really, really helped, and brought me a long ways.  Because those older gentlemen and ladies--you know, it was more men than women--and they just kind of like took--Oscar Brown, Sr. for one.  I know you know Oscar Brown, Jr.'s [HM] father.  You know, he was an attorney.  He had his own real estate company over on 46th and Drexel, I believe.  And he, they just kind of like took me under their wing.  I could call up Mr. Brown anytime and ask him anything.  He was at that time, when I first went in, I think he was the president of the Dearborn Real Estate Board.  Or, I think he was the president.  And he stayed involved with the different real estate boards.  Mr. [Ripley] Mead was president of the Dearborn Real Estate Board, you know.  And they just worked with me.  I could pick up the phone when I had any kind of problem, you know, and they just worked with me to help me.  You know, they were real mentors in helping me succeed in real estate.
Story_ID: 84926
Speaker 1: And who, so who else was significant during that time?  You mentioned Mr. Brown [Oscar Brown, Sr.], Mr. [Ripley] Mead.  Were there other people that were sort of movers and shakers?  And was this around the time that you were getting active politically?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  I began to, you know, actively support candidates that were running.  And also I sold, I sold Congressman Davis [Danny K. Davis, HM] his first house.  And I've been active with him ever since, and I still am very active with Congressman Davis.  I've always been there, you know, when he was, during the time when he was Alderman, and he became--before he was Alderman.  I sold him the house before he became the Alderman, and supported him all the way through his aldermanship and then during the time that he was Commissioner, and also during the time, you know, now as Congressman.  And you know, I'm with a group now--I did join the realtors--I mean I belong to both groups.  I belong to the realtists and the realtors.  And I am with the realtors now and it's, I'm his, what they call the district, a federal district coordinator.  And I am the federal district coordinator for Congressman Davis.  And we go to, well, Washington once a year to bring forth all bills that we need--we would like for him to vote on, you know, and tell him, you know, the pros and cons of the bills, you know.  And it's up to him whether he does it or not, but we at least like for him to know what they are in housing, and also through the year as we have different bills come up.  I am the person that contacts Congressman Davis and asks for his vote on our behalf.
Speaker 1: And what did you, did someone tell you that you needed to get politically active to be in business, or did you see it as that way?  Or--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  No one ever really told me.  I just, you know, I just felt that, you know, that I wanted, I needed to do, you know, be kind of politically active.  And I needed--you know, some people that were running for politics, I thought they were not qualified to be politicians.  And there were some people were that I thought were great, and they needed to be.  So, with those people I most certainly supported them.  You know, I'd go to their benefits; I donated and, you know, whatever, you know.  So, that's--
Speaker 1: So, who are some of the people you've supported over the years?
Speaker 2: Well, I've supported... God--Jesse Jackson, Jr. [HM], I supported him.  Congressman [Bobby] Rush [HM], I supported him.  Alderman Wallace Davis at the time when he was running for Alderman.  Ed Smith, I support him now, he's still Alderman.  God, it's just, it's hard to name them.  But I just supported a lot of, a lot of people I've supported and I'm still supporting.
Story_ID: 84927
Speaker 1: So, what, what, when you look back on your career, because your career has spanned quite a few years.  What--you know, in your business--what would you say were sort of critical parts?  You know, either people or, you know, events that helped you along the way?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I was, you know, appointed by two governors, Governor [Dan] Walker and Governor [Jim] Edgar in Housing.  And being on the committees, that helped me a lot, because I learned a lot sitting on those Housing Committees, you know.  And the fact that I've always, I've always attended a lot of seminars--whatever's coming up, all the new changes in real estate and all of that--I've always made myself available, you know, to take those continuing education courses--just courses in real estate so I could make sure that, you know, I'm attuned to, you know, what's going on at the time, or what was going on--and what still is going on at the time.
Speaker 1: So, what did you learn, though?  Can you just give some examples about what you learned when you were sitting on those boards and commissions that (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Okay.  At the time when I was sitting on the board, we were on the banking... we were doing the banks at the time.  When I was on the board for Governor Walker, we were into making the decision as to whether banks could have a, what do you call it?  A little bank... the Assembly... see, if you had one bank--
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause here in Illinois, they didn't have branches.
Speaker 2: Right, branch banks, they didn't have branch banks.   So, we were working on that.  The whole time I was with him, that's what we did.  You know, we had to work, you know, we worked... every Wednesday we had to meet.  And that was what that was about, on that banking committee.  Because the banks wanted to open branch banks.  They would not allow them to open branch banks, and we were working on the committees, you know.  And that was my first time being--and didn't even know that until I got involved, you know, with this board.  And that was what we was working on then.  And when I was with Governor Edgar it was more into the loaning end of it, you know, with the Fannie Mae, Ginnie Mae, and all of that.  So I just, you know, kind of like learned a lot from sitting on that board, especially the one that we had with Edgar's... Governor Edgar's board.  We didn't have to make that many... a lot of meetings, you see.  But, but with Governor Walker, every Wednesday we had to be there.  And we would work from about five o'clock in the evening until about nine at night.  So that was, that was pretty--you know, I learned a lot there.
Story_ID: 84928
Speaker 1: Now, can you... did you ever think about getting--you say primarily you're management, and your sales existed primarily on the West Side and some on the South, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did have an office on the South Side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had an office on the South Side.  And I just maintained that office about a year, because I became very--I guess it was maybe stressing myself... spreading myself too thin or whatever.  Because I, I got very, very ill, and I mean really ill.  They really didn't expect that I was going to make it.  And the doctors had given me up, so far as they told my family.  But anyway, I got very ill.  And after that, after the illness I decided I would just close the office, and I did.  And I closed that office and then I just maintained the office on the West Side.
Speaker 1: And have you... that's a community that you know.  The community's changed a lot though over the years.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I know both communities, and I worked both communities.  Well, when I say communities I mean the South Side and the West Side.  Because I live South.  So, you know, because I managed property on the South Side, I know a lot of people on the South Side, you know.  So, you know, I live South, and I have, you know, developed friendships, you know, and business relationships on both sides, the South Side and the West Side.
Story_ID: 84929
Speaker 1: But with... and on the South Side, wasn't Travis-wasn't it Dempsey Travis [HM]--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --who remained sort of a person, and then Elzie Higginbottom [HM] was--
Speaker 2: Yes, he was very active.  Now, he came in later.  But at the time, I, in fact, Mr. Travis had previously been the president of the Dearborn Real Estate Board.  And when I came in, I convinced him to go for a second term, for a second term as president.  And, you know, there had been several people in between.  And I told him then, I said, "Well, why don't you come on back?"  We needed another president.  At the time, I mean, the president was going out, you know, that we had.  And we really hadn't decided on anybody else.  So, I convinced that he should come and serve a second term, and he did.  He came back, and was president and served a second time as president.
Speaker 1: So, now, who were the main people having sort of fiefdoms, in terms of real estate?  Because at one point, Jacoby Dickens [HM], I mean he owned a lot of property, right?  And then... I'm just trying to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, you know, I, I know him.  I have met him, I've had, you know, just a few conversations with him.  You know, like I--at the banquets and stuff like that, sitting and just chatting.  But, but, you know, I know that Jacoby was from Seaway, right? Okay.  So, but he came later.  You know, I mean I didn't know him--we're talking about way back in the seventies.  He's more of maybe probably the later seventies and the eighties and nineties.  I think that--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, he owned real estate.
Speaker 2: He may have owned real estate, but he wasn't at the bank.  Now, I knew nothing about him until he went to the bank.  I had never heard of him until...  So, yeah, he probably did.  But, you know, I personally knew nothing about that.
Speaker 1: So, this is what's interesting, is that it--you know, in your description it sounds pretty insular--that people, you know, you were doing your business and you didn't have a lot of inter--you know, it doesn't look like there was a lot of interaction, even though you served on some boards.
Speaker 2: Yes, I served on a lot of boards.
Speaker 1: But I'm just trying to understand what life was like, and what--you know, who was influencing you--or who were your peers or--
Speaker 2: You know, I think that, you know, my peers were people from the Dearborn Real Estate Board.  I was very, very, active with the Dearborn Real Estate Board at the time.
Speaker 1: So, who was, who was--
Speaker 2: And then I--
Speaker 1: Well, talk about who was part of that real estate board.
Speaker 2: Okay.  As I said, it was a black group.  It was Elmore Baker, you know.  When I went in, he was the one that actually founded the group.  He was there at the time. He was very old.  I think he was probably basically retired at the time, but he was there.  And Mr. Ripley Mead, Mr. Maner, you know, that did a lot of--
Speaker 1: You said Mr. Brown [Oscar Brown, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Mr. Brown, and Mr. Dempsey Travis [HM], you know.  All of them were there at the time when I went in, you know, in addition to just a lot of--but those are some of the main names that were there.  And I was just very active, you know, with the Dearborn Real Estate Board.  And then I became very active with the National Association of Real Estate Brokers, and I was on the board there.  And I served on the board of the National for I guess five or six years.  And I also was the editor for the National, and I used to write articles about it--what was going on in housing.  And that was, that was published nationally through, I mean, for the realtists.  Everybody that belonged to that got a copy.  And I used to write all the different, write about all the different changes in housing.  So, I was very active with that group during, all during the seventies [1970s], until then I was appointed--as I say, and I was... as I said on the Board of Directors.  And we traveled--and that's another thing I have to say about the realtists and the National Association of Real Estate Brokers.  See, well, we were the National Association of Real Estate Brokers.  And they were--the whites were with the National Association of Real Estate Boards.  There was a difference.  And the one thing that I... I didn't appreciate so much at the time--because I complained about the price.  But then in retrospect when I looked back, I think "Wow."  You know, the one thing that they did is, when we would have conventions, you know, all of us--you know, they used to--didn't allow blacks in the better hotels and stuff.  They made sure that they got the top of the line, wherever we went, in the contract.  They would get the top of the line hotel, you know, that we would stay, you know.  And that was really appreciated--I appreciated that later.  But then at the time, I'm like, "God," you know, because we had to pay our own way.  (Laughter).  So, I kind of complained about it.  But you know, I realized later on that they were introducing us to something that blacks had never been introduced to, and it was really appreciated, yeah.
Story_ID: 84930
Speaker 1: You know, and I don't know... were you aware of the lawsuits that were happening around real estate and the role of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and things like that?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember--God, I forget the name--you know, where... it just don't come to memory... the girl that wrote the book, The Raisin ["Raisin in the Sun"]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Lorraine Hansberry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Her father [Carl Hansberry]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, her father, you know, and--
Speaker 1: Well, can you talk about that, her father? Because--
Speaker 2: Well, I remember--
Speaker 1: Well, didn't he have kitchenette king? I heard that.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't really know that much about her father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I think it was Earl B. Dickerson that knocked down that ruling that, you know, that on the titles they said--and I've seen a lot of titles that said "Blacks do not... you cannot sell to blacks."  I mean, when I went into real estate that was still on the title.  You know, and I think that by the time I went into real estate, that ruling had been, it had been through court, you know, and blacks had won it.  But you know, yeah, he, Earl Dickerson and Lorraine Hansberry's father were the ones.  Because, you know, that was in one of the buildings he was going to buy, or something like that.  But it was still on the title.  I ran into--well, naturally, at that time all they'd do was just strike it out.  But it was definitely still there.
Story_ID: 84931
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And tell me what... do you ever look back on any of the transactions and say I made a mistake, you know, there?  Or, you know, was there anything that--
Speaker 1: That I made a mistake?  Um, I don't, I can't really say anything that I would be sorry about.  A lot of people--for instance, I used to work with people... I got a lot of success stories, I suppose.
Speaker 2: Can you tell me those (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Oh, well, I can tell you, one thing I used to do with people, and also with young ladies that came to work with me--I used to make sure that I would take them in and train them.  You know, I would be a mentor in training them.  And I used to, you know, get them from the high schools and, you know, get them as soon as they finished high school and train them the secretarial business, of how to operate an office.  And I did a lot of that, you know--knowing that they'd just be training and they were going to leave.  But I wanted, I wanted them to be able to take something from a job where they'd actually done it, than just from the schools, you know.  So, I trained a lot of people, and they still come back today.  And they've all gone out, you know, and they've got really jobs at banks, and...  And they'll come back and say, "You know, we started here.  You know, boy, you're the one that really gave us..."  Because that makes me feel real good on that.  And as far as people--a lot of people over the years came back, people that I sold properties to, you know.  Because I would always work with them.  You know, a lot of people would just kind of say, "Well, you know, your credit's too bad," blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  You know, but I would research and see exactly what they could do.  If they could write a letter on this, you know, to the mortgage companies and then call the mortgage companies and give them my personal opinion of the people, you know, that they really seem like they could--they're going to pay this mortgage, you know.  And I used to do that.  And then I worked with them, you know, working with them to tell them how to straighten up their credit, what to do.  You know, like people would come maybe and they'd be interested.  And I'd say, "You can't buy a house right now.  Your credit just, you know, you can't do it."  And they'd say, "Well, what are we going to do?  We really like the house."  I said, "Well, okay, I'll work with you.  I'll tell you what to do.  Now, you follow my instructions.  You know, it's not too bad that you can't clear it up.  But it's going to take about a year or so.  And you clear it up, and then you come back."  You know, and I said, "And you know, I'll work with you."  So, I've done that a lot.  And then they came back after a year or so and they would apply again, and we sold them a house.
Story_ID: 84932
Speaker 1: So, I guess what my thing is, I, I'be always kind of sa--I've always been very kind of focused on the business.  I've been involved on a lot of boards and, you know, worked with different people and everything.  But I've always been a hard worker.  So you know, I go in the office and whatever... and whatever... running around...  I know I'm going to get to the office around about ten o'clock.  And I may work till seven or eight at night.  And I'm always kind of--I'm slacking off now.  I don't, you know, work as much as I used to.  But over the years, that's what I've done.  You know, so I guess I'm more focused on, you know, mainly what I can do, you know, all around.  I guess I'm more focused on just getting the job done.  And I've always... one thing I very seldom do, and that is have lunch.  Because when I have--if a person calls me for lunch, I say "I'll have dinner with you, okay."  Because lunch cuts into my day.  And, you know, by time I get to the office at 10 o'clock... then I got to leave and meet you at 12, and we're going to sit there and talk and do whatever until around about, you know, 1:30, I'm back.  You know, and then day is about gone, you know.  So, I've always focused a lot on that.  And I never really wanted to have--I may have lunch sitting at my desk, and most likely I will.  I don't go out for that.  You know, I'm focused on what I'm doing.
Story_ID: 84933
Speaker 1: Now, when did you... was it always planned that your kids would get involved, or did that just happen?
Speaker 2: It just happened.  Now, I never, ever encouraged my children to come in to real estate.  A lot of people say, "How did you get them to do it?  I mean, you know, I wish my kids would do that."  I never personally just said, "This is what I want you to do."  What I did was that, and it wasn't something--I didn't know at the time it was going to grow on them, really.  I was trying to keep them out of the street.  (Laughter).  So, when they came home from school, they had to come to the office and clean up.  So, they came to the office.  They had to empty my garbage, they had to clean the floors, they had to, you know, keep...  And my older daughter, she'd have to come down and she had do all my filing and, you know, all of... whatever I could find in that office, and even in somebody else's office for them to do.  You know, because at the time we had about three or four offices in that particular building.  Whatever I could find for them to do, you know, they came in there and they did it.  You know, that was one thing.  The next thing was that when I became on the board of the National Association of Realtors, we traveled a lot.  And during the time that they were not being schooled, especially during the summer, was when we traveled and all.  It was basically conventions, because conventions would always be in the summertime... I would always take the kids.  I would always take one or two with me.  And they just got so--especially my son that's Vice President, Kenneth--he was so excited, you know, and focused.  And the people, my mentors, just kind of took Kenneth under their wings.  "Come on boy, let me go show you this.  Let me show you," da, da, da, da, da, da.  You know, so they just kind of, he kind of grew in with the older people, you know.  And so he, I guess that had a lot to do with him.  Now, what happened with him is that he was working at Burger King; he was a manager of a Burger King.  And he came home one evening, and some people drove up by him and put a gun on him and put him in the trunk of the car.  And I guess in their trunk--I don't know quite how it went, but anyway they put him in the trunk of the car and they made him drive, go back to Burger King... or they drove back, whichever.  And they made him go in and open, you know, I guess try to get him to open the safe or something.  I don't think he ever could get it, because he was too nervous to get it open.  But they put him and a couple of other people somewhere in the freezer or somewhere back there, you know.  People did see it and they got them out in time and all that.  But he was just, you know, after that, he did go back to work for about a week or so, but he was just too scared.  So, one day he came into the office and he said, "Well," he said at the time that he had gone and gotten his license, his salesman license, in the meantime, you know, over the years.  And he came in and he said, "Well," he said, "I quit Burger King today."  I said, "You did?"  I said, "What you going to do?  I mean, you going to look for another job?"  I said, "What you going to do?"  He said, "I'm not going to look for another job."  I said, "What do you mean you're not going to look for   another job."  He said, "Because I'm working here.  Where's my desk?"  (Laughter).  And he's been there ever since.  So, that's what happened, that's how he came in.  And then my other son, you know, he was, he was working, you know, on just a regular job.  And he got laid off, and then he came into the real estate and, you know, then my younger son, you know, he came in and he started doing--he got his salesman license so he was doing some selling and investing and everything.  And then he started helping me do the appraising.  And so he came in, so that's--and you know, as I say, my daughter, you know, she was always there.  And then the younger girl, she came in as I say, on a part-time basis to help us out all the time.  And she worked there for a while full-time, but more, you know, kind of like on a part-time basis.  And so that's how they all got there, you know.
Speaker 1: So all of them are involved?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But the younger girl now is not involved.  You know, she's kind of like doing her own thing.  But I mean over the years, she has been, yes.
Story_ID: 84571
Speaker 1: You're successful as a-in real estate.
Speaker 2: Well I would think so, yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you, I mean would you feel comfortable talking about, you know, how successful?
Speaker 2: Well, in what way?  (Laughter).  I mean I've been successful.  I'm really, you know, ready--I mean I'm able to sustain myself.  You know, I live a good lifestyle, you know.  And so, I think I'm relatively successful in real estate, yeah.
Speaker 1: What--but you wouldn't be willing to talk about how much?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But would you, let me ask this.  Would you talk about what things would you contribute--you know, would you say have contributed to your success?  You've talked about some of it, you know, that you were always improving yourself.  You know, you were always, you know, trying to learn from other people.
Speaker 2: Well, educational.  You know, I, you know, went back to college with my middle son, Kenneth.  And you know, we went, I was at the Central YMCA [Community College, Chicago, Illinois] and got a bachelor's, I mean an associate degree there.  And I then went on and got a bachelor's from Northeastern [Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois].  And so, that had a lot to do with it.  Because you know, I was going back to school and still doing business and all that, but I was determined to get a degree.  I was just determined I was going to do that.  So, naturally that contributed a lot, and it built a lot of self-esteem where I was concerned because I always felt that I needed it, and you know, it was an additional...  And so, it really built a lot of self...  I've always been a go-getter, but that built a lot of self-esteem to be able to do that, you know.  And I think about going back and getting my master's, then I say why?  Then who knows, I may do that, too.  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 84572
Speaker 1: So.
Speaker 2: Now, talk about real estate as a profession.  Would you encourage other young people to go, or others to go into real estate?  And if so, why?
Speaker 1: Okay.  Real estate, you know, it's still very lucrative.  It, so if you're... if anybody is really willing to work, they can succeed in real estate.  But if you're not willing to work, you're not going to succeed.  And you have to, it has to--and I've always told anybody that was going into it--you have to give it your all.  You really have to be able to work real estate full-time.  You can't do it on a part-time basis and expect to be really successful.  You can make some extra money, but if you're really going to be successful in real estate, you need to give it the whole, full... your full focus, you know.  Now, real estate today, I guess it may or may not be--I guess in some instances it may be easier to get in if you're going in with the big offices where you got the multiple listings.  But you've got a lot of competition, I guess, even with the salespeople and stuff like that.  I kind of think that real estate was a little bit easier to get into at the time that I got into than it is now, because I know that they have certain quotas and all of that.  You know, I was fortunate, as I said, going to Mrs. [Wells] Wells.  And when I went in I did, you know, work part-time, and as I said, you know, going to Alden's and stuff.  So maybe, you know, you can still go in and work if the broker allows you to do part-time stuff.  You know, most brokers don't want part-time.  You know, they would rather have full-time.  But if anyone's really willing to work at it...  But it's something that people see people making money in real estate, and they say, "Oh, that's so easy."  But it's not.  I mean you have to, you know, you have to make up your mind that you're going to give it your all.  And you're not going to leave there at 5:00 or 5:30 every day.  You know, you know, if something's got to be done, you've got to sit there until you complete it and then you go home.  You know, so it's nothing that you got to--you can't punch the clock with real estate.  It's something you have to really make up your mind you're going to have to do.
Story_ID: 84573
Speaker 1: Now, what is important for, I mean for having a successful family business?  Because you've successfully incorporated your family, and sometimes it's not that easy.
Speaker 2: You know, we get along fine, you know.  My kids, they all call me Mrs. Lambert.  (Laughter).  And people tease them about that, but that's what they call me in the business, you know.  The only time that we do that... we don't do that... is when they're, you know, when we're on a social thing just together, you know, and they'll call me Mom or Mother, you know.  But other than that, we have, you know, we just, we get along fine.  I mean not--you know, they, I can depend on them.  I really can, you know.  And then every day at 7 o'clock I call my sons Kenneth and Charles, and we map out what our day is.  It doesn't matter where I am... traveling...  Now, maybe if I'm abroad, you know, if it's from the country of Africa or something like that, I probably wouldn't.  But if I'm in the United States of America and I'm traveling wherever I'm traveling, I'm calling Kenneth every morning at 7 o'clock.  And we go over what happened the day before.  I mean, "What are we focusing on today?  What are we going to get done today, and all of that?"  And then I call Charles, and he and I go over the same thing.  So you know, that's, we do that every day.  And so, you know, we get along fine.  It's no problem so far, knock on wood.  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 84574
Speaker 1: Now, I want to ask you also your--because your life and career has been spent really in the black community.  And I'm, I want to ask you what... do you have any like quotes or concerns or observations about, you know, where we are and you know, any concerns about the future in terms of the community?  Because you've been able to observe the same community for... here in Chicago--
Speaker 2: Okay.  The one thing that amazes me is that since I'm an appraiser now, I find that the homes that I sold for $20-$25,000 way back in the sixties and the seventies, are now going for $200,000.  That kind of blew my mind.  (Laughter).  So, you know, I think that, I think black people in general are being priced out of Chicago, you know.  And then we're getting all of the new condominiums coming up and all the new construction and all the new rehabbing, and all that.  And I've ask myself many times, "How can we afford it?"  I think that, and we're beginning to see a lot of foreclosures now, you know.  Because I just don't see--I know we're making more money than we were back in the seventies and the eighties.  But yet and still, I mean the prices of real estate now has just escalated so high until I just, you know, I kind of wonder.  I just, I really think we're being priced out of the market.  I think eventually--you know, I think, you know, we're just being priced out of the market.  We're not going to be able to afford these homes.  And I wonder how we can afford them now.  I think we get them and there are a lot of mortgage incentives that, you know, that they work with to put people in homes.  And that's good if they can afford them.  But I just kind of--I hope they can.  But a lot of people, I'm saying, is not going to be able to, I don't think.
Story_ID: 84575
Speaker 1: And what do you think about-what about the displacement of people in, you know, the CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] housing?  And do you see people being displaced in other areas or going to the suburbs?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, there's a lot of people moving, definitely to the suburbs and being infiltrated, you know, into other communities and everything.  But you know, definitely moving into the suburbs.  Because you can't--you know, unless maybe you're on Section 8, you know, you can't afford this.  You know, a lot of people--you know, you're coming out of public housing and, you know, you're going into private housing, and a lot of people just can't afford it, they really can't afford it.  And another thing that I've always said, and that is--I guess it's some programs now that's coming up with this.  But I've always said that when a person is coming out of public housing, or even just a regular apartment, and they're going into housing, they should be taught how to maintain a home.  There is a difference.  Because when you're in an apartment and you're renting, you expect the landlord to do everything.  You have--whatever happens, you know, the landlord comes and he does it.  And I've known of a situations, even homes that I sold over the years, that people are not conscious when the sink starts leaking what am I supposed to do?  Because the landlord did it, but now it's your responsibility.  You've got to fix it, okay.  So, if the water starts running, the ceiling will fall.  And they just don't know, you know, how to do these things.  And I've always maintained that if a person is coming, especially out of an apartment, and maybe, maybe even out of another home--but mostly, especially if they're first time buyers--they should be taught, you know.  Now, mainly if they were raised in a home... but I'm saying coming out of an apartment.  Because if you're raised in a home, basically you know what you're supposed to do, because your parents taught you.  But if you're coming out, as an adult coming out of an apartment, you should, in order to get the mortgage you should be taught how to maintain your home.  I've always said that.
Story_ID: 84576
Speaker 1: And, do you see, well, let me--one other question on the property management.  What would you consider a good one versus a not good one?  And are you a good one?  I mean, a good property manager?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say that I am.  (Laughter).  Yes, I think I'm very, very, good.  I think we're very good property managers.  We are very concerned about the landlords and the maintaining and the upkeep of the property.  We don't take anything if it's not maintained, you know, if it's not good.  If people call us and say we want your management, we go out and take a look at it.  There's a lot of them we turn down.  You know, if it's... especially if the landlord--because a lot of it, you know, we say, "Okay, we'll take it, but you got to do this, that and the other.  And you've got to do that before we take it, okay."  Now, if they're willing to do it, we'll take it.  But you know, we don't... the one thing we're not going to be is slum landlords.  So, if you're not willing to maintain your property, then don't call us because we're not going to take it.  Because I believe that a tenant that's paying his rent, you know, they should get good service.  They, if they have something that's going on--it should be nice grounds, whatever.  And if there's something going on in their apartment, they should be serviced.  They're paying the rent, and I believe in servicing the tenant.  I also believe that the tenant, if he's in that apartment and he is getting the service that he needs and wants, he should also pay his rent to the landlord.  I don't believe in tenants just staying there months and months and months and don't pay.  So, if they don't pay, we will ask them to move.  We will ask them to move and take them to court if they don't do so.  But I think that one hand--you know, they have to work together.  The landlord has to give the tenant service, and the tenant should pay his rent.
Story_ID: 84577
Speaker 1: And the, what about support?  I mean you've had to use accountants and lawyers and, you know, and other professionals around you.  And I'm just wondering what things have you learned about dealing with them, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't quite... will you kind of--
Speaker 1: I was just wondering, I'm just trying to understand, because business has to be supported.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Yes, I have attorneys--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --that you know, I work with, you know, for different court cases, you know.  And you know, I also maintain insurance on all properties and everything.  Because, you know, people always want to sue you for something, you know.  So you know, so naturally I do have attorneys that, you know, different attorneys that I work with.
Story_ID: 84578
Speaker 1: But has the business changed much over the years?  You know, the business of property management, has it changed, or is it basically the same business that you entered into?
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of the buildings that--years ago there used to be a lot of multiple units.  Now, most of that stuff is torn down now.  You know, it's either still vacant land or either the people have gone in and rehabbed those properties now.  You don't, it used to be--it just used to be just so--you know, it was just the sight of all these raggedy buildings with all these kids all running around and all that.  And it was not the tenants' fault, because the buildings were na--they were just, you know, people didn't keep them, they didn't maintain them.  I mean a lot of people, they just, they would just bleed the buildings.  All they wanted was the money out of the buildings and they would not put anything back in them.  And they just went from bad to worse, and eventually they were torn down.  I find the neighborhoods are better because of that.  Because it caused a lot of crime in those areas because those buildings are just sitting there, you know.  And so I was so glad, you know, when they started to just tearing them down, you know.  So now, it's just vacant land.  So, in that way, you know, I think the neighborhoods became better, you know.  And the neighborhoods are better now because you've got a lot of different, you know, rehabbing and, you know, new construction that's going on.  And housing and different people--I mean some of the houses are being built, you know, in the area.  You know, so the neighborhoods are better.  The only thing that I say the difference between then and now is that, is the drug activity.  Now, I found that a lot of the neighborhoods--and you know, not anyone--not our fault in any way.  I mean because it's hard to have to live in those areas.  But then you don't have a choice in a lot of instances.  Then you got drugs, you know, and that is really infiltrating a lot of our neighborhoods.  If it wasn't for that, our neighborhoods would be much, much better.  But you know, the drive-by shootings...  You've got your kid and the kid--you know, you don't know what to do.  I mean you can't afford to go anywhere else, so you have to live there in... you know.  But the neighborhood basically would be okay, but you got that factor.
Story_ID: 84579
Speaker 1: And if you were getting started in real estate from scratch today would you still go in the same area, or would you go in another part?  Or, would you do something completely different?
Speaker 2: I would still stay there.  You know, well, getting at this point in my life I wouldn't want to.  But I guess if I was, you know, at the age I was when I started, I probably would try real estate again.  I don't know if I'd be located where I am.  And maybe I would, you know.  I may be located in a suburban area or something, but maybe I wouldn't.  You know, it's something I guess I have to think about, you know.  Because where I am is a, you know, is a thriving area now with businesses, you know.  And everybody, you know, works together to keep our neighborhood together.  And you know, we've got very successful businesses on the block and all.  So, you know, it's very encouraging.
Story_ID: 84580
Speaker 1: And do you ever think about your par--the Goins, and if they could see where you are today?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think about them all the time.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: What do you think they would say?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think that they would be very, very proud.  Yeah, I think about that all the time... I think about it.  I used to say that "I'm going to make Daddy proud."  Well, Mother [Annie Goins], too.  But like I said, you know, I was a daddy's [Mack Goins], you know, daddy's girl, you know.  I was like, hey, you know, I was a father's child, you know.  Whatever my daddy did, I did it, you know.  And so, I think that they would be, they would be very, very, proud of me today.
Speaker 1: Because you followed in his footsteps.  I mean, he was, you said he owned his own--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --gin and--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, yeah.  No, he didn't own his own gin, he owned his own farm.
Speaker 1: Farm, sorry, farm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Farm.
Speaker 2: His own farm.  And he felt that he should be able--since he was independent he should be able--like the other white people that owned their own farm--they could sell their cotton wherever they wanted to sell it.  So, why couldn't he sell his where he wanted to sell his so he could get the higher rate also per pound--you know, instead of having to go here to sell it to the white man, and then the white man would take his and then go sell it and get more per pound.  So.
