Story_ID: 10166
Speaker 1: Please say your name--full name and spell it.
Speaker 2: Kimberly Ann Lightford. That's K-I-M-B-E-R-L-Y A-N-N L-I-G-H-T-F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: And any nicknames?
Speaker 2: Just Kim or Kimmie.  I had one when I was really little, it's Newt, but it kind of outgrew me (laughs).
Speaker 1: Your birthdate?
Speaker 2: It's 5-10-68 [May 10th, 1968].
Story_ID: 10167
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I do.  Failure is not an option.
Speaker 1: And how did you come to have that?
Speaker 2: I realize that it's not an option to fail; you've got to keep going. Through all of my upbringings and trials I would always tell myself you can't fail, that whatever it is you set your mind to do, go do it.  If I'm going to college, then I have to finish college.  If I'm working here, whatever I'm trying, I've got to keep going until I get it right and then if for some reason I can't do that, just don't think that life ends there, that I don't have to be failure per se, but just to continue on. So I tell my nieces and nephews all the time, it's just not an option for you to be a failure.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Greens withs smoked turkey.
Speaker 1: All kinds?
Speaker 2: All kinds of greens, collard greens, turnips, mustard, spinach mixed in.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer. Love summer.  Love the heat.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: When you take a vacation, where is your favorite place to go?
Speaker 2: To the islands.  And I've--I can't say which is the, you know, the best, or I enjoy the most, but I enjoy Jamaica, I enjoy the Bahamas, Hawaii is beautiful, I enjoy Hawaii, so anywhere I can get that--there's the sun, the desert look, the ocean all at the same time, I think that's beautiful.
Story_ID: 10168
Speaker 1: Would you give us the names of your parents and spell them? And tell us where they were born.
Speaker 2: Oh, good. My dad, his name is Melvin Lightford, Sr.  He was born in Huntsville, Alabama.  My mother's name is Barbara Ann Beasley Lightford and she was born here in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Excuse me Adele, could you move to your right just a little bit?
Speaker 2: To my right? Okay.
Speaker 1: There we go.
Speaker 2: I was trying to be sure I didn't get in the camera. Melvin and Barbara. And give me your siblings in birth order..
Speaker 1: Oh, good. My oldest sister is Carmelita Patrice and my middle sister is Janine Monique and my brother is Melvin Jr.
Speaker 2: What was it like growing up in the Lightford household?
Speaker 1: Wow.  It was hectic, pretty hectic.  Mixed emotions I have.  On one hand, two parents that married at sixteen and seventeen, very young, started a family very young, by the time they had me, I was the third child, my mom was nineteen, my dad was twenty.  My dad went to the Army and when he returned from the Army they used the G.I. Bill or what have you to build--to help you buy a home and moved from the West Side of Chicago [Illinois] to Maywood [Illinois] which was an up and coming suburban community in the late '60s [1960s].  We moved there in '72 [1972] when I was four years old.  My mom was an only child so it was important to her that she support her kids in what they do.  She felt always she never had support from her family.  So my mom went to school with me literally.  She was my assistant teacher aide, my mom was always there.  She went to kindergarten with me.  She was a kindergarten helper, so it was like my mom was just there.  Whatever activities we were involved in, she always kept us involved.  So I did student council, cheerleading, volleyball, track, just every, you can imagine how busy I could be but I did that twofold and one was kind of to get away from my house a lot, from my dad, because my dad was just--I don't know, I just--he raised us military style, he thought we were in the Army like, you know. And it was pretty difficult to be young.  Now that I'm older I realize that they were young, trying to raise a family and that they were growing too, so it was those issues.  It was still hectic but it was love at the same time.  I can't even, I would have, there's no one clean-cut answer for how the house was.
Speaker 2: They stayed together for the marriage?
Speaker 1: My parents will be married thirty-five years on New Years Eve this year [2000].
Story_ID: 10169
Speaker 1: Oh, do I have a testimony, and I know they have one, it's like the first twenty-five years of their marriage.  I don't know how she survived it, you know, me and my mom [Barbara Beasley Lightford].  My dad [Melvin Lightford, Sr.] was a little abusive, and so--quite abusive--and I don't know how she did it and the last ten years have been like just pray anything can happen, to pray miracles can happen, and my dad is like a total 360 degree different person.
Speaker 2: Do you know what changed?
Speaker 1: I like to believe maybe it's grandchildren, having grandchildren began to dwell on him a little bit.  I'd like to believe I had a little something to do with it.  He was still being abusive when I was in my early twenties and I told him one day, I said, "You better hope Mom goes first because if you're still around, you know, you're going to be in a tight spot to be, because we're not going to take you in, the way you've been treating us."  And in old age, you know how we keep our parents around us until their last breath, you know. And tell him we'll put him in a home and nobody will come see up and we'll just kind of, and so I kind of like share with him that he needs his daughters, he needs his family, you know, and stop being so abusive and angry with us for whatever reason.  I think my dad was angry, you know, and so I'm hoping that maybe he thought about that, too.  I don't know, I think just prayer.
Speaker 2: Looking at it for a moment from your dad's side, what do you think was in his life pattern that had any (unclear).
Speaker 1: You know, that's still a mystery to me because my dad's father, my grandfather, was just awesome, gorgeous, awesome man.  He died when I was nine years old, but I don't remember him ever being abusive to my grandmother. And I have three aunts and I would ask them all the time, you know, where did my daddy get this from, and you know, it's not his father, they were always like daddy's little girls so they were special to him.  So he didn't get the behavior from his dad. So I would like to think, you know, society played a role in that, you know, just being a man, growing up in that era and taking on the responsibility of marriage and a family young and wanting to survive and, you know, choosing the Army as his out and, you know, working and trying to make a way.  And then my grandmother is just a little more feisty, so his feistiness may have come from his mother more so than his father's behaviors because it wasn't my grandfather.
Story_ID: 10170
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Barbara Beasley Lightford] ever, looking at life through your mother's eyes, can you share with us--promptly--a situation where you and your mother related just one on one.  What would have been the most memorable? Most effective one for you relating to your mother?
Speaker 2: When I was growing up, or does it matter period?  Or anytime?
Speaker 1: Whatever really stands out for you in your exchange with your mother.
Speaker 2: I believe her grace.  My mother is like, she has a grace about herself.  Through everything that she was going through, she was still like, a great mother, a provider, cook, clean, we always looked nice, dressed neat and she was always at the school.  She started the PTO [Parent Teacher Organization] in our grammar school and she would be in charge of eighth grade graduations and things of that nature and so it was always, no matter how she had to be feeling on the inside, it just wasn't an outer show. So I believe it's her grace that I always remember and think about when I'm going through a tough time, if I'm going through it, does it have to show, does everybody have to see this hurt written on the outside, you know.  And that's what I believe my mother is.  She's just--she's graceful.
Speaker 1: At what point did you become aware that your mother was running into so much problems? How old were you? Was that before you went to school?
Speaker 2: Oh my god, it was like from a little bitty girl, I would say about, I probably became aware of it at about four or five years old maybe, you know, really young, and it carried on into my late twenties.
Story_ID: 10171
Speaker 1: Your mother [Barbara Beasley Lightford] was active in school, working with the kids and all. What was school like for you?
Speaker 2: School was great for me.  I always received good grades, but I always had a D or F for conduct, just bad attitude.  I made the honor roll, I was very active, I looked nice.  The teachers, like, what is wrong with this child, you know. And so I had a teacher that pulled that out of me, you know, and he sent me in the fifth grade to represent the class as our student council representative.  Because he was it was like, you know, you're a leader in the classroom and you did great grades and this and that but there's just something.  So he sent me to represent the class and that began to help redirect my focus a little bit, my attitude, my negative attitude, everyone has an good--an attitude, be it good or bad, but it just redirected my behavior. And from then on, I was blessed with great teachers and those that wanted--that made me excel even more, made me come out of that, you know, that you're the class leader, you cannot too have this bad attitude or this behavior with that. And so they kind of drive that up in me, you know, from 5th to the 8th grade, you know.  So I would think that I enjoyed school.  I loved it.  I guess I loved it enough to keep going and going and going.  But I enjoyed school.
Speaker 1: Who was your favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Well, can you have one that's a favorite but not be the one that really made the difference? Good. Because I have a couple favorites but then I do have one who really made the difference and that's Reverend Foster. I had a teacher who was a reverend when I was in the eighth grade and I was exposed to her from starting the fifth grade because she was the student council coordinator, or what have you, that teacher that oversees the student government.  And so she, wow, made such a big impression on me until I finally got up into her classroom from fifth grade and sixth grade, I was the treasurer when I was in the sixth grade and so I had to work a little more with her and then when I got into the seventh grade, I rotated into her classroom because we rotated for social studies. But she was not my homeroom teacher, but in social studies she would play [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] speeches and made us sit and listen to them and think and she was trying to bring out the culture in us and make us aware of who we are and where we come from. And then she put a lot of, you can't be in that way, Kimberly, on me, and she put a lot of--she--one thing she told me I'll never forget, that makes so much sense to me now, is think before you speak.  She'd say, you just blurt out and say anything.  Just think before you say anything from here on out. And she told me this in the seventh grade.  I was the vice president of the student council when I was in seventh grade and this was like of the whole school and my sister Janine was in the 8th grade president so she and I were the president and vice president. And we would sit up and try to conduct meetings, arguing and fighting with one another because of what was going on at home. And she would just stay on us so much but it was like from a love perspective and, you know, she'd, just ladies, ladies. And she just made such a big difference so by the time I got to eighth grade I was in Ms. Harris' room which is another one of my favorite teachers. But in order for me to be the eighth grade class president and over student council I had to be in her classroom.  And so there was another girl in line that she was going to replace me with and her name was Leticia Collins which is still one of my best friends today. And I told Tish, "No way, I've been working throughout all these years, I'm going to be the president, they have to switch me in homeroom."  I went to Ms. Harris and Ms. Foster and I got them together and I'm like, "Oh, please, switch me, switch me", so they did, they did a switch and then her presence was heavily on me because I was in her homeroom and being in that level she just really like made me go above and beyond my behavior. And I did the speech at the graduation and one thing she had me do was we had our first African American mayor of Maywood [Illinois] when I was thirteen and in the eighth grade and he came to school and I had to give him a speech and this award presentation and she wrote the speech for me.  I thought it was terrible then and I still think it was a terrible speech, now that I do a little speechwriting, but I knew I had to memorize the speech and I wanted to do good and I just studied and studied and I was just so nervous, and when I did it, it was over, you know, it was just like, this long and over. But Mayor--his name was Mayor Freeline, Joe Freeline--he is the mayor in Maywood now and I am a trustee with him and so it's just like a blessing that I reminded him when I was thirteen that I had given him this award as the first African American mayor and now I'm working with him, sitting on his board, so she just brought out the best in me in a lot of ways.
Speaker 1: That's delightful. Now what about the teachers that you said were your favorite favorites?
Speaker 2: My other favorites? Ms. Harris was one of them.  She was my mathematics teacher.  She was my homeroom teacher for seventh grade and she was a woman that was graceful.  She was soft spoken, she was real compassionate and she brought the ladyness out, you know, with that attitude, that you're still a lady and act like a lady at all times and be a lady and math was my favorite subject and so she was stimulating because she challenged me and I liked the challenge and I wanted to do good in math because at that time I wanted to be a math teacher.  So it was like a really good thing to be with Ms. Harris, you know. And her whole--she was more like a sister/mother type person, it wasn't all authority, but it was authority with some love so Ms. Harris would definitely be one.  And then Mr. Hendry--a gentleman--he was my sixth grade teacher and Mr. Betts, my God, I have so many! They were my sixth grade teachers and this was when we began to learn about black history.  We had a big black history program in the sixth grade and Mr. Betts was just Mr., you know, like Mr. Mandingo (unclear) himself, just this gorgeous black man, you know, and he was so rich in culture and he would wear dashikis to school and he'd have on flared jeans with this big Afro, you know, I thought he was gorgeous. And he was really articulate, and he was also a math teacher so I just loved him in the sixth grade and my love for math too. But that other side is the exposure he wanted to do with who we were, hadn't I got that in grammar school at all until the sixth grade with him. And with Mr. Hendry, he was more the athletic person, he was the coach.  He was the one who said, go try out for volleyball, go try out for softball, you're gonna run track.  By that time it was what I'm going to do, you're going to run track after cheerleading, because I always, I'd been a cheerleader forever and he, well, do something else, you're going to do this, you're going to do that. And then he told me that I was going to run long jump and I was like, what is long jump.  They take me out there, make me practice, make me run and jump in the box and actually I won for all of the--there was about eight or nine schools in my school district at that time and I wanted to long jump for all the schools, you know, just because he told me I could do it and it was something I had never done before. And so I kind of like really think he's the favorite because he brought some other things out in me and my teachers were like just helping me be the best I could be and forget about my behavior and my attitude. But I believe by this time they realized there were some problems at home that had nothing to do with the little girl that I wanted to be, you know, the little girl with the good academics and the good athleticism, that little girl.  So they really brought that out in me.
Speaker 1: What elementary, middle and high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I went to Lexington Elementary School in Maywood [Illinois], I went to Proviso East High School and just grammar school--yeah.
Speaker 1: When you got to high school, life continued in the same vein?
Speaker 2: Yeah but it had gotten a little better because I was the freshman homecoming queen, (laughs) so it got a little better.  It was a little better because my oldest sister was a senior and my middle sister was a sophomore and I was a freshman and by then I was so much more mature, so I thought, than all of my other friends eighth grade was really like boring if I had not been like the president.  All my friends were in high school.  I had the same friends as my sister's friends with the exception of Leticia Collins and Vicki, some girlfriends but they couldn't do as much as I could and we were only friends at school.  After school I had different friends, especially by the eighth grade, and they were all in high school so I felt like I'm finally where I'm supposed to be, you know, I'm in high school, I'm with my friends now and I won the homecoming queen thing and I was still doing pretty good academically.  High school was fun, school was fun.
Story_ID: 10172
Speaker 1: So you've had this pattern of leadership straight out the womb almost. How did you develop that aside from those instances in school you gave us? When did your leadership side emerge?
Speaker 2: I would have to say as early as ten years old in the fifth grade and it progressed when I went to high school.  I was on student council in high school but then that little girl came out more so, than oh, I want to be cute, and I've got a boyfriend now and so student council wasn't as important as it had been for me. So I didn't put all that into it as I should have.  When I went to college I pledged a sorority, Delta Sigma Theta and that's when I began to--those leadership skills began to re-emerge, so to speak, tied in with public service, very active on campus and in the community. And so that's when it kind of relived itself and I thought--.
Speaker 1: Excuse me--can you?
Speaker 2: My bracelet?
Speaker 1: Your bracelet. Just keep it down so that way it won't--.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Then you have been really preparing yourself for a role in the legislature.
Speaker 2: All along.  All along.  I had no clue and when it came to me, it's like when they say have a listening ear for the Lord, listen to what He's trying to tell you to do, not directing your own path, but listen, and when it finally came to me I had no idea.  I mean I went to undergrad school just to get away from my house.  I didn't go with emphasis on, I need an education. Then after undergrad school I started working for the [Illinois] Secretary of State which was my first job and I was in this program called Minority Management Training.
Story_ID: 10173
Speaker 1: What college was this?
Speaker 2: I went to Western Illinois University [Macomb, Illinois] for undergrad school.  I earned a bachelor's in public communication and human relations and management minor and slash African American studies.  I worked for them for three years and I had gotten to a point where--it's so amazing that politics played a role and it was so negative because I voted straight Democrat, I punched ten and voted straight Democrat in the election of, ninety--I believe it was '93 [1993], and then I was demoted on my job basically, and this is like the first time I ever went public with this but I had done pretty good at the Secretary of State's office every year, being promoted, moving around.  I was running the full supply and inventory system for 121 drivers license facilities at this time. And that was pretty good.  I was the youngest on the whole floor there, the fifth floor at the [James] Thompson Center [Chicago, Illinois], then we moved over to 11 North State Street [Chicago, Illinois] and I was the only African American in a management position at that time and I was about twenty-three, twenty-four maybe and I thought I was doing pretty good but when you become complacent, I believe is what happened--it was time for me to move because I could have stayed right there, but I was limiting myself to what God had in store for me. And so I voted and I punched ten in the election and then they told me, you no longer work here, you're to report at another drivers license facility now.  I had never been in a drivers license facility. And I go there and they have me in the camera division where I'm standing up on my feet taking picture of peoples' drivers licenses was my job now, after three years of running their--actually it was a problem, I fixed this problem for them. And once I was demoted I go, oh, no, no way I'm going to stay here and take pictures of people for--this is not what I went to college for, I'm thinking. So I resigned after I did that for about six or seven months I was preparing myself to move and I moved in with my grandmother.  I'm a runaway too I've got to throw that in there for all the little kids who think they're having a hard time and thinking that they can't make it.  When I realized I didn't like what my dad [Melvin Lightford, Sr.] was doing, you know, I thought I could survive and so I started running away at thirteen and I lived with everybody throughout.  I really can't recall the last time I fully lived in my house with my parents for, you know, past a year, a length of time, what have you.  School became my scapegoat, a place to live, I could survive. So I resigned from the [Illinois] Secretary of State and I moved in with my grandmother and I paid my bills down, I refinanced my car, did this whole thing and positioned myself for graduate school.  So I moved to Springfield [Illinois] and I had no idea why I was being led to Springfield for graduate school.  Out of all the schools that I could choose, I chose Sangamon State University which is now the University of Illinois at Springfield and I went down there.  I was in a two-year internship program and I was at the Department of Corrections in the director's office at that time, which was Howard Peters, and I did a two-year intern with the Illinois House [of Representatives] Dems [Democrats] and with the Illinois Legislative Black Caucus and now I'm the Senate chairman of the Black Caucus which is, like, wow, how did it all happen.  From there being fully exposed, my state rep at that time was Eugene Moore. He's now the Cook County Recorder of Deeds, he kind of pulled me into all of this, you know.  It was his suggestion, you know, that you should run for trustee in your home town, you know, you should make a difference, get back to your community. And so I had no idea I was on this path being led into government I should say.
Story_ID: 10174
Speaker 1: You ran for Trustee [of Maywood, Illinois] in what year?
Speaker 2: In '97 [1997].  I finished graduate school in '96 [1996]. And I returned home with no intentions of returning home, I was going to Florida, actually, I had been in the interview process with the Florida Federal Penitentiary System and I was looking forward to moving down there, warm, because I love the summer sun, buy a drop top, just go relax, you know.  I complained to him in January of '96 [1996], I complained to him [Eugene Moore] about the park district being boarded up in the village of Maywood and I thought that was a major problem for the development of youth because that was my outlet as a child.  We always had activities going on, recreational things to do in the community.  And I was home for Christmas break, I was stopped by the light on the corner of 9th [Avenue] and Madison [Street, Maywood, Illinois] and this is where the park district building sits and it was boarded up and I could not believe it.  So me, like any other constituent, I get back down to Springfield, the legislators come in, and I flushed my state rep out, how could the building be boarded up, what are you doing for kids. Because I'm working at the Department of Corrections and I'm seeing the juvenile crime rate skyrocket, particularly they have it broke down by zip code, coming out of my zip code and then you have people going, "Kimberly, isn't that where you're from", and I said, "Yes, I am, and I'm proud of it".  There are some issues and society issues there where the children aren't being met, their needs aren't being met and you wonder why there are more of them attracted to selling drugs and attracted to different things because the community is not providing this outlet for them that was there for me when I was growing up, you know it just changed, you know. So I'm fussing him out and he tells me, "What are you going to do about it." "What do you mean, what am I going to do about it, you're the state rep."  This is what I thought.  Then he tells me, "You need to get in there as a trustee and if you don't like what's going on then take over and change it."  And I go, "Oh, it's that simple, just take over and change it."  "Well, yeah, if that's what you feel."  And I'm like wow, I'm going to Florida, you know, I'm graduating in May and I'm going to Florida.  I had no plans on going back to Maywood.  And so I just didn't feel right for weeks, just didn't feel right, it just didn't sit right, no matter how I thought, prayed, and then that listening ear came.  You know, finally I listened and it's like, okay, that's what you should be doing.  I hadn't searched for a job at home, I had no idea where I'd be working, where I'd be living, nothing.  I began to, I was with the Department of Corrections, I went and talked to the director of the agency which was a change and told him sorry I'm so late coming and asking for a job--we're in like March at this time and I'm graduating two months later--but if I could finish my intern and go home and take a position because I want to run for Trustee in the village of Maywood so I can oversee recreation for youth and senior services. And he said, "Oh, okay, I never knew you had aspirations to get into politics." And I said "Neither did I." And so I go home, I run for Trustee and I move in with my parents for the first time in years and I'm twenty-eight years old and livin' home with my parents which was pretty interesting. But they were so proud of me, I was the first to earn a master's degree in the family, the first to earn an undergrad degree as well, so they were like really proud right now so I can do whatever I want.  I go home and I move in with my parents, I run for Trustee, and I win Trustee.
Story_ID: 10175
Speaker 1: You were telling us about how you came to have you know, some influence what happens to the Boys and Girls Clubs and other social areas.
Speaker 2: Okay, good. Actually when I became a Trustee [of Maywood, Illinois], the first project that I worked on was the Boys and Girls Club of Maywood and I had over 800 kids enrolled and so that just demonstrates the great need that was there for this youth outlet.  In addition to that I've helped collaborate with state funding to give to the local community to help redo all their parks, redo the local pool which is the Fred Hampton pool.  We just spent half a million dollars into redoing the local pool so it has been like a lot of uplifts that has taken place.  And seniors as well.  We have more activities for seniors in all our senior homes, we go to them and do different services in the actual senior home and then we bring them all together and do different types of events and things.  They have their Easter program now, they have Thanksgiving, Christmas, different holidays, they have fashion shows and do things that were just totally obsolete prior to me becoming a Trustee. I don't know if it was a ten year span where there were no activities or what have you but when I left in '86 [1986] the community seemed to be doing fine, or appeared to be doing fine, and I returned in '92 [1992] and it was like, what happened, you know.  Maybe it was on the decline when I was leaving and didn't realize it as a child as much too, when I came back. And it was like the mid '90s [1990s], just no progression. And then we had this election which they changed, instead of having six districts with separate Trustees, the town opened up the village wide and so there was a race of, there were seventeen opponents for the trustee position and then six of us were selected to run government for the town, and so.
Speaker 1: How many African Americans? What was the breakdown of representation?
Speaker 2: Of those running?
Speaker 1: Of the six.
Speaker 2: Oh, of the six we have, we're primarily an African American community.  We have one white male and then the rest are African Americans. There is two--two African American women and three African American men, African American mayor.
Story_ID: 10176
Speaker 1: Take us back to thirteen when you just decided you were not going to stay in the Lightford household. How did you manage on your own between that time and the time you actually took your own apartment?
Speaker 2: My family, I lived with my great-grandmother.  I lived with my grandmother.  I lived with my other grandmother.  I lived with my older sister when she was married.  I lived with my friend and her mother.  A lot of moving around, and then in and out of my house, here and there, and then college was my scapegoat that I mentioned. And I felt college, I knew I had a dormitory room, I knew I had a room, I knew I had food and I knew that I would be fine from August to December, I knew I would just go home for a couple weeks and go back and I knew I'd be fine from January until May.  So I used school as my outlet to have a place to stay, sleep, and I think I chose an education as my outlet and I used that clear on up to graduation and then I--oh, I lived with another friend, one of my sister's friends for a minute.  Then me and one of my sorority friends, we got a townhouse over by UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago] campus.  That was my really first, first apartment, with Keisha.  And then after I resigned from the [Illinois] Secretary of State to return back to Springfield [Illinois], I had an apartment of my own.  That my first time of really an apartment of my own other than the college campus.  I didn't have a roommate.  I basically had my own room more often than not.
Story_ID: 10177
Speaker 1: So you have enjoyed your years as a Trustee [of Maywood, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Sometimes.  Sometimes, because government isn't easy and when you have a population of those who really don't understand government, it's really more than trying to fix a broken community after twenty years of neglect, and then it's also trying to teach the people to come out of that broken mentality, trying to encourage them to see the bigger picture of what the components of a community and the changes that have to take place in order for us to claim our community again.  So I've had some ups and downs with some discouraging times, you know. But I'm blessed when I step into the Boys and Girls Clubs and when I see kids running around, being kids again.  When I see the outlets that I've helped to provide, then I feel good about it.
Story_ID: 10178
Speaker 1: What was it like campaigning for your first term [as Trustee of Maywood, Illinois].
Speaker 2: I was with Mayor [Joe] Freeline which was the first African American mayor I mentioned to you that I gave an award to when I was thirteen years old in eighth grade.  He had put together a ticket and it consisted of himself, it consisted of a Trustee that had been a Trustee for twenty-some odd years which was Gary Roth, a white Caucasian that I told you about who's very knowledgeable. And Lanzia Castillo (ph.) who was also another trustee for twenty years but he was going to run for clerk instead.  And then what they did was interview people to get on their ticket and they selected me out of their interview choices so we had a team running together, a mayor, a clerk and six trustees, so we had a ticket we were trying to push for the first time.  It was interesting because I brought the youth perspective to the ticket.  We did our coffees or teas and things of that nature, my interest was mostly youth involvement, senior activities, more so.  I believe they were delighted by me because I brought that internship experience from the [Illinois] House [of Representatives] with me with I was with the House Democrats and so I would talk to them about how more funding was going to the Department of Corrections than Education.  You know, I would talk about how I witnessed a vote that gave more funding to build more prisons and give more funding to be more proactive with our children and provide them outlets so they would not lead a life of crime for these prisons to be built.  And so it was easier for me interviewing, I'm sorry, campaigning, because I had this first-hand experience.  It was like within me, I just lived it for a couple years and so I really would give them my heart and how I really felt we should go about doing things and why they should select qualified candidates instead of always selecting a friend or selecting someone somebody told them to vote for and that they needed to begin to vote for people who really understood the system to the point they felt they could really make a difference, and not think it's just so one-sided because government isn't.  It's just not so easily done.
Story_ID: 10179
Speaker 1: So your first term as a full-fledged [Illinois State] Senator, what was it like when you got in the seat?
Speaker 2: Overwhelming.  Overwhelming.  It was joy mixed with unclarity.  I wasn't sure about, you know, like, wow, I was thirty years old when I was sworn in, and so how would this change my life?  The norm of the Senate is not a thirty year old African American female so almost, how do I fit in, but I didn't want to fit in.  I decided that I wanted to create my own path and that I wanted to do what was best for my district. And I have a very diverse district, very, very diverse, and so when I go to many first time, I'm always thinking, what are they thinking, and it's like oh this little girl. And so I knew I had to really work hard and earn respect.  That's what some of my colleagues didn't have to do because they were the norm, they fit the picture, or either they had family members so they had a legacy in politics so their name spoke for itself.  And then here I am, not one single family member in government or in politics, my name wasn't familiar, and I had to kind of work my way through it.  Sometimes people don't recognize that.  That's not it.  Or, I had to be an attorney, or I had to be somebody somebody. And so I was in that shadow for quite some time so I really had to work my way through that, work out of it, and just use all my skills that I thought I had all along, you know.  So I did feel overwhelmed.  I felt the responsibility was so overwhelming, I can't let these people down.  When I vote, I've got to know really how it's going to affect their lives, and how I'm voting, you know, not because someone told me to, but how can I feel good in my soul about the decisions that I'm making.  So it was a major challenge for me, it was just awesome.
Speaker 1: What tools did you use to address that challenge, that feeling of being overwhelmed?
Speaker 2: Trying to prepare myself.  I just went back into my old tactics of reading, listening, watching, observing, don't say anything until you feel comfortable.  I went back to Reverend Foster, think before you speak, you know, and I did a whole year of just thinking and listening, and not speaking much, and just trying to learn the system enough to be able to play an integral role in it, you know.  I think doing the best I can and being the best I could helped me out of, what helped people to realize who I really am and what type of background I stand from and so I think that's what I did, I just tried to be motivated.  You haven't gotten this far to be afraid of doing what you know how to do or what you can learn how to do, so I think the drive that I've had to have all along just kept me going.
Story_ID: 10180
Speaker 1: When among all this did you find time to meet and marry your husband?
Speaker 2: Which is a sore situation for me right now, but my husband--I met my husband after I won the nomination [for Illinois State Senate].  I was the Democrat nominee and I met him that summer working00I worked around my campaign, gosh, I didn't tell you that part, I was still working a full time job when I was campaigning for the Senate, I was really, that was really a task for me and I met him in the [James] Thompson Center [Chicago, Illinois] downtown on the elevator at lunch.  So you can meet your mate in high places (laughs).  And I had a little time because we were on a downtime after the primary before the general election and so when we met he had no idea I was a Democrat nominee and I didn't bother to tell him, either.  I had no idea he was doing as well as he has been doing in his life and he was a basketball player and now he has his own business and things of that nature so we were like really resistant from one another in terms of opening up in a lot of ways because I was thirty and he was thirty-four.  Neither one of us had children or had been married.  It was like this perfect opportunity, you know, so we though, to meet each other.  So a month later he asked me to marry him and I accepted and we eventually moved in together to cut back on costs to prepare for the wedding, honeymoon and things of that nature and we were married about ten months later.  We were married in my first year session.  I was planning a wedding, there was just so much, and, you know, I don't think--it's caused some problems
Story_ID: 10181
Speaker 1: So have you had time to address your personal side of life and give it that attention?
Speaker 2: No.  Early on I felt like, I'm losing my youth, you know.  You can't be a certain way because you're the [Illinois State] Senator now.  You can't dress a certain way, you can't act a certain way, you can't go here, you can't do this.  All these can'ts that society was placing on me because I was a senator now. And I'm very down to earth and well grounded and know how to survive and so my thing is, I'm Kimberly first, and being a Senator means this is my career now, this is a job, and I want to do well in it, but it doesn't make me, I'm whole already, I'm solid, and I bring myself to the Senate.  The Senate isn't making Kimberly, and that's the only way to stay focused.  You can get lost in power, you can get lost in prestige, you can get lost in society, making you become something other than who you really are and that's something I refuse to do.  I've got to still be me and know that it's God who's moving through me to do these things.
Speaker 1: So you've been able to get some balance with your personal and professional (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I'm just beginning to.  It's taken about a year and a half for me to prioritize, put things into perspective, do a little less reading, try to read summaries now, understanding that I can't make every single meeting, I can't be at all these places and trying to say, you know, my Sunday is for me.  I try to get at least every other Saturday to make time for me and my family otherwise I'm always at someone else's something, I'm doing something else. And they appreciate me being there but then it creates a lonely spot for me.  And I decided that I'm going to do my best in what I do but I've got to set some limitations.
Story_ID: 10182
Speaker 1: As you know, young people are not usually very aware of their legislators in state government.  How would you suggest young people become more aware and more participating in the area of state government?
Speaker 2: I'm glad you asked that because I do have this big picture but I'll give you my big real small.  I love to implement African American studies from the government aspect into the school district because I was not exposed to enough African American leadership when I was in grammar school and I think if kids today knew more of who we are and how they can be and where we come from that may instill some more self-esteem and self-worth and be builders for them. And so I would love to, first, implement it in the school system because I believe it has to be there.  If the teaching is not at home, then the teaching needs to come from the school system.  And then I feel it's our responsibility as legislators as well to extend ourselves that piece of knowledge that may not have been given to us and I know it wasn't given to me.  So I don't mind, I go out and speak to young groups all the time.  I don't mind being that youth person that needs to grab the kids and be involved in youth day or be the role model day at my high school, Proviso East High School [Maywood, Illinois] and different things so that kids can see me and know that I'm real, I have a heart like they do and may have had some issues growing up similar to theirs that they can overcome as well as I did.  So I think it's our role to extend ourselves out in that area.
Speaker 1: Generally, are the students surprised to discover you and your youth?
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely.  And then when I go, I try to dress down, I try to be casual, not in a suit, I don't--I prefer to reach youth not from an authoritative initial, you know, it's this home girl that I give them so that they can relax with me and be themselves and be able to communicate, you know.  I don't want them to clam up on me like they would with their parents and their administrators because then you can't really have that interaction with them.  So I go dressed down, I go to my high school, and all the guys try to pick me up, which is cute (laughs).  And the young ladies are like, hey, they're so relaxed, and once I go up, and this is Senator Lightford and then they hear me and they listen to my projections and I, you know, give them my--then it's, oh, she is an adult.  Then, oh, she is the [Illinois State] Senator, and then it changes.  But it's not a you, you, you and I'm not pointing a finger and they're more relaxed with me and I think I have a better relationship when I do that.
Speaker 1: Have you invited young people to participate in your campaign?
Speaker 2: Actually, I have.  I haven't had to do much campaigning but I've invited them into my office to do summer.  I had a young lady this summer who was fourteen years old, to get that exposure and experience too, of the Senate office from the constituent aspect of it.  I had a student from the University of Illinois at Chicago in my office.  He was doing his last semester and he came in to get some political science credit.  I had another young lady, her mom called, she was in her senior year, her summer, and she called and said, "I would like for my daughter to get some office experience, I want her to be more exposed, can she come down?"  And I, oh, of course, I would love to have her.  I've extended my door opening my door, and it's not to get free labor.  Some people would take it, but I want them to get exposure, you know, of set this up, write this, do this, more than just come and answer my phone and be my receptionist.  It's more attend this community meeting with me and then write a report on it and tell me what you got from it, or set this up, you know. So I've really been trying to like, gear them in and be that intern that I once was.
Story_ID: 10183
Speaker 1: What do you see in yourself as it relates to being in the [Illinois] state legislature?  What else would you
Speaker 2: like to see yourself do and become?
Speaker 1: I would like to become the person that people want to talk to on education issues.  I'd like to be the person that many people feel that if they need someone to lead something dynamic that there's--really will make a difference.  I'd like to be that person that they can count on, that they can depend on at some point.  Some of my colleagues now, I go to them knowing that this is the person I can talk to about education issues, and this is the person that I can talk to about health issues and this is the person to go to when you feel good in that. And I'd like one day to have that same relationship where I can build an expertise on a subject, that's a meaningful subject, and have my colleagues feel comfortable, have the community feel comfortable in so doing it, and making an impact in that way.
Story_ID: 10184
Speaker 1: So you've just reached the [Illinois State] Senate and most likely you could enjoy a long tenure there.  What would you like to do beyond state government?
Speaker 2: I'd still like to teach.  I'd still like to teach, but I would want to teach African American studies from a history perspective, from government perspective that I shared with you about.  I would like to perhaps go in, if not elementary, that's another age group that's really important--that the group that is a freshman in college, the young group that says, okay, we want to extend our education but I need to know who I really am right now, who I can be. And I want to do that introductory to whom you should know, where you come from, who you are, where you can go. And so if not that grammar school, get them early on perspective, I like to grab them on the other end to say, don't start your life right away into the family concept, you know.  The young girls--don't think about being a mother right now, think about being a young lady right now. And for the young men, you don't want that responsibility, enjoy life, enjoy your youth, go away to college, play--be involved in sports, pledge that sorority like I did, do those things, and I don't recall really having that, you know. And I think more generations, they need that.
Story_ID: 10185
Speaker 1: Is there anything I didn't ask you that I should have asked you?
Speaker 2: No, I think you were very thorough.  When we talked about my dad [Melvin Lightford, Sr.] and I said how he changed around a lot, I do have to mention that my dad is my biggest support right now. And that's amazing to me, when I think about how he would have been the last person I thought I would go to, now he's that front person, and the last--the first shall be last and the last shall be first--and my dad, he retired two years ago right in time for my campaign.  So I told him retired from me, now he can work for me.  But my dad has been just so supportive of what I'm doing.  I tease him and say, because it's your name that's out there that you like seeing, you know.  But my dad is really my dad and I just want that to be known, that, you know, relationships can change in your family if you work at them.  Relationships can change in your office setting, relationships can change in corporate structure, what have you, if you work at it and if you choose that this is--I know a better way that this should be. And that's when I told you I told my dad, you know, "You're going to rot old," I think I made some impact on him when I told him he's not going to have his kids love him and be there with them and I guess it worked itself out.
Speaker 1: So you have a closer relationship with your dad than your other sisters and your brother?
Speaker 2: With--we have individual relationships, individual.  My oldest sister, she taught me early on that I don't want to be a mom because she had her first child at fourteen, and so there was some adversities there that had nothing to do with me or my dad relationship or my little sister.  Then with my little sister, being my little sister, she had her separate relationship with Dad and then I had mine.  We were very different.  Even though we were a year apart I was more still the baby girl but I didn't want to be the baby girl, I, you know, didn't want to be like Daddy, I was always like Daddy, and no one ever told her she was like Daddy, 'cause she was all like Mom you know, and then it was just me all like Daddy and so I fought that.  I didn't want to be like Daddy.  I didn't want to look like Daddy, I just didn't.  And now it's okay, it's okay.
Speaker 1: It sounds like some of what you were, the part that was like your daddy, was probably responsible for you getting on your leadership path?
Speaker 2: I believe so.  I truly do.
Story_ID: 10186
Speaker 1: My dad [Melvin Lightford, Sr.], he always asked me, and it's amazing now, he'll go, "what's next, Kim-Kim"--that's what he calls me--and I'll go, "What's next?" He's like, "What's next?" "I don't know.:  And he asked me this after I finished undergrad school, he asked me what's next.  "Nothing's next, I don't know. " Then I'm in graduate school and he goes, "What's next?" and I go, "Nothing."  Then I run for Trustee [of Maywood, Illinois] and he says, "What's next," so this is our private little what's next thing so after the [Illinois State] Senate he comes, he asks, "What's next," I'm like, "Whoa, this is enough." (laughs) I said, "Let me sit right here for a minute."
Speaker 2: Catch my breath.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  I've been on a whirlwind of lessons.  I just finished graduate school in '96 [1996] and I'm a Senator by '98 [1998] and I'm sitting here talking to you by 2000, married, so.
Speaker 2: A nice long vacation on a warm island would--
Speaker 1: Would do me fine.
Story_ID: 10187
Speaker 1: What would you want to say to future politicians?
Speaker 2: To future politicians?
Speaker 1: Or to students in general?
Speaker 2: Okay, 'cause I would have a different message, you know, for--
Speaker 1: Whichever message.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay. For--I don't know, for politicians, I would say, make sure you're whole before you get involved and taking on this awesome responsibility that affects so many peoples' lives and make sure your soul is in it and your decision making will be thorough and know that you're not going to be able to change the world overnight.  So patience is a virtue in this, I really believe.
Speaker 1: Excuse me, my throat is drying up. And then for students? I'm so sorry.
Speaker 2: That's fine, are you okay? I think for students I would say, be focused and listen and know that you may say I want to be this when I grow up, but that may not be the reality of it, and so failure is not an option.
