Story_ID: 666964
Speaker 1: So I'll begin by slating.  My name is [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Today is December 6th, 2017 and we are on the Upper West Side of Manhattan [New York], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And would you please say and spell your name and tell me your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm Ida Elizabeth Lewis [HistoryMaker Ida E. Lewis].  I was born in 1934, September 22, 1934.
Speaker 1: And can you spell your name for me?
Speaker 2: I-D-A, Elizabeth, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, Lewis, L-E-W-I-S.
Speaker 1: Excellent, and where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Malvern, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Malvern, M-A-L-V-E-R-N; sometimes I put the E on it.
Speaker 1: But it's Malvern, Pennsylvania (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pennsylvania, yes.
Speaker 1: And what is, what has been your occupation?
Speaker 2: I, I, I'm a journalist.
Speaker 1: Journalist.
Speaker 2: Or I was a journalist.
Story_ID: 666965
Speaker 1: So we start with some easy questions.  We call them People magazine type questions.  What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: Food?
Speaker 2: Potatoes.
Speaker 1: Time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Cape.
Speaker 1: As in Cape Cod [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Cape Cod, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, and do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 666966
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your family, and let's start with your mother.  Would you tell me her name and date of birth and location of birth?
Speaker 2: Grace Walker Lewis.  I don't know exactly what her birthday is, Nov- I think it was November 21st, but I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Do you know what year she might have been born?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where's she, was, was she from?
Speaker 2: She was from Paoli, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: P-A-O-L-I.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was her work?
Speaker 2: She was an employment agency.  She owned an employment agency.
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: In, in Morton, my hometown, Morton, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Morton, Pennsylvania.  Do you know how she came to do that?
Speaker 2: No, one day she said she wanted to open a business.
Speaker 1: And she did.
Speaker 2: And she did.
Speaker 1: And how long did she have that company?
Speaker 2: Oh, for thirty, thirty years or so.
Speaker 1: And so, she's providing staff to what kinds of businesses in Morton (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well she, she would, for work clerical, homemakers, all kinds of businesses you know.
Speaker 1: And tell me about her family.  Where, where were her parents from?
Speaker 2: My grandmother well they, well they moved north from Georgia, Savannah, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When, do you know when they moved?
Speaker 2: Oh no, long in the 19--probably around 1915.
Speaker 1: Fifteen [1915]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifteen [1915], yes.
Speaker 1: And do you know what her parents did, what was their work?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was in the [U.S.] Army in World War I [WWI] and he was gassed, so he spent most of his life at the Coatesville Memorial Hospital, in Coatesville, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: And you say he was gassed?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, that's, that was one of the, the things that Germans used against the soldiers.
Speaker 1: And that compromised his breathing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --for life--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes for life, yes.  He spent all his time in the hospital.  And I used to go visit him with my grandma.
Speaker 1: Was he able to talk?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, he was able to talk and laugh and--but you know, he was airy sometimes.  Sometimes he would forget things, yes.
Speaker 1: Were there a lot of other veterans in the hospital (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --with that same issue?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Gassing was a big thing there at World War--in World War I, yes.  He was a wonderful man.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Hiliary, H-I-L-I-A-R-Y, Hiliary Walker.
Speaker 1: Walker.  How long did he live?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was in college [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] when he died.  I guess he was sixty, sixty something years old.
Speaker 1: So he lived a long time--
Speaker 2: Yes he did.
Speaker 1: --for having--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But he never was able to move back home?
Speaker 2: No, but it was so funny.  He said he would leave the hospital to come see grandmom and then they would let him stay out for a day or two and then he--they would come and pick him up.  He was fun, very funny.  Every year or so he would, he would escape from the hospital to see grandmom, yes.
Speaker 1: But health wise he just couldn't manage.
Speaker 2: No, he could not manage.
Speaker 1: Was he on oxygen?
Speaker 2: I don't, no, he was--no, I don't know--he wasn't on oxygen.  He was and he was a hand- and I thought he was the most handsome man I have ever seen.  I use to go to the hospital to see him with grandmom and I'd just sit there and just watch him, you know, he and he had such grace.  He was a very intelligent man.
Speaker 1: And your grandmom, what was her name?
Speaker 2: Ida [Ida Walker].
Speaker 1: Like you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was named after her.
Speaker 1: And did she work?
Speaker 2: Sometimes she did housework.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was that in Savannah--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or this was, they had already moved?
Speaker 2: They moved to the North when my mother was a young woman, a, a child as a matter of fact.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your grandfather was in the VA Hospital in Pennsylvania [Coatesville Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Coatesville, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yes, after World War I.
Speaker 1: Right, got it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you trace your mother's family back to slavery?
Speaker 2: No, no I--my grandmother would say certain things but she didn't really want to talk about it.  So no, I, I don't think--what I know about them that they--oh, my grandmother used to say to us that she was never a slave.  And, so we took her at her word.  And I don't think my mother of course, was not in slavery.  And I, I don't know anything about my grandfather.
Story_ID: 666967
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father, what's his name?
Speaker 2: Samuel Lewis, Samuel Walter Lewis.
Speaker 1: Okay and where was he born?
Speaker 2: In Savannah, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Do you know his birth date?
Speaker 2: No.  We never had a birthday for my father but I remember having a little get together for my mother [Grace Walker Lewis], just us, the children, but I never--my father never talked about his birthday.
Speaker 1: And his, what was his work?
Speaker 2: He was, he worked at the shipyard [Sun Shipbuilding and Drydock Company] in Chester, Pennsylvania.  I don't, I don't know exactly what he did, but he was a, he worked at the shipyard.
Speaker 1: For his whole life?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you assume it was a labor job?
Speaker 2: I assume, yes.
Speaker 1: But you don't know what?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Did he talk about work at all?
Speaker 2: No, no, he was--but he always went to work dressed, so, I don't know what he did.
Speaker 1: Um-hm and he's from Savannah?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: When did his family move north?
Speaker 2: I don't know 'cause my--it had to be very early because he met my mother in, in Paoli where he, where he lived and it had to be very early when he was a child.
Speaker 1: And how far can you trace back his family?
Speaker 2: Not very far, no.
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about his parents?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, my grandmother [Irene Lewis], my, and my grandfather [Samuel Lewis].  My grandfather was in some sort of business.  I don't know what.  He, he had a business in Paoli, Pennsylvania and my grandmother was, did not work, she stayed at home.
Speaker 1: How many children did they have?
Speaker 2: They had, let me see, there were three that I--four that I could, including my father, that I know of, but I think that one of them had a twin and died, so four of them that I know of.
Speaker 1: Okay, and on your mother's side, how many siblings?
Speaker 2: She had two sisters [Viola Walker and Hattie Walker].
Speaker 1: And where did she fit in?
Speaker 2: She was the oldest.
Speaker 1: And for your father where does he fit in?
Speaker 2: He was, I think he was the second one.
Story_ID: 666968
Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents [Grace Walker Lewis and Samuel Lewis] met?
Speaker 2: No, (laughter) probably--no I don't.
Speaker 1: But they had six children?
Speaker 2: Six children, yes.
Speaker 1: And where do you fall in the birth order?
Speaker 2: I'm number two.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, if you would, name your siblings and just tell me what did each of them end up doing in their work?
Speaker 2: Okay, my oldest brother, he's an actor.  He lives in California, L.A. [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Samuel [Samuel Lewis].  My, the one that comes after me, he's, he passed on.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: James [James Lewis].
Speaker 1: And what did he do?
Speaker 2: He worked for the government.  And then John [John Lewis], I don't know what John does.  My, and my baby brother Robert [Robert Lewis] and then my--he died and my sister who lives here in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay and what was her work?
Speaker 2: She worked in--social work.  She, after college she worked for a social, she did social work.
Story_ID: 666969
Speaker 1: And what town did you grow up in?
Speaker 2: Morton, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Morton, which is different--so where is Malvern [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: That's where I was born.
Speaker 1: Is that close to Morton (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and--well, about fifteen minutes or twenty minutes away from--
Speaker 1: Is that where, that's where the hospital was?
Speaker 2: Yes, on Main Line, what we called in Pennsylvania--I don't know if you know anything (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Main Line, yes.
Speaker 2: --the Main Line, yes.
Speaker 1: So Malvern is on the Main Line?
Speaker 2: That's right, yes.
Speaker 1: And Morton is where?
Speaker 2: Fifteen minutes from--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: But it's not on the Main Line?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Is Morton a black community?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --I and I learned that, this is so strange, I learned that while I was living here 'cause I looked it up and it was a small town and I don't remember--there's a few white people around where we lived, but the majority of the people in the community and there were only about seven hundred, were white and I didn't even know it (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's something.  So when you look back on your childhood, back, back, back, what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I remember my father [Samuel Lewis] taking a photograph of me.  I was a little girl and I have the photograph here and that's my earliest--when we lived on the Main Line and that for some reason, that's the earliest memory I have of him and me.
Speaker 1: What do you recall about living on the Main Line?
Speaker 2: I was, I remember being very happy there and my grandmom [Lewis' maternal grandmother, Ida Walker]--my father's parents [Irene Lewis and Samuel Lewis] lived in Paoli [Pennsylvania] and I remember going there a lot (unclear) and I remember happy times you know, but I was always happy wherever I lived, so.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any racial tension when you were there?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Story_ID: 666970
Speaker 1: When you think of the house you grew up in, the neighborhood you grew up in, what are the sights, sounds and smells that you remember as a child?
Speaker 2: Oh, I remember I would, when I was in college [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] though--
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: --I remember dying to get home for my, to eat my grandmother's cabbage and she would always have cabbage for me 'cause she knew I loved it.
Speaker 1: How did she prepare it?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know but it was so good and the biscuits.  I remember the cabbage and the biscuits.  And she would have that for me, especially for me when I got home.
Speaker 1: That's nice.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She was wonderful.  I have her picture everywhere here.
Speaker 1: That's Grace?
Speaker 2: Yes, no, that's, her name was Ida [Ida Walker].
Speaker 1: Ida.
Speaker 2: And her daughter's name was Grace [Grace Walker Lewis].
Speaker 1: Sorry, got that, right.  And what about the sights, what do you remember seeing when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: A little country town [Morton, Pennsylvania], that's all I remember.
Speaker 1: Were, you said that it was not a majority black town, but were there other black families there?.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes.
Story_ID: 666971
Speaker 1: So where'd you go to school?
Speaker 2: I went to a grammar school called Phyllis Wheatley [Phyllis Wheatley School, Morton, Pennsylvania] and I went to, then I went to Swarthmore High School [Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] and from there I went to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: So when--in your early school, was this public school?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Public school.
Speaker 1: And, so what years were you in elementary school?
Speaker 2: I remember graduating in 1948 (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From--
Speaker 2: --grammar, Phyllis Wheatley.
Speaker 1: What, from what grade?
Speaker 2: Eighth grade--
Speaker 1: Eighth grade.
Speaker 2: And then Swarthmore, '52 [1952] I think.
Speaker 1: So let's stick with leading up to the eighth grade first.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is this a, an integrated school?
Speaker 2: No, it was not.
Speaker 1: It was a segregated school?
Speaker 2: It was a segregated school.
Speaker 1: Even though your town was an integrated town--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --the schools were segregated?
Speaker 2: Yes, they use to tell us that my town, I had an integrated town, but I don't, you know, it's interesting; I don't remember any white people there.  I mean it was, and the majority of the people who lived in that town were white, but it gradually became integrated, but I don't remember anybody who, who was white, although my mother [Grace Walker Lewis] and father [Samuel Lewis] would have company--my mother's best friend as a matter of fact was white.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How did she meet her?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  She use to come and sit on the porch with my mother and her name was Ms. Lewis as well.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so your mother was, did, had no issues with welcoming anyone into her home?
Speaker 2: Oh no, we had no issue.  In fact, we didn't think about white people or black people, we, you know, we dealt with the people in our town and that's it.
Story_ID: 666972
Speaker 1: What kind of a student were you?
Speaker 2: In grammar school I was a very good school--a very good student and in high school [Swarthmore High School, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] I was mediocre but I got on graduation I got one of the only scholarships that they gave to the students who graduated.  So, I was considered a smart kid.  I didn't consider myself a smart kid, but they, I was--my teachers and everybody, they, they considered me a smart kid.
Speaker 1: What were your favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: History, I loved history.
Speaker 1: And were you learning about African American history back then?
Speaker 2: In our, that's one thing I'm so happy about going to Phyllis Wheatley [Phyllis Wheatley School, Morton, Pennsylvania] and we learned black history and, and we celebrated black people on Black History Month [Negro History Week; Black History Month].
Speaker 1: Great.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And when you were a little girl, when you were dreaming about what you might do when you grew up, what were you thinking about?
Speaker 2: Oh, my god, I use to have so many dreams, but I wanted to be a journalist.
Speaker 1: You did?
Speaker 2: Yes, I wanted to be a journalist.
Speaker 1: What made you have that thought?
Speaker 2: I don't know. I just wanted to be a journalist.
Speaker 1: And did you know that journalism was more than writing?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes.  I remember we had a contest and we had to do something you know, anything and I drew a copy of a magazine and won the contest.  It was just, and it wasn't very much (laughter), it was just, it was just a cover with a sky or, or and, and, and things, but I, that's, that's what I did and I won the contest.
Story_ID: 666973
Speaker 1: Did you grow up in the church?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: What, what denomination?
Speaker 2: Baptist.
Speaker 1: What, what was your home church?
Speaker 2: First Baptist Church of Morton [Morton, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: And what did you participate in?
Speaker 2: I was in the choir and until high school [Swarthmore High School, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] and then I said I've had enough of this (laughter).
Speaker 1: Choir, and you were done?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And did, was going to church once a week or did you go more often?
Speaker 2: Oh no, once, we'd go every Sunday and I went in the morning--Sunday school and--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 666974
Speaker 1: Did you participate in any extracurricular activities as a child?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, when I was in high school [Swarthmore High School, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: That's fine.
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I was in the homemakers club and I was in the French club.  I was, I, if I must say so, a great hockey and lacrosse player.
Speaker 1: All right!
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And did they have teams that you could join then?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.  They had and, and we, for something like twenty years in high school, I wasn't there for twenty years, but we had a record of never losing, our lacrosse team.
Speaker 1: Wow!
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 666975
Speaker 1: So you go to Swarthmore, how do you come to go there?
Speaker 2: Well, you'd have to take a test.
Speaker 1: But why did you pick that school?
Speaker 2: Well, 'cause they said it was the best in, in, our surroundings so that's why I went and my brother went, in fact, all of us went to Swarthmore.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And are you, are you and your siblings first generation college?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Who was in, who went to college before you?
Speaker 2: My aunt, two of my aunts went to college.  And, and in fact, I visited the college my, one of my aunts went to, in Alabama, or where, I forget exactly where.  And then another one went--and I had an aunt who went to a private school in, in Georgia, I think it was.
Speaker 1: So you came from a family that valued education and--
Speaker 2: Oh very--
Speaker 1: --and where people were educated?
Speaker 2: --very much so.
Speaker 1: So what did you go to Swarthmore to study?
Speaker 2: Swarthmore High School [Swarthmore, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 1: Oh, Swarthmore the high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, sorry and, so what was your focus?
Speaker 2: Journalism.
Speaker 1: From, you knew it?
Speaker 2: I knew it.  I wanted to be a journalist.  First of all because you travel a lot and my parents [Grace Walker Lewis and Samuel Lewis] would send me to visit relatives of ours during my childhood.  I went to Ohio where, where one of my uncles lived.  I went to--I fell in love with Boston [Massachusetts] and they would send me to different places during the, during the summer.  So I had that in me that I, I wanted to travel, in fact I used to dream about traveling.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: Where were you thinking you would go?
Speaker 2: To Africa and that's where I went after I graduated.
Speaker 1: From--?
Speaker 2: Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: So after you graduated, after you finished college?
Speaker 2: College, yes.
Speaker 1: So, Swarthmore, you had to test into that school?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did it, did it have different levels within it after you got in there, like different tracks, or was it all together?
Speaker 2: Different tracks (unclear)?
Speaker 1: So, like, I went to an all girls high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah?
Speaker 1: --where you had to test into and they had an A course and a B course and a C course.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you have something like that?
Speaker 2: Yes we did.
Speaker 1: And where were you?
Speaker 2: I think it was the B course.
Speaker 1: And how academically rigorous would you say it was?
Speaker 2: It was rigorous, yes.  It was considered the best school in, in the, in the area and so they pushed hard for us to go to the college, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To this school--
Speaker 2: Yes, 'cause everybody went to college afterwards.
Speaker 1: So it was a college prep high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And was this school integrated?
Speaker 2: Oh yes--
Speaker 1: Yes, so not--
Speaker 2: --'cause I was there.
Speaker 1: Right, well--
Speaker 2: And my brother went with me.
Speaker 1: But so you all integrated it?
Speaker 2: No, no, it was already integrated--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause the people, the blacks from Swa-, who lived in Swarthmore [Pennsylvania], had to (unclear), yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultnaeous) Okay.
Speaker 2: It was not many of us; I think it was seven, I think about seven of us in my class.
Speaker 1: I see.
Story_ID: 666976
Speaker 1: Did you experience any racial conflict when you were there?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: You were welcomed?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what years were you at Swarthmore [Swarthmore High School, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: From '52 [1952] to '56 [sic.].
Speaker 1: So in that time there was a lot of social consciousness brewing throughout the country (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: There was a lot of racial conflicts in different parts--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but not where you were?
Speaker 2: Well, I think there must have been, but I didn't experience any.  I guess there was not in our community or surroundings with the, any racial business, but my mother [Grace Walker Lewis] was, was a real race person and she taught us that, about race.  I mean race was not empty from our house, was not.
Speaker 1: What did she teach you?
Speaker 2: Oh about you know, that being black you had to be the best you could.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was the main thing.
Speaker 1: --did, did you, were you told that thing that so many of us were told that you had to do twice as hard?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yeah, oh yes.  And she was--and also in our grammar school [Phyllis Wheatley School, Morton, Pennsylvania], the teachers would tell us that we had to--they were hard on us because we had to be good.  They were wonderful, those teachers.
Speaker 1: This was at the segregated school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, is--so from grammar school, from first to eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 666977
Speaker 1: So you choose Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What makes you choose that school?
Speaker 2: Because (laughter), because once I visited Boston [Massachusetts] when I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you were traveling with your family?
Speaker 2: Trav- yeah and, and I use- I would you know, my holidays sometimes were--and I fell in love with a little boy and I said (laughter) that when I go to college at Boston University, 'cause I had made up my mind, you know, that's, that's what I would do, I'd, 'cause of this little boy.  That's why I--
Speaker 1: Romance (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, romance, yeah.
Speaker 1: And how old were you when you met this little boy?
Speaker 2: I, when I finished high school [Swarthmore High School, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, when I, no, I met him before that--
Speaker 1: Was before that, yeah--
Speaker 2: --before that and then, that's where--and of course, he was, I didn't know where he was, nor did I care.
Speaker 1: He got you there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he got me there.
Speaker 1: And what was your major?
Speaker 2: Public relations and journalism.
Speaker 1: Okay, they had a, the journalism degree there?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So tell me about your time at Boston University?
Speaker 2: I, I think that I, I had a wonderful time at Boston.  I, my best, my best years, the young years were spent at Boston University.  I loved the school, you know.
Speaker 1: What, what specifically did you love about?
Speaker 2: First of all it was freedom, you know, and, and they were, it was wonderful.  I just had a wonderful time there.
Speaker 1: Any teachers stand out?
Speaker 2: No, but there was someone in my dormitory that I liked a lot and sometimes I see her now, but I've been wondering lately is she gone because she was a, would become a house mother, but I had some teachers that I liked very much; I, I forget their names now.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, how, what is the demographic makeup of the school at this time?  You're there 'til '54 [1954]?
Speaker 2: No, I graduated in '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: In '56 [1956].
Speaker 2: Six [1956], um-hm.
Speaker 1: So how, how many black students are on campus?
Speaker 2: Now?
Speaker 1: Then?
Speaker 2: There was a lot.
Speaker 1: Really.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And, and I stayed in a dormitory and we had quite a few black girls from the South, most of them from the South.  That was wonderful.  And I had no problem counting black kids at, at Boston University.  There were many.  There were many.
Speaker 1: And was there any racial tension there?
Speaker 2: None, none.  You know in my life I've had very little racial tension and--
Speaker 1: Why do you think that is?  That's, that's not the common story, you know?
Speaker 2: No.  I just hadn't, I just had none.  I had none when growing up [in Morton, Pennsylvania].  I had none when I went to Boston University and I don't have any now (laughter).
Speaker 1: Very good.
Story_ID: 666978
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your time at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  What were you learning?
Speaker 2: What was I learning (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're studying PR [public relations] and journalism.
Speaker 2: Yes, I--
Speaker 1: Who are you reading?  What, you know, what are the influences that you remember?
Speaker 2: You know quite frankly I remember having fun.  In fact, I was having so much fun that, that they thought that I wasn't learning, so they sent me to a psychologist or some--I know I had to go to a psychologist.  And the guy, he was such a nice guy, he was handsome too, and we talked and after we talked--and, and I think it was two days I had to meet with him and then after two days you know, he said, "Ida [HistoryMaker Ida E. Lewis], I want you to go back to school and do your work and stop your foolishness.  I have nothing to say to you."  That's what he said and that was it.
Speaker 1: So had you not been doing your work?
Speaker 2: I, I guess, well you know, I fell in love with this guy and all I thought about was him.  His name was Fred Washington [ph.].  Oh, he was so handsome.  He was gorgeous.
Speaker 1: Was he your boyfriend?
Speaker 2: Sort of, because I would play tricks on him that I you know, I, and he, but he never gave up.  He's dead now.  And, and I use to sit next to him or he would sit next to me and we did nothing but play.  That was the truth.  But then I, when, when they, when the guy told me, my counselor told me that, I said to myself, "Now my parents [Grace Walker Lewis and Samuel Lewis] are spending this money for me to go to this school and I, Ida you have to stop it."  So from that point on when I went back to school I then studied.
Speaker 1: You got serious?
Speaker 2: I got serious.  And, and I graduated when I was supposed to graduate and--
Speaker 1: Did you have any internships or jobs in journalism while you were in college?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: So, so what kind of practice did you get in journalism?
Speaker 2: I didn't get any.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: What, when did you graduate?
Speaker 2: I, I graduated in '56 [1956] I think, '56 [1956], um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, you said '56 [1956].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so you said there were a number of black students who were at the school?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, sure, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And I, I read that one of the writers who influenced you was Alexander Pushkin?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I have him.  I have him all over this place.
Story_ID: 666979
Speaker 1: Tell me what--you, you started reading his work when you were in college?
Speaker 2: No, when I was in, in the eleventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not the, not the eleventh grade, at the fifth grade.
Speaker 1: Young.
Speaker 2: Yes, well, I acted up in class.  I, I was not an ideal student in that I was, I, I you know, I couldn't keep still and so my teacher, Ms. Watson [ph.].
Speaker 1: This is in the--?
Speaker 2: In, in grammar school [Phyllis Wheatley School, Morton, Pennsylvania] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In grammar school, okay.
Speaker 2: I had to stay after school because I had been naughty.  So she talked to me and talked to me and she said, she said to me, "Ida [HistoryMaker Ida E. Lewis], now I'm, I'm really tired of this business" and he said--she said to me you know, "We have great hopes for you."  I said, "Great hopes for me?"  She said, "Yes."  She said, "In fact I think that you can become our Pushkin."  Of course I had never heard of Pushkin.  And she said, "Don't you know who Pushkin is?"  I said, "No Ms. Watson."  She said, "I want you to go home and look in your, your encyclopedias and I want you to write me an essay on Alexander Pushkin."
Speaker 1: And you're in the fifth grade?
Speaker 2: I was in the fifth grade, no, sixth, fifth, sixth grade.  And I said, "Sure I'll do it."  And she said, "And I want you to behave yourself," 'cause I was, I was naughty.  I, I, it was nothing vicious or anything, but I just, but I just, I could not keep my work, or my eyes or my thinking on my work all the time.  I'd play.  So I go home and I said to my father [Samuel Lewis]--I looked in the encyclopedia that we had and it was just this, this short little paragraph about him.  I said, oh this couldn't be so; I mean why would she ask me for, you know, they're not saying anything about Pushkin.  So I asked my dad, I said, "Would you take me to Swarthmore College [Swarthmore, Pennsylvania]," because Swarthmore was just the next town from us to the library 'cause I have to look, my teacher, I mean she's got this idea that I have to look up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Learn about him.
Speaker 2: --learn about him.  He said sure.  So he took me and I was first of all, I was fascinated because he was; I thought he was good looking.  I mean I was really silly.  So, I learned all this about Pushkin and I wrote my paper and everything and gave it to her and she said it was very good.  She said, "You see, this is who we think you could be."
Speaker 1: And, and what did you learn about him?
Speaker 2: I just learned about his life, and I loved his poetry.  And I, and I thought he was so brilliant, you know and from then on I said that I was going to--he was going to be my calling.  And that's what happened, I, even through college.  I, I would go to the library and re-read some of his work and his poetry.  I just fell in love with Pushkin.
Speaker 1: So that teacher definitely influenced you?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Ms. Watson was her name.
Speaker 1: Did you know [HistoryMaker] Hubie Jones?
Speaker 2: No, but the name sounds familiar.  Did he write something about Pushkin?
Speaker 1: No, but he went to your school, possibly around the same time.  What about [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden, did you know him?
Speaker 2: That name sounds familiar.
Speaker 1: He was probably there at about the same time.
Speaker 2: At Swarthmore [Swarthmore High School, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 1: No, at--
Speaker 2: At Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Boston University.
Speaker 2: Boston. Oh, I see, um-hm.
Story_ID: 666980
Speaker 1: Did you join a sorority?
Speaker 2: Yes, AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority].
Speaker 1: Did you pledge there?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, and what other social activities were you a part of?
Speaker 2: I, not many.  I remember joining AKA because my aunt was an AKA.  I didn't do very much social work, social activities at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Activities, um-hm. Did you stay involved in the AKA afterwards?
Speaker 2: Afterwards, no.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 666981
Speaker 1: So you graduate in 1956 and what do you do next?
Speaker 2: Well, let me see, I have to think about this.
Speaker 1: Did you, well, did you first go to the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News], or did you do something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes I went to the Amsterdam News.
Speaker 1: That was your first job?
Speaker 2: That's right.  I remember going to, going to, to the Amsterdam News and Jimmy Hicks [James Hicks] was the editor.  He was a nice man and he really was something, you know, he was impressed by me so he said, you know--Mr. Powell [C.B. Powell] was the, the owner--
Speaker 1: Owner, sure--
Speaker 2: --and he said, "Well I can't, I can't, I would want, I want to hire you but I can't unless I get the okay from Mr. Powell" (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From Mr. Powell, yeah.
Speaker 2: --so he made an appointment for me and, and him to go, to meet Mr. Powell, so we go into the room and Mr. Powell said--he was gruff--and he said to me, "Now what do we want, what do we--?" No, I told him that I wanted to write financial study, I said "Your magazine, your paper doesn't have any financial"--
Speaker 1: News--
Speaker 2: --"news reporting for black people and that's what they need."  And he said, "Well what do black people know about finance?"  I said, "Well you're not helping Mr. Powell."  I tell you I, I was really something.  I said, "You're not helping.  You're in publishing and you mean to tell me you can't give some space for, to give black people some ideas about financing?"  He said, "Oh, you know, I don't care about finance for black people 'cause they don't care about it."  And then he said, "Okay, I'll give you, you can write a column," so that's what I did.  From there--I stayed there for about a year or so.
Speaker 1: And, and so let's stick with that for a second because you're, you weren't trained in financial writing were you?
Speaker 2: No, but I, I, I you know what, I figured out what they needed (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And that's what I sold myself on.
Speaker 1: Um-hm and now what kinds of reporting did you do because--?
Speaker 2: I didn't do any reporting.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No, no, I, you know what, I did once, Jimmy sent me to--somebody had helped--I mean he sent me on an assignment and that assignment for, there was some fighting in the you know, in, in the projects there, and he sent me and what I saw, it, I, it, I couldn't take it.  I knew that that was the kind of thing, I couldn't--this little baby was, it was horrible.  And I, I went back crying to him that I couldn't do that, you have to get someone else to do that kind of reporting for you because I can't and, and that ended my, my reporter, reportage type job.
Story_ID: 666982
Speaker 1: When you're writing financial information how are you getting, how are you getting the stories?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I went and I'd researched, I researched everything and I also, I got a job and I was a director of research for an investment company downtown and I was writing this, my piece for the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News], 'cause they didn't pay me very much, paid me about--
Speaker 1: So you needed a (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I needed--
Speaker 1: --a job?
Speaker 2: Yes, and they gave me something like twenty-five dollars and that couldn't keep me.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you're--this is your move to New York City [New York, New York], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm in New York.
Speaker 1: Where are you living?
Speaker 2: Oh, in apartment house, 45th Street.
Speaker 1: Did you have roommates?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had my brother Jimmy [James Lewis], who helped me pay my rent until he went to California and, and at any rate I--so I did that, I, I, worked for a, it was a plan called, small investment, small investment real estate company.  That's what I--and so that's what I did.  I, 'cause I can't, I can't remember all of it now.
Speaker 1: So you worked at the Amsterdam News for a year and you also worked for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I worked for this financial, yes, I worked with this--and then I went to New York Age because they gave me a full time job.
Speaker 1: And New York Age is a publication?
Speaker 2: It was a publication.
Speaker 1: And is, was it a black publication?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Where was it located?
Speaker 2: On 125th Street.
Speaker 1: So this was a competitor to the Amsterdam News?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did it have similar circulation?
Speaker 2: No, no, it didn't.  And, and I, I remember that I, I went there and the owner was from Chicago [Illinois], Mr. Fuller [Samuel B. Fuller], of Fuller brush company [Fuller Products Company, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Oh, he owned the--?
Speaker 2: He owned it.  And he sent someone there as the director of the--and he liked me and I didn't like him and so he decided to fire me.  He brought me in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mr. Fuller?
Speaker 2: No not Mr. Fuller, I forget the name of the--
Speaker 1: The, the boss of the office?
Speaker 2: The boss, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he brought me in one day and he said--he fired me.  I said, "Okay, no problem."
Speaker 1: He didn't tell you why?
Speaker 2: No he, you know, he said, you, he fired me and so I went back to the office to pack my little gear and, and I'll never forget the society editor, and she said, she said, "Oh I know why he fired you Ida [HistoryMaker Ida E. Lewis], because you won't give in," you know, the same sort of thing that's happening today. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And I was packing my, my, my little package, my little--so he, he called me back and he said, "Oh, I've changed my mind, you're not fired," and I said, "You know, you're not even man enough to keep your word."  That's what I said to him (laughter) and I just went back to the office and then after that I left, but not, soon after that, but about six or seven months I left the place.
Speaker 2: And where did you go?
Speaker 1: I'm trying to remember, oh, and that's when I went to the small (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) to Small Investors--
Speaker 1: --yes, yes.
Speaker 2: --Real Estate Plan [Small Investors Real Estate Plan, Inc.], right--
Speaker 1: That's right, yes.
Speaker 2: And so was there a period were you wrote for both the New York Age and the Amsterdam News?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, because they were competitors, that wouldn't have worked, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, that's right, um-hm.
Story_ID: 666983
Speaker 1: So when did you move to Paris [France]?
Speaker 2: Let me see, soon after--let me see.
Speaker 1: Or how did it come about?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember.  Oh, I remember.  I had a friend and where is her--there's a picture of her there (points to picture) and she and her boyfriend went to Paris and she was writing me that, how wonderful it was, so I decided that I would go to Paris.  So that's what, why I went to Paris.
Speaker 1: So you went because your friend was there?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Her name, Milda [ph.].
Speaker 1: And where did you meet Milda?
Speaker 2: Here in New York [New York] in the same apartment house that I lived in.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is what, around 1962--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that you go to Paris?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What are your parents [Grace Walker Lewis and Samuel Lewis] saying about this?
Speaker 2: Oh they, they were (laughter)--I asked them for money to go to Paris, they said okay.  I remember it, in fact my mother and Jimmy [James Lewis] and a whole group of them went to the airlines, air--I, I, I can see it now, I, they took me to the airport and, and, and I stayed there for six years.
Speaker 1: So you went to hang out with Milda and her boyfriend?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: No job?
Speaker 2: No job, no.
Speaker 1: You had left this job, at, this Small Investors Real Estate Plan [Small Investors Real Estate Plan, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And had you saved up any money?
Speaker 2: Some money but not much.
Speaker 1: And what were you planning to do, just starting out as a visit?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I stayed.
Speaker 1: And what did you do there?
Speaker 2: I worked for the Le Monde, the--
Speaker 1: The French newspaper.
Speaker 2: --and the Le Figaro Litteraire and--
Speaker 1: And were you writing in French?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I worked for the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation].  And that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Was this all freelance, or--?
Speaker 2: Freelance, I would go to the office and say, "Here I am," (laughter) and I made a lot of friends and I--that's how I made my living.
Speaker 1: And you stayed there for six years?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How, where were you living--what's your life like while you're there?
Speaker 2: Oh I had many friends and I had a nice apartment.  It was good.  It was good.
Speaker 1: Did your parents or siblings come to visit you?
Speaker 2: When Jimmy was, no, was it Jim, oh, Jimmy was in the [U.S. military] service and he visited me once and that's it.
Speaker 1: So, the, the mythology is that blacks are beloved by French people.
Speaker 2: Oh it's wonderful.
Speaker 1: Did you have that (laughter)?
Speaker 2: It's wonderful (laughter), it really is.  It was--I really had a wonderful time in France.
Speaker 1: What made it good?
Speaker 2: Everything.
Speaker 1: What, what, what, do you have any specific memories you could share?
Speaker 2: It was just good.  It was, and Beauford--there was a, there was a group of Americans, black Americans there, Beauford Delaney, have you never heard of him?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Beauford Delaney was there.  What's this--[HistoryMaker] Melvin Van Peebles was there.  It was, it was just, just a wonderful, wonderful fun time.
Speaker 1: And did you interact with them?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Story_ID: 666984
Speaker 1: You wrote a book of essays--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --'The Deep Ditch and The Narrow Pit' [Ida E. Lewis]--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --while you were there?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What, what were these essays about (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it was poorly written and everything but, (laughter).
Speaker 1: What were your essays about?
Speaker 2: About black people, African people, 'cause I met a lot of Africans when I was there, and, but it was poorly written and, and it was published too, but you know, it was nothing to brag about.
Speaker 1: So you, so you met a lot of Africans there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --because many people from West African countries--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in particular would go to Paris [France]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is this your first time meeting people of African descent from different parts of the world?
Speaker 2: No because my mother [Grace Walker Lewis], 'cause most of her children had left the house, she had an African girl living with her because you know, she had a big empty house but, and that's how I got interested in Africa.  And I traveled when I was in Paris; I traveled to Africa a lot.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Where did you go?
Speaker 2: All along the western coast, East Africa and--
Speaker 1: Did you go by yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was--I just had a wonderful time.  That's why I just, with my young life I have nothing to complain about.
Story_ID: 666985
Speaker 1: As you are learning about different cultures and being in a different culture in, in France in Paris [France], you're writing for these various publications, what are some of the topics that you're writing about?
Speaker 2: Economics.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you stuck with the financial--?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I wanted to write about what I, places that I visited, but most of it was economic.
Speaker 1: And are you comparing the economy of the United States to other parts of the world, what--?
Speaker 2: No, no, because they are not compatible, I mean you can't compare African's economy with America.
Speaker 1: So what are you writing about?
Speaker 2: Just generally, just general, what I saw, what I--and also I, I, I compared also, but I did compare--because there were a lot of Africans in France, that life with African life and I also worked for the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation] and the BBC would, I would broadcast, I'd go to the office and there in, in, in Paris and I'd broadcast, you know.
Speaker 1: What were you, what content (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Whatever, usually there was someone who would question me, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you, in 1965, the next year, you write an article in Life magazine, 'Black Mask of Angry Africa' [Ida E. Lewis].
Speaker 2: Well, they had sent me to Africa, in fact I have it somewhere around here.
Speaker 1: Life magazine--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --had sent you from Paris to Africa?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So where did you go?
Speaker 2: I'd go, went to East Africa.
Speaker 1: One country or all around?
Speaker 2: No, I went from--to Ethiopia, it was Tanzania, Uganda, and Kenya and I wrote about my experiences there.
Speaker 1: And why did they send you there?
Speaker 2: Because I asked (laughter).  All I had to do was ask and they sent me there.
Speaker 1: And so you had, how, and when you got to Paris--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --did you immediately start writing for Life magazine?
Speaker 2: No, no (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did that come about?
Speaker 2: They, they sent me to their office and they--'cause they had a new office in, in, in Paris and they gave me an assignment.
Speaker 1: And they liked it?
Speaker 2: They liked--they published it.
Speaker 1: So you're, you're piecing together a freelance writing career while you're in Paris?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: And are these articles making their way back to the U.S.?
Speaker 2: Yes, but, but I didn't want to come back.
Speaker 1: No (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They said--okay after I wrote my piece, they said, "Well Ida [HistoryMaker Ida E. Lewis] okay, come back."  I said, "No."  I, I, you know, I would, you know, when I think about it, I was, I was headstrong and that, you know, I just did what I wanted to do and they said, well, okay.  They paid me, and very well, and I stayed in Paris.
Story_ID: 666986
Speaker 1: And so in 1967 you write an article, 'The End Of Integrationism: Neither Assimilation, Nor Secession, Black Americans Engage in a New Way' [Ida E. Lewis].  This is in a publication called Jeune Afrique.  What, do you remember this article?
Speaker 2: No I don't.
Speaker 1: What, what I'm reading it says that you contrasted the tactics of nonviolence with the new program advocated by Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture].
Speaker 2: I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: You don't remember that, okay.
Speaker 2: I must have it around here somewhere.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, you return in '69 [1969]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I came, I--my mother [Grace Walker Lewis] said, "Please Sissie," they called me Sissie, "come home and visit with us."  So I came home and I hadn't planned to stay here, but I came home and I stayed.
Speaker 1: And then what happens?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: So I think it's 1970 then--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and.
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I remember I wanted to start a magazine and I did 'cause I think that's what happened.  I haven't thought about this in so long.  That's when I started--no, was that when I went to Essence?
Speaker 1: In 1970?
Speaker 2: What 1970?
Speaker 1: Yes, Essence was founded in 1970.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's when, that's, that's what happened.  I was sitting here one night and I get a phone call and it was, not Ed Lewis [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis], but the other, Jonathan.
Speaker 1: Jonathan Blount?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he asked to see me and I said okay, so they came over, the three guys came over and I, that's when I met them.  And they asked me to become editor of their publication.
Speaker 1: And this was, and at that point did it exist, or it was their idea?
Speaker 2: It was, no they had published one issue.  And Ruth [Ruth Ross], her name was Ruth--they had one editor of that, her name was Ruth something and they told me that they weren't happy with her and would I be interested and I said, okay.  I had never done such a thing and I said, okay, but I had--when I was in Paris [France] I had worked with Jeune Afrique and so I knew the process.
Story_ID: 666987
Speaker 1: So let's go back to Paris [France] for a minute.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You were working for the magazine Jeune Afrique?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me, what was that publication?  What did it cover?
Speaker 2: It was, it was young Africa and--
Speaker 1: Was it for women or--?
Speaker 2: No, it, it was like Time magazine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know and I would write, and I wrote things about America or I'd interview someone who came into Paris and that was it you know.  That was fun.  I had forgotten all, I had completely forgotten that.
Speaker 1: And so what socially while you're there, were you, did you have any French suitors?
Speaker 2: Students?
Speaker 1: Suitors.
Speaker 2: One, I remember (laughter), I, I remember walking down the street with him and he, he said to me--he was a cute fellow, yeah I forgot all about him, my god.  He said, "Ida [HistoryMaker Ida E. Lewis], do you go out with--," and I was going out with him a lot.  And he said, "Do you go out with--would you go out with French men?"  I said, "I'm going out with you."  He said, "But I mean as a friend, friend."  And I knew that I wasn't interested in him as anything else, but I said, "No I don't," (laughter).  Yes, it was fun.  I, I had a lot of social suitors you know.  It was fun.  We use to spend our time on what is the place in Paris, where the, all the foreigners would mingle and that's where I met, what's his name, oh, what is his name.
Speaker 1: Not sure. What, what did he do?
Speaker 2: You mentioned his name.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Melvin Van Peebles (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Melvin Van Peebles.  And I remember meeting him and he comes into this, Montparnasse [Paris, France] is the name--
Speaker 1: Okay, Montparnasse.
Speaker 2: Montparnasse.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Yes, he walked into, into Montparnasse and I was there with friends and he looked at me, he said, "Oh you're Ida Lewis.  You're the one I've heard so much about," because he didn't mingle with the, with black people.
Speaker 1: Melvin Van Peebles?
Speaker 2: No he did not (laughter).  He didn't, he said, "Oh," he says, "oh you're the Ida Lewis I've heard so much about," yes.
Speaker 1: So did you end up talking?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  We became friends.  When he came here he visited me here and he turned out to be a nice guy.
Speaker 1: What kind of work was he creating at that time over there?
Speaker 2: He, he was writing his books.  I don't know what it--you know, we'd meet sometimes at Montparnasse but, I just knew that he, he was a writer, so.
Story_ID: 666988
Speaker 1: So when you're, you're back, it's 1970.  It's interesting, 1970 was a time in the Black Power movement when a lot of, of black people are becoming professional and there are lots more lawyers and doctors--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --and corporate executives.  I mean there's, there's a wave of people.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In fact, Essence was founded but also Black Enterprise was founded that year, in 1970.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, okay.
Speaker 1: So there was not only were things happening for black people, it was being documented.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And now here comes Ed Lewis [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis], Clarence Smith, Cecil Hollingsworth and Jonathan Blount.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They're the ones who founded Essence--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --magazine and they identified you to be the editor.  Did they tell you why?  Why they picked Ida Lewis [HistoryMaker Ida E. Lewis]?
Speaker 2: No they said that they were--somebody at Time [Time Inc.] 'cause I worked for Life magazine and--
Speaker 1: When you were in Paris [France]?
Speaker 2: That's when I, yes and so someone at Life magazine had recommended me so they called me.
Speaker 1: And you said yes?
Speaker 2: I said yes.  I didn't know what exactly; I had never been an editor of a magazine and--
Speaker 1: How old were you at this point?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  I, I think I was in my thirties.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yes, I think I was in my thirties.
Story_ID: 666989
Speaker 1: So you're invited to become the editor [of Essence]. Tell me how that began.  Where, where are you working, who's working with you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) See I was not working.  I was living off of my--whatever funds I had saved and I was living here.
Speaker 1: Here meaning you had gotten this apartment already?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I'd gotten this apartment and so I remember going there and it was such--I, you know, I, I really never liked it, but I thought it would be good experience 'cause I didn't know really much about being an editor and what bothered me--I sensed tension between the guys and I didn't like that you know, and I, I thought if those guys couldn't work together then what the hell you know, what, what am I doing there, but I, I took it you know and, and then it got so that I couldn't come home and be left alone.  There was always one of the guys downstairs waiting for me.
Speaker 1: One of the founders?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What, why?
Speaker 2: They, they, they were fighting and they wanted to get me on their side.  I couldn't care less.  I didn't, I wasn't interested in being on, in, on being anyone's side, you know.  And they were upset with Jonathan [Jonathan Blount] and then Ed [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis] would come and they would take me to dinner and the best thing was I was getting free dinners (laughter).  That was the best thing and it, it you know, they just interfered with my work.
Speaker 1: And so your work, you're building out the framework of a magazine--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And how much staff do you have?
Speaker 2: I had a whole staff.
Speaker 1: You did?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you hire them or they had already hired them?
Speaker 2: I think they had already hired them.
Speaker 1: And since you had not been an editor before--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what, how were you figuring it out based upon the publications where you had worked before?  You remembered how they were put together?
Speaker 2: Yes, I remembered that.  I, I knew how to put together a magazine, but I had no real experience with that, with that--and, and that was easy to learn, but what annoyed me was the friction between the guys 'cause I didn't like it.  'Cause I thought that these guys, black guys, working, what a wonderful thing to have a magazine and, and it was not pleasant, it was not.
Story_ID: 666990
Speaker 1: When you say it wasn't pleasant, you're--here, here you are trying to build up the editorial product, have enough stories properly edited, is there someone doing layout for you at that point?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah they had an art department, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And are the guys squabbling over the content?
Speaker 2: No, they were squabbling among themselves and I remember one of them taking me out or, and he's, he--oh Ed [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis], I think, told me that these guys they think there're three or four of us, I think it was four, but there's, that's not, that's not the way it is.  It was not, it was not four of them, it was him you know.  And of all the guys, they would take me out to lunch and just complain about each other, it was something and I just, I, I, I didn't like it.  I really didn't like it and I was glad when Ed fired me because it was not the place for me you know, because--
Speaker 1: Did you try to make it the place for you?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't care, because it wasn't--you know I, I don't like friction and I had never been in that sort of situation.  I had never, you know, and I didn't like it and then seeing these black guys who I think have a great opportunity to do something terrific and they're fighting.  And the one I liked was, was the one that they hated.
Speaker 1: Jonathan [Jonathan Blount].
Speaker 2: Jonathan, 'cause he was just young and you know, he, he, he was, he was so happy to have that.  He, he really was happy to have that.
Speaker 1: To have that what?
Speaker 2: To have the magazine [Essence] and he, I think he just went to, I think he went too far you know, I really do.  I--but that was not my place to tell him, you know.
Story_ID: 666991
Speaker 1: So when Ed [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis] fired you had he already identified [HistoryMaker] Marcia Ann Gillespie to take your place?
Speaker 2: No, but, but what's her name, helped him.
Speaker 1: Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor]?
Speaker 2: No, no, not--what's her name, Marcia--
Speaker 1: Oh Marcia, okay.
Speaker 2: --Marcia, Marcia was in cahoots with Ed to, to get rid of me and (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was, was she on staff [at Essence] already?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: What was her role?
Speaker 2: I think she was my secretary.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: I think so.  But, it, you know it, she wanted my job and I think she--years later we talked and I think she came here or--she wanted my job and, but she didn't realize that I, I didn't care.  I really, I, and so she worked against me and that's--so one day Ed comes down and he said, "Ida [HistoryMaker Ida E. Lewis]."  "Yes, Ed?"  "I'm going to do something," I'll never forget this, "that is, it going to be, it's going to be felt all over the world."  I said, my god to myself.  And I said "What are you going to do," (laughter), you know?  And he said, "I'm going to have to let you go."  I said, "Oh good, that's what--," and he was having a meeting upstairs I guess to tell the folks he's firing me and he said--I said, "Good," and he got up and I shook his hand and that was it.
Speaker 1: And was he as formal then as he is today?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Very formal.
Speaker 2: Very formal.
Speaker 1: And no, no reason.  He didn't tell you why?
Speaker 2: He didn't tell me any reason, you know.  I read in the paper that, that--'cause he, they, you know, it was some, I mean it was, it was--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And it was reported in the newspaper and I read that, something, I mean maybe you have it there.
Speaker 1: No, I don't.
Speaker 2: Oh, well it was something.  I don't know, he--
Speaker 1: He said something about the end?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 666992
Speaker 1: So when you left, well let's--before you left because I'd just like to get a sense of what you did do while you were there even though you didn't like it.  You setup the magazine.  You started it.
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: And what kinds of stories were you running do you remember?
Speaker 2: No, no I don't.  I used to have the copies of the magazines but I think my nephew took them all.  You know, I, I, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: What, the fact that there was going to be a national magazine for black women at that point was exciting?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: So was it, even though you didn't like the squabbling that was going on--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --did you, did you like being able to pull together those kinds of stories?
Speaker 2: I liked my job, you know.  If we didn't have, if we, not we, they, didn't have the problems they had with each other it would have been fine, but they didn't make it easy so, it was, you know, I--and I listened to my staff and you know, we put together, the magazine together.
Speaker 1: Was it monthly at that time?
Speaker 2: It was monthly.  It's monthly now isn't it?
Speaker 1: Yes, and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So that was a lot of work?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  It was, I, between putting together the magazine and finding them downstairs when I came home (laughter) it was a job, you know.  It was, and I told my mother [Grace Walker Lewis] 'cause my mother was staying with me.  I said, "Mom I don't know how long I can stay."  She said, "No you stick it out Sissie, stick it out."  And so I tried to stick it out, but--
Speaker 1: Did you work with [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks when you were there?
Speaker 2: I didn't see much of Gordon Parks.
Speaker 1: 'Cause he was supposedly the editorial director?
Speaker 2: Well he, he didn't do it, I mean, he, I never, he didn't help me with the magazine.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: What did he do, do you know?
Speaker 2: No, but he was a nice guy.  I liked him.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Where did you go after you left Essence?
Speaker 2: For about eight, nine months I decided, I, I didn't do anything and I, then I decided to do Encore magazine.
Story_ID: 666993
Speaker 1: And what is Encore?
Speaker 2: Encore was more my liking.  It was a news magazine.  It dealt with newsworthy stories.
Speaker 1: But actually, let me ask you this 'cause this may have happened at Essence.  Did you go to Ghana for Essence to interview Chukwuemeka I don't know how to say--the, the defeated leader of Biafra?  Was that while you were at Essence?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, Ojukwu [Chukwuemeka Odumegwu Ojukwu].
Speaker 1: Yes, Ojukwu.  I think it was.
Speaker 2: No, I, I did that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You went with [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni.
Speaker 2: Yes, but that's when, that's--
Speaker 1: That wasn't for that publication?
Speaker 2: No that was for Encore.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is for Encore, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you're at Encore starting in 1971 right after you left Essence.  Are you, did you found Encore?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was your vision for the magazine?
Speaker 2: A news magazine dealing with ideas and, and about blacks and poor blacks.
Speaker 1: So was it similar to Jeune African [Jeune Afrique]?
Speaker 2: Yes, which yes, it was very much like--
Speaker 1: Kind of based on that format (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And so this was a more comfortable format for you than a lifestyle publication?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, yes.
Speaker 1: And who was funding Encore?
Speaker 2: Me (laughter) and my friends and my parents [Grace Walker Lewis and Samuel Lewis] and my--
Speaker 1: And so did, was it monthly?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And in, in year one you go to Ghana?
Speaker 2: I must have.
Speaker 1: So you saw it as an international publication from the start?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes I did.  Yes, I went to Africa for, for Encore.
Speaker 1: The business side of the magazine, who was handling that after you get it started?
Speaker 2: Oh, who, I had, I had, I had a business department, you know, Darryl Barton [ph.], and he's dead now and two others and I forget his name, but his name must be in the magazine.  I had a business department.
Speaker 1: And the range of news stories is it local to national to international?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how many beats do you have?  How many people are covering beats for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I had, I had a nice staff.  I had about five, six reporters and it was very funny because in the beginning most of what I got was free.  They said, "Ida [HistoryMaker Ida E. Lewis], I want to work with you," so they--after, after the first, after the, the second or third magazine then I began to pay, you know.
Speaker 1: And is it national in distribution at the beginning?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So how are you setting all of this up?  Do you learn about the distribution model when you're at Essence--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or before when you are in Paris [France]?
Speaker 2: No, I learned as I went.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes, and I, then I also hired people who knew and so.
Speaker 1: How long did you publish Encore?
Speaker 2: I, I, I wonder myself; I think about six or seven years.  I, I forget.
Speaker 1: So this is--you're, you're building this publication at the same time as all of this enthusiasm and growth is happening in the black communities?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I think that had a lot to do with it.  There was a lot happening then and, yes, it was, and, and then blacks were talking about black enterprise, you know, doing things and it, it was a very exciting time actually.
Speaker 1: Who did you hire in your staff?  Do you--who are some of the people that you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't remember many--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: Were they primarily black reporters and writers? No (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no it was interracial.  And in fact my favorite, favorite reporter was a white girl and I forget her name but she was really nice.  She stood by me and she was good.  Her husband worked for Life and she worked for me.
Speaker 1: You, so you have the publication for six or seven years you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and maybe more.
Speaker 1: Maybe more?  Are you doing that full time then and nothing else, or are you involved in other things?
Speaker 2: No, I'm doing it full time.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, what year does it close?
Speaker 2: Let's see, it had to be '79 [1979].  I don't think it was in the '80s [1980s], but I think '79 [1979] but I'm not sure, I forget.
Story_ID: 666994
Speaker 1: So in '79 [1979] you spoke at a Southern Methodist University's annual Women's Symposium: What Will We Leave To The Children? A Challenge To Personal Involvement.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Big question that could be asked right now, what, what were you, what were you addressing, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't remember sweetheart (laughter).
Speaker 1: Because you know, for, as the move for African American empowerment was happening so was the movement for women and so they're, they're kind of happening in tandem.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, you become a member of Columbia University's department of journalism [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York] faculty.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How does that come about?
Speaker 2: One of the--I think the dean of this, of this department asked me to come to tea and I did.
Speaker 1: And so you were there for how long?
Speaker 2: Oh I don't know, maybe a year.
Speaker 1: Oh so a short time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What, so, what were you teaching?
Speaker 2: Journalism.
Speaker 1: The general, just general journalism?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What did you think of teaching?
Speaker 2: I liked teaching.  I liked it very much.
Speaker 1: And Columbia University, obviously great school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Why did you stay just a year?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I think I went away somewhere, I don't, I, I forget.
Speaker 1: And so in the, in the early '80s [1980s] what journalism work were you doing?
Speaker 2: Nothing I think.
Speaker 1: No?  What was the work that you were doing?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I, I, you know I haven't worked in so long that, that I, I forget (laughter).  I, I do- I don't remember.
Speaker 1: When did you retire?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, it's been a long--I'm eighty-three.
Speaker 1: You don't look eighty-three.
Speaker 2: I'm (unclear), I'm eighty-three and I don't remember.
Story_ID: 666995
Speaker 1: So did--I have some highlights here.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You, in eighty- in 1984 you begin working as a political media consultant and a press agent and among your clients was Ross Perot--
Speaker 2: Yes, that I (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Abe Hirschfeld [Abraham Hirschfeld] and Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell IV].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell us about working with--
Speaker 2: And, and who else, was somebody else, yes, I was asked to be the press whatever, and I did that. That was fun.
Speaker 1: So this is during his run for president?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So what was it like working with Ross Perot?
Speaker 2: Oh god, I mean I would hold--he was small you know and I'd try to tell him something and I'd, I'd hold him by the shoulders (laughter).  It was, it was fun.  We traveled and he was a nice man (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he made a good run of it.
Speaker 2: Yes he did.
Speaker 1: So as you're developing are you writing his speeches--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --doing talking points for him?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: And he's the third party candidate, so people are looking and wondering if he's going to spoil the pot, what's he going to do.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It was a lot of controversy surrounding--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --Ross Perot.  You're in the thick of it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How does, how did that feel?
Speaker 2: That was fun.
Speaker 1: Yeah?
Speaker 2: And he was a nice man.  I, I remember going--he would fly me down to Texas and his people were nice too.  It was, it was just great fun, you know, and he listened and I can--his voice, I can hear his voice now.  I had, now see, I had forgotten all about that.  I had forgotten that I had worked for him.
Speaker 1: Well, and you also worked for Abe Hirschfeld?
Speaker 2: Oh god, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hirschfeld.
Speaker 2: --that was something.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: Oh my god, that, that was, in fact only thing that he did for me was pay me well because he was, he was a character.  He--
Speaker 1: What, what did he do, give me an example?
Speaker 2: I have to think back, but he, he never, he, you never were, you were never certain about what he wanted or what he did.  I did the best I could for him, but it was, it, it, it was not pleasant, but he was a nice man, you know, I--
Story_ID: 666996
Speaker 1: Well you also worked for Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell IV].  Let's see, he was the grandson, right (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was it his grandson or son?
Speaker 1: Adam--not sure.  And Adam Clayton Powell I guess was he the third or the fourth?  I'm not sure about that.
Speaker 2: I, I don't know which one.
Speaker 1: But, he made a run for office.  I went to college with him.
Speaker 2: You did?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He was not too bright.
Speaker 1: He (laughter)--
Speaker 2: He wasn't.
Speaker 1: I remember that he always wanted to follow in his--
Speaker 2: Father's footsteps.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and, and so as you were working with him and trying to help him--
Speaker 2: He was not, he was not too bright; he wasn't.  I hate to say that about him, but he--don't write that.  He, he was not bright.  I remember my friend Jessica--what was her name?  Jessica Grenich [ph.] got me to work for him and I told Jessica, I mean he, he was hard to work for because he was not bright because I like bright people and he--
Speaker 1: Now he had worked in, he was in the New York State Assembly for nine years.  He was on the city council [New York City Council] for five years; he ran against Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel], which many people did, in 2010 for the seat.  He never got above--
Speaker 2: No because he was not that bright.  I mean that showed me something about black politics.
Speaker 1: What's that?
Speaker 2: His name got him where he was.  They voted, they were actually voting for his father [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] and it took him a long ways.  I don't know if he's still alive or where he is (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh he is, he's still alive.
Speaker 2: Is he a politician?
Speaker 1: He ran, not sure, he ran, when--Espaillat [Adriano Espaillat] just won. He was, he, he was in that race.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Did he win something?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: You know, because he's not bright, you know I hate to say that about the guy but that's the truth.
Speaker 1: After your time as a political media consultant and press agent you went on to be a literary agent, is that right?
Speaker 2: I did.  Well tell me what I did?
Speaker 1: I don't know what you did.
Speaker 2: Does it say?
Speaker 1: It says that you worked as a literary agent for three years.  Did you represent authors?
Speaker 2: What did I do?  It doesn't say?
Speaker 1: It doesn't.
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's all right.
Story_ID: 666997
Speaker 1: In 1998 you become the first woman editor-in-chief of The Crisis which is the NAACP's publication.  How did you come to that job?
Speaker 2: Well, what's his name, he's dead now.
Speaker 1: Paul Ruffins?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: I, I came after Paul Ruffins.
Speaker 1: After him, right.
Speaker 2: Oh what's his name, he's--you named him.
Speaker 1: What did he do?
Speaker 2: He was, he was the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], what's his name?  He's dead now, [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond.
Speaker 1: Right, Julian Bond, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Julian called me one day and asked to see me and he wanted me to you know, be editor of Crisis and I, I accepted.
Speaker 1: And had you known Julian Bond for some time?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: How did you come to know him?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know, in my--
Speaker 1: Just in your social circles--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --or business circles?
Speaker 2: Either social or business, I, I'd known him for quite some time.
Speaker 1: And so now this is the end of the '90s [1990s].  What are some of the issues that you are covering as you are running The Crisis?
Speaker 2: I forget.
Speaker 1: Okay because when, well just in general the NAACP is covering civil rights, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And do you know how long you worked there?
Speaker 2: A year or two.
Speaker 1: There was one piece that you wrote about Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], 'The Dream Endures Forever' ['The Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.: The Dream Endures Forever,' Ida E. Lewis] that appeared in the publication.  I guess really trying to hold on to his vision, let people see.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: This was a piece that you wrote.  Another piece that you wrote, so remember 1998, Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], 'White House Drama: Sex and Politics' [Ida E. Lewis].
Speaker 2: I wrote that?
Speaker 1: Yes (laughter).  This was--
Speaker 2: You know more about me than I know about myself.
Speaker 1: This, this was about the president at the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You became an adjunct professor in the Department of Journalism at Boston University --
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --College of Communication [Boston University College of Communication, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 666998
Speaker 1: So now, when you were in that role how often were you traveling back and forth from New York [New York] to Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I'd go up one day and come back the next.
Speaker 1: Every week?
Speaker 2: Every week, yes.
Speaker 1: And how long did you work there?
Speaker 2: I think two or three years, yes.
Speaker 1: And so are you teaching the fundamentals of journalism?
Speaker 2: No I took, I, I taught an advanced course in journalism.  That was fun.  We, we--that was fun, yes.
Speaker 1: I'm seeing that over time you're still writing for The Crisis.  Another article is, 'Portrait of a Century Awakening to the New Millennium' [Ida E. Lewis].  Do you remember that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You were looking at the thinking of W.E.B. Du Bois and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and, and--nope.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: It's all right.
Speaker 2: After, after--my last job was with BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts].  I haven't worked since.
Speaker 1: As the adjunct professor?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you retired fairly young?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what have you done with your time since your retirement?
Speaker 2: I just had fun (laughter).  I, you know, I have done not much.  I've traveled and that's it.
Story_ID: 666999
Speaker 1: Well, I'm sitting in your home and you have an amazing collection--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --of art and memorabilia, African American memorabilia and you were, you began to tell me that it started with your mother's collection (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about that?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother [Grace Walker Lewis] would collect little art pieces, paintings and, and I, I did what she did, you know.  When she passed on I got whatever she had and, and then I started collecting and I've been collecting for quite some time.
Speaker 1: What are some of your favorite kinds of things to collect?
Speaker 2: Oh, I've collected paintings.  As you see around here I have lots of sculpture.  All it has to do is show that it's black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you're looking at--
Speaker 2: --'cause I love, I love black--
Speaker 1: --black history.
Speaker 2: I love black history.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 667000
Speaker 1: And as you have traveled, where are some of the places you have visited?
Speaker 2: Oh my dear, I've been all over West Africa and parts of North Africa.  I've been to East Africa, each country in East Africa including, including Egypt.  I've been to Southern Africa, Southwest Africa, South Africa.  So I, I've almost covered you know, about thirty countries in Africa (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wow.
Speaker 2: --and that's what I've been doing for the last what, whatever years I, I, I don't have a job.
Speaker 1: In your collecting, have you written about your collecting as well?
Speaker 2: No, no, no I've been thinking because you know my time is, I'm eighty-three years old and I've been thinking what, whether or not I should--my, my nephew, he's wonderful and he's been putting together some things, I don't know what he's doing, but I know he's coming here and he's taking things away and, but I have a niece and I said well, I should decide what they should have.
Speaker 1: When you say he's taking things away, what do you mean?
Speaker 2: Oh he's taking magazines away and I mean he's such a wonderful guy and, so I've been thinking about what should I do with my collection and, because I don't want it to be, you know, I, I told them to come and tell me what they want so I can put it all down because I don't know how much time I have, but I have, I think I have enough time to get them to come here and, and tell me what they want, because I know they get along but I don't want them fighting over my--
Speaker 1: Your possessions (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) possessions when, possessions when, when I'm gone.
Speaker 1: Did you ever marry?
Speaker 2: No, I have a daughter though.
Speaker 1: Oh good, what's her name?
Speaker 2: Muriel [ph.].
Speaker 1: And what does she do?
Speaker 2: She is a professor at Antioch College [Antioch University Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California].  She lives, she lives in south--no, Santa Barbara [California].
Speaker 1: California?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Beautiful.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Story_ID: 667001
Speaker 1: As you think about your life, who are the mentors that you had?
Speaker 2: My mentors.  First of all my mom [Grace Walker Lewis], I think about her a lot and she's my mother but she's my mentor and my [maternal] grandmother [Ida Walker], those two ladies.
Speaker 1: And you said your mother came to live with you at some point?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.
Speaker 1: When was that?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh god, about five or six years before she passed on.
Speaker 1: How old was she when she died?
Speaker 2: She was seventy-six I think.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, now I read that you gave $100,000 to Boston (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: --University?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, for what purpose--
Speaker 2: Whatever purpose they--
Speaker 1: For scholarship--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and it's established a scholarship in your name [Ida E. Lewis Scholarship Fund], is that right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Are they already giving scholarships?
Speaker 2: I hope so.
Speaker 1: You haven't--
Speaker 2: No, I haven't--
Speaker 1: --followed up about that?
Story_ID: 667002
Speaker 1: When you think about your career and all the things that you've been able to do in your life, what is the legacy that you believe you've created?
Speaker 2: I haven't thought about it to tell you the truth.  I've been--you know, I, oh, I did, I think told BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] that I wanted black students to have my money.  I think I told them that.  I just want--I'm interested in, in, in blacks getting as much education as possible.  Education in--my, my mother [Grace Walker Lewis] was like that.  I don't want, I didn't want them to just give it to anybody.  I wanted them to give it to blacks 'cause I'm really a, I'm like my old teacher. He was very interested in blacks.  I feel very strongly about that, you know.  As much as we can give back to our community to be the best is, is good, you know.
Story_ID: 667003
Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2: Oh I have many but I'm not going to tell them to you (laughter).
Speaker 1: You sure (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I have many regrets but, you know, but nothing that would deter me from mix- make it difficult to be who I am, you know, but I have some regrets.  One regret is that I--the man that I really loved, he's dead now, I'm sorry that I didn't--I was too flip to, not to take him up on marriage, you know, 'cause I really liked him but I wouldn't let him, I wouldn't let him know it and he was, he was wonderful.  We went to college together [at Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Did you stay close?
Speaker 2: He, he would come, every year, a couple times a year here he comes.
Speaker 1: Did he ever marry?
Speaker 2: Oh yes he married and moved to Washington.  He was a doctor and I don't know, he had a couple of children and when he asked me to marry him I'd say--and I knew that he was going with someone else in Boston [Massachusetts] and I, that's when I said, "No, no, I can't marry you because you have somebody."  He said, "Oh no, no," and I said, "No, no, you go and marry her," so that's what he did and therefore, whatever.
Story_ID: 667004
Speaker 1: When you think of young African Americans today who might want to enter the world of journalism what advice would you have to give them?
Speaker 2: Just go after it you know, you can't do more than that, you know, just, whatever you want to do, especially in journalism, just, just go after it.  If you want to work for The New York Times go after that.  Each time they tell you no, you, a couple of years later you go back.  I mean you have to--you can never give up, you can never give up.
Story_ID: 667005
Speaker 1: When you think about the state of black America today, it's 2017, Donald Trump [President Donald John Trump] is in the office, you know, life--Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] used to be in office (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, but that's my man.
Speaker 1: --what, what do you think about the future of black folk?
Speaker 2: I think it's good.  I think it's good.  Just as we had Obama for a moment, there are going to be others.  (Unclear) I've heard people say, oh, we will never do that again.  We will because I have a lot of young people who come to see me here and I know that there're many Obamas out there, maybe not in politics, but in other fields and I just wish them well.  Well, you know, I love black people, I do and like my, my, my teachers use to tell us, you know, we are--and I, I don't mean to preach to you, but we are a special people and to get through what we have in this country and keep going, we are, we don't know it yet, but we are.
Speaker 1: Is there anything you'd like to share that I have not asked?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: Are you sure (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I'm sure, I'm sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thank you so much.  It's been a pleasure to talk to you.
Speaker 2: You're welcome, you're welcome.
Story_ID: 667006
Speaker 1: My name, Ida, that's Ida Elizabeth Lewis [HistoryMaker Ida E. Lewis].  I think I was about three years old.
Speaker 2: And where do you think that picture was taken?
Speaker 1: That was taken in Malvern [Pennsylvania], yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pennsylvania?
Speaker 1: Pennsylvania.  My father [Samuel Lewis] took that picture.
Speaker 2: Okay, you want me to talk?
Speaker 1: Yes please.
Speaker 2: Oh that's, that's when I was, my high school picture. No, I think it was my eighth grade picture.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-two [1952], last year in high school.
Speaker 2: Oh, last year in high school, okay, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of your high school again?
Speaker 2: Swarthmore High [Swarthmore High School, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania].  It no longer exists, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Oh that's a current picture here in New York [New York].  I know it's two or three years old.
Speaker 2: And that's me with my, that's, that's me and my favorite brother, James Andrew Lewis [James Lewis] and I think I was seven years old or six years old--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and Jimmy about three years old or four years old.
