Story_ID: 402712
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer with The HistoryMakers. Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Would you state your name and spell it for me please?
Speaker 2: My name is Annie Frances Lee [HistoryMaker Annie Lee], A-N-N-I-E, F-R-A-N-C-E-S, L-E-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your date of birth?
Speaker 2: March 3rd, 1935.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Gadsden, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am an artist and a gallery owner.
Speaker 1: And tell me the location of this interview.
Speaker 2: At my art gallery studio [Annie Lee and Friends Art Gallery] in Las Vegas, Nevada.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: April, is--this is April? April 5th, 2007.
Story_ID: 402713
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions, okay?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: And what about a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: And what do you like to eat? What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Seafood (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: And chili.
Speaker 1: And chili?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, when you go on vacation, what is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Home (laughter). I don't usually go on vacations.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Excuse me.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: And did you want to change your vacation destination (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you can change it to shopping, any, anywhere in the world (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay. Now do you have a favorite phrase?
Speaker 1: Take care of your own business.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) All right.
Speaker 1: Seriously.
Speaker 2: Makes sense to me.
Story_ID: 402714
Speaker 1: Now you wanted to go back and tell me all of your name.
Speaker 2: My name is Annie Frances Moten Johnson Lee [HistoryMaker Annie Lee].
Speaker 1: Okay, and spell Moten for me (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) M-O-T-E-N.
Speaker 1: E-N?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Let's start by talk about your ancestry. Tell me your mother's name.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Ruby Barn- Ruby Louise Barnett [Ruby Moten].
Speaker 1: Okay. And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Gadsden, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what about her parents?
Speaker 2: I only met my grandmother, Ida.
Speaker 1: Ida?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Ida Barnett [ph.], one time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she was also from Gadsden?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you know nothing about your grandfather or--
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: --anything like that? Okay, that's fine. And your father's name?
Speaker 2: Robert Lee Moten [Robert Moten], M-O-T-E-N.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: Laurel, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know anything about his parents?
Speaker 2: His mother's name was Hattie [Hattie Moten].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's I know about her.
Speaker 1: All right. Do you know--well, let's go--let's talk about your mother.
Speaker 2: My father, oh, oh, okay. My father, I know he had three brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Jonell [John Moten], Herman [ph.], and James [ph.]. And my mother, it was like, I think it was like twelve or thirteen siblings. And I don't know those.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right, let's, let's talk about your mother. Tell me about your mother. Did she share any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: No, not really. Well, she used to say that she was really, really cute (laughter) and that everybody liked my father. All the ladies liked my father, and she married him anyway. But she didn't go too much into her--
Speaker 1: Do you know, did she grow up on a farm or in the city?
Speaker 2: I know she, she did domestic work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I didn't know too much about her life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know from--she brought me to Chicago [Illinois] when I was two years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I know about from there.
Speaker 1: All right. Do you know how much education your mother had?
Speaker 2: I don't think she graduated from grammar school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nor my father.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And my father, he was like a hobo really. He ho, he, he hoboed to Chicago to get a job at the steel mill. And my mother followed him later after he got the job. We were extremely poor.
Speaker 1: So your mother and father met in, in Gadsden, Alabama?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you, was there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: No, I don't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No? Okay, all right, all right, so when you were two, your mother--like you said, your father went to Chicago to find a job, and your mother followed.
Story_ID: 402715
Speaker 1: So tell me about, well, tell me what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it wasn't really, really, really--it was extremely poor, but I didn't know it at that time. I remember being a little girl. I remember my mother [Ruby Moten] always sewed. She always made me things, and she always made sure that my brother--I had a brother that was a year and, year and a half older than myself. His name was Tony [Tony Moten]. It was the two of us. I remember that my mother said we had to know how to wash, iron, cook, sew, and take care of ourselves. She made sure that we did that. I remember we washed on Monday, ironed on Tuesday, cleaned the house; we did that. I remember I was always busy. She taught me how to sew. She tried to teach me how to crochet and knit. I couldn't do that. I remember my brother and I, we would paint on anything that we could find. I thought everybody in the world painted. We would paint on paper, cardboard, or whatever we could find. I remember being a little girl playing in the weeds and all that stuff and cooking in mud and all that. I remember that very well, playing with paper dolls. I think I was all--well, I'm not really a loner, but I did enjoy playing by myself. What else? Am I (laughter)--
Speaker 1: I was, I was, I mean and you, you're telling me about the different things that you did as a child. You talked about painting. Did your mother introduce you to painting?
Speaker 2: I don't think so. My mother introduced me to other things, like the sewing and the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sewing, okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember I used to want to be a secretary, so we--she bought me this little typewriter, where you would turn, and, and I would practice on that. So she really introduced me--she, she said you have to know how to live, so I had to learn how to do typing and shorthand and that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, art was just a hobby. I do remember she played a lot of board games with us, you know, like pickup sticks, and checkers, and dominoes and all that stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, my mother was--she didn't let us out of her sight. She didn't let me out of her sight. She was overbearing, watching me. I don't call it watching me. What do you call that? I never, ever remember ever spending any time with a babysitter, ever, never.
Story_ID: 402716
Speaker 1: When you were in, in grade school, what neighborhood did you live in, in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: 34th [Street] and Rhodes [Avenue]. It was on the Chicago South Side.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what kind of neighborhood was it?
Speaker 2: It was a pretty little neighborhood. I remember the morning glories, and the flowers, and the trees and all that. But we were poor, and we lived in the basement. And I always remember I had to get up on a chair in order to look outside. And we stayed in that basement, and we--my mother [Ruby Moten] was on public aid. She and my father [Robert Moten], they, they clashed all the time. They didn't get along that well, so she actually raised us. And it was really, really kind of sad.
Speaker 1: You said you didn't know that you were poor though. Why was it sad?
Speaker 2: When I think back on it.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But during that time--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you didn't know you were poor?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that means your mother provided for you as far as (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, as best she could. But I do remember her telling us, "I'm not gonna make you go to school today because you're not gonna have anything to eat when you come home, and I'm not gonna make you try to learn on an empty stomach." I remember that. I remember we had a coal stove and a gas stove. And my brother and I would have to go in the wintertime with that little wagon he had and get oil or kerosene or something for it. I know this, what she did, I couldn't do, 'cause she had rats. And I, if I see a rat, it's over, I'm through, I'm gone. She fought them. It was so bad until we had a bathtub with legs on it, and she would put a bear trap tied around the leg of the tub to keep the rats from dragging it off into the wall and dying in the wall. No, see, I couldn't do that kind of stuff. But--and at the time I'm thinking man this, this is what's going on I guess. But I do remember thinking that I can't live like this all my life. I didn't know nothing else, but something wasn't right. And I remember we couldn't get in the projects because we were too poor.
Speaker 1: Because you were too poor?
Speaker 2: My mother didn't have enough income. And then the urban renewal--I guess it's what you call it--come through where they started tearing down the homes. And my brother, he was an artist also, and he was extremely good, and so I kind of followed on his footsteps, you know, in school and everything, "Oh, that's Tony's [Tony Moten] sister," you know. So, and I remember we used to have 4A and 4B in high school [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], yeah, in high school. And my brother had a half a semester to go to graduate, but he didn't. He quit and joined the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps], and my mother fell apart.
Speaker 1: Now tell me about the people in the neighborhood where you grew up (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were all nice, yeah. We--my--we worked. I, I would go to a neighbor's house, and we'd mop on, mop their yard; I mean their little house to earn money. I remember selling the first Ebony and Jet magazines. We'd have a little wagon pulling them and selling them. I remember I used to go from door to door selling Cloverine Salves and stuff like that. I bought all of my clothes for grammar school [James R. Doolittle Jr. Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] from working when I was like twelve years old, just doing odd jobs, and my brother would do odd jobs. And that's how we got our little money to--and it was accepted. There was nothing wrong with that. Kids don't do that nowadays, you know, but we did. My mother would go to Catholic Salvage [Catholic Salvage Bureau], and she'd buy a pleated skirt and turn the material this way and then make me a dress. She made all of my clothes, and I always looked nice because she was a good seamstress. I remember she made me a dollhouse and all the furniture in it and all that kind of stuff. It just worked.
Story_ID: 402717
Speaker 1: And your neighbors all were people who, who worked. And what type of jobs--do you know the different occupations of the people in your, in your immediate (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I don't--
Speaker 1: --neighborhood [in Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: But I do know that it was a, a nice neighborhood. Everybody was like neighborly, neighborly. And it was--I remember the morning glories, and the, and the flowers all up and down the street, and the, we used to call them Indian cigars that fall off the trees [catalpa], and the kids, and we'd play. But I could never leave from in front of my house. My mother [Ruby Moten] made sure, "You stay right in front of the house." But it was, it was nice. And we played games in the, in the evening and--like a fairytale neighborhood (laughter). Won't happen anymore, playing games and things.
Speaker 1: Who were the people that lived upstairs from you?
Speaker 2: Mr. and Mrs. Simmons [ph.]. I remember them. They owned the house. And then they sold the house that, 'cause that was my mother's landlady. And then they sold the house to Mr. and Mrs. Harville [ph.], and my mother rented from them.
Speaker 1: Do you know how much your other paid for rent?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: No idea.
Speaker 2: But I do remember, after I got married and had my first little girl [D. Joy Smith], I made thirty-five dollars a week at an insurance company [Supreme Life Insurance Company of America].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember that very clearly because I said, "I can't make it in life on this."
Speaker 1: Now, the apartment, the basement apartment that you lived in, how many rooms was it?
Speaker 2: One room, a kitchen and a bathroom. And then all the way in the back I remember was the furnace, and you'd go back there and wash.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you all slept in, in one room.
Speaker 2: In the same bed, one at the top and one at the bottom, and the, and the couch that let out.
Speaker 1: And that's where your mother slept.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What, what happened to your father [Robert Moten]? Did he leave?
Speaker 2: They, yeah, they separated.
Speaker 1: Oh, how old were you?
Speaker 2: I want to sa- maybe eight or nine, somewhere around there. But I saw him. He would come by, you know.
Speaker 1: Did he help your mother financially (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As best he could, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, all right. Tell me about--
Speaker 2: He was like a little rolling stone (gesture).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 402718
Speaker 1: Tell me about elementary school. Do you remember any of the teachers?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember the art teacher's name was Ms. Lazare [ph.]. I remember a teacher we had, his name was Mr. Spalding [ph.]. I don't why I remember him. I remember I used to like school, and I, I always got all A's. I got along very well in school.
Speaker 1: Okay. What was the name of your elementary school? Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Do- Doolittle Grammar School [James R. Doolittle Jr. Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. And in fact, I won my first scholarship to the Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] from Doolittle. I was ten. And they took us, the art class took us over to Oakenwald School [Chicago, Illinois] and told us to paint the school. And I painted the school and won a scholarship to the Art Institute, a little semester (unclear) scholarship.
Speaker 1: Now, so you, you got all A's and, and you knew from a child that you, you loved art?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did you realize that you would become--
Speaker 2: Absolutely not.
Speaker 1: --an artist?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My whole, my whole role was to become a secretary--
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Which I did do.
Speaker 1: All right. Were there any extracurricular activities besides art?
Speaker 2: I played with my girlfriends. I remember there was like three of us. We used to play all together all the time through grammar school and high school.
Speaker 1: Do you remember their names?
Speaker 2: Florence [ph.], Shirley [ph.], and Patsy [ph.], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now when you left grammar school, did you go straight to high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: No junior high school, no middle school?
Speaker 2: No, straight to high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to Wendell Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Wendell Phillips?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now tell me about the experience at the Art Institute. You said you went there for a semester?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And this was after grammar school or during?
Speaker 2: Be- during grammar school.
Speaker 1: During grammar school. And tell me about that experience.
Speaker 2: We had to draw from live models. I remember that. And it was like a big deal for me to go down on North Michigan [Avenue] on the bus, ah, by myself. And then they told us if we got three or four paintings hung on the wall at the Art Institute, we'll get another little honorable mention, and I got that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and, and what were you painting with at that time?
Speaker 2: I think it was water colors or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me what happens during high school. How were your high school years?
Speaker 2: They were very good. I took, I was a cheerleader for four years because I didn't want to take swimming and didn't want to take gym. So, cheerleading took the place of that, and then, like I said, I did my art. And it was like two hundred and seventy graduates, and I was number twenty-five. And I won a four-year scholarship to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], but I didn't take it because I got married.
Story_ID: 402719
Speaker 1: I got married six months before I graduated from high school [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: And tell me about that.
Speaker 1: I married Louis, and he was a very--Louis Johnson [ph.]. Very, very, very nice guy. And he got cancer when he was twenty-four and I was twenty-one, and he died. And I had a two-year-old daughter [D. Joy Smith], really sad. So, I got married again, to Howard [Howard Lee, Sr.], and I had a son [Howard Lee, Jr.]. And then my son got killed in an auto accident when he was twenty-eight. Then Howard died when he was forty-eight from cancer. We don't want me to keep--my brother [Tony Moten] died when he was about forty-six. Then my father [Robert Moten] died, and then my mother [Ruby Moten] died.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: So yeah, I got bunches of angels watching me.
Speaker 2: Well, well, tell me about your life with Louis. You know, you decided to get married at such a young age.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What did your mother feel about that?
Speaker 1: She was devastated. She didn't, she didn't think I knew what I was doing or whatever, but I was in love (laughter). That's the only time you be in love, when you're young like that. Yeah, he was a nice guy.
Speaker 2: And so did you go to work? What did he do for a living?
Speaker 1: He worked at Western Electric [Western Electric Company]. I worked for the phone company.
Speaker 2: Okay. And what was that like, during that, that time, because--
Speaker 1: It was nice.
Speaker 2: So what year are we in now?
Speaker 1: Fifty-three [1953].
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-three [1953]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Then, after Louis died, I worked for an insurance company, and that's when I was making that thirty-five dollars a week. And I said this is not gonna make it. And I had the little girl [D. Joy Smith], so I went to school at night and took shorthand and typing. And, and I remember I was working for Supreme Insurance Company [Supreme Life Insurance Company of America]. And I used to get there early in the morning. And one of--the vice president asked me, "Why do you come here so early?" And I told him I was doing my homework trying to learn the shorthand. And he said, "Do you mind if I give you practice dictation," and I said, "No." So when I graduated they gave me a promotion to secretary.
Speaker 2: Okay. For that--what was the name of the insurance company?
Speaker 1: Supreme Life Insurance Company.
Speaker 2: And how long did you work there?
Speaker 1: I'll say maybe four or five years, maybe.
Speaker 2: Okay. And so what--where are you living with your husband?
Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: What part of town?
Speaker 1: South Side [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then, that's when I had turned down a four-year scholarship to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] so I, 'cause I had got married.
Speaker 2: Okay. And after Louis died, you were still working at the insurance company?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And you stayed there for a while?
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: So what happens next in your life?
Speaker 1: Then I married Howard.
Speaker 2: How did you meet Howard?
Speaker 1: He was actually Louis' good friend. And Howard just helped me a whole lots while Louis was sick. And he was really sick, I mean, you know, colostomy bags and all that kind of stuff and running back and forth to the hospital. You know, how it, how it goes taking care of a cancer person. And so he was just there. You don't want to go into all that crap (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, and so you married--
Speaker 1: That was a big mistake. I was married to him for about nine years. I got a divorce, and then we lived together all total about twenty-five years.
Speaker 2: So you got a divorce and still continued to live together (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. So I had my daughter by my first husband and my son by my second husband.
Speaker 2: So what are you doing about your artwork at this time, anything (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I would just draw any time I got a chance. And any time I had an opportunity to take a class, I would go--I don't think I did paint--or a painting, I'd go take it and just running around, you know, and just drawing. I would draw all the time. Just, that was like my relief. And I'd take classes, English classes and stuff in and out of college. And one day it dawned me this is really crazy. I think I regretted not taking the four-year scholarship. And it kind of dogged me down through my life. That, that was so dumb of you not to do that. So I went back to college when I was forty and went eight years at night and got my master's [degree].
Story_ID: 402720
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], were there teachers that were trying to guide you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --towards college?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of them?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, but yeah, I got a lot of encouragement.
Speaker 1: To go to college? But you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --were just dead set on getting married.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were, yeah, very encouraging.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother [Ruby Moten], I remember she used to sit with me every day with the typewriter to make sure that I could type. And it was one girl and myself, and we were just like, excelled on the typewriter, so that's--we got scholarships in business.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you were in high school, what about the makeup of the students in, in your school? Did you go to a school that was integrated?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It was an all-black school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Were the teachers also black (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was mixed.
Speaker 1: It was mixed teachers?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 402721
Speaker 1: Now, were your parents [Ruby Moten and Robert Moten] or your mother political at all?
Speaker 2: Sort of, yeah, she did her best, like you have to get out and vote, you know, and she would do little canvassing at, by poll time and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So now, you're married with a, a daughter [D. Joy Smith], and your husband [Louis Johnson (ph.)] passed away. And then you immediately marry again?
Speaker 2: About seven months afterwards.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now you, you're married to Howard [Howard Lee, Sr.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: So tell me about after the life insurance company [Supreme Life Insurance Company of America]? What did you do after the life insurance company?
Speaker 2: I did jobs, secretarial jobs here and there. And I eventually, after my son [Howard Lee, Jr.] was born, ended up at the railroad, Chicago North Western railroad [Chicago and North Western Railway; CNW Corporation].
Speaker 1: And how did, how did you come about that?
Speaker 2: I had applied for the job because the pay was good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I got it. It's the most prejudice place I ever worked in my life. And that was, that was the reason I went back to college. I said you know, this railroad, I can't tap dance.
Speaker 1: Tell me some of the things that happened.
Speaker 2: I applied for a job, a promotion. And one of my girlfriends told the supervisor that, "Annie [HistoryMaker Annie Lee] applied for the job. And she's not gonna get that job. They've never had anybody black in that position." And I'm like, "What?" And at the time (laughter), I was at the college [Loop Junior College; Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois] then, and I was taking a class called assertive woman. And I, and, and, and it's telling you that you don't mess over anybody, but you don't let anybody mess over you either. So I'm thinking well, why am I paying all this money to take this class, and this man's say, is saying stuff like this. This is dumb. Why am I going back to college? You know, I'm trying to better my position. And I so I said um, I was floored really. So I wrote him a letter, and I went to EEO [equal employment opportunity], and I went to an attorney. And I said--what happened was he--they said, "That Annie's score--there's ten women applied for the job, and her score is the highest, but she probably won't get it." So I went to an attorney, I went to EEO, and I put in complaints, and then I wrote him a letter and told him he and I both were getting ready to get fired, because if I don't get the job, the railroad belonged to me. And you know everybody stopped speaking to me, the black people. They would come by and say, "She's the one, she's the one." Everybody was afraid to speak up. So I just really became militant (laughter). I was like, I'm not gonna take this. I have struggled too hard and too long period.
Speaker 1: So what happened?
Speaker 2: I got--I end up with his job.
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was his job?
Speaker 2: He was chief clerk of the engineering department (laughter). I had applied for a secretarial job, but I ended up with his.
Speaker 1: I mean did that happen immediately, or did you get (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it took a little while, but--
Speaker 1: Okay, so you did get the secretarial--
Speaker 2: I did get that secretarial position, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so how did you work your--
Speaker 2: And I wrote--when I wrote him that letter, I wrote his boss that letter. I gave his boss a copy, and his boss' boss, and the president of the company. So everybody started running around (laughter).
Speaker 1: So when you got the position as secretary, did they start speaking to you again?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. And how did you progress through the company? What was the next position that you had?
Speaker 2: Then they promoted to the chief clerk.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what, what year are we, that--what year did you go to the railroad?
Speaker 2: Nineteen- it had to be '76 [1976], because I said I was gonna put ten years in that railroad to become vested, you know, to qualify for railroad retirement. And I said when I get ten years in, I'm quitting.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you quit in '86 [1986]?
Speaker 2: My son got kill de- I started December the 1st, '76 [1976]. My son got killed December the 9th [1986], and I never went back. I got sick. So I said you got to be careful what you ask for; you might get it. It was, it was strange, right, nine days after I made the ten years. So I got sick. I developed a thyroid problems overnight, and I was just, just really sick for a year.
Story_ID: 402722
Speaker 1: Now before we go on with your life, because you need to go back a little bit and, and, and tell me more about the neighborhood in which you grew up in (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember Ms. Stewart [ph.]. She lived a couple of doors down. And I used to go over and do her hair for her. I used to straighten hair and curl and all that kind of stuff, 'cause I used to practice on my little homemade dolls all of the time. And I used to love to do hair, but my father [Robert Moten] would not let me go to beauty college because he had a friend who died from a ball of hair being in her throat. At the time, it was pressing and combing, and they would inhale all of that stuff. So, he wouldn't let me do that, but I enjoyed doing hair. And I remember I'd go over to Ms. Stewart's house. And I remember she had bought me some dolls for Christmas. I never will forget it. They were like Dora Belle [ph.] and Cora Belle [ph.], the dolls. And I remember she was really, really nice to me and liked me a lot. And I had some girlfriends. I had Loretta [ph.]. I used to play with Loretta and Sara [ph.]. Sara lived across the street in the basement also. And we just rambled and played and jumped rope and do things that little kids do. And then in high school--I mean in grammar school, at Doolittle [James R. Doolittle Jr. Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], I remember meeting Florence [ph.] in kindergarten, and we became friends all the way through school period, through college--to, through high school. I remember we used to stop in the candy store called Mr. Gamble's [ph.]. And we'd buy a slice of pickle, 'cause we couldn't afford the whole pickle. And we'd buy peppermint sticks and put it in the little butt of the pickle. If we had some money, you could buy the end of the pickle and, and put the peppermint stick in there. I remember the classes, the, the classes were all fun. We--I, I remember a lot of ice being in the schoolyard, and we would be running and sliding on the ice and falling out laughing. I remember all of that. My mother [Ruby Moten], I remember during the--was it war [World War II, WWII] or something? But she made a victory garden, which is a vegetable garden. And I knew absolutely nothing about planting, but she did. And the garden would grow. We would go out there her, and it was really nice. Washing, we washed on a, a rub board, the tub with the rub board like that. And right outside of my house was a vacant lot, and we played ball in the vacant lot. I remember that. And my brother [Tony Moten], my, my brother and I got along really, really well. He always--well, we did, we did and didn't. Every time my mother would leave out, I'd have to go put on my snow pants because he would give me a whipping just automatic (laughter). He'd beat me up. But other than that, he would really watch out for me. He would, when he worked on the weekends, he would give me money. He would take me to the show. And my mother wouldn't let me go to parties unless he took me. So he would take me to my party and leave, and then go to his party, and come back and get me before we went home. My mother didn't know that. But he always looked out for me, and we got along good.
Speaker 1: What about the, the stores, even the candy store that you went to buy candy and pickles? Who owned the store?
Speaker 2: I remember Walgreens [Walgreen Company] on the corner because they had eggnog custard that you could get in a cup on, and I remember getting that on Sunday. It was so good. And we had the five and dime store that my mom would take me to. And we had the chili macs. It was called The Greek [ph.], and you'd go in there and we'd get chili for lunch, and it was so good. Then there was Redman's Corner Liquor Store [ph.]. And I slightly remember my grandfather. His name was Papa Louis [ph.], 'cause he had horses and wagons. And I remember upstairs in like, it was hay and stuff up there. And, and I remember this grocery store, this great big grocery store called The Bird's Grocery Store [ph.], and it sold chicken feet. That's really going back (laughter). And then there was the fire department. I remember we used to go in the fire department and play and, and, and talk to the firemen and swing around the pole.
Speaker 1: Now you, now you said Papa Louis had a horse and wagon. This is in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Yep (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, back then, they would have people come by to shop in your (unclear) for you. They'd have the ragmen come back on, with horses and wagons. You could buy rags. But this was, this was when I was like two. Really, I don't remember it real clear, but I do remember it--rags, and then I remember the watermelon man would come by with watermelons on the wagon. And the man would come by selling cloth, 'cause my mother would buy yards of cloth from him. And then, like I said, she would go to Catholic Salvage [Catholic Salvage Bureau]. I remember going to those stores with her. And--
Speaker 1: What was Catholic Salvage?
Speaker 2: It's like Goodwill [Goodwill Industries International, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She knew what days they, they were bringing out the, the new stuff and all that kind of stuff. I remember when I got grown I never, I said I'll never eat another pinto bean in my life; I'll never eat liver ever again in my life; I'll never eat anymore oatmeal again my life. I remember all of that (laughter), stuff that I was raised up on, rutabaga, you know, yellow (unclear). And I hated greens. I'm (laughter), so, what else?
Story_ID: 402723
Speaker 1: Like I said, my brother [Tony Moten] and I, we got along really, really well though because he just helped me a lot.
Speaker 2: He helped you how?
Speaker 1: He helped me, he helped me, well, he helped me with art; he helped me when, when I needed to go someplace.
Speaker 2: Oh. Okay.
Speaker 1: And then he gave me a little money. And my mother [Ruby Moten] wouldn't let us go to, to movies unless we went to Sunday school. So we went to a little church called Hopewell Baptist Church [Hopewell Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois], and we sang in the choir. And I remember going to that church every Sunday morning so we could go to the Louis picture show [Louis Theatre, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: The Louis picture show.
Speaker 1: Yeah, every, every Sunday we go down to the Louis. It was at 35th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue].
Speaker 2: And what movies did you see? Do you remember?
Speaker 1: Them old cowboy movies. I remember the cowboy movies and Bud and Costello [sic.] or whatever (unclear), comedy, yeah, something and Costello. I remember that.
Speaker 2: Abbott and Costello [William "Bud" Abbott and Lou Costello] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, them.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we had a radio. We'd listen to 'The Lone Ranger' and all that stuff on the radio. We had no TV.
Speaker 2: What about music?
Speaker 1: We had a record player. My father [Robert Moten] bought us a record player for Christmas, so we played music. I remember my mom and all us, we would listen to the fights when Joe Louis would fight, listen to that on the radio. And I remember my mother would take us to the Riverview [Riverview Park, Chicago, Illinois], which was an amusement park. And you ride on the roller coaster. She'd take, she took us to the Ice Capades for circus or for Disney [The Walt Disney Company] or whatever it was. I don't know if it was Disney or what. I remember she would take us on picnics all the time. It would be so hot, hot, hot in the basement where we lived, she, she would take us down to the--it, it's called si- it was called South Park [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive]. It was a busy street, but right in the center was a park all the way down. King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] is what it's called now. And people would lay out there at night with blankets on the blankets. You can't do that anymore, can't lay anywhere at night. But you could lay there all night on the blankets and all. And she used to take us to the beach.
Speaker 2: And what beach?
Speaker 1: 35th Street Beach [Chicago, Illinois], 35th [Street] and Michigan, I mean 35th and right on the lake, Lake Michigan.
Story_ID: 402724
Speaker 1: Think about sounds, smells and sights of your childhood and tell me what comes to mind.
Speaker 2: I used to like to, to smell the flowers right after it rained, because when we came up out of the basement, right there was a flower garden, was, was a yard, and it would be flowers in it. So I could sit right on the side going down there. This is the basement, and it was like a little ledge. I could sit right there, and they had flowers and stuff. And I remember I used to like bees, bumblebees and catch the bumblebees and worms and all that crap. We'd catch 'em in jars and lightning bugs, all that kind of stuff. Can't stand all that stuff now, but (laughter) when I was a kid we did it. I remember the Indian cigars off the tree [catalpa], 'cause those were the long skinny things. Well, we used to go out and collect those. We used to go inspecting the garbage cans in the alley. And we--
Speaker 1: Inspecting them for what?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I don't know, just whatever, whatever (laughter), whatever we could find. You'd go up and down. That was exciting, going in and out of garbage cans up and down the alley (laugher). That was a big deal. See, that was an outing.
Speaker 1: And who would go? Just you and your brother [Tony Moten]?
Speaker 2: My friends, all us.
Speaker 1: And your friends?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we'd go up and down the alleys.
Speaker 1: Did you learn to swim?
Speaker 2: Never. Fact, in fact that's the reason I became a cheerleader. The, the gym teacher almost drowned trying to save me (laughter). I told her I couldn't swim, and she kept telling me to get in the water and do it anyway. So I almost drowned, so she had to jump in with her clothes on. Her name was Ms. Clark [ph.]. 'Cause she messed up her gray, her gray skirt. I never will forget it, a gray woo- a wool skirt, trying to save me. It was her fault.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember graduating from high- I remember my graduation from grammar school [James R. Doolittle Jr. Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. And the teacher, her name was Ms. Clark, music teacher who directed the graduation. And our graduation songs were 'Ave Maria' [Franz Schubert] and the 'Whipple (unclear)' [ph.] song, on graduation. It was beautiful. I remember that.
Story_ID: 402725
Speaker 1: The other families that lived in the neighborhood [in Chicago, Illinois], were they in the same economic--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) bracket--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, except the people that lived up on the second floor, we used to think that they were really rich. But they were just as poor as we were. But, they only had one, one or two rooms, but, but they wasn't in the basement. So we'd have to--I remember sometimes my mother [Ruby Moten] would do day labor, and I would just stand on the chair looking out the window waiting for her to come home. And I remember when she came home one time with some fruit for us like grapes and apples. I remember that. Yeah, it was, it was, it was mixed, I mean the people that owned the homes and the people that rented. You know, but mostly all of us was like about the same.
Speaker 1: Now, the--
Speaker 2: Except for Bernard [ph.]. Bernard down the street, his mom and dad both work, and Bernard was spoiled. He could get anything he wanted (laughter). And when his parents would leave, he would invite us all over, and we'd eat up everything they had in the house. So we remember Bernard. And then Calvin [sic.] was a, Calvin was around there too. And it's really strange because when we grew up, my first ex- art exhibit was at Calvin's gallery. And he's still there, and he's had his gallery thirty-something years, and then Bernard; we all just, we all grew up together.
Story_ID: 402726
Speaker 1: You're married to, to Louis [Louis Johnson (ph.)]. Is, is there more that you want to talk about your relationship or what you were doing during that time you were married to him?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, okay.
Speaker 2: We had a fine--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --very well.
Speaker 1: And tell me again--
Speaker 2: Louis was really, really thoughtful and nice.
Speaker 1: And you graduated from high school [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] in 1953?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, and then you married Howard [Howard Lee, Sr.] what year?
Speaker 2: Fifty [1950]. I don't know, '50 [1950]. I was married to Louis for five years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was '58 [1958] when he died?
Speaker 2: He died in March, and I married Howard around the end of '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: Okay. And then you had your son [Howard Lee, Jr.], and this is when you're working at the Supreme Life Insurance Company [Supreme Life Insurance Company of America].
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So now, the Civil Rights Movement is beginning to heat up in the late '50s [1950s] and into the '60s [1960s]. Were you involved at all in the civil rights (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember one incident.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right before then, I, I applied for a job at, for the government.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a white girl and myself, we both passed the test, and we had the same scores. And then we both got the job, and they started her making way more than me. And I asked the lady well, "Why is she making more money than I am? We had the same scores." She said, "That's just the way it is, and maybe one day things will get better." And I'm thinking wait a minute. "What do I have to do to qualify to get--?" She said, "Your, your skills are excellent. It's just hope that things will change." So when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] demonstrated in Chicago [Illinois] and they burned up everything on the north, things did change. I mean it got better, it really did, as far as employment was concerned, 'cause I was confronted with that crap all the time. It was just heartbreaking, you know, especially when you tried to keep your skills, you know, up above par. And I did try because I knew if I didn't make it, my mother [Ruby Moten] would die, 'cause my brother [Tony Moten] had quit. And I said if I don't do good she will have a stroke, so I tried to do good.
Speaker 1: So what government position was this? Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Secretary.
Speaker 1: Secretary, okay. So did you work there anyway?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm, and it did get better after he demonstrated.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about what was going on in the community in Chicago at that time, as far as civil rights. Do you remember the riots? Do you remember--
Speaker 2: No, I remember, I remember Emmett Till getting killed; I do remember that. I remember when they brought his body back to Chicago, and everybody was lined up to go see his body. It looked like a Halloween mask in the casket. I remember there was just a line forever, you know, the young guy that got--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --kid that got killed in the--it was horrible, the, what they had done to him. So that kind of stuff kind of stood out in my mind. But I wasn't really, real political. I was all in the trying to learn, I think, learn and take care of my daughter [D. Joy Smith].
Story_ID: 402727
Speaker 1: What year do you go to the, to the railroad [Chicago and North Western Railway; CNW Corporation]? Or you stayed in the government job for how long?
Speaker 2: I think I worked for the government for ten or twelve years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I worked for the [U.S.] Army and all kinds of places.
Speaker 1: You worked for the Army?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And as a secretary?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I worked for lieutenant colonels and colonels. I loved that job, all those men (scoffs).
Speaker 1: Where, where, when was this (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) All those men.
Speaker 1: When was this?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the years. I know I was there. I worked at 5th Army [5th Army Headquarters, Chicago, Illinois]. What year was the blizzard, in, in '67 [1967]? They had this big, huge blizzard in Chicago [Illinois]. I remember I was working for 5th Army then, and it started snowing that day, and it just kept snowing forever. I think that was '67 [1967]. I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay. And you, you, you liked that position?
Speaker 2: Um-hm (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 402728
Speaker 1: So now tell me about your relationship with Howard [Howard Lee, Sr.].
Speaker 2: It was a very, very bad relationship. We fought all the time. He was a chronic gambler. And I just hated that because I had two kids to take care of. And I just couldn't take him gambling, so we didn't get along well at all.
Speaker 1: What type of work did he do?
Speaker 2: He worked, he worked like for the, he did longshoremen. He was, worked for the phone company. He would work, but it didn't do any good. He wasn't lazy, just a gambler.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Okay. And--
Speaker 2: And it was just a bad relationship.
Speaker 1: Okay. But it, it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he fought. And whenever he'd lose, he'd come in--at the racetrack--he'd come in and take it out on me.
Speaker 1: So it was a, a, abusive relationship?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay. So you said--
Speaker 2: And what made me get out of it is that I was making up my daughter's [D. Joy Smith] bed one night, and she was sleep on a knife. And she was like twelve, thirteen years old. And I said it's too much.
Speaker 1: She was sleeping on a knife because she felt that she needed to protect herself or protect you?
Speaker 2: No, me. She said, "If he hit you again I'm killing him." I got out of it then. I said it's time to get out.
Speaker 1: But, now you said that you divorced him. But you all still continued to live together.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got these kids, and I'm thinking well, they need to know--you know, that keeps a lot of women in abusive marriages. They think that the kids should have a mother and father. That's not necessarily so. You know, and then it could do a lot to your self-esteem, make you think you're not, you know.
Speaker 1: Were the other people that lived in the neighborhood [in Chicago, Illinois], even when you were coming up, did they both--did most of the children have a mother and father living in the household?
Speaker 2: Um, it was like ours. The dad would come and go, come and go, you know. It wasn't really mother and father both there, no.
Speaker 1: Do you remember during the war [World War II, WWII] what was going on in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: If I could remember, my father [Robert Moten] was in the war. I remember those S&H Green Stamps [Sperry and Hutchinson Company] they would give you during the war. And you saved the stamps, and you could redeem them for different things. But I don't remember too much about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay, so, when you found the knife, is that when you left or you still stayed there after--
Speaker 2: I probably left three or four times before that anyway. But that's when I just really we- in fact, when I got my divorce, it had been paid for two years before I got it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would, I would go out and give the lawyer money. I'm getting a divorce one of these days, and I'd just send him the payment. I'm getting out of this one of these days. And by the time I got it, it had been paid for.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you finally left him?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. And you were working at your secretarial job.
Speaker 2: At the railroad [Chicago and North Western Railway; CNW Corporation] at that time.
Speaker 1: At the railroad, okay.
Speaker 2: Chief clerk, yeah, secretary and chief clerk.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Well, I divorced him in--I done forgot what year. But anyway, he remarried too.
Story_ID: 402729
Speaker 1: So tell me what happens next. You're in the railroad [Chicago and North Western Railway; CNW Corporation] for?
Speaker 2: Ten years.
Speaker 1: Ten years. And you're son [Howard Lee, Jr.] gets killed and--
Speaker 2: After, right after I made my tenth year.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And so--
Speaker 2: He and (laughter), okay, now this is really strange. My father [Robert Moten] was a gambler too. And he said, "Baby, I played poker every Friday with a bunch of little guys. You want to come and go with me, 'cause I'm kind of," he didn't want to travel by himself every time 'cause he was getting older. So I'd go with my father every Friday and sit with him and his little poker players and watch them. And then I started playing poker (laughter). Now mind you, I got a divorce 'cause I hated my husband gambling. So I'd sit with my father--and my first husband [Louis Johnson (ph.)] gambled too. So I'd sit with my father. I did that for about a year. And I'd listen to my father tell me now (unclear), you know, the tips on poker. And I started playing poker, and I had won all of this money. And I remember I, I came home and I asked my daughter [D. Joy Smith], I said, "Do you want me to buy a car or a house?" And she said, "Ma, get a house." Well, I had won enough money for a down payment on a home.  And that was our first house. And so I bought the house with this money (laughter). That's a big switch, isn't it? And that was my first home. Since then I have had fourteen houses. I know I'm the original gypsy. So that was the first house that I bought my kids. And I remember the first week I moved in my husband was horrible. He came in and broke the windows out of the new house.
Speaker 1: Your husband. You're talking about Howard [Howard Lee, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Howard, um-hm.
Speaker 1: But you were divorced from him by now.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He broke the windows out of the new house, and I had to call the police three times at the new house. Then I remember he came up on my job, and he performed so bad at my job. I was working for the arm- no, I was working for another company. He performed so bad until I was so embarrassed I had to quit the job. It was just really bad news. I had followed him to California. He had said he was, had a house for us and all that. I took my kids down there, and I stayed one year, and I hated every minute of Los Angeles [California]. So I came back with my kids and found another job, and he didn't like that. And I mean it was just bad, just a--and you sit and wonder, how did you go through all that crap. So I remember coming home from the, from that job when he had performed. And I went in my room, and he had cut up all my clothes, everything, even in the dirty clothes bag, in the drawers. And I said, "What is this?" Now that's when I think I grew up, really grew up. My son [Howard Lee, Jr.] had found one of his socks, and he said, "Look, ma, I cut his sock. I'm cutting up his sock. I'll get him; I'll get him," and my son must have been about nine. I said don't think that way. And I could kill this man, and if I killed him, I'm going to jail for some clothes. This does not make any sense, so I'm gonna leave this alone and not deal with this, so I didn't. I said I'm just gonna do better.
Story_ID: 402730
Speaker 1: So what did you do next?
Speaker 2: Probably went back to school. Every time I got uptight I'd go back to school take another class, try to figure it out.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. And the classes that you would take (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Smartest dumbest person you ever (laughter). Classes I'd take, English, art, English, art, whatever, writing--
Speaker 1: And what--
Speaker 2: --art.
Speaker 1: --and what school would you go to?
Speaker 2: Junior college [Loop Junior College; Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois]. I would take a class here, take a class there. And then one day I said, I said you know, why don't I just try to get a degree and stop doing this? And they start giving you credit for your, your life experiences. I had enough credits around to have gotten a degree anyway, so I finally pulled it all together.
Speaker 1: Okay. So now, what year are we in?
Speaker 2: Then, then, then, okay, I bought that first house.
Speaker 1: What year was this? What year were--
Speaker 2: It had to be around '70 [1970], '70 [1970], '70 [1970], somewhere around then, because that's when I was gonna move to Atlanta [Georgia], and he [Howard Lee, Sr.] kept coming back. And I told you I got a job in Atlanta. I got a job. I was still working for the government then, working for, they call it a hearing judge. When you apply for your disability, your case will come before a judge, and I was a judge's assistant. So I got a job on Peachtree Street in Atlanta as a judge's assistant. And I paid down on an apartment, and I was gonna move down there with my son [Howard Lee, Jr.]. And at the last minute I changed my mind and didn't take the job and didn't go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I said I hate to take him down there away from all his friends and stuff, and so I didn't go. And then my daughter [D. Joy Smith], she got married, and she went with her son--with, with her husband to Puerto Rico to live. He was in the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps]. Before that, she came home one day with her little girlfriend and said, "Mama, she got to stay with us 'cause she's abused, and she's sixteen years old, and she's a foster kid. And all they do is just beat up on her all the time and make her babysit," so I ended with the girl. She was sixteen, and I kept her until she got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So she must have been about twenty when she got married. And let me see, after that, my daughter left. And my son and I, we moved out of that house into an apartment 'cause that house had start falling apart. And then we're in the apartment. That's when I got the job at the railroad [Chicago and North Western Railway; CNW Corporation]. Then I bought another house. And my son, I got him a job at the railroad. So both of us at, working at the railroad, and we had this house. Then that's when he got killed, and I sold that house. And I was sitting there. My daughter was like, "You can't sit in this house. You've got to, you've got to come up out of here." So it was a townhouse near her, and she said, "Just buy this townhouse." It needed renovation. So I bought the townhouse, and I just sit there and renovated the townhouse for the whole year and just I was at home sick with this thyroid, and just sick, mourning my child. And so, but during that, that year at home, I used to paint for a home show company [Color Your World (ph.)], you know, companies like, bring the paintings around--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --to your house like Tupperware parties.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The president of the one of the companies came by. He said, "Annie [HistoryMaker Annie Lee], don't, don't sit," he said, "paint. We'll buy anything you paint, just paint. Don't just sit here, paint, paint, paint." Yeah, okay, so I just started painting. I sat and painted that year and made three times as much money as I did at the railroad going every day. I'm thinking wait a minute; something is wrong with this big picture; something, something is wrong. Why am I going back to this railroad? I had this big feeling that if I went back anyway it wasn't the right thing to do. I was real depressed. So I said okay, I worked all these years just to take care of my kids. My son's gone. My daughter is married. I can do what I want to do and that's paint. So I'll just stay home and paint. And that's when I became a professional artist.
Story_ID: 402731
Speaker 1: Before we go on to the art career, tell me ab- I know that you took classes here and there at, what school?
Speaker 2: Loop Junior College [Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Junior college, okay.
Speaker 2: Wherever they had classes that I thought I might, could use.
Speaker 1: Okay. And then when did you start your undergrad as--well, you got your A--
Speaker 2: Within the, the first year, the first year that I was at the railroad [Chicago and North Western Railway; CNW Corporation].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And what made me go back, like I said, I saw extreme prejudice there. I'd never seen anything like that in my life, nepotism and all that. And, and I'm think well what is this? And then the black people there were afraid, afraid that if they said anything for themselves, they were gonna lose their jobs. I'm thinking this is not right. So I said I'm gonna have to do better, because I cannot stay here. So I figured well, I'm making good money. And we used to say this money cost too much. It's taking too much out of my life. So I, I, I figured the only thing I could really do is maybe teach art, and I said I'll teach art in college. So within the first year I went back to school to pull all my credits and everything together and went to Loop Junior College to get my associate. I probably had enough credits already for that anyway. Then I went to Mundelein College [Chicago, Illinois], and they didn't have any art degrees, but they had business. So the, the, they convinced me that eventually you might, you never know, you might want an art gallery. I'm thinking that's the farthest thing in my life. I don't want an art gallery, but I'll take the business course anyway, since my degree that I would have gotten from Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] would have been in business. So I took business. My work was towards a business degree for my bachelor's. I did not get my bachelor's degree 'cause I could not pass that one class called quantitative business analysis. But Loyola University [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] said I didn't have to pass that class. I could go for my master's [degree], so that's what I did. I got my master's in art education from, from Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and Loyola combined. We took classes from both places, and we had a choice of which school we wanted our degree to be from.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the class is called interdisciplinary arts, which means that I'm supposed to be able to teach music, drama, dance, writing, and art.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what year did you get your, your master's?
Speaker 2: It's on my degree. I don't (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay, you don't remember, okay.
Speaker 2: And after, after I got it, I decided I didn't want to teach. It really dawned on me I'm doing exactly--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Now while you were doing your undergrad, you were saying that this was a Catholic school, Mundelein?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: A private women's Catholic college.
Speaker 1: And tell me about that experience.
Speaker 2: It was a nightmare.
Speaker 1: Tell me why.
Speaker 2: They were accelerated classes. A good example is in the summer, in June, you get your books for September. The first week you're gonna have a test. So you start studying in June for your test in September. You don't know what the test is gonna be about. You just gotta know the book. It was insanity. Women were breaking out in rashes, hair falling out. It was--you sleep with books. You don't talk to anybody. You had no social life at all, period, just books. I remember one lady said, "When I graduate from this class, I'm gonna take underwater knitting," something you don't have to--it was crazy. But we got through it. It was awful.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you say it took you eight years to complete everything?
Speaker 2: Yes, and after I graduated from there, then I went to Loyola, Columbia and Loyola, and I got my master's in art.
Story_ID: 402732
Speaker 1: So now you were beginning to tell about--
Speaker 2: I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) how you started working for the home show.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was--always wanted to go to New Orleans [Louisiana] to see the artists all around the square. I've always saw pictures of artists, man I said I'd just love to go down there see, just see the artists and be a part of that. And I remember taking this bus ride to New Orleans, and I had my little art portfolio that I'd done, 'cause I went to American Academy of Art [Chicago, Illinois] too off and on and took classes and the Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. You name it, I've been there, okay; any, any school in Chicago [Illinois], I've been to. So I had my portfolio, and I was looking through it. And there was lady standing there, and she said, "Who did those paintings?" And I said, "I did." She said, "You're kidding." She said, "When you get back to Chicago you should contact my boss. I work for a home show company [Color Your World (ph.)], and we sell art, and, and we're always looking for artists." And I said, "Oh, you're kidding." So anyway, I called when I got back. And the guy came out, and he said, "We, we've never, ever sold any African American art at all, but let's try it." So this had to be around in the '70s [1970s], '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Seventy- okay, all right.
Speaker 2: About '79 [1979]. And he said let's try it and see how it works. So I remember doing five little jazz musicians. And he said you know--what, what I would do is paint an original on a little eight by ten [inch] canvas. He said, "Let's do ten of each, and we're gonna try to sell them in Minnesota--in Wisconsin--and see how it goes." So he called me. He said, "Annie [HistoryMaker Annie Lee], do me twenty of each. We sold those right away." And I'm like, "Really?" And he said, "Do twenty of each." So I did twenty of each, and he called back. He said, "I can't believe it." He said, "These things are going like hotcakes.  Do fifty of each." And I did fifty, and he came back and he said, "Just paint until you get tired." He said, "We're not gonna--we don't pay you much money per piece, but we'll buy volume from you, plus it'll help your name get known around the country." He said, "We start in Wisconsin. We sell in ten different states." He said, "And we'll just start selling these all around all the states so your name will get out there." (Laughter) I'd come in from work and I'd paint from seven in the--I'd get in maybe about 5:30 from the railroad [Chicago and North Western Railway; CNW Corporation], and I'd start painting at maybe 6:00. And I'd paint 'til 3:00 in the morning every day, all day. I was--it got so until I hired people to erase the eraser off, you know, the, pencil off the painting. I had somebody--it was, I had kids on the neighborhood to help me. And I loved every minute of it. And (laughter) I, I always remember my neighbor came over one day and she said, "Annie, stop, stop, stop; you've got to stop." She said, "You're gonna paint yourself into a coma, stop it." I had an operation on my wrist 'cause I got acute tendonitis from painting. And I went up to Mayo Clinic [Rochester, Minnesota], and I remember painting with the cast on coming back. I was making two or three thousand dollars a month. I was like, ho, besides the railroad. And, and I said me, I can do whatever I wanted. I remember opening my son [Howard Lee, Jr.] a fish market. And then he got killed while, during that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And with the, with the, with that added income I was able to, you know, just do most of the things I wanted to do and help my kids and stuff.
Story_ID: 402733
Speaker 1: Now you were still working at the railroad [Chicago and North Western Railway; CNW Corporation]. Tell me, what were your duties at the railroad? What did you do at the railroad? You were, by this time, the chief clerk in the engineering department.
Speaker 2: You know I really can't hardly remember. I had to keep up with, with the, with the crews and make sure they had the ballots on the tracks and all that kind of stuff. It was just something I totally, just did because I was there. And I do remember this: I remember the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] wrote an article on me, and, and the people at work just really didn't seem to particularly care about that, me and my art. And I'm thinking um. You know, and to me it was just a total waste of my time even being there, but I learned a lot. And if I hadn't of gone there I would never have gotten my master's degree. So things, things work out like they're supposed to. You know, you might question it, but, it, they do; they work out just the way they're supposed to. So I just learned you don't fight it. You go with the flow, and you do the best you can every day, and you don't misuse anybody. And, and things--you know, if, if you try to help yourself, then God's gonna help you.
Story_ID: 402734
Speaker 1: Tell me about your artwork. Do you remember your first piece?
Speaker 2: I remember the first piece that I did that I paid to have produced. Okay, I re- yes, I do remember the first print. My friend Dan [ph.], who grew up with me, who owned the art gallery, he came by my house--well I'm doing the home show companies, okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And Dan came by my house, said, he said--I had a painting of some trees that I'd done, and he said, "Who did that?" And I said, "I did." And he said, "I didn't know you could paint." I said, "Yeah, I painted all my life." He said, "Can, may I take that piece to the gallery and see if I could sell it?" I said, "Sure (laughter)." He called me the next week and said, "Annie [HistoryMaker Annie Lee], guess what. I got a check for you." I said, "A check for what?" He said, "I sold the painting." I'm thinking oh, you got to be kidding. And so he, he, he said look, come on. May--not--the home show company and Dan are two different things. Dan said, "Annie, do you think you could do some paintings? And maybe we'll give you a one woman's art exhibit." I said, "Yeah, but I don't have any paintings." He said, "Well, we'll just start working on it, and we'll wait 'til you get enough." So, it took about two years to get enough paintings for me to have a show. Meanwhile, I'm doing these little musicians and things for the rail- for the home show company. So it was two different things. I tried to keep them separate. And so Dan, one day he said, "Annie, may I take three of your paintings and make prints out of them," like this (gestures off camera). And I said, "Yeah." And it was one that I liked myself, and I said man, I should make a print out of that, but I can't afford it 'cause it costs about three thousand dollars at the time. And you know, that's a lot of money to be spending on hoping it'll sell, but it was 'Blue Monday' [Annie Lee]. And I went on and did it anyway, and today that's still my best seller.
Speaker 1: What was the inspiration for 'Blue Monday'?
Speaker 2: The railroad [Chicago and North Western Railway; CNW Corporation]. That's the way I looked every morning going, getting up going to that railroad. And I, and one day I said, "I know somebody's got to feel bad like, too. I hate, I hate that job, and I know I'm not the only one going to work on a job that they hate." I hated the prejudice. I, I, I mean it was just awful. So, that was 'Blue Monday.' That's the way I looked.
Speaker 1: So it was that, sort of like a, a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I sketched it.
Speaker 1: --of yourself (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was me. I sketched the picture on the way to work, and came home, and painted it in a, in a half an hour. And usually, it takes a while to paint a picture. I painted, and then I went and made the prints. And it's still the best seller today.
Speaker 1: Now, the, the artwork that you were giving to the home show people, what was the name of that company?
Speaker 2: It was called Color Your World [ph.].
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And another company was called Artistic Impressions [Artistic Impressions, Inc.]. So I ended up work, working for two or three of them.
Speaker 1: Now, would that be original art that you were giving to them?
Speaker 2: (Nod head).
Speaker 1: And what size was it?
Speaker 2: Eight by tens [inches].
Speaker 1: Eight by ten. And how much were they sell, selling for?
Speaker 2: They might would sell them for fifty or sixty dollars. And at first they started giving me like five dollars apiece, and then they gave me ten dollars apiece. And then they'd sell, and then they went up; I was getting twenty-five dollars apiece. You know, it really, it moved up.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Dan is the one who paid for--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --'Blue Monday'?
Speaker 2: No, I paid for 'Blue Monday.'
Speaker 1: Oh, you paid for 'Blue Monday.'
Speaker 2: Dan did 'Six No Uptown' [Annie Lee], the women playing cards. And he did a little boy playing ball called 'Full Count One and Two' [sic. 'Full Count Three and Two,' Annie Lee], and he did one called 'Stretch One, Two' ['Stretch 1&2,' Annie Lee], women doing aerobics. And Dan said, "Okay, Annie, I'm gonna take a chance on you." He said, "I just think this is gonna sell." So he ran an ad in Essence magazine. And it was just a little fourth of a page 'cause it cost a mint to run an ad in Essence. And he ran this little ad, and that was it. He said, "This is the best thing I ever did," he said. And it just took off like crazy.
Story_ID: 402735
Speaker 1: Let's talk about some of the pieces. Now you talked about 'Blue Monday' [Annie Lee].
Speaker 2: That's my first piece that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's your first--
Speaker 2: --I ever did.
Speaker 1: --piece?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, and that was you hating to go to the railroad [Chicago and North Western Railway; CNW Corporation]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what were some of your other pieces that were very popular?
Speaker 2: The card playing ones, 'Six No Uptown' [Annie Lee].
Speaker 1: 'Six No Uptown.'
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and what was the inspiration for that?
Speaker 2: I loved to play bid whist. Me and my neighbors, we play, play in my kitchen all the time, so that was, that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Then, I mean, back then it was just, it was just fabulous. I mean I worked like a dog, but everybody was so nice, you know, a, appre- appreciative. I did what, I painted '5th Grade Substitute' [Annie Lee], 'Holy Ghost' [Annie Lee], a whole bunch of paintings, everything that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What about 'Gimme Dat Gum' [Annie Lee]? That was very popular too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the little kids in church?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what I would do is try to think back, back when I was a kid, and I remember my mama [Ruby Moten] used to do that, you know, just do things that people could identify with. That was what I would try to do. I'd try to, in my paintings, just see if I could capture a feeling, like '8 1/2 Narrow' [Annie Lee], ladies shoes too small. 'Cause I remember I bought some shoes; they were really sharp. They were too tight when I bought them, okay (laughter). I knew it, but they were so sharp. So I gave them to my girlfriend, and I said, "Can you break these in for me?" And she was going to a party, and she came back later that night and didn't have my shoes. I said, "Where are the shoes?" She said, "Girl, I had the cab driver to pull up to the garbage can and threw the (laughter), with my shoes on (laughter)," so.
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: So things like that, and, and, and then, no--I did '8 1/2 Narrow' where the lady was at the bus stop, and she was coming out of her shoes 'cause her shoe was too tight. She knew she should have got a nine when she bought (laughter), so things like that I would try to do, just you know, things that I went through.
Speaker 1: And you say you like to shop, so 'Maxed Out' [Annie Lee] was, was a (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's my girlfriend. That ain't me. That's my daughter [D. Joy Smith]. I knew people could identify with that.
Speaker 1: So, and what medium do you use?
Speaker 2: Acrylic.
Speaker 1: Acrylic.
Speaker 2: Which I'm extremely allergic to it.
Speaker 1: I--
Speaker 2: I've had to go to emergency about three or four times, and the doctor told me to stop using it. But I've tried pencil; I've tried pen and ink. Oils take too long. I stopped using oils a long time ago because of the fumes and things, thinking that acrylic is water-based, and it wouldn't bother me, but it was awful. So now when I paint, I have exhaust fans and all kinds of crap around me, or I'll paint outside. And that was one of the reasons I moved to Las Vegas [Nevada], because I can paint outside. In Chicago [Illinois] it would be too cold.
Story_ID: 402736
Speaker 1: So tell me about your first gallery show.
Speaker 2: I did about thirty paintings. And Dan [ph.] came--he, whenever I'd finish one, he'd take it home and lock it up. And he did this (laughter) for about two years. So the first show, it started at twelve o'clock, and it was on either a Saturday or a Sunday. People were lined up outside the, the, the, the gallery waiting. And when he opened the gallery, I think we must have sold twenty-five of those thirty. He was in shock, and I was in shock. We was like, ah. He said, "Annie [HistoryMaker Annie Lee], I have," he said, "no, no one woman--no one artist has ever had a show like this." He said, "This is unbelievable." But the prices wasn't outrageous. But at the time, you know, but--
Speaker 1: What were the prices then?
Speaker 2: Five hundred [dollars], you know. I remember 'Blue Monday' [Annie Lee] sold I think for about five hundred. I tried to buy it back from the lady at numerous times. She wouldn't sell it. But it was just the idea that they sold, so.
Speaker 1: And do you remember--but 'Blue Monday' was in that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: The original.
Speaker 2: And 'Six No' ['Six No Uptown,' Annie Lee] was in there--
Speaker 1: And that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --was, the originals were in there?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you know, do you remember who you sold them to?
Speaker 2: Yes, a lady named Lutheatis [ph.] bought 'Six No'--I mean 'Blue Monday,' and an airline stewardess bought 'Six No Uptown,' 'cause she would be the most unlikeliest person I thought would by that, yeah, so.
Speaker 1: So tell me more about the, about the gallery and, and the opening.
Speaker 2: Well, well, I used to exhibit it in some of the banks and just I mean and all over, all over. And then with the home show companies, they started asking me to travel to the different shows and would I do signings. And then after Dan ran the ad, then the galleries would start calling from around the country, you know, "Would you come and do a signing here? Would you do a signing?" And I found out that I was running around this country, and I didn't have time to paint at all, just running around. And I got to the point I hated it. I mean I just wanted to be home to paint. Leave me alone. But, even to this day, I mean people would ask, "Will you, would you come to my organization and talk to these women?" Just, and that's just not what I do. I'm an artist. I don't--I panic. I can't stand (laughter) standing up talking in front of people. And then it just got to the point where--I don't know.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: But, now the home shows, you were still doing original pieces for them?
Speaker 1: (Nods head).
Speaker 2: Okay. So when did you decide to not do them anymore?
Speaker 1: They eventually went to--well, they come up with all new processes, images on canvas and new, new ways of doing it where you don't have to do originals. So that kind of relieved a lot, yeah.
Speaker 2: But they would just take your original (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) One, one original--
Speaker 2: --and then--
Speaker 1: --and then they could produce it from there--
Speaker 2: --produce it, okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Just one.
Speaker 2: So that made that a lot easier for you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot easier.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 402737
Speaker 1: Now tell me about the Essence ad. You said things just took off. What types of things happened once the ad (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Galleries, the galleries started ordering a lot. They knew where they could get the African American art from and from that ad. And so, I got a lot of calls from galleries to order.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then, I think that went on; Dan [ph.] and I, we were together maybe about four years. And then when my son [Howard Lee, Jr.] got killed and I was off for that year, I decided that I would produce my own work; why not?
Speaker 1: 'Cause you--were you pay, paying him as a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He, he would give me a percentage for the sales.
Speaker 1: --percentage on, the sales, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have a, an, an agent?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: No, all right, all, always took care of yourself, huh?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Somebody else asked me that, "Who is your marketing manager?" I said, "Me and God, we did this. We just said run around the country."
Speaker 1: So you decided to produce yourself. And, and how did that work? I mean how did--
Speaker 2: I did--
Speaker 1: --you do that?
Speaker 2: --three prints. I produced three prints, and I had the carpenter come in and do, build me three shelves. And I said, "Now how am I gonna let these people know I got these pee- three prints?" And we had note cards made from each one, so I'd mail out a note card every time I get a new print. And the people started ordering from me at home. And I didn't drive, so when I'd get the orders in, I'd walk them down to the post office every day. Then they, it really picked up, and I, I had UPS [United Parcel Service] come by every day and get, take my shipments. And I did everything. I started at my kitchen table.
Speaker 1: Okay. So tell me, tell me--walk me through the process of what you would do.
Speaker 2: I'll paint a picture. And if I like it, I'd say um, now--not really; if I like it, I'd paint it. I said well, "What do you think?" I'd ask my daughter [D. Joy Smith] or somebody, "You think I should make a print out of it and see?" Yeah, okay, I'll make a printout. So I make a print. Then I'd go to the magazine and get the list of all of the African American galleries and send them a note card: and this is my new print. And then people would start ordering. And then they would call me, "Annie [HistoryMaker Annie Lee], okay, the next time you get a print in, just automatically send me ten," and all that kind of stuff, so. Then, I moved from this little townhouse with these three shelves and bought another house. What, what, what house number are we on now (laughter), see I'm at--
Speaker 1: I think this like four or five (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) my first--yeah, and then I bought another house (laughter), and I converted the garage into--with shelves and things, so I started doing more prints. So I made, had about ten prints, and I had shelves built in there. Then I hired a young girl to come in and help me with the shipping, and the packing, and taking the orders. This is in my garage. Then, people started ringing my doorbell, "Annie, my mother is in town. Can I bring her over to see you?" "Annie, my cousin is in town. Can she come by to meet you?" And every day it's like a bunch of people coming in my house. And I'm thinking this has got to stop. I mean I can't--so I said I know what I'll do. It was a--right down the street they were building a new strip mall. I'll, I'll try opening a gallery may- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what city are we--we're in--
Speaker 2: We're in Hazel Crest, Illinois, now.
Speaker 1: Hazel Crest?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I said maybe I'll open a gallery. And when these people's relatives come from out of town, instead of--(whispers) like they're in there now (gestures off camera); her daughter is here from California (laughter), maybe they can bring them to the gallery instead of my house. So that's the first gallery [Annie Lee and Friends Art Gallery, Hazel Crest, Illinois] I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) First gallery. What year was that?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-two [1992] I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Hazel Crest.
Speaker 2: And actually, I opened a place because of the--I needed a shipping space, so in the back I had all the shipping. And I took a little space up front and made a gallery, and it was a great success. People really participated and all. And then I just outgrew it, and I said well, I guess maybe I should get a bigger gallery. My goal wasn't ever to have a gallery. It was just shipping mostly, 'cause the galleries were ordering, and I needed the space. So then I moved from there to Glenwood, Illinois, and I bought this great big old building, eight thousand square feet, which I got right now back there (laughter), trying to sell it, eight thousand square foot gallery and shipping. And I was there for sixteen years.
Speaker 1: Sixteen.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I moved here. And being the, being the original gypsy, I was gonna--or went to, to get a warehouse here, to lease a warehouse, and bring all the shipping down from Chicago [Illinois] to here. And when I went to look at the warehouse, the, the rent's so outrageous. I'm thinking this is dumb. I'll buy a building. Why pay that much money to rent anything. And this guy happened to be building these buildings over here; here I am again (laughter). I said okay, I'll, I'll, I'll just get the building. So this building is a little bit over ten thousand square feet.
Speaker 1: And, and it's very nice.
Story_ID: 402738
Speaker 1: Let's talk more about your work, about your artwork itself. You, you talked about the fact that you painted things that people could relate to in their (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hopefully, yes.
Speaker 1: --in their everyday lives. What about the fact that there are no faces on your--
Speaker 2: That came about as a result when I was working for the home show companies turning out all those paintings. I couldn't very well sit down and paint fifty expressions. So I tried to make the figure let you know what was going on, you know, let you know this is a saxophone player, rather than having to put that expression here, and so it stuck. So it became a challenge to me to try to give you the message without you seeing the face.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the body expression--
Speaker 2: Exactly, the movements--
Speaker 1: --let you know movements.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm trying to let you know what's going on without you seeing it. Like 'Holy Ghost' [Annie Lee], she's shouting. You can tell she's shouting, but you don't see her face. 'Blue Monday' [Annie Lee], her head is down. You know she's sitting there, but you don't see her face. So, it's a great challenge for myself to try to get a message across without you seeing the face.
Story_ID: 402739
Speaker 1: You were telling me how you moved here to Las Vegas [Nevada] so that you can, you know, paint outside (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Paint outside, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, and all that.
Speaker 2: And the weather was nice.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And the cold weather in Chicago [Illinois] it just go to me.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: And then we were talking about process, and you were gonna tell me more about that.
Speaker 2: For a painting, for me the hardest part is, is coming up with the idea in the first place and then getting it--I do sketches of everything--and getting the sketch done the way I want it. Then after I do my sketch, then I draw it on the big canvas. And then after that I gotta come up with the colors. And so the process of getting to the painting part is the hardest for me. I can paint fast, but the process can take four, three, four months, research; believe or not I do research. I mean if I'm, if I'm doing a Buffalo Soldier, I don't know anything really about Buffalo Soldiers, so I gotta go read about them and, and, and, and try to get the feeling of why am I painting this soldier, you know. So I do a lot of research, a lot of books.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, besides painting original artwork on canvas, you use other processes of, of getting your product, like the prints. Tell me, is it a lithograph or--
Speaker 2: Okay, I, after I do the painting, I, I have a printer in Chicago that I've had fifteen years. I'll send it to my printer, and he end up--when a--the paper print is a lithograph.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I have a, a guy in California and one in Virginia that does giclees. Giclees is the images that's done on a computer generated. And the reason that artists use giclees is you can do one piece; you can do three pieces; you can do fifty pieces. When you do a litho [lithograph], you have to do two thousand, three thousand. A litho, once you start, the more litho you get done, the, the more reasonable it is to get it done. Giclees are so expensive you don't have to get a lot done and have them sitting on the shelf, hoping to sell. You can have three customers and get three pieces done. You do have to pay a process cost up front for them to make the plate of the--for both of them you have to make a (unclear), so it's really interesting. You learn, I learn something new every day. I started making figurines from my work, and I'd never done figurines before. And that's, that's altogether another whole process. I ended up giving out licensing agreements to different companies and let them do different things with my artwork. So right now--and then I get royalties from whatever they do. So right now I have a company, Sandy USA who does my figurines. They do caster sets. They do a whole lots of things. Then I have another company BG [ph.], they do puzzles, and them puzzles are being sold at Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] with my little picture up there on it. And it's another company, Suns- Sunshine [ph.], they do puzzles. I have another licensing agreement with a young guy. He does wall- light switch covers and computer, computer mat--
Speaker 1: Mouse pads.
Speaker 2: --mouse pads and key chain racks. And then I have another licensing agreement company that I give these young guys who do my calendars every year. So, I do a lot of that too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me more about the, the art process itself. We kind of went pretty fast about prints, and lithographs, and giclees, and original artwork. Can you expound on that a little more?
Speaker 2: The originals, of course, cost more. The, the litho is the most reasonable one priced. When you do a limited edition, a limited edition is I'll do so many of one piece, maybe two hundred. Every time you do a limited edition you have what is known as an artist proof. That means that the artist went to the printer and pulled the first few, few pieces off. So you have the limited edition; you have the artist proof; and you have artist remark. Remark means that the artist goes back into that painting--that print and draws something or embellish it, so it's more than the artist, artist proof. So you got the limited edition, artist proof, and the remark, and you got three different prices. And when the artist go back in, then it's more expensive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You can get a limited edition done in litho; you can get it done in silkscreen; you can get it done in giclee; you can get it done in anything you want to do it in. Pricing, usually I leave the pricing of my artwork up to my employees or my daughters and what I--I don't usually, I, I'll give it away, you know, but they (laughter), so I don't usually set the prices. But my originals sell from four thousand to twenty thousand [dollars], you know, it depend.
Story_ID: 402740
Speaker 1: Now, what advice would you give to someone collecting art, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Buy what you like. Buy what you like, you know. Don't try to match your furniture. Please don't do that. Just (laughter), it's not what art is about. Just buy what you like. I don't, I, I can't say names. I know a lot of people buy because of the name of, of an artist, but I just buy what I like. Whenever I--I'm an art collector. I have about forty originals in my house, and none of them are mine. One of them is mine. Wherever I go, I try to buy a piece of art from the local artist, period. It's just simple as that. I try to buy a piece original.
Speaker 1: And should the person be looking to buy the art just because they like it, or should it be an investment?
Speaker 2: I buy it because I like it. It's up to you. A lot of people do it just for, strictly for investments purposes. But I buy art 'cause I like art. I'm fascinated, I'm, I'm fascinated by artists (laughter), believe it or not. I mean I like to see artists working, and I love pretty art.
Speaker 1: Okay. So now--
Speaker 2: I own one [HistoryMaker] Annie Lee.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: I own one Annie Lee original.
Story_ID: 402741
Speaker 1: From Chicago [Illinois], you said you, you had a studio there, a gallery, I should say, and you moved here because the weather is better. And now you opened this, this gallery [Annie Lee and Friends Art Gallery, Las Vegas, Nevada]. And, and you've been here how long?
Speaker 2: A year.
Speaker 1: A year. So how, how is it going?
Speaker 2: It's going fine. It's going fine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a pretty building. I love the building. And we've had--my grand opening was magnificent. I had oh, five, six hundred people here, all black-tie. I had two chefs who were chefs on cruise ships. We had two pigs with apples in the mouth and everything. It was magnificent (laughter). And then since then we've had art shows here. And about a month ago a movie was filmed here. So it, it, it's going well. And in fact, J. Anthony Brown, comedian, he's supposed to have a comedy, fashion, and art exhibit here in August. So, it's going, it's going good. It's going good. And in my life, I just illustrated a book for Disney [The Walt Disney Company], which was the high--that was something I never expected to do.
Speaker 1: And how did that come about? Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: I was at home one day, and I got a fax on my fax machine. And it said, "Dear Ms., Ms. Lee [HistoryMaker Annie Lee], would you consider illustrating this book?" And I'm thinking now what publisher--they, evidently they got the wrong artist 'cause I'm not an illustrator. And then I looked at the top of the letterhead, and I said, "Mickey Mouse." I said, "Whoa, wait a minute. This is Disney, wow." So I called, and then I said, "I'm afraid you got the wrong artist. I'm not an illustrator." And they said, "Ms. Lee, we know all about your art." I was like, "Oh, really?" And they said, "Yeah, nobody can illustrate this book but you." I said, "Oh." They said, "Well, before you say no, please read the script and think about it." So I did. And it was about a shouting in church. I said I can do that (laughter); that one I can do. So that's the name of the book, is 'Shouting!' [Joyce Carol Thomas and Annie Lee].
Speaker 1: 'Shouting!'?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's a little girl seeing her mother and all the people in church. It's from a little girl's point of view. It's a children's book.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful. So you look forward to doing more books?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was fun. It was, it was different.
Speaker 1: And tell me how it was different.
Speaker 2: It was different because I'm not used to somebody telling me do something over. Like, do what? (Laughter) I mean I do a painting, I'm through with it. But with the illustrating, they have art directors there, and they kind of guide you through, and they--honest to goodness, it was really an experience for me because when I got this script, I read it and I did exactly what the script said. It was, her hat was so big, with pretty flowers on it and bees. You could see the bees flying in the flowers. And it was on a beautiful Sunday morning. So I draw the hat with the bees and--they didn't mean for me to just, just do it just, just like that, you know. But I was drawing everything. And they said, "No, let us just give you a little guidance." And the women, the editors there were magnificent. The, the directions that they gave me, it was like producing a movie, "Okay, give us a close-up of this, and that's, that's--put this in the background." And with the directions, you couldn't go wrong. And I thought it was a great experience.
Story_ID: 402742
Speaker 1: Besides books, now you told me about the difference license, people making different items with your paintings. You showed me a rug. I guess you would call it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's a wall hanging, yeah.
Speaker 1: A wall hanging, oh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a tapestry hanging, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tapestry, okay. I'm sorry the wrong name (laughter). And how is that process done?
Speaker 2: It's woven on a loom I, I would imagine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's one of the companies I gave a licensing agreement to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they've done tote bags, and that's brand--those were samples that they send to me. We call them prototypes, to see if I have any changes, if I approve or whatever, but it's gonna be a wall hanging.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay. And, and which, what is the latest one? That's your latest--
Speaker 2: Yeah, what I did--
Speaker 1: --piece.
Speaker 2: --was a series called 'Qualitea Time,' Q-U-A-L-I-T-E-A. And it's what women do when they don't have to do anything. We sleep, so I had the lady on the couch sleeping. And we soak in a tub, so I had a lady in a tub with the candles and all of that. We pray, and I had the lady praying. And I was gonna do more in that series. So those are the first three pieces that I did of 'Qualitea Time.' And they also are teapots.
Story_ID: 402743
Speaker 1: So what, what else is going to be new for you? What else, what do you have coming up?
Speaker 2: Well, well, I- we do the art show on Tom Joyner's cruise [Tom Joyner Foundation Fantastic Voyage] every year, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But the--
Speaker 1: On, on a cruise on a ship?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: We--
Speaker 1: --you're the only artist that--
Speaker 2: No, me and, Leroy Campbell and I started out. This is going on about the sixth year that we've done--set up the art exhibit, but they have added more artists since. I just, I just, I, I created an award for [HistoryMaker] Cathy Hughes at Radio One [Radio One, Lanham, Maryland]. She's been in business for twenty-five years. And they called and asked if I would design the award, which was a great honor. Again, that threw me into shock. I'm like, I don't design awards, but I did it. And that was this past year. So, and, and right now I'm working with Tom Junior- with Oscar Junior [Oscar Joyner], Tom's son, to, on a new project that might turn out. I don't know if that's why we didn't get the email this morning. So we're working on that. And--
Speaker 1: And what type of project is that?
Speaker 2: I don't know if they're ready to put it out yet or not.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know, and I don't even know if they're gonna choose me to do it--
Speaker 1: I got you.
Speaker 2: --but I've been sending in samples of it. And as far as me, I usually try to paint themes, it's easier if I paint a theme. And I'm trying to come up with something like the inner workings of the church, the different committees, the visiting committee, and the building committee, and the cooking committee (laughter). So, I'm thinking about doing that, a series of that. And I, I like, I like the Roaring Twenty periods [1920s]. I like the outfits they wore at that time, during that period of time. I'm, wos- want to go back, back and do things, you know, old things. Like I want to do an old wedding way back when, when they used to have the reception in the basement of the church. I want to do a series of an old, old wedding.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it's just this kind of subject will--takes the longest.
Story_ID: 402744
Speaker 1: What about church?
Speaker 2: What about church?
Speaker 1: What church do you attend?
Speaker 2: Right now I don't tend, attend the church. I did in, in, in Chicago [Illinois]. I attended--can't even think of the name of the church. My mind just went blank. It was a wonderful church. And since I've been in Las Vegas [Nevada], I haven't attended church 'cause I hate driving here. And all of the Baptist churches are on the other side of town. And I just--I'm a Baptist. I, I, I, I, I, not, I'm not all that--I have--well, am I religious or not. My daughter [D. Joy Smith], my daughter just graduated from ministry school too by the way. And she, and she's like, does missionary duty. She goes to prisons and talk to the women and things like that. But I'm not in her religion. I'm a Baptist. She's like Church of Christ [Church of God in Christ]. So I just believe in doing right, being right, and I don't think you have to just be in church to be right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was just wondering since you were talking about doing the inner workings of the church. I just felt--
Speaker 2: It's just a good subject matter. I mean, you know, and then people have--I, I identify with church, you know.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: But like I said, I know I don't attend like I should. I have to feel a church when to go. I, if I don't feel that, I can't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: New Faith Baptist Church [New Faith Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] is the name of the church that I belonged to in Chicago.
Story_ID: 402745
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of your friends, some of your artist friends.
Speaker 2: What about them (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of them.
Speaker 2: What do you want to know about my artist friends? Actually, they're all just my friends. I, I get along--they're mostly men. It's mostly men artists. We do have women artists. We have Kathleen Wilson [Kathleen A. Wilson]. Kathleen is in California with Syn- [HistoryMaker] Synthia Saint James and Varnette [Varnette Honeywood]. But we're not, you know, with each other a lot. The guys, every time I go to a show, they are always there. It's very seldom that, that the women show up together. And I was gonna have a show of all the five, it was gonna be five or six women here in June. And when they stole all my paintings I just canceled the show. I canceled it because I didn't have the proper insurance coverage, and I didn't want Kathleen bringing her art and all of them bringing art and their art get stolen. I wouldn't have been able to, you know, replace it. And it's really strange. I never had a break-in in Chicago [Illinois] out of sixteen years I had the gallery [Annie Lee and Friends Art Gallery]. And I've been here one year and have been broken into three times.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So rather than have all the artists bring their artwork down, I just canceled it until I was--and I didn't think insurance companies was that important 'cause I had it sixteen years in Chicago and never needed it.
Story_ID: 402746
Speaker 1: When I asked about your artist friends, I meant as far as working in the industry. You know, you, you mentioned Kathleen Wilson [Kathleen A. Wilson] and Varnette Honeywood and [HistoryMaker] Synthia Saint James. In comparison, women, okay, and, and men in the art, art field, period, did you find that you had any struggles because you were female--
Speaker 2: Never.
Speaker 1: --or black?
Speaker 2: Never. All, all, although I know that black art doesn't get paid; we don't get paid like the white artists. And we put as much time and work in our paintings. And if somebody get thirty thousand dollars, it's like wow, she got thirty thousand dollars. And white artists can do the same thing and get a hundred thousand. You know, we, we put a lot of work in our art, but we just don't get paid like that. And we're not recognized like musicians and the, and the entertainers and things, but we work just as hard. But for some reason or another the art just never really made it. And some, some of us are lucky. I, I got lucky because I think the reason I got really lucky is because of my subject matter, which was aimed towards black women, and most of my work is aimed towards what I know. Me being an African American woman, I know what I--you know, my life. But the artists out here, we stra- they struggle a lot. We struggle; it's hard, it's hard to make a living as an artist.
Story_ID: 402747
Speaker 1: Did you decide to open your own gallery [Annie Lee and Friends Art Gallery] so that you can have total control over what happens with your artwork? Was that one of the reasons?
Speaker 2: No, to get it out of my house.
Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter) that was the only reason?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Um-hm. No, and now I never--I do have control of it, you know. Just to get it out of my house.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, when, when Dan [ph.] had the artwork and he was showing it in his gallery--
Speaker 2: The reason I started doing it on my own is when he was doing it I was working.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a job--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at the railroad [Chicago and North Western Railway; CNW Corporation]. And then when I was at home that year I wasn't--that's when I decided to go into art full-time.
Speaker 1: I see.
Story_ID: 402748
Speaker 1: Now, you said that you have a house full of original artwork. Who are some of the artists that you like?
Speaker 2: Paul Goodnight [HistoryMaker Paul D. Goodnight] is, is my--just, I think Paul is just one of the best artists there ever was. I got Charles Bibbs; I got a piece by Arty Mars [ph.]; I got Jacob Lawrence; I got Frank Morrison; I got Dr. Jim Biggers [James Biggers]. You name it, I got it. I got LaShun Beal; I got WAK [Kevin A. Williams]; I got--oh, I just got them. I got Kath- I'm--Varnette [Varnette Honeywood], Frank Frazier. And then I got a lot of unknown artists. Like I said, when I go to other states and see pieces that I like, I just buy it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I am an investor in art (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So those are invest- those pieces that you like and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --an investment--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Investment pieces, okay. Now are there artists that you think their work is controversial?
Speaker 2: How you mean? Well, I'll tell you about WAK. When WAK first started, we told WAK you gotta put some clothes on your, those people, WAK. Yeah, so, it was a little bit too, too much nudity, I thought, but hey, that, you--artists can do anything they want to do, and art is art. You know--
Speaker 1: Right, it is.
Speaker 2: --it's in the by- eye of the beholder. But WAK was the only one that I picked on, told him to put some clothes on his people (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Did he take your advice?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he did. And he said he's (unclear), very beautiful art (laughter).
Story_ID: 402749
Speaker 1: It appears that because you, you have your own gallery [Annie Lee and Friends Art Gallery], the people that are your customers are mostly black. Is that true or not (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, most of the originals, a lot of the originals that are bought, are bought by white people, my originals; it's by both.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you have a mixed market?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Especially for the originals.
Speaker 1: Do you do a lot of marketing at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And, and basically, that's because you have all these different licensing--
Speaker 2: I just never have done a lot of marketing. I never needed to. I can't keep up now. I mean I need originals right now as we speak. I have none. And I go home and I stare at blank canvas for three weeks, and I still don't have any originals. So I, I really need to be, you know.
Story_ID: 402750
Speaker 1: You talked about Paul Goodnight [HistoryMaker Paul D. Goodnight]. And I know that some of his artwork was on I think it was 'The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air.' I remember the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He want one of my originals.
Speaker 1: I, I remember seeing his artwork--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in, in that show. And I saw it--I, I think I saw your pieces in, in some television programs. Tell me what, what programs might--
Speaker 2: Most or all of our--
Speaker 1: --I've seen them in?
Speaker 2: --artworks, most of it was on--you know, all the African American artists, most of us, was on Bill Cosby show ['The Cosby Show'], 'A Different World,' '227.' I know mine was on 'Different World,' '227,' 'Amen,' 'A Different World,' Eddie Murphy's movie, 'Boomerang,' then 'Coming to America.' And I had a piece on 'ER' in the black doctor's apartment and just all over.
Speaker 1: Okay. So what was that like? How, how would they call you to, or select you to have there, your artwork (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sometimes--
Speaker 1: --on their set?
Speaker 2: --the studio will call and ask if it's okay to use a piece. Sometimes you just look up and there it is. And it's really a good thing. I mean it's nice, nice, you know, to know.
Speaker 1: Do you get any royalties from them doing it?
Speaker 2: Not a lot. You figure the, the advertising is worth it.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell me more about--
Speaker 2: 'Barbershop' movie, yeah, I had--
Speaker 1: 'Barbershop'?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --one and two ['Barbershop 2: Back in Business']. I had a painting in the barbershop, and it kept keying in there's a painting of a barbershop (unclear). And my grandson was also in that movie.
Speaker 1: Oh, was he? What, what--
Speaker 2: Yeah, one and two.
Speaker 1: --part did he play?
Speaker 2: In, in, in one he was a detective on the outside of the, the restaurant--I mean the barbershop. And in two, at the very end, he was a real tall guy passing out pamphlets, directing people into the Nappy Cutz.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, my grandson.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's his name?
Speaker 2: Stacey [ph.], yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. And he is your daughter's [D. Joy Smith] son?
Speaker 2: Daughter's oldest son.
Story_ID: 402751
Speaker 1: Tell me more about your daughter [D. Joy Smith]. You told me that she just graduated from ministerial school.
Speaker 2: Right, and then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then she's got four children. I got--and my son [Howard Lee, Jr.] had three. I got seven grandkids and seven great-grandkids. And my oldest grandson, Stacey [ph.], lives here in Las Vegas [Nevada] with me. Well, he's not with me now, but he was. He'll graduate in--he'll get his bachelor's [degree] in June in technology and finance, and then he's going on to get his master's [degree]. And then I have three other grandkids, two in Chicago [Illinois], Charlie [ph.], Charlie's twenty-five, and Shannon [ph.] is twenty-eight. And I have Amber [ph.], and Amber is twenty-three, and she's in Texas. Those are my daughter's kids. And my son had three kids: Howard, Jr. [ph.], Marsha [ph.], and Antonio [ph.], and got little babies running all around (laughter), seven of them.
Speaker 1: To keep you very busy.
Speaker 2: Well, actually, they're all in Chicago, most of them (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, are they?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 402752
Speaker 1: What's on the horizon for [HistoryMaker] Annie Lee?
Speaker 2: Just great things. I just, I, I enjoy what I do. I, I like making dolls too, trying to make dolls. I have been scuffling trying to make these dolls the right way for the last year. So I'm just, want to really, you know, do that and keep on painting--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Do what I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You never know. You know, every time I look up there's something different. I'm building a home. I'm building two homes, in fact.
Speaker 1: So you're gonna move again.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so now--
Speaker 2: This is number fifteen (laughter).
Speaker 1: Where are you moving to?
Speaker 2: Right outside of Plano, Texas.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I swore up and down I would never, ever have anything but a ranch. But believe it or not, I'm building a two-story. And right--I'm on one corner, and right on the next corner I'm buying my daughter [D. Joy Smith] a home too, and she--I'm building her one too.
Speaker 1: And your daughter is in Chicago [Illinois] now?
Speaker 2: She's in China. She's in China.
Speaker 1: In China?
Speaker 2: She's teaching at the University of Shanghai [sic. Shanghai University, Shanghai, China]. She'll be back in June. The home should be built by then.
Speaker 1: So are you gonna open a gallery there?
Speaker 2: No, ma'am.
Speaker 1: No gallery?
Speaker 2: I'm seventy-two years old. I'll be seventy-three next year. I'm trying to retire. I'm (laughter)--you want me to get started (laughter). I've been trying to retire for the last five years.
Speaker 1: But you're gonna continue to, to paint.
Speaker 2: Have this gallery [Annie Lee and Friends Art Gallery, Las Vegas, Nevada] and yeah, to paint--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And sell originals.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so this gallery will remain here?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Las Vegas [Nevada]. That--
Speaker 2: And it'll just go--I just want to go paint and, and, and, and draw and to make dolls. Like my grandson said yesterday, he said, "You say that." He said, "I know I'll look up and you and you know, open up another gallery or something, somewhere."
Story_ID: 402753
Speaker 1: Now when you look back over your life, is there anything that you regret or you would change?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I would have taken the scholarship to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] in the first place, like I should have. Well, yeah, I, I won't say like I should have. But yes, I would have take--did that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would never have married the second time, never (laughter). But other than that, no. Things, you, you know, it went well. It's been a lot of hard work, but it paid off. And in fact, I sit down and I think, I'm not the only person that worked hard. There's a lot of people work hard, really hard. But I got rewarded, and I appreciate it. But it's a lot of people work hard and never got rewarded I didn't--I don't feel, you know.
Story_ID: 402754
Speaker 1: What advice would you give to a young inspiring artist?
Speaker 2: To take all the art classes that you can and just to draw, draw, draw and paint, draw and paint, draw and paint, and just get, get as good as you can, you know. It gets to the point where you can't please everybody, so you try to please yourself. And you know, just do your personal best. At least that's what I try to do. And when I'm, feel that I put my best in it, if you like it, fine. I feel God blessed me to do it in the first place, and if you like it, that's two blessings, so. But I can't please everybody, so I just try to do what I do, and I think that's what artists should do.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because future generations will have access to hear your story, what message would you want to send to the future generations?
Speaker 2: That you can do anything you want to do in this world. It's easy to cop out. It's easy to blame your mistakes on other people. Just face up to it and just keep on pushing, period. You got to work; it's as simple as that. And when you're in school, I, I suggest you always, always try to aim towards what it is you love to do, 'cause you're gonna have to work, so you might as well make your living doing whatever it is you love to do, you know. At least, at least that's the way I feel about it.
Story_ID: 402755
Speaker 1: What do you want to do that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2: I, now that you ask, I was talking to my daughter [D. Joy Smith] the other day. And I said, "You know what, it just dawned on me that all, all the things that I wanted, my prayers were all answered." So I'm doing what I want to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, good.
Speaker 2: I feel very blessed.
Speaker 1: You, you have a legacy of your art. What do you want people to say about you? How do you want to be remembered, is, is my question.
Speaker 2: Really, Annie [HistoryMaker Annie Lee] did what she had to do (laughter). She did it her way, I guess. I, I just never really--I mean I've been so blessed until, you know, I, I just been blessed, and so I hope people realize that. And I appreciate everybody, everybody that has helped me and who's all the customers and all of the ladies. I enjoyed going to these shows. I'll give you an example. I went to MotorCity [MotorCity Casino Hotel] in Detroit [Michigan]. I did three thousand signatures in two days. And all the ladies there, I mean I just enjoyed talking to them one on one. I don't like standing up talking to a bunch of folks, but one on one I enjoy, so. I, I just appreciate all the little, all the fans I've had.
Story_ID: 402756
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you would like to talk about?
Speaker 2: I just think that maybe one day people should give artists more recognition than what they're getting. They should be paid more like the entertainers and like the singers and all. Artists work just as hard. I was at an award show not too long ago, and [HistoryMaker] Ed Dwight I think it was that's on there. He got an award, and he, he recognized, he even made the statement that other artists should be receiving awards like this. And I thought that was great that he even thought about it, because they should. It's a lot of artists out there that work hard. I mean you might get paid a little money, but still, they should have more recognition.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: If that's what they're aiming for (laughter). I, I just actually enjoy the satisfaction of doing it. I've been blessed that way.
Story_ID: 402757
Speaker 1: The painting is a dance marathon. I, I don't remem- I remember hearing about that period when the people used to dance and dance to see who would last the longest. So that's what the painting's about.
Speaker 2: The picture, that's Tom Joyner up there on his cruise ship.
Speaker 1: And the picture down at the bottom is Tom and his crew, J. Anthony Brown, Myra [Myra J], and Miss Dupree [Jedda Jones] on the cruise ship [Tom Joyner Foundation Fantastic Voyage]. And every year we set up the art exhibit on the ship for him--and J. Anthony, Myra, Tom, and Miss Dupree.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, so that's from right to left?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That's my painting, '8 1/2 Narrow' [Annie Lee], when I was saying earlier about she saw the pretty shoes she really liked, but that she knew they were too small. She should have bought a nine. And again, that's showing you no features, but the movement of the body lets you try to let you know what I'm thinking.
Speaker 1: And that's me when I was secretary working at the railroad [Chicago and North Western Railway; CNW Corporation].
Speaker 2: That, that, that's one of my bid whist series, 'Rise and Fly' [Annie Lee], playing the bid whist.
Speaker 1: And that's me down with some of my girlfriends playing bid- bid whist, which is something I really like to do; at a bid whist game.
Speaker 2: That's a painting--a photograph of me presenting the painting to Mayor Harold Washington in Chicago [Illinois] before he died.
Speaker 1: This is a painting of an old fashioned wedding called 'Jumping the Broom' [Annie Lee].
Speaker 2: And the photograph is of me in my heyday, when I was doing a little modeling, and that was at a modeling show.
Speaker 1: '5th Grade Substitute' [Annie Lee], and on the blackboard are my grandchildren's names. And the teacher, she's had it. She said, "I quit." The name of it is '5th Grade Substitute.'
Speaker 2: And the photograph at the bottom is me graduating from Mundelein College [Chicago, Illinois], yay (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is a painting of an invitation that I did for my grand opening of my art gallery [Annie Lee and Friends Art Gallery, Hazel Crest, Illinois], my first art gallery. And the name of the invitation is 'The Art Gallery' [Annie Lee].
Speaker 2: And that building down there is actually my second art gallery [Annie Lee and Friends Art Gallery] that I still own in Glenwood, Illinois. It's a quaint little building. And the sign is on an old covered wagon that used to be in the yard. And I just left the wagon there 'cause I thought it was unique. And in fact, that building was part of the Underground Railroad.
Speaker 1: This painting is called 'Sunday Evening Radio' [Annie Lee]. It's an original painting that I did for Tom Joyner. He was like, "Annie [HistoryMaker Annie Lee], could you do me something with an old radio in it?" So that's the--where that came from.
Speaker 2: And those photographs on the side are my grandchildren, and my great-grand, grandchildren, and my daughter and her husband.
Speaker 1: And your daughter's name is?
Speaker 2: Joy, J-O-Y. Her name is Darvina Joy Smith [D. Joy Smith]. And in fact, we have a book out front. It's called 'The Joy of Annie Lee' [D. Joy Smith]. And she wrote poem, poetry for all of my paintings.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So, it's--I'll give you a copy of the book.
