Story_ID: 522013
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Sterns, observing are Jordan Reese and Tanya Barrientos. Ma'am could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Risa Juanita Lavizzo-Mourey [HistoryMaker Dr. Risa Lavizzo-Mourey], first name is R-I-S-A, middle name, J-U-A-N-I-T-A, and last name, L-A-V-I-Z-Z-O hyphen M-O-U-R-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind the name Lavizzo?
Speaker 2: There is a story, that's my father's [Philip V. Lavizzo] name and it's, it's an Italian name that the family originated from the Savoy region of the Kingdom of Sardinia, so that's the part between France and Italy that kind of went back and forth between the two countries and my, I guess he would be my great-great-grandfather [sic. paternal great-grandfather], came to the U.S. in about 1860, his name was Giuseppe Lavizzo and he gave the family our name and our religion.
Speaker 1: Okay, which is Catholicism?  Was that, that--?
Speaker 2: It was, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay and did he come to the gulf, I mean Mexi- I mean to New Orleans [Louisiana] here?
Speaker 2: He left from Naples [Italy] and disembarked in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 25th, 1954, Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: All right and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a physician and the president and CEO of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation [Princeton, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: All right and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: December 14th, 2016.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in New York City [New York, New York].
Story_ID: 522014
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we always ask that only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I do have a favorite food, I'm gonna give you a favorite meal, how's that?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm a simple person, roasted chicken, fresh salad, couldn't be better.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red
Speaker 1: All right, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Springtime.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 522015
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your family history, your father's [Philip V. Lavizzo] side of the family, your mother's side of the family, but we'll start with your mother's side, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Okay, Blanche Louise Sellers Lavizzo [Blanche Sellers Lavizzo], Blanche, B-L-A-N-C-H-E, Louise, L-O-U-I-S-E, S-E-L-L-E-R-S, and Lavizzo, L-A-V-I-Z-Z-O.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Atlanta, Georgia, July 11th, 1925.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: It's all right, and okay, so what do you know about your mother's ancestors?  How far back can you trace them and what are the stories about their activities?
Speaker 2: Well my mother's family was pretty much located in Georgia in Atlanta and in some of the small towns south of Georgia, south of Atlanta, I'm sorry.  She was a descendant of--her story's an American story, an American slave story, her mother [Lilla Anderson Sellers] was multiracial and grew up in the southern part of Georgia, her father also multiracial, probably part Indian [Native American], African American and her mother's family, I mean, yeah her mother's family were actually pretty fortunate for the times, her uncle was a physician and they had their, their own business, private practice, physicians practice but often had difficulty making ends meet practicing medicine so he also worked for the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] and--
Speaker 1: What was his name, her--I'm sorry--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, go.
Speaker 1: Yeah what was her, your great uncle's name?
Speaker 2: Bud Anderson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where wou- where did he practice?  Was it in the--
Speaker 2: In Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay, I--
Speaker 2: In Atlanta.
Speaker 1: --all right.  Okay so he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually--
Speaker 1: --he had--
Speaker 2: --Atlanta and Macon, Georgia, you know, the, as, as with many African Americans in that time you had to be somewhat mobile in order to make ends meet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah that's something he had to be a postal, a post- work for the post office as well as being a physician?  So--
Speaker 2: And then my, her father who had grown up in actually a little town called Baxley, Georgia, and his family had a farm, actually a--quite a large farm for the, for the time it was about five hundred acres, I only know this because I went and did some research down in Baxley, Georgia and learned that he had, his grandfather had purchased that land and it was just--he was described as Samuel Garrett Sellers, a free black man purchased this land.  I wish I knew how he got the money to, to purchase it but that's where the family lived for at least two generations and then he and his brothers moved to Atlanta and actually started a funeral home called Sellers Brothers Funeral Home [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so, so she, she had a, you know, as you said a fairly fortunate, you know, situation grow- growing up and, so she was, they would go to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] right?
Speaker 2: She was able to go to Spelman and then to medical school at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].
Story_ID: 522016
Speaker 1: Does she [Lavizzo-Mourey's mother, Blanche Sellers Lavizzo] have any stories about growing up that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: Oh she has lots of stories about growing up (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you think of a good one?
Speaker 2: Well it, it, a combination of the ways in which the living in Atlanta [Georgia] was both cosmopolitan and, and very rural all at the same time.  Sunday morning meant going to church, you actually, they were members of [Reverend] Martin Luther King, Sr.'s church, and so they--
Speaker 1: Ebenezer Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia], yeah (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) Ebenezer Baptist Church, and then they would come home and it was her job to go out to the back yard and select the chicken that she would wring its neck, pluck it and prepare the meal for Sunday dinner.  So she was always a, a pretty lady like person so it--for me growing up imagining my mother wringing the neck of a chicken and preparing it for a Sunday was, just a contradiction (laughter) for me.  And so there were stories like that, there are also a lot of stories about how closely knit and how interdependent the black community was on one another, as I mentioned her father [Samuel Garrett Sellers] had a funeral business and in those days of course, it was before the--we had 911 is the universal number you call if you have an emergency and the ambulance essentially in Atlanta for black people was the hearse.  So she learned to drive, driving the hearse and would tell stories about what it was like to see the, the needs of a community being, being both at times met very effectively and other times clearly being cast aside because there wasn't an infrastructure for our people.  So she had a lot of very interesting and important stories for, for my upbringing and, and my sense of values.
Speaker 1: Okay but she grew up during the days of Sweet Auburn Avenue and all of that and--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --all of the people that populated those churches and, yeah wow, that, you know, businesses that, you know, the Daily World [Atlanta Daily World] and all of that--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --like a glob- a golden age for people to look back on now--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --for the cohesiveness of the community there.
Story_ID: 522017
Speaker 1: Did she [Lavizzo-Mourey's mother, Blanche Sellers Lavizzo] always wanna be a doctor? Or--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure if she always wanted to be a doctor but certainly from about middle school age she did and she was probably in, in some measure responding to her father's [Samuel Garrett Sellers] wish that he had a son who would become a physician and he had two daughters.  And so she, she was the one who leaned towards the scientist, sciences my, my aunt [Juanita Sellers] tended to lean towards the arts and my mother was a pretty determined person and I think at some point, she got the sense that some of the men in the family thought it wasn't a good idea for her to go to medical school and at that moment, she was determined to go to medical school so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --she proved--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --them wrong.
Speaker 1: So she, she got her M.D. from Meharry right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Yes she did.
Speaker 1: Did she add--have any stories about--what, well was it tough being a female medical student at Meharry in those days?
Speaker 2: There were only about five women in medical students then, there were no dorms for women, the women had to stay in the nurses dorms, it was, I think very difficult because it was--although there were five women, and it, it speaks to, you know, in some ways, the, the inclusion of Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee], it's, there it was still very difficult there was a lot of sense that a, a woman doctor was not going to continue to practice and so she was taking a slot from a man who would.  And since there were so few slots for African Americans who wanted to become physicians, there was always that tension.  But, I think that she bonded with the other women and this was clearly a very, very important part of her life and what she imparted to me as a, as a young girl growing up.
Speaker 1: Yeah but she did practice medicine right?
Speaker 2: She did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She practiced her entire life taking off probably only four to six weeks for times, when she had children so she, she was very dedicated to her profession.
Speaker 1: Yeah and it's big, that's kind of curious that they would think that she would just be there to meet a doctor or something or, I don't know what the thinking was--
Speaker 2: Well she did meet a doctor [Philip V. Lavizzo].
Speaker 1: --what she, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: She achieved that goal, too.
Speaker 1: Okay 'cause your parents met at Meharry, right?
Speaker 2: They met there, yeah.
Story_ID: 522018
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side of the family, can, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Philip Valcour Lavizzo [Philip V. Lavizzo], first name P-H-I-L-I-P, middle name, V-A-L-C-O-U-R, last name, L-A-V-I-Z-Z-O.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His, he was born in New Orleans [Louisiana], April 26, 1918.
Speaker 1: All right and so, what are the stories of, about the ancestors on your father side?  You started a little bit about--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my--
Speaker 1: --about the name--
Speaker 2: --my father's family was, you know, in, in some ways a typical New Orleans family, a lot of different ethnic groups found their way to, to New Orleans, his immediate family, his father [Joseph V. Lavizzo] was a contractor, and his mother [Aurelia Powers Lavizzo], well is a homemaker, she unfortunately died when my father was only seven years old, she was thirty-nine years old, and I'm not sure exactly what her cause of death was, although I think it, it might have been ovarian cancer, just putting it all together.  But my father's childhood really was marked by two big events, his mother's death and then the Depression [Great Depression] that came right in the middle of his, his upbringing, so he, he experienced New Orleans in it's kind of heyday, and then what happened to it during the Depression and particularly what happened to black people who were in business during that time.  Now before his, his father, now his father's family really was a large family, he had three brothers and a couple of sisters, and as I said they were descended from this, my great-grandfather, Giuseppe or, Anglo and anglicized to Joseph Lavizzo and his wife.  Now, the interesting thing about that whole story is that the Lavizzo, Giuseppe Lavizzo actually didn't stay, remain in the U.S., he was probably in the U.S. for about ten years and during that time he had two families.  He had one family with a woman named Catharine [Catharine Lavizzo], had a daughter with her, she was white, and then he had another family, my family with a, a woman named Aurelia [Aurelia Lavizzo (ph.)] and, of course, our family stayed in the U.S. and eventually Giuseppe and his other family went back to Europe and he ended up dying in, in the southern part of France.
Speaker 1: Now would your family, your father's family be considered Creoles?
Speaker 2: I, yeah, he never considered himself Creole but I think there's some that would.
Speaker 1: 'Cause he came at a, you know, different time then the other Creoles I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I guess we could say that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Earlier time.
Speaker 1: --but it's really the same--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --similar mix of, you know, race, races.  So, but he didn't consider himself a Creole (simultaneous)? Okay.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He didn't, he considered himself African American or black.
Story_ID: 522019
Speaker 1: Now did he grow up under well, well you said he experienced, they experienced the Depression [Great Depression] so, I mean, it, it kind of--that they were, you know, poor, I guess, right? Growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were devastated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can remember stories growing up where my father [Philip V. Lavizzo] would talk about how his father [Joseph V. Lavizzo] went from being able to get jobs, building houses and the like to being totally out of work and the, everyone in the family--well it was a big family there were ten children, and they all had to pull their own weight.  My father started caddying when he was maybe ten, eleven years old and the silver lining of that is that golf became one of his great pleasures in life and he--but it was a major source of, of income for him as a young man and a source of income for their family during that difficult time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now I take it he went to Catholic schools, right?
Speaker 2: No he, he went to public school and I heard lots of stories from him and my aunts of their, their long walk to school, they probably had, you know, allowing for the exaggeration that sometimes happens around the dinner table with these stories it, it was at least a couple of miles that they walked to school.  And, but they were, their parents were very intent on them going to school and my father was very bright he actually graduated from high school when he was fifteen and went to what was known as normal school then, which was probably a two year college, graduated with a, a teaching certificate and taught school for a few years before he went to medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay, so well, that was all in New Orleans [Louisiana] right?
Speaker 2: All in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 522020
Speaker 1: Did he [Lavizzo-Mourey's father, Philip V. Lavizzo] talk about what gave him the idea to, you know, make him seek the, you know, an M.D. degree?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's interesting, I don't think I could tell you why he pursued medicine over other careers, like engineering or science, he, he loved the sciences, I can only imagine it was that there weren't as many avenues open to people at, at that stage and you could see a path, although it was a very difficult path, you could see a path to, to medical school in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so he enrolled in Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] about what year?  What, what year was it?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-four [1944].
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-four [1944].  Okay, all right, and so he--did, did he have any stories about Meharry?
Speaker 2: He loved Meharry, he loved telling about the, the joy of learning medicine and, and his professors, he, he really loved being a physician it was, it defined who he was and he, he conveyed that in almost every situation you would find him in.  And interesting story that I learned not from my father but from his sister [Evelyn Lavizzo White], had to do with the, the difficulty in the segregation that students at that time experienced.  And what I found at one point was a letter from my father to, to his sister thanking her and his other siblings for the money that they were sending him to go to medical school and he made a reference in the, in the letter about getting the check from the State of Louisiana and I, I asked my aunt what, what is, what is that all about State from che- State of Louisiana, why, why a check from them?  And she said, well, you know, it was illegal to admit black people to the university of Louisiana [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and so the state provided a small stipend to black students who wanted to go to medical school someplace else, although it wasn't enough by any means to, to cover it.  And it was such a stark reminder to me of the incredible obstacles that students who wanted to pursue medicine faced.  There were financial hurdles and there were just out and out refusals to admit students to, to a state university that would have been so much easier and so much more appropriate for him to be able to attend.
Speaker 1: Right, but this a--unfortunately it's a common story, it's baffling, some states would pay your full ride to graduate school if you, just as long as you left the state.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And you went to some other--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --some place in the North, they'd pay your way to Colum- we mean, I mean we've interviewed people that went to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you know, every, anywhere.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: You still had to get admitted there and that was a challenge, too (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Yeah, but if you, if you could admitted someplace, they'd, they'd pay your way.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Just as long as you didn't stay there and they hoped that you didn't come back--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, and in a lot of ways 'cause they really didn't, they didn't really see a place for you, you know, if you're--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a physician.  So, but a--but, teachers, a lot of people had.
Story_ID: 522021
Speaker 1: So it was at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] that he [Lavizzo-Mourey's father, Philip V. Lavizzo] met your mother [Blanche Sellers Lavizzo] right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, now is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: The, the story that they often told, was that the, the upperclassmen would go to the train station on, on or about the first day of class when the, the younger students were coming in the--and you know, kind of see who was arriving among the, the nurses and the doctors and my father became immediately smitten with my mother is the story they often told.
Story_ID: 522022
Speaker 1: Your father [Philip V. Lavizzo] was an author of a paper that's quoted.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: A '51 [1951] paper called, 'Observations on the General Adaptation of Syndrome: Surgery as Measured by the Eosinophils--' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eosinophils, yeah--
Speaker 1: --'--Response' [sic. 'Observations on the General Adaptation Syndrome: Surgery as Measured by the Eosinophil Response,' P.V. Lavizzo].  And, now I've never heard of it (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Now it's a, it's a well known paper?
Speaker 2: Well it describes inflammation and how after surgery the, the body reacts and we all have experienced when you get a cut or something like that it swells and one of the reasons it swells, your, your tissues swell is because of the eosinophils, and he described that in a paper in 1951 [sic. 1952].  One of the interesting things that I found some years later was a, a notebook where he had meticulously drawn the, the cells and what they looked like in different stages so I, I knew about that drawing actually before I, I had read the paper that he wrote.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is important because this pap- paper is not just an important paper to black physicians but it's a, but it's an important paper for the field, you know, and, transcends some of the racial stuff.
Story_ID: 522023
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what they look like, how they walk, how they talk, their sense of humor--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --their dispositions, their views, their talents, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I'm more like my mother [Blanche Sellers Lavizzo], but I have some traits of my father [Philip V. Lavizzo] that are obviously very important to, to my success and to the approach I take to, to problems and to the world in general.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would say, my father was very committed to the notion that one needed to have high standards, that it was important to improve your community to give back to insure that you were always doing the best you could to ensure that the community could be successful.  And my mother had those same views, she, she overlaid with a kind of empathy and compassion that I think I have tried to embrace and express in my work.  I think she was always interested in the people and in bringing people together and my father tended to take a more analytic and economic approach if you will?  And my, my mother was more the, the compassionate people oriented person.  So, but they both had this commitment to excellence and to having high standards and to really being sure that in what you did you were living the, the adage that, you know, you are expected to, to help your felt- fellow person.
Story_ID: 522024
Speaker 1: Now your father [Philip V. Lavizzo] and mother [Blanche Sellers Lavizzo] moved back to New Orleans [Louisiana] right, after the--after medical school, after Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: After medical school, well my father went and did his internship in Washington, D.C. at Freedmen's Hospital [Howard University Hospital]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then moved back to Nashville [Tennessee] for residency, and the story behind that of course is that there really were only two centers of medical care, Meharry and Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] at the time and so, physicians in that area--era often went from one to the other so he did his internship in Washington, D.C., moved, they moved back to Nashville for residency and during that time as residents they went out to Seattle [Washington] for a year to practice in the public health service out there.  And, then after completing residency they did a brief time in New Orleans and actually a, a small amount of time maybe nine months or so in Mound Bayou, Mississippi before actually moving to Seattle.
Speaker 1: Yeah there was a hospital in Mound Bayou [Taborian Hospital] for a little while--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --isn't that?
Speaker 2: --there was a clinic there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All, all-black town?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: From Chicago [Illinois] to Mound Bayou and it, and when they went to Seattle, and was that part of the New Deal program or something or--during the war [World War II, WWII]?
Speaker 2: They went to Seattle because at the time, my father was a surgical resident, my mother was a pediatric resident and surgeons need to be able to operate a fair amount in order to accumulate enough experience to be board certified.  And many African American physicians at the time didn't get board certified in part because it was expensive but it was also difficult to accumulate the number of cases, supervised cases that you needed in order to meet board certification.  So, one of the things that the residency program at Meharry did was it sent their surgical residents to Seattle for a year to practice and, you know, be able to operate and accumulate the experience that they need because there was really only one hospital in Nashville that would allow black surgeons to operate, and you just couldn't get enough experience.  So they went out to Seattle in 1950, and saw an, a, a world that was very different than they had experienced in Atlanta [Georgia] and New Orleans and, and Nashville, a place that had much less segregation, there was still some segregation in Atlant- in, in Seattle but a lot less than they had experience growing up and thought this would be a, a good place to move and raise their children.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, I was just thinking now, not Grady Hospital [Grady Memorial Hospital] in Atlanta but at, they didn't consider going (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they, they never practiced in Atlanta.
Story_ID: 522025
Speaker 1: Seattle [Washington] now, so what medical institute, I mean did they, did they just go into private practice in Seattle?
Speaker 2: They moved to Seattle and established a private practice together, for many years they practiced together, my father [Philip V. Lavizzo] practiced both general medicine as well as surgery since there really wasn't a large referral network to send patients to.  And then my mother [Blanche Sellers Lavizzo] practiced general pediatrics, they, they had privileges at a Catholic hospital, Providence hospital [Providence Seattle Medical Center] in Seattle and it was interesting, they, I, I learned this later actually after they had both passed away that my mother had an experience trying to get privileges at Group Health [Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound; Kaiser Permanente Washington], which was a cooperative insurance company and managed care association in Seattle and was actually denied privileges.  I learned about this because the person who was writing the history of group health contacted me and said he had seen the medical staff minutes and in the minutes was mention of a African American woman who had applied and was denied privileges because she had gone to one of those substandard black medical schools in the South.  And he asked me was this my mother?  And, you know, my parents never really talked about the difficulties that they had and I said, "I, I don't know but I'll check it out," and I called around and after a number of phone calls I learned from one of my mother's good friends that, yes indeed, it was my mother and the black community in Seattle at the time had boycotted Group Health and that had actually created some hardships for them because it was the only insurance some of the these folks had and they had young children and so on, but they decided it was important to let Group Health know that that was unacceptable.  So all that by way of saying they, they were in private practice, they had their struggles with getting privileges at hospitals, but as a African American community, they all kind of pulled together and took care of each other.
Speaker 1: Okay, were they able to, to bend Group Health on, on this issue of--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --Group Health?  Okay, so this is, you know, things may have been a little better in Seattle, but they weren't perfect?  Did you (unclear)--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It wasn't nirvana.
Story_ID: 522026
Speaker 1: So, now do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have two brothers, an older brother Valcour [Valcour Lavizzo] and a younger brother, Philip [Philip Lavizzo] and a sister Evelyn Aurelia [Evelyn Lavizzo].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and are they here--or how--are any of them doctors?
Speaker 2: I have, we have a psychologist and a business person and a photographer, but I'm the only physician.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory actually is being in Seattle [Washington], yet the first place I remember us living which was on a street called Cherry Street and actually it's, and this is gonna sound funny, I was playing doctor with the, the babysitter who was taking care of us at the time.  So I, I guess you could say I was tracking at an early age to be a physician.
Speaker 1: All right I just, I, I, I failed to mention that you, you were born--no, no, no that's not true, that's not, I, I'm sorry, go 'head, go 'head, that's--so, so you're playing doctor in Seattle?
Speaker 2: Yeah, playing doctor in Seattle.
Story_ID: 522027
Speaker 1: Did you all live in the CD?  What they called the Central District in Seattle [Washington] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We, that address was in the Central District and then we later moved to an area that's known as Mount--the Mount Baker area [Seattle, Washington] and that's where I gr- essentially grew up, we had--we lived in two different locations in the Mount Baker area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now can you describe like what your neighborhoods were like I guess, I guess in the Mount Baker area?  Wha- wha- yeah, how would you describe Mount Baker in terms of the demographics there?
Speaker 2: It, this--that area was, I'd say pretty middle class, demographically, ethnically mixed area, there were on my block probably 50 percent African Americans and 50 percent other ethnic groups, mostly white.  But, we had someone from Asia, Filipinos on the, on the block, and the elementary school [John Muir Elementary School, Seattle, Washington] I went to which of course grew from a larger part of the neighborhood, so it, it was mostly white.  But, again we had it, we had a variety of eth- and ethnic groups and actually when you think about how divided our society is now economically, that neighborhood was much more heterogeneous, it was, as I said mostly middle class but you also had people there, like my parents [Blanche Sellers Lavizzo and Philip V. Lavizzo], who were professional and other people who were clearly struggling.  And so we, we had a sense of a much better cohesive community and sense of the, the, the struggles that different people have in, in their lives.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Now did you parents maintain their offices in downtown Seattle or in the CD or?
Speaker 2: Their offices were in the CD.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, right.  Were there many black doctors in Seattle in those days?
Speaker 2: In, when I was growing up there were five black doctors in town and, of course, two of 'em were my parents and there was a, a urologist, an internist and another, anoth- two internists.
Story_ID: 522028
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, Seattle [Washington] is a very mountainous place with a lot of water, and at the time it was a kind of a rainy place.  So the sights and sounds often for me included beautiful views of the mountains, it's a beautiful place to be, the smell of evergreens and, and the, and damp earth, because it rained a lot, it's a place where people spend a lot of time outside.  In, in my neighborhood [Mount Baker, Seattle, Washington], it was not at all unusual to see people walking down the street and just being outside.  So the sights, since w- and, and my father [Philip V. Lavizzo] loved the water probably because he had grown up in New Orleans [Louisiana] and always had water around him, so from a very young age, we were swimming, boating, I can remember as a, as a very young child, being in a row boat, with my father rowing, and then as I got older and as times got better for them, we had a motor boat.  But, so water, being outside, was always a part of what I thought of, and felt growing up.
Story_ID: 522029
Speaker 1: Where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I started school at a Catholic school in--and actually the first three years of my schooling were in a Catholic school.  The, the one that I probably remember the most was called, Our Lady of Mount Virgin Parish [Our Lady of Mount Virgin School, Seattle, Washington] which was just a few blocks from our house and we would walk to school and walk home for lunch and then go back to school after lunch.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now did, did you like school?
Speaker 2: I loved school.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school, or?
Speaker 2: No, I, I really didn't. I tended to like most of the subjects. I, you know, there were some years that I liked more than others of course and some all--we all, I had some favorite teachers.  But school was always a place that I, I enjoyed being because it, it, it played to the, the kinds of things that I was good at, I guess.
Story_ID: 522030
Speaker 1: Did you have favorite teachers I guess at, at this first school [Our Lady of Mount Virgin School, Seattle, Washington] anyway?
Speaker 2: Not at the first school, but after third grade, we, we moved to public school, John Muir Elementary School [Seattle, Washington]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and, and actually the, the story behind that was in, in part one of discrimination, and yeah I guess it's, it's interesting that even though in those first years actually, in the third grade I was starting to, well my parents [Blanche Sellers Lavizzo and Philip V. Lavizzo] were perceiving probably more than I was at the time the sting of discrimination, it, it didn't hit me as much then.  And, so anyway they decided it would probably be better for us to go to a school where there were more black children and more diversity, so I went to John Muir Elementary School and, I had it, more good years there than not.  But I do remember one year in particular that was, was difficult and where I had the sense that my teacher just did not think I was capable of doing too much at all and struggling with that.  But on, on balance, I like school and that's probably why that one year really sticks out in my mind as being really difficult.
Speaker 1: So the teacher just didn't like you?
Speaker 2: I did, maybe it--didn't like me but certainly didn't think that I was gonna do some of the things that I seemed to say I wanted to do.  And, I'll, I'll just tell this story because I think it's important for young girls to, to hear.  There was a science question that had to do with the, what the name of the, the backbone was and the, the answer she was looking for was backbone and the answer that I gave was vertebrae, which she marked wrong and I came home and one of the traditions in our family was we had dinner together every, every night, we always had dinner together.  So I remember saying that I had been told that it wasn't vertebrae, it was the backbone and it--my father, he could have a temper at, at times and he--I, I think it's fair to say he went straight up and turned left and produced documents for what the backbone is actually called in scientific language and I brought it to school the next day and had the satisfaction of getting that answer right on the test.  But, you know, so I, I say that because there are a lot of young girls even today who probably encounter that kind of reaction and certainly black girls like I am.  So I--it's important to stand up for what you know to be right.
Story_ID: 522031
Speaker 1: I'm thinking you've got two parents [Blanche Sellers Lavizzo and Philip V. Lavizzo] who are physicians, did you spend or did your siblings spend a lot of time in the office?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Or yeah, you know, downtown [Central District, Seattle, Washington]?
Speaker 2: I, that's a, that's a great question, we did, I probably spent more than the others, my fondest memory really is Saturday mornings because Saturday mornings was the special time that I had with my mother, she practiced on Saturday mornings, so a pediatrician, you--good time to be in the office if you're gonna take care of kids right?  Saturday mornings, so every Saturday morning she and I would drive down to her office which was about three or four blocks from the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] and I would then walk to the Y, get a swimming lesson and after my swimming lesson I'd walk back to her office and hang out for the rest of the morning with her and thinking I was helping out in the lab and, you know, sitting in the waiting room with her patients and just being there and seeing her do her work and how people responded to her.  And I think that, that really instilled in me the joy of being a doctor, yeah.  There were other times that we spent time with them and those were usually when there was an emergency in the evening and they had to go into the hospital there was, there wasn't anybody who could take care of us, you know?  The, they were three thousand miles away from their family and anybody who could really come and, come over and help out in the evening, so when that happened we all piled into the car and went to the emergency room, my parents would do their work and my brother [Philip Lavizzo] and I would hang out at the nurses station and, again that was, that was pure joy for me, I think it was just the opposite for my brother.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, so you--you're learning, I guess directly and vicariously about the profession--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the medical profession by being around--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) two doctors.
Story_ID: 522032
Speaker 1: What church did your family belong too?
Speaker 2: Well my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or was that important really?
Speaker 2: --my family was not deeply religious.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, Our Lady of Mount Virgin Church [Seattle, Washington] was the church we went to as a, when I was a young, very young and then later on they moved to what's a, a different parish, Immaculate Conception [Immaculate Conception Church, Seattle, Washington]. It's a Catholic church a little closer to where we lived and we lived in Mount Baker [Seattle, Washington].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, in--now wha- was your--well, I, I can just imagine that, both your parents [Blanche Sellers Lavizzo and Philip V. Lavizzo] being doctors in Seattle [Washington], African American doctors, they were like an integral part of the African American community?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, what other organizations were they in?  And, and how did they interact with the rest of the community?  I mean out--outside of the patients, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Well, they were members of most of the organizations that were pillars of the African American community at that time, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the, my mother was a Link [The Links, Incorporated], my father was part of the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], they were part of the Urban League [Urban League of Metropolitan Seattle, Seattle, Washington], they although, you know, my father was obviously Catholic and my mother converted to Catholicism, but they were engaged in the civil rights activities that tended to come out of the black churches.  So although we weren't members of those churches we, we were the one, we were there when there were marches and meetings and gatherings to advance civil rights, so all of those were, those organizations were a part of my childhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, I know that, the black community in Seattle is as active as any other, so I just wanted to make sure that I pointed that out.
Story_ID: 522033
Speaker 1: You went to high school at, what was it, The Bush School [Seattle, Washington]?
Speaker 2: I went to--yeah that was a, a girls school and I went there for most of high school and then I had one year that I went to Franklin High School [Seattle, Washington].
Speaker 1: Okay, but, but did you graduate from Bush?
Speaker 2: From Bush.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, so what happened?  I mean what was the--The Bush School is this a private school, the girls school?
Speaker 2: It's a private girls school.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Is it in Seattle [Washington] itself or?
Speaker 2: It's in Seattle--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --it's in an, an area that's called Madison Park [Seattle, Washington] and, you know, the, the story there and I, again I, this is I, I think an important story for girls to hear.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I was in seventh grade, I was at Asa Mercer Junior High School [Asa Mercer Middle School, Seattle, Washington] which was the public school that everyone from John Muir Elementary School [Seattle, Washington] where I'd gone too went to, went to Asa Mercer and the, the culture there was one that really didn't promote scholarship and really didn't reward scholarship, particularly for, for girls.  And, you know, when you're twelve, thirteen years old, you can really succumb to peer pressure and I got into this mindset that I needed to be like all the other kids who weren't necessarily interested in school in the same way that I was.  And that was being reinforced by teachers who weren't encouraging us and so my parents [Blanche Sellers Lavizzo and Philip V. Lavizzo], particularly my mother saw that this was not a good situation for me and said, you know, "You're, you're gonna go to a different school next year," and chose The Bush School because it was one of the, the best schools in the, in the city and it was an all-girls school.  And since she had gone to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and she recognized the, the ways in which a, an environment that is particularly nurturing for girls and women can build your self-confidence and help you understand that you can do pretty much anything you set your mind too if you have that kind of supportive environment.  So it was really her decision to, to have me go to The Bush School and it, it really made a huge difference in, in my trajectory because I, I realized that I could, could apply myself in ways that I wasn't when I was at Asa Mercer Junior High.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and so, so you stayed there for the next three years?
Speaker 2: Well, five years really (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Five, five years, okay.
Story_ID: 522034
Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers there [The Bush School, Seattle, Washington] or personalities there that you remember that played a positive role in your--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were, there were several teachers who particularly took an interest in me and one was my, my math teacher and she used to regularly encourage me that I had a, I had a good brain and, and then there was a French teacher that I had who again was particularly mentoring and encouraging.  There were other teachers that were maybe less so, and, and this was a, an important time for me because I think it exposed me for the first time to a world outside of the very protective African American community that I'd, I--my parents [Blanche Sellers Lavizzo and Philip V. Lavizzo] and their friends created for us and the, just the neighborhood that I grew up in [Mount Baker, Seattle, Washington].  And now I was with kids who had very different background than, than, than I did, many of them were much wealthier and so I got a chance to experience the kind of cultural shock I think a lot of kids who go off to a big university when they're eighteen or so, experience and all of a sudden it's a, it's a different world, it can be somewhat alienating.  And because I was younger and I was still at home and I was able to come home and have the support of my family, I think it, it helped me, helped prepared me for being in situations that I would find myself later in my career where you do have to accommodate to different perspectives and understand your place and your strength in situations that can sometimes be not friendly.
Story_ID: 522035
Speaker 1: Who are some of your fellow students?  Were they like the, the, some of the richest, the people in Seattle [Washington], or?
Speaker 2: It, I--it was a girl school, so some of the most of the affluent families went there, their daughters went there.  There was a--I was a day student but it also had a residential component and people whose fathers were, bankers or worked in various industries in Alaska or you know, in Japan sent there, their daughters there.  So it, it, it broadened my view in a lot of ways and at the same time during that time Seattle was--went through a recession and there was, there were cartoons that showed, you know, people leaving Seattle in droves and the captions would be, "Last one leaving Seattle, turn out the lights."  So there was this contrast between the affluence at the school [The Bush School, Seattle, Washington] and what was going on in, in the larger city and that brings to mind a, a story that really influenced me at the time.  That when I was in junior high [Asa Mercer Junior High School; Asa Mercer Middle School, Seattle, Washington], as in high school, my job was to take my parents' statements from their, their business and fold them, stuff 'em in envelopes, seal the envelopes and prepare them to be mailed and for that I got a, an allowance. My parents [Blanche Sellers Lavizzo and Philip V. Lavizzo] engaged in this activity right before they handed the statements over to me to do that of going through every statement and, and making sure that it was accurate and deciding whether or not it was a bill that they wanted to send to a patient.  And I remember them having these conversations during that recession where they'd say, "Well we can't send this bill to Mrs. So and So," and I'd ask my mother, "Well why can't you send the bill?" and the response I got was well, "If we send this bill, she's not gonna be able to pay it because she's lost her insurance and she's outta work and then she won't come back and she really needs the care, so the best thing to do is just not to send the bill."  And that got me understanding the broader social and economic issues that surround healthcare and a person's ability to stay healthy.  So that time in my life and being exposed to it at one point, in, in one instance the affluence that was present in Seattle and at, at the same time, seeing the ways in which people were really struggling had a big impression on me probably more so than the individual teachers or the, the students that I met, although I have remained friends with a lot of the students that I went to high school with.
Speaker 1: Now what was the nature of the, the economic letdown in Seattle?  I think the rest of the country was doing fairly well and--so you started high school in like '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, '68 [1968] to '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Now is, isn't this a--this is a--like 1968 is the, is the year that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, but it also represents a time when, you know, racial consciousness I guess in the United States, you know, reached an all time high?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In the sense that major corporations hired their first black employees--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, '68 [1968], it's always a--
Speaker 2: --I think--
Speaker 1: --sixty-eight [1968] or '69 [1969], when you find the first black person who worked for a major insurance company or do this or do that, it's always in '68 [1968] or '69 [1969].
Story_ID: 522036
Speaker 1: What was the major economic letdown in Seattle [Washington] at that--?
Speaker 2: We have to remember at that time in Seattle, this was before Starbucks [Starbucks Corporation], before Amazon [Amazon.com, Inc.], certainly before Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation], Bill Gates was actually in high school with the boys school that was a comparable one to Bush [The Bush School, Seattle, Washington], there were really two industries, Boeing [The Boeing Company], and Weyerhaeuser [Weyerhaeuser Company], and Boeing was in a slump.  And so, when Boeing went into a slump and started laying off people there was a recession in Seattle, so it was really driven by the fact that it was a two company town and one wasn't doing so well at the time.
Speaker 1: You would think that Boeing would know, would, would have been just steadily climbing you would, I mean, you know, just, you know, thinking of the pro- proliferation of airplanes and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and that we're in the Vietnam War, I don't know if they made war planes too but--
Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, you--you're gonna stimulate me to go back and look at the, the larger dynamic there but that was really what was underlying the--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the hardship that people were feeling.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I never would have guessed that Seattle would have been going through that, but, so that ha- that had to be tough on the people in CD [Central District, Seattle, Washington]?
Speaker 2: It was very tough on the people in CD (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause their, they depend on factory jobs and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: And that was really one of the things that mobilized the community to develop into lobby for the Model Cities program and for the clinic that ultimately my mother [Blanche Sellers Lavizzo] was the medical director of Odessa Brown Children's Clinic [Seattle, Washington], was the fact that there was such a large percentage of people in the African American community living in the Central District that didn't have insurance and therefore didn't have access to, to the healthcare and in fact, Odessa Brown was a woman who had leukemia and was not able to get care, died prematurely and had always been a force in the, in the community which is why the clinic was named after her.
Story_ID: 522037
Speaker 1: I guess I have to ask you about Jimi Hendrix, you probably didn't know him (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--I didn't know Jimi Hendrix and it's, and yet he was right there, no I, I didn't know him.
Speaker 1: He, he had to be a little older than you right, probably by maybe four years?
Speaker 2: And he, but he went to Garfield High School [James A. Garfield High School, Seattle, Washington] and, of course was a legend even then in the Seattle [Washington] area but sadly I didn't know him.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I know, I think [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones is from Seattle too, right?
Speaker 2: He is.
Speaker 1: Way back, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Much earlier than even Jimi Hendrix.  But, okay was there, was there, was there a lively entertainment district in the CD [Central District, Seattle, Washington] in those days, when you were brought up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was there, I wouldn't say that compared to, you know, some of the other places in the country that are really known for having great music, we had it but it wa- we weren't New Orleans [Louisiana] or Washington, D.C. and, and I grew up in the kind of family where my father [Philip V. Lavizzo] wasn't inclined to let me experience that too much anyway so, I--it wasn't a big part of my life.
Speaker 1: Okay, I think like--I can--I, my, my mind is going to Seattle days and the interviews we've had and I know several black basketball players went to Seattle University [Seattle, Washington] and Elgin Baylor, Charlie Brown [HistoryMaker Charles Brown].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Just a bunch of 'em but, you know.
Story_ID: 522038
Speaker 1: As you're in high school, now, now did they, was there a reaction to Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --assassination in, when you were in, at Bush [The Bush School, Seattle, Washington]?
Speaker 2: Well for, for me personally there was a huge reaction because as I mentioned my, my mother grew up in Ebenezer Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia].  [Reverend] Martin Luther King, Sr., married my parents [Blanche Sellers Lavizzo and Philip V. Lavizzo], buried both my grandparents [Lilla Anderson Sellers and Samuel Garrett Sellers], my, my mother was good friends with Martin Luther King, Jr., so his assassination was devastating to us and I can still remember being on my way home from school and hearing about it and then getting home waiting, you know, kind of grief stricken, for my parents to get home and the, just the enormous grief that we all felt.  And calling our relatives and just feeling the, the sense of despair that we all felt as, as a community that had to now regroup and think about how we were going to continue the, the movement.  Now as you know, this was a, a time when there was some division in, in our community about the most effective approach to continuing the--to expand the, the freedom that black people should get and deserved to have.  But, in my family, since Martin Luther King was a friend and a, a very good friend we were committed to his movement and his, his assassination meant not only personal grief but a, a good deal of soul searching on, on how do we continue to move forward with what, as I said was a deep commitment in my family to make sure that the African American community and, and our people were advancing and that we were fighting discrimination and, and fighting the, the, the larger determinants of, of the ability for people to achieve all that they could.
Story_ID: 522039
Speaker 1: When you're in high school [The Bush School, Seattle, Washington] also was the emergence of the Black Panther Party in Seattle [Washington]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now we've interviewed [HistoryMaker] Aaron Dixon, [HistoryMaker] Larry Gossett. They were associated with the, either the Black Panther Party or the Black Student Movement at, at the University of Seattle, I think and--
Speaker 2: University of Washington [Seattle, Washington], I think (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Washington, okay for, for Larry--
Speaker 2: They were, that was a lid- I was still in high school then and, so I wasn't as close to, to that, because it was, that was happening at the university.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a--did you get your first natural then or, or whe- when did that happen?
Speaker 2: That happened in about 1972, I guess was when I got my first natural.
Speaker 1: So did, did you wear your hair longer before?
Speaker 2: I did, I, it's, I had gone back and forth between it being a natural and straight, but it, yeah it's in '72 [1972], I think it's the, when I broke out.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah people started, they started around '68 [1968], around the country, had a break into it, it's depended on where you were.
Speaker 2: Yeah, to where you were, your age and so on.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well that's good you still have it (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I'm, I'm for that.
Speaker 2: Well it's come and gone (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) If I could have hair, I would have one.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 522040
Speaker 1: What were the demographics of The Bush School [Seattle, Washington]?  I know it was primarily, primarily white, affluent--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --girls, but were there any other black girls in school with you?
Speaker 2: A handful, I had a very good friend in my class who I'm, I'm still friends with and then there were, you know, four or five others that came along after us, I think we were the first two and then there were a few more that came along after us.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, so you're, you're on the track to become a, a d- doctor basically?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, that was, that was my goal at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, did, did you--were you involved in student government in school or anything like that?
Speaker 2: I've, I was, I was--there was a, a body called the, the court, I had to struggle for the name for a minute, and this was, I guess both the student governance and student disciplinary body, so when there was a, a problem with, at the school, the people who were on the court, got together and discussed it and figured out what to do, so I was a part of that.  And I think, one of the years I was class president or vice president or something along those lines, I wasn't, that wasn't a big part of how I defined myself but I, I did have some leadership positions when I was in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, it sounded like for the most part that you were respected in high school at least or was it (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that kind of thing that happened in grade school [John Muir Elementary School, Seattle, Washington] where you weren't expected to know anything, you know, so it--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 522041
Speaker 1: Was there anything special about graduation [from The Bush School, Seattle, Washington]?  Did you, did you have any--were you honored in any way, or?
Speaker 2: Well graduation was really a bittersweet time for me because I was really looking forward to going to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], I was admitted there, it was one of the--I was one, to be one of the first classes that would be a coed class at Yale and that was going to be exciting, going back east, even then, in Seattle [Washington], we have the feeling that, you, you know, it was a small town and faraway place and all the things that were really happening were either in the Southeast or the Northeast and I, I just couldn't wait to get back there.  And, about that time my father [Philip V. Lavizzo] was diagnosed with Parkinson's disease and he was, was really very ill and the--so graduation for me was this excitement of going back east and at the same time my father being very ill and he died and I ultimately didn't go to Yale. I stayed at the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] because it was, you know, his death was a devastating you know, experience for our family.  And my younger siblings who were eight and ten years younger [Philip Lavizzo and Evelyn Lavizzo] than I, I am were just little kids and so I stayed in Seattle and, and so I, I think of the graduation not as with as many happy, happy mem- memories but, you know, as a period of growing up really that that was a--
Speaker 1: Did (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --a chance for me to grow up.
Speaker 1: --did your father pass before graduation or--?
Speaker 2: Just after.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah 'cause it's in June right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is 1972, and had you already been admitted to Yale?
Speaker 2: I had and I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I thought that I would wait a year and go a year later but, in the interim I met my husband [Robert J. Lavizzo-Mourey], well to be husband and decided not to go to Yale but to go to the university in, in New York, so I went to SUNY Stony Brook [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York] after that for a couple of years and then went to medical school [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] after three years.
Story_ID: 522042
Speaker 1: So you started off at the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right, and you're there for a year.  And then you--so, any, any stories about that, that period of time, the year there, did you stay home or did you?
Speaker 2: I, yeah I lived at home--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and commuted to, to the university, I think it was, it was, as I said it was a difficult time, it was a time of kind of emotionally growing up and taking on adult responsibilities so.  But also really developing an even stronger resolve to be a physician, that was when I, I became very focused on the courses I needed to take, the kinds of achievements I needed to have within those courses if I was gonna go to medical school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now why at the State University of New York at Stony Brook [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well that's where my husband [Robert J. Lavizzo-Mourey] was going to graduate school.
Speaker 1: So you met him in, in Seattle [Washington]?
Speaker 2: In Seattle.
Speaker 1: And he was going to grad school then?
Speaker 2: He was, he's, he was a senior, I was a first year student and so he graduated and was admitted to graduate school there and I decided to matriculate there, much to my mother's [Blanche Sellers Lavizzo] dismay, another thing that young girls should know that sometimes they break their mother's hearts when they follow their love.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, 1973, in--so your major was what?  Biology or, or what?
Speaker 2: I actually was a liberal arts major (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Liberal arts major?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so all right, had you, had you changed your mind about becoming a doctor or had you?--
Speaker 2: No, I was, I was determined to go to medical school after three years and so I took all of the science courses and probably the easiest way to do that and to declare a major was to be a liberal arts major and I applied to medical school after three years.
Story_ID: 522043
Speaker 1: In undergraduate school [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York], who are some of the professors and teachers or leaders on campus that you encountered?
Speaker 2: The person who had the biggest influence on me was Jack Geiger [H. Jack Geiger], and he is a physician journalist well known for having started a, another clinic in Mound Bayou, Mississippi, some years, many years after my parents [Blanche Sellers Lavizzo and Philip V. Lavizzo] were there, who taught a course in healthcare delivery and he really helped me understand the, the healthcare system and also the, the power of speaking out about the inequities and injustices--injustices in, in healthcare.
Speaker 1: Okay and, and well just while we're on it, what, what were some of the, those inequities in those days and do they persist today?
Speaker 2: Well I think the biggest one was the lack of insurance that people had was, you know, well not having universal insurance but then going beyond that, just access to, to healthcare services and facilities at the time that it was well recognized that there're far fewer African American healthcare professionals then, than we have now.  And the distribution of the places to get care was such that in an African American community, or any, any poor community you might not have any access or just one or two places.  So the, the issue at that time really was access to just basic healthcare services and, and we spend a lot of time talking about how to change that distribution and then, how to ensure that we had policies that would provide coverage, a battle that went on for about forty years to achieve what's now much closer to all though certainly still not universal coverage.
Speaker 1: Okay, and its threatened every day by members of [U.S.] Congress and others.  So, and well, Dr. Jack Geiger, any, anyone else?
Speaker 2: There was also a biology professor who took me into her lab and, you know, in order to be taken seriously as a medical school applicant, you really had to demonstrate an aptitude for science and, and so everyone was always eager to find a professor who could really teach them how to be a scientist.  And, Martha Baylor was someone who was doing work on viruses at the time and I worked in her lab and, again I think it was important that I had a woman professor who helped us to, show me the, the ways in which she and her family had been able to have an academic career and an academic career at a research oriented university, and so she was very helpful and influential.
Story_ID: 522044
Speaker 1: So you graduated in 1975?
Speaker 2: Nope, I didn't graduate.
Speaker 1: Oh you didn't?  Oh okay, well then we got a mistake (laughter). So--
Speaker 2: People always wanna make sure that I graduated but I, I actually didn't graduate. I applied to medical school after three years and was admitted [to Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] and, so I, I'm a high--I'm a college dropout.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now this is--this seems incredible.  I thought that, you know, you had to finish a bachelor's degree before you could be admitted to medical school.
Speaker 2: No you, it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But that's not--?
Speaker 2: --you have to complete the requirements, the science requirements, but at the time I think it's changed now, at the time you did not have to actually have the, the bachelor's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so in--now you had good advice from someone?  You know, to be able to know that and--
Speaker 2: I, I, I read the applications and the requirements very carefully and I knew that you did not have to have a degree, that--but when I went to the, the advisor at Stony Brook [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York] and said I wanted to apply after three years, she really discouraged me, she said it, it almost--you, people are almost never admitted after three years.  But, if you wanna try, we'll do it and so I would--I wouldn't say that she was encouraging, but I was determined to apply after three years because I, as I said, I was--and I, and in some ways I regret not doing four years of college and getting a broader perspective at, at that age.  But I was really determined to go after three years, that was my goal to get to be a doctor and I was impatient to get there.
Speaker 1: Now did you--is there an entrance examination to medical school that you have to pass to be able to do it?
Speaker 2: Well there's--
Speaker 1: Almost like an MCAT and the--?
Speaker 2: Yeah there--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Exactly, there's a, a standardized test that tests your aptitude in science and math and general knowledge and, and then there's, you know, your, your grades.  Now, one of the things that's interesting about the way SUNY Stony Brook did things at the time, which I don't think schools would do now because it probably would be perceived as violating students privacy.  But, they posted your grades and your ranking as a premed student, you know, on the outside of the counselor's door.  So you could go and see very easily how you ranked among all the other students who were defining themselves as premed students.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So I had a pretty good sense of what my standing was and I knew what my scores were on the, the MCAT and so I figured I'd give it a shot.
Story_ID: 522045
Speaker 1: This is interesting 'cause, my mind immediately went to a story of Dr. Vivien Thomas, you know, the heart surgeon?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Who never got to be a doctor, you know he applied to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], he's the one who's in the movie ['Something the Lord Made'] that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Portrayed by Mos Def.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Who's now, it is--his portrait hangs in Johns Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland] and all that, but they, he was never allowed to eventually--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know 'cause he had--didn't have a bachelor's degree--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so he couldn't--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --become an M.D.  But, okay so--
Speaker 2: Well you know this, this time was interesting because affirmative action was very much a, a part of the educational policy and you, you may recall that there were a couple of very prominent cases of students, white students saying that they had been denied admission because black students were be- being given seats that they really should have gotten.
Speaker 1: Allan Bakke.
Speaker 2: Bakke (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: The Bakke case [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978].
Speaker 1: It was (unclear) case.
Speaker 2: Yeah, very much, yeah that was right in my era and so this was a, a point of discussion regularly among the premed students at Stony Brook [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York]. It was who would be potentially denied admission because African American students were, were getting the slots that they really didn't deserve.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  So this is, so you applied and was admitted in '74 [1974], rather than '75 [1975]?  Was that--?
Speaker 2: I was admitted in, in '74 [1974]. I matriculated in '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  All right, so, all right so, so you're, you go to Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 522046
Speaker 1: Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts] 1975, and do, do you remember a Ha- Harold Amos by any chance?
Speaker 2: Of course, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. And, yeah he was the first African American department head of the Harvard--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Medical School and he was there.
Speaker 2: He was, well a professor of mine and fast forward many years, well as a CEO of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation [Princeton, New Jersey], I got to honor him because he had been the director of a program that the foundation started to provide additional resources for young African American and other faculty of color.  And the program was so successful in really helping young faculty members become successful in their careers and achieve, not only academic success but success as professors, as deans and, and university presidents, and so the foundation renamed the program in honor of Harold Amos.
Speaker 1: Okay, Harold Amos.  All right now, now what was Har- Harvard Medical School like for you?  I mean what, was it what you expected it to be or?
Speaker 2: I loved Harvard Medical School because it really for me was the first time that I was in an environment where there were, there was a, a cadre of people, African American people who wanted to do just the same kinds of things that I wanted to do.  There were about twenty students in our class, African American students, five were women, they came from really all over the country and had achieved incredible things even at that young age and we were a tightly knit community really hell bent on making health and healthcare better for people.  And I, I just loved it, I felt like I was in my element I, it was hard, we worked hard and there were, there were many times, somewhere we felt we, we were actively discriminated against, but there was this sense that, that we were and we were there with purpose.
Speaker 1: Now this is--was this the largest class of African Americans in--?
Speaker 2: Maybe at the time.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Of course it's gotten much larger, but at the time it was, it was very significant.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Even with the people that all applied for school back in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] where there was a quota they were--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --taking one--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or two and then they'd say well sorry, we already have our two, you know, no matter what their qualifications were (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well and that had been my experience, not so much because of quotas, but because of the schools that I found myself in where the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] I really was the only African American premed student for that year that I was there and then my cohort, and the same thing at Stony Brook [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York], I was the only one.  And so now to be with a group that really had this shared purpose, it was, it was really invigorating for me.
Speaker 1: Yeah it sounds exciting, you know, when, when you get around a group that--and, and you all could help each other study and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely. To, to study, to chart a future that was one of commitment and they're trying to make things better and many of the people that I went to medical school with have, I mean I know some of them have been interviewed by The HistoryMakers so, and I, I think that it is an incredible affirmation of the, the, the principle that we talk about that when you bring people together, and they have a sense of common purpose, they really do thrive.  And that to me is one of the real important arguments for making sure that our schools are diverse and inclusive because it helps everyone, it especially helps the students who really do have a purpose to learn from each other and, and get strength from one another.
Story_ID: 522047
Speaker 1: Now did the black medical students have an organization at all that they formed?
Speaker 2: At the time we didn't have a formal organization we, it was much more informal. We did come together when there were issues that we needed to work together on, we were very cohesive around admissions, the school had a policy of having students on the admissions committee and we were proactive about making sure that we were represented there.  The, the dean of the, of students at the time was Alvin Poussaint [HistoryMaker Dr. Alvin Poussaint] and he really was the, the nucleus for us and, and the leader of, you, you know, the, the students and, and also a great mentor for us.  But at the time there really wasn't a formal black student medical organization that came later.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know that MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], then like the Black Student Union there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was undergraduate, but, but it, it does still exist and it's, all the scientists talk about it being like this force that kept them in at MIT and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --got, you know, guided them through.  So, now who, who else?  Were the--were there any, who were some of the physicians, black or white that, that were your instructors that you really--
Speaker 2: Well Alvin Poussaint, Harold Amos, those were the, really the only two African American professors that I had in, in Harvard Medical [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] at the time, and later during the clinical years there were others that were very influential for me.  Marshall Wolf was a person who was an influential professor, Chester Pierce [Chester M. Pierce] actually was a faculty member at Harvard Medical School at the time, he was in the department of psychiatry and, but he was, but I didn't have him as a, as a professor.
Story_ID: 522048
Speaker 1: There was a controversy when you were there?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dr. Bernard Davis [Bernard D. Davis]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about what, what happened with Dr.--Dr. Bernard Davis?
Speaker 2: Well, he's a well known microbiologist who published an article in The New End Jour- The New England Journal of Medicine, essentially saying that affirmative action should be dispelled because it was leading to a practice of admitting students who were not capable of being good physicians and would leave a swath of deaths in their path.  That as you can imagine being written by someone at the medical school where I was attending and the students who were there felt particularly betrayed really and it led to, it may have been what actually led to the black student union at Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts] in the long run, but in the short run, it, it certainly caused us to come together, to make public statements about our right to pursue a medical career to pr- produce data to refute the argument that we were incompetent doctors and it is one of the times in medical school that I came to just tremendously respect Alvin Poussaint [HistoryMaker Dr. Alvin Poussaint] because as a faculty member who was very much in the minority, I mean there were so few African American professors at Harvard Medical School at the time, he showed tremendous courage in helping us come together but also in speaking out in a very powerful way against that kind of racism.
Story_ID: 522049
Speaker 1: Was there any particular aspect of medical school that was difficult for you?
Speaker 2: Well intellectually and physically, medical school is, is really challenging, it, in the, in the early years you are going to class six days a week, Monday to Friday you're there until five in, in the afternoon and then you have to go home and study.  And, and then in the clinical years, you're essentially changing rotations once a month, so just when you're getting comfortable you're in a different environment so, and, and the, the consequences of not mastering the material were that you could actually do harm to people and this against the backdrop that I just told you were there were people out in the world who believed that we were not capable of being good doctors, gave--put an enormous amount of pressure to, to do well and to do well by your patients, so that was hard. I think that was hard, it would be hard in any medical school. It was, it was difficult because Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] is, is Harvard, it's--and then there were things that I think many medical students will report, the kind of difficult situations that we often had with, with patients, particularly with white patients or in my case, white male patients who did not see us as the kind of person that they thought would be their doctor and sometimes the, the cues they gave were subtle, and other times they were, they were quite overt. "I don't want you--I don't want you to be my doctor," or they're referring to you in inappropriate or dismissive ways, "Oh, Dr. Kitten," or, you know, things like that, those aspects are emotionally difficult about, about medical school.  But it was all part of learning how to, how to be a good professional and how to be a good doctor.
Speaker 1: Now, now were these the--the people that questioned you being a doctor, were they questioning you on, on both counts of being a woman and a, and an African American?
Speaker 2: At, at times sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  And did they tend to be more educated or less educated or it didn't matter?
Speaker 2: You know I don't, I, I don't know that I could characterize it that way, I, I think sometime--I, I don't think I could characterize it.  I, I will say this though: at the time we didn't talk about this as, as African American students or as women students and fortunately that has changed. Fortunately people who experience that now feel that they can talk about it and learn how to deal with it, how to change behaviors, change that kind of implicit bias that people have, sadly it still exists but I think we've gotten a lot more reasonable in how we deal with it when we, when we run up against that kind of thing.  At the time we thought we just had to be quiet about it and now we realize that it's much more reasonable to talk about it and, and try to change behaviors.
Story_ID: 522050
Speaker 1: During the time you were in Boston [Massachusetts], the Boston school crisis was going on so a lot of racial issues were boiling around the city to the point where, you know, pe- people around the country that considered Massachusetts liberal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: --were scratching their heads--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --trying to figure out what was going on.  So, yeah, like the, like a white backlash happened.
Speaker 2: Exactly, the schools had been mandated to desegregate and there were demonstrations and, you know, some very graphic des- demonstrations, I think a picture that many people have seen is of a white man standing on the courthouse steps with an American flag using it as a spear. That was the environment. That was the backdrop when I was in medical school.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So, and I think it was in the '70s [1970s], also that Dr. William Shockley, a Nobel Prize winner came out with the, this theory of racial inferiority.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Which was taken seriously because he's a medical--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: He was a Nobel Prize winner.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: He was at, he was at, I don't th- he wasn't at Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] right?  He was at [Stanford University, Stanford, California]?  Or was he (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--
Speaker 1: You know--he was, he is a, he was in, in the Ivy League, I know [sic.], but--
Speaker 2: I can't remember where he was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, but he made national news.
Story_ID: 522051
Speaker 1: I have a note here, did, did you know Jill Stein?  Does she--?
Speaker 2: She was in my class.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I did know her.
Speaker 1: Now she just ran for president for the Green Party [Green Party of the United States], right? Right? Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was for the Green Party.
Speaker 1: She's--
Speaker 2: Got 5 percent of the votes and I, I remember her very well because when, in my third year medical school we started a, a women's group, there was a group of women that got together during lunchtime to talk about our careers and how we would overcome some of the obstacles that we were experiencing and she was a part of that group and played the guitar extremely well and sometimes help us all decompress as she played the guitar and we just listened to music on the, on the lawn of Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay, and she's now like a engaged in a recount of--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --the campaign (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It looks like it's gonna be thwarted though.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but at least she put the effort forth, you know--
Speaker 2: She did.
Speaker 1: --with it, you know, in Wisconsin, I think and--
Speaker 2: Wisconsin, Pennsylvania, and Michigan--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 522052
Speaker 1: Do you remember Augustus White [HistoryMaker Dr. Augustus A. White, III]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We've interviewed him, now I didn't do it but, tell us about him.
Speaker 2: Well, he was a year ahead of me I think, a year or two and, you know, Gus was just one of tho- there were, there were a few people at Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts] who were legendary because they were talented students and very generous in the way that they helped and mentored the rest of us and that was Gus.
Story_ID: 522053
Speaker 1: So you did your, your residency at Brigham Hospital in Boston [Massachusetts], right? Women's hospital (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, it was then called the Peter Bent Brigham Hospital and then, Brigham and Women's [Brigham and Women's Hospital]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was the name that it took on during my internship.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right so, wha- what was that like?  What was the residency like?
Speaker 2: Residency, I think is, is one of the most intense times that one has as a physician. You're chronically sleep deprived, trying to learn not only the intellectual but the, the social aspects of being a physician and for me, it, it was really the, the first time that I professionally got to experience the importance of what we now refer to as the social determinants of health and the ways in which the, the care that you can provide as a medical doctor, the medical care that you can provide is, is necessary but wholly inadequate to really provide people with the kind of outcomes that they, they want to have, that is good health and to get better.  And, I, I remember many patients that we were just not able to, to improve their health outcomes because we were focused only on their medical condition and not on the other factors that had so much more influence on whether or not they could actually be healthy.  So it harkened back to lessons that I had learned from my parents particularly, my mother [Blanche Sellers Lavizzo], but there was one patient that I talk about all the time who I met when I was a first year resident and she was a patient who had chronic leg ulcers, also had depression, was homeless and would periodically come to the hospital because her leg ulcers were painful or infected and she was also in need of a warm place to be and a, and a hot meal.  So she came to the admitting station on a cold night and it was very clear that what she really needed was mental health services, someone to help her find a home, a social network, but what we did was admitted her to the hospital, gave her some antibiotics, a good meal, a couple of days in the hospital and then sent her right back out to the same problems that she faced every day.  And so for me, residency was a combination of learning medicine but also coming to grips with the other aspects of our society that we had to influence if we were going to be able to help people really be healthy.
Story_ID: 522054
Speaker 1: Yeah, now this is a, a time period of--when the medical profession is starting to get into the HMO [health maintenance organization] business I guess in the--
Speaker 2: Just before that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Well it, it was in the, during my residency [at Peter Bent Brigham Hospital; Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts], the second half of it was when Medicare changed its payment to--from strictly fee for service--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --for in hospital care to what was called diagnosis related groups, DRG.  And so they began paying a fixed amount for a hospital stay and that led to dramatic decreases in the number of days that patients would stay in the hospital.  So, when I was in medical school [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts], third year medical school, a person who came into the hospital with a liver condition might stay in the hospital for three weeks, and by the end of my residency, they were staying in the hospital for, four or five, six days.  And I, I remember asking one of my professors, wh- why are we seeing this big change in length of stay?  And his response was, DRGs and that is one of the things that got me interested in health economics and health policy because I, I thought, Jesus, what's being legislated in Washington [D.C.] can have such a dramatic effect on what I'm seeing here at the bedside, I want to try and understand that a little better.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that--there was an incident in Chicago [Illinois] in the early '90s [1990s], where a man drug himself with a stab wound to the doorway of the hospital and was told that--they asked if he had any insurance.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he wasn't (unclear) and wasn't admitted. Now the hospital suffered consequences for this.
Speaker 2: And that led to legislation that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --prohibited that, that, that you could not turn someone away in an emergency room who was un- unstable is the--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Story_ID: 522055
Speaker 1: So also a time--I mean the late '70s [1970s], I guess is also was also a time where people started thinking about preventive care more, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is it, was that part of your training at Harvard?  Did they talk about prevention at all or, or just, you know, treatment?
Speaker 2: We were focused more on treatment and more on the underlying science, Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts] was then, and still is very much interested in the relationship between the clinical care and science.  And so, and prevention wasn't a big part of what we were taught, there were people there who were interested in it, I have to say my real interest and commitment to prevention and population health developed later, although as I said the, the seeds were sown during residency [at Peter Bent Brigham Hospital; Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts] when say this, this disconnect between the care that we were providing and, and the broader needs that they patients and the population had.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're seeing a, like a--wha- what people would call, I, I g- guess outside of the health food store context, the holistic?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it--really trying to think about all of the factors that influence how healthy a person can be, their, their personal behaviors, you know, what they eat and how much exercise and all of those sorts of things whether they're, you're able to get your medicines and take them.  But then there're so many other factors, whether you live someplace where you have access to a good job, a job that pays a living wage, whether there's, you have access to healthy food in your neighborhood, the kind of social cohesion that you have in your, in your neighborhood that would allow you to call someone to help you if you needed help.  Those are the kinds of things that often make an even more important difference in whether or not a person is able to stay healthy than just getting the, the medicines and, and clinical care that they need.  So I was starting to appreciate that at that time and I was also starting to appreciate the role that health policy and health economics has on healthcare and also those other social determinants of, of health, so it, it was laying the ground work for the things that I would pursue later in my career.
Story_ID: 522056
Speaker 1: The thing about a residency I've never really understood, and I, I don't know if I ever, if I'll ever understand it, is the sleep deprivation--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and the hours, they seem to, I mean they seem to put people at risk if, if I got a sleepy doctor, you know, who's stressed out, you know, suffering from just the effects you've talked about---
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --on, on another level though.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He's not a go- they have a home and all that but still, I mean, being stressed out every day.  I mean, how does that?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I, I think that the, the thing that residency is trying to teach or impart with all of that, and those long hours is that, as a physician you, you need to be committed to the wellbeing of your patient and your needs become secondary, whether it's sleep or food or getting home, those become secondary to being a good doctor and taking care of your patient.  So that combined with a sense that you, you have to have a certain amount of experiences in order to know what to do in a given situation, shaped medical education in a way for, you know, generations, to have physicians essentially living in the hospital and sl- being sleep deprived but being there for their patients.  I, I think medical education has evolved away from that now and has recognized that we don't make good decisions when we're sleep deprived and you put people at risk, you also put yourself at risk.  A number of residents got into car crashes driving home after being up for twenty-four, thirty-six hours.  So it has changed, but the residency when I was in residency [at Peter Bent Brigham Hospital; Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts], we were still expected to do thirty-six hour shifts and that was just the norm.
Story_ID: 522057
Speaker 1: So your residency ended in what, 1980? Or--
Speaker 2: Eighty-two [1982].
Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982], okay.  And so, and you had your first child--well, you got married in '76 [1976]?  We have to backtrack, you got married in '76 [1976], and had your first child in 19 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 1: And--'75 [1975]? Okay.
Speaker 2: We got married in '75 [1975], right.
Speaker 1: And the first baby was born in seventy--'81 [1981], right? So--
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980].
Speaker 1: Eighty [1980]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Another zero here, so was it difficult being a resident with a, with a young child?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Now it just seems like it would be.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well I, I had the distinction of being the first resident at the Brigham [Peter Bent Brigham Hospital; Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts] to have a baby, you know, that's, there weren't that many wom- women residents at the Brigham in there, their first hundred or so years of existence.  And it, it, it was something that I certainly couldn't have done without an extremely supportive husband [Robert J. Lavizzo-Mourey] because there were many times that he had, you know, I was on call every third night and so he was on call every third night with, with our daughter Rel [Rel Lavizzo-Mourey], and it--but the, the thing about having a baby when you're a resident in--is that when you're off, you're off, no one is, is expecting you to take calls or anything on your day off.  So when I was home I got a cha- I was, I could just have fun and be with her.
Speaker 1: So, so you were like thirty-six hours on and then off?
Speaker 2: Twelve hours off.
Speaker 1: Twelve hours off, okay, all right.  Okay, and it seemed like it's still tougher than, you know.
Speaker 2: It wasn't easy. I'm not gonna pretend it was easy.
Story_ID: 522058
Speaker 1: Okay but you, you successfully completed it [residency at Peter Bent Brigham Hospital; Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts] and--now you, you started a position at Temple University School of Medicine [Lewis Katz School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] right, in 1982?  You're a clinical instructor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so the story there is, you know, my husband [Robert J. Lavizzo-Mourey] and I had an agreement that we would alternate choosing the city in which we lived 'cause we both had careers and we, we knew we were gonna have make tradeoffs.  And so, we moved to New York to Stony Brook when he went to graduate school there [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York], and then we moved to Boston [Massachusetts], when I went to medical school [Harvard Medical School] and we stayed through residency.  And so the next move was his and he got a job as a professor in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], so I looked around to find a job in Philadelphia and became an instructor at Temple University medical school, stayed there for about a year and a half before moving on to become a Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Clinical Scholar at the University of Pennsylvania [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, now where was your husband teaching at the time?
Speaker 2: Philadelphia College of Sciences [University of the Sciences in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 522059
Speaker 1: Is this your first encounter with the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation [Princeton, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: This was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the first time I encountered the foundation and it was a transformative experience for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, now the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, well tell us something about it.  I know it's founded in '72 [1972], the same year you, I think, graduated from high school [The Bush School, Seattle, Washington], correct?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Robert Wood Johnson II was a, was a person who really helped expand the Johnson and Johnson company [Johnson and Johnson Products; Johnson and Johnson Services, Inc.], making it a global company really grew it and was the, the mastermind behind that.  And when he passed away in '68 [1968], he bequeathed a billion dollars of his stock to start a national foundation the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation whose mission was to improve health and healthcare for the American people.  And so, as part of that they started a fellowship to try to help the future leaders of American medicine learn the disciplines and skills beyond medicine that would help them become effective leaders, and that was the Robert Wood Johnson Clinical Scholars Program [Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Clinical Scholars Program] the other program that I love to talk about and kind of tracts back to something I mentioned earlier in my history, is that the foundation started the 911 system, the emergency medical system [emergency medical services], before that, there was no central number to call if there was an emergency.  So you had situations like my, my mother [Blanche Sellers Lavizzo] and growing up where the, the funeral director was also running the ambulance service and there was, there, there wasn't any central number to call, Robert Wood Foundation funded the studies that led to the emergency medical system we know now and that single number 911.
Speaker 1: And 911 now covers the police as well, that's probably initially what it was for?
Speaker 2: Well it was all emerg- it was always all emergencies (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and people hear it now they think of the police more than they do the medical profession but, but Robert Wood Johnson Foundation founded it. That's something.
Story_ID: 522060
Speaker 1: What were you, what was your--thinking at the time I, I've--had you planned to, to become a practicing physician or a surgeon or, or what, what, what area of medicine were you, you know, going into--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I, I hadn't asked that question--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --I don't think.
Speaker 2: Well I was planning to be an academic physician so to teach and do research and my clinical discipline I decided would be geriatrics.  And the reason I chose geriatrics was that I was interested in health policy and in academic medicine.  There's a, a tradition to have your academic work and your clinical work aligned and my academic work would be health policy. I was very interested in health policy and I mentioned earlier that Medicare had just changed its rules for reimbursement and we all at the time realized that what Medicare did as health policy, so the rest of the insurance industry and others would do, so we were keenly interested as policy analysis--analysts, in studying what Medicare did and the impact of that, and that really meant working with older people.  Simultaneously I realized that I really liked the, the intellectual challenge of geriatrics because during my year and a half or so at Temple [Lewis Katz School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], most of the patients that I had were young women because they, they chose me because they wanted a woman physician and for the most part, they were pretty healthy and I realized that I, I had the challenge of taking care of a complex patient who had a lot of different medical problems and was perhaps facing a lot of the social challenges that people face as they get older, was intellectually rewarding for me.  So those two threads coming together is what led to my choosing geriatrics as my, my prof- my specialty.
Story_ID: 522061
Speaker 1: As a Robert Wood Johnson Scholar [Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Clinical Scholar] you're able to--I guess they, that they provided the scholarship for the Wharton School [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: They--yes that allowed me to go to the Wharton School and get an M.B.A. and also train as a geriatrician and do some research.  So I got a lot done during those two years.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's a yeah, so okay.  So, any stories about the University of Pennsylvania, the M.B.A.?  How was health policy changing and, and when did the Wharton School start an M.B.A. in health policy, do you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It had started a few years earlier in the late '60s [1960s], I believe and most of the people going into that program were people who would ultimately run healthcare systems or do consulting for large corporations or end up in their pharmaceutical industry, there were relatively few physicians going into the school and getting that dual degree; it's much more common now but at the time it was very uncommon.  And I think that that was one of the things that has characterized my career was really being a bridge between two areas, medicine and business and there are other examples of where I've been able to benefit and create new solutions if you will?  By bringing together disciplines and professionals that don't usually work together.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So the, the, the program really was not one that I had initially thought would be my choice, I always thought I would go to a school of public health and get a Masters in Public Health because I was interested in improving the health of populations.  But, at the time there wasn't a school of public health in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and here's another lesson for people as their careers develop, there are often many pathways to the goal that you have and what I really needed to understand was how to look at large numbers of people.  In business, we refer to it as markets and, and consumers, and how to understand the influence of finance and economics on the decisions that people make about the health of populations and all of that can be learned from a business perspective as, as it can be learned from a public health or population health perspective.  So, I didn't originally think I was gonna get an M.B.A., but it turned out to be a very useful set of concepts and, and principals to shape the kind of work that I wanted to do.
Story_ID: 522062
Speaker 1: So in '86 [1986], you were hired as a professor at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] right?  And what was your--what did you teach?
Speaker 2: I was a pretty typical academic physician. I taught some lectures in pharmacology but my main teaching responsibilities were at the bedside.  So for two or three months out of the year, I was the attending physician in a part of the hospital and the medical students and residents were essentially under my supervision and I taught them clinical medicine, general medicine and geriatrics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then later as our practice in geriatrics grew and we developed a real unit in geriatrics, I began a house call program.  Actually I didn't begin it but I was one of the early physicians working in that program.  And then we taught medicine by making house calls and having students and residents accompany us to the patients' homes and exam them, deliver the care they needed in the--in their home and all the while teach about the social factors and economic factors that really influence a person's overall health and wellbeing.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, you know, house calls, I mean the whole idea of a house call is almost out of medicine by that time--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --especially in the big cities you just didn't see it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 522063
Speaker 1: Something else that you did that--on ca-, campus and we have a note that you were named the Du Bois College House faculty master, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well tell us about that.  Now this, this is the, the black house, basically of the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Well the university had a number of college houses that--where there were faculty in residence, senior faculty, some junior faculty and then undergraduates and sometimes some graduate students as well, and that most of these colleges, college houses had themes as you imagined, W.E.B. Du Bois College House was an African American history and culture.  And so, for three years our family lived on campus in the, in the college house, it was from our kids' [Rel Lavizzo-Mourey and Max Lavizzo-Mourey] perspective the best three years imaginable.  They were surrounded by literally hundreds of big brothers and sisters, they had the run of the campus, we ate at the dining hall and they felt like they were college students when they were in elementary school.  So it was--and they were exposed to every great mind that was African American and came to campus so that it was just a tremendous experience for our family as a whole.  And, you know, we committed to doing that because at the time, there was some really difficult racial tension on campuses, often happens, you know, and the, the students were feeling like this was not a safe place for them on Pennsylvania's campus, University of Pennsylvania's campus.  And I think that in those kinds of times having faculty and others who can create a sense of safety and belonging and validation is important and Penn has more African American faculty now than it did then but we really felt like it was important for, for us to step up and, and be a part of the community and what was needed at that point.
Story_ID: 522064
Speaker 1: If I remember correctly, just breezing back through '60 Minutes' files in my mind, to--well, you know, there seemed to be a lot of tension with the police in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and young African American males especially, Frank Rizzo was the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --mayor, a former police officer himself and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --there was a guy named Imperiale [sic.], that had like a, like a--what do you call it?  An ad hoc group--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --of vigilantes I guess, or something--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --who would roam the streets looking for people who are out of order, and you know, usually black people that they thought who were out of place or doing something--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and was this part of the tension?
Speaker 2: It, it was, it was that, so not feeling safe off campus and then on campus there were a number of situations where students were called things that were hurtful.
Speaker 1: In the classroom?
Speaker 2: No, well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or--
Speaker 2: --it was, it was on campus in, in, you know, I don't think it was in the classroom, I think it was actually some things that were shouted on, on campus and, and that just, that led to a, I think a feeling among many students that the campus wasn't welcoming and the city wasn't welcoming.  And these are the students who are extremely talented and smart and had worked really hard to gain admission to Penn and y- you always, I, I always see it as a real tragedy when someone's opportunities that they worked so hard to achieve, get cut short because of, of an environment that doesn't validate and support them so that they can achieve what, you know they had set out to achieve.  And so I think it was--that was the kind of environment that we were seeing in, in Philadelphia at the University of Pennsylvania then and, and in a lot ways it, it wasn't all that dissimilar to the environment that I had experienced at Harvard Medical School in Boston [Massachusetts] and I, I guess I understood how important having that community of people was in allowing me to be successful as a medical student and I, I kind of wanted to pay it forward and make sure that there were some students who might otherwise have not made it who were able to make because they had a more supportive environment.
Story_ID: 522065
Speaker 1: So, who--you mentioned some of the personalities that came through the house [W.E.B. Du Bois College House, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in those three years that your, your, your children [Rel Lavizzo-Mourey and Max Lavizzo-Mourey] would have seen and as well as the students, I mean, you know, younger, young kids are always influenced by high school students and college students I think, they look up to 'em and it's--ma-, maybe being more important than their parents sometimes, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: But who, who came to campus during those years (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh geez.  Well I, you know, I remember [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis and having a conversation with her, you know, other icons of the Civil Rights Movement, [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond came through, all of the major thinkers of, of the time Cornel West came to campus [of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], we--I particularly enjoyed conversations and seeing [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou, Alice Walker--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --is a person that I love, so those, I mean, I could go on and on.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And then of course there were a number of artists that were of probably more interest to the students and, and their group than, than I but it was, it was a pretty heady time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, these are the early days of hip hop?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, I don't know if people like Public Enemy or that--
Speaker 2: Don't recall.
Speaker 1: --(Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Prob- they probably did and I, I, I just wasn't a part of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The only person, I, I know Wilson Jeremiah Moses, the black historian was there--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and I don't know if--who else was on campus in terms of the faculty.
Speaker 2: Oh there, well Howard Stevenson [Howard C. Stevenson] who's--Ken Shropshire [Kenneth L. Shropshire], who's done a lot in, in the law school within the, the medical school, people like Bernett, Bernie Johnson, Dr. Bernett Johnson [Bernett L. Johnson, Jr.], people that within the medical field that are extremely well known.
Story_ID: 522066
Speaker 1: So okay, so you're there [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for the three years and like in '92 [1992], you're recruited by President George H.W. Bush's [President George Herbert Walker Bush] administration to serve as deputy administrator for agency, for the Agency for Healthcare Policy and Research [Agency for Health Care Research and Quality], right?
Speaker 2: The, the real story is that Secretary Louis Sullivan [HistoryMaker Dr. Louis Sullivan], who was the head of HHS, Health and Human Services [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services] recruited me to come and be the deputy of that agency which was a new agency within his department and it was really in the final eighteen months of George H.W. Bush's administration and I went down to Washington [D.C.] to be interviewed for the position, I was interviewed by the White House and essentially failed my White House interview because I was asked whether I, I, I want to get this right, I think I, it, I was asked whether I was Republican or Democrat and I answered that I was Independent, and they said, well if you were, "If you're an Independent, you don't vote in primaries," and that's true in Pennsylvania at the time, you couldn't vote in the primary if you were Independent.  And so, they said, well if they'd call Dr. Sullivan and said, "If you want this person to be the deputy, she's gonna need to be civil service, so you'll have to bring her on as senior executive service," and he did which meant that when the election happened and Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] won the presidency, I didn't have to resign.  If I'd been a political appointee, I would have resigned and that meant that I was in a great place for working on healthcare reform when President Clinton came into his presidency and made affordable, or universal coverage one of his first policy initiatives.
Story_ID: 522067
Speaker 1: And so you worked with Hillary Rodham Clinton on this, this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is a, it was exciting and during the time period there was--the first lady was criticized by her opponents for--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --daring to try to do something with that as first lady, but it was--but, te- tell us about what, what, what you all were trying to do and what, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well at the time we did not have guaranteed health insurance. There were anywhere from 46 to over the time period that this was being fought, 50 million people without health insurance and the, the Clintons had campaigned on a principle of trying to achieve universal health insurance.  They setup a process for really vetting all of the potential polices that involved five hundred or more people getting together in working groups to analyze every aspect of the healthcare system and come up with the best possible policy.  The process was very different than the way legislation is usually done in Washington [D.C.]. It's usually done by a, a small group of people in conjunction with leaders of [U.S.] Congress and their staff and so the process itself was criticized and was very different than what had, was the norm.  And the co- the issues as, as you know are very contentious, healthcare has become increasingly politicized and so you put those two things together with the fact that the first lady, Hillary Rodham Clinton, Rodham Clinton was given authority over it and she was not an elected official obviously.  It was enormously controversial and in the end, there was a bill written, the Health Security Act [Health Security Act of 1993], it managed to get through a couple of the committees but ultimately was dead on arrival and so the, the eighteen months or so of intense effort that went into producing a bill that was extreme--really a very comprehensive bill to not only ensure u- universal coverage but also to address issues of prevention and the affordability of healthcare failed.  And that whole issue, healthcare reform and universal coverage became something that was politically radioactive for about fifteen years or so.
Speaker 1: Okay, of course the plan was defeated by the, the, by Congress in 1994 right?  That's when they had--the Newt Gingrich Republican Revolution--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --and the--
Speaker 2: --and it, this in part contributed to that change in Congress, you know, I think there were many people who felt that the, one of the reasons that the Democrats lost seats in the, in the House [U.S. House of Representatives] during that time was a backlash to the healthcare effort.
Story_ID: 522068
Speaker 1: Why do you think people oppose like, universal healthcare? I mean, so many countries in Europe have it. Canada has it, you know?  Cuba, you know?  I mean, you know, affordable healthcare for everybody.  I--and the U.S. seems to like it, I mean it, you'd think that it was a--you know, everybody's gonna be poisoned as soon as--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --we pass it that, that--I mean, I don't know, people are so averse to it.
Speaker 2: It, it's one of the big questions that I, I have in my career and really we have spent so many years at the foundation [Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, Princeton, New Jersey] and, and personally trying to make the case for why healthcare is important by demonstrating the, the negative impact on individual health on a community's health, when you don't have access to healthcare, the financial devastation that happens to people when they don't have insurance coverage and have the misfortune of getting a serious illness.  But we've, we have not fully internalized that as a country. I think we're closer now than we ever have been, in part because people, more people, 20 million more people now have experienced healthcare coverage and have seen how it changes their lives when they don't have to worry about getting sick and being able to pay for it.  But I think that it's, it is one of the big questions in my mind, why we have not been able to more successfully educate people about the importance of this in their overall security as individuals.
Story_ID: 522069
Speaker 1: So we were talking about the defeat of the first version [Health Security Act of 1993] of the Affordable Care Act [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010] and so, did, did--how long did you work for the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration past that, that time?
Speaker 2: Just maybe six months after that, I was on leave from the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and they have a policy you can take a two year leave and after that then you have to apply for another two years or go on back to the faculty, and so I went back after two years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I don't know, did you along with David R. Williams and Rueben C. Warren released an article on the relationship between race and health partly funded by the National Institutes of Health and the National Institute on Aging.  Now what was the, what was the, what were your--what, what was the paper about?
Speaker 2: Well, it--one of the things that has now really been born out but this was an early paper showing that there's stress, physiological stress that you can measure associated with racial discrimination, the overt and also the less overt discrimination and racism that people experience and that that has an impact on chronic illness and that the prevalence of chronic illnesses that black people experience.
Speaker 1: And, so what are the illnesses that black people experience that are related to this, this kind of stress?
Speaker 2: Well I think that the, the many chronic illnesses we, we don't know that they're related specifically to this, but we do know that there's a higher prevalence of things like high blood pressure, many cancers, many behavioral conditions that we are beginning to see are related to toxic stress.  So I don't think we are advanced enough in our, our knowledge of the physiology to, to specifically name all of them, but we know that as classes of conditions, that there's these are clearly related to increased stress, so that was the, the general thesis of the paper.
Speaker 1: Okay, now there have been black psychiatrists and black psychologists for years, I mean, was it, with Cobbs [HistoryMaker Dr. Price Cobbs] and Grier [William H. Grier]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --back in the '60s [1960s], they talked about this on some level-it may not, it may not have been as clinical as you, that you all came up with.  But, but, and there was an associate, a black psychologist--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Dr. Bobby Wright [Bobby E. Wright] and others--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that, have discussed, you know, that the pressure can really, you know, make a difference in your health and your overall state of being, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well it's one of the things that at Robert Wood Johnson Foundation [Princeton, New Jersey] we're now really looking into related to younger children that, the kind of intense stress that's associated with, with violence, with ongoing discrimination, with stress in one's family can actually alter the way that the brain develops, the synapses get pruned and or expand, and that has a an impact on their ability to learn.  And we also have been able to understand through a number of very sophisticated researchers work that it, it increases your risk, sometimes several fold for specific kinds of conditions like diabetes and high blood pressure.
Story_ID: 522070
Speaker 1: Now this was a time, I know now, I know, those in Chicago [Illinois] or hear about Chicago in the news, hear about all of the gun, all the gun violence in Chicago--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --these days, but there, there's a footnote that's always added or usually added pe- people, I don't know if they realize it, 1994, '95 [1995], is what actually worse--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --then it is right now.  The, and the late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s], in the, on the East Coast--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --was horrifying because of the crack [crack cocaine] epidemic--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so, you know, the, your, you--the study that you're involved in was, was one of I think several attempts to try to get a handle, a grip on this right?
Speaker 2: We're trying to shed a light on it.  You, we--it's interesting that you mentioned that the prevalence of violence in many environments is actually less than it was in the '80s [1980s], '90s [1990s], and I, I--and when that gets mentioned many people are incredulous, they just don't believe it.  And I think what's different now than then is we have much more of a spotlight on it and there's social media and other ways that it can be made immediate to, to people that we didn't have then and so it seems very much more intense I think to, to many people in the community even though there is evidence in many places certainly not all the, the level of violence is going down.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know if you remember, I can't remember his name, but there's a doctor at the Harvard School of Public Health [Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts], health, that had a major project basically and, where, where he, I think he called it, the term was collective efficacy he called for the communities to rally in, in a way in unitedness around the youth in the way that they had not done before--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --and in a way with two (unclear) do you remember that?
Speaker 2: Well there's--I, I, I know of work out of Chicago that it is similar in describing violence as a public health--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --issue, wha--
Speaker 1: Yeah he, he had an office in Chicago but he was really the Harvard School of Public Health.
Speaker 2: Gary Slutkin?
Speaker 1: No, now yeah, Sluktin was with CeaseFire [CeaseFire Illinois], yeah, he--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --he created CeaseFire but it was related to the studies--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --of, of a black--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: ---physician from Harvard Pub- Public Health whose name I, I-wish I could remember it, his name, but that's but, okay.  So what you're, what you're doing is, is in sync with, you know, what a lot of people are looking at in those days.
Story_ID: 522071
Speaker 1: At the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] so you, you're back as a professor in 1997, you were named the Sylvan Eisman Professor of Medicine and Health Care Systems?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And now what's the significance of that appointment?
Speaker 2: Well having a name chair is, is always an honor. It provides some resources to do your research and, and other work but mostly it was a way of the university acknowledging that my position and work was a, had reached a level of, of significance to the university that, that I had earned a chair.
Story_ID: 522072
Speaker 1: --That you launched the program attempting to return house calls to doctors' practices at that time?  Now we, we had already discussed that, now did, you did this ear- earlier than '98 [1998]?  Or was it, was it in '98 [1998], that it was launched, or?
Speaker 2: It, it was earlier and then I resumed it when I came back.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And what was the response, what was the impact?
Speaker 2: Well, house calls had largely fallen away and yet what we were seeing in, in our community in West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was that there were many people who couldn't get to the doctor because they may have a mobility problem or transportation and problem and so they just weren't getting access to care and as a team of healthcare providers, doctors, nurses, social workers, we could provide comprehensive care in their home in a way that was certainly much more accessible to them and what ultimately has been shown to provide care that reduces hospitalizations and improves outcomes.  But for, for the work that I ultimately focused on at R.W.J.F. [Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, Princeton, New Jersey], what it really showed was that the living environment, the neighborhood, the housing, the opportunity to have healthy food and so on were so much related to how healthy a person could be and their health outcomes that as a healthcare system we really do need to focus on those things, that's the way we're going to help people become healthier.  And I saw that personally as a physician going into individuals' homes in West Philadelphia, a neighborhood that is, you know, at times very challenged in terms of the resources that the, the neighborhood has.  So I got to really appreciate that as an individual doctor and that led to the kind of work that I wanted to do at Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
Speaker 1: Okay now how do the--I know we interviewed a woman in, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] who was a--in fact she was really in, she was in the Republican Party though, people in the black community seemed to love her, anyway her na- her name was Amoore [HistoryMaker Renee J. Amoore]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and she had a home healthcare--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: She was a nurse--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --by tra- by training.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: She provided like home healthcare, pro- professionals going to the home.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do, do you know who I'm talking about?
Speaker 2: I, I, I know, I don't know her but I, I certainly know the, the concept in, I, I may have interacted with some of her, her staff but I don't know her personally.
Speaker 1: Is that kind of--I mean is that, is that something you would have? I mean are you--I don't know how to (laughter) but is, is that something that grew out of your, your (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --the increase in that kind of service?
Speaker 2: --what we were trying to do was to show that you could put together a team of people and deliver care in someone's home and actually help them stay in their home, live the kind of life that they wanted to live even though they may be very frail and to provide the kind of support that their family needed to keep the family together.  A critical component of that is having home health services and when I was doing this work and providing care in the home like that I would often say that the most important person for me was the home health aide because that was person who could actually tell me what was going on with that patient when I'm talking to the home health aide on the phone, they could tell me whether they're eating the way they should, how they're, whether their mindset was the way it usually was, are they laughing the way they usually laughed and give me a sense of--be my eyes and ears as, as it were.  So, the relationship between a physician who makes house calls and the home health aide is one that makes the difference between whether that person is able to stay in the home and thrive or, or not.  So I, while I wasn't a part of developing home health programs and services, I think I was a part of, of showing the value that that member of the team had to making sure that families and patients got what they wanted which was to be able to stay in their home and live the way they wanted to live even though they, they may be very frail.
Story_ID: 522073
Speaker 1: The alternative of course is go to an institution and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Go to a nursing home which--
Speaker 1: And, yeah, nursing home--
Speaker 2: Yeah I've never met someone who wanted to go to a nursing home.
Speaker 1: No, you're right, you're right.  And so, so this aspect of healthcare has changed around the country to a certain extent but they're still, you know, still got a long ways to go--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: That's my perception--
Speaker 2: --it's very different than what it was but, I think that we, we still have a reimbursement system that doesn't make it easy for people to get that kind of care and yet it's been shown with many studies subsequently that as, as I said it, you can provide care in the home that is more acceptable to the family and the patient and also reduces hospital stays and, and therefore hospital cos- therefore, healthcare costs.
Story_ID: 522074
Speaker 1: You joined the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation [Princeton, New Jersey] in, in 2001 right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And how did that happen?  You, there was some relationship already right?
Speaker 2: Well I was recruited to be a senior vice president there and oversee the work that they were doing in, in healthcare, improvement of healthcare and I think the work that I had done on healthcare reform and, the policy work related to improving the quality of healthcare and addressing disparities in healthcare led to the foundation knowing of me and inviting me to apply for the position, I went there as a senior vice president and the president had recently announced that he was going to step down within about a year and so I became a candidate for the president and CEO and about a year after going there became the, the CEO.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems as though you were picked to do that, I mean eventually, I mean I don't know if, you know you may have had the work but--
Speaker 2: Well it was a, it was a, it was a rigorous competition, it, it certainly felt like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  So, now this is, well Robert Wood John- Johnson Foundation has, you said, 'cause you said Robert Wood Johnson established it with like, was it a billion dollars?
Speaker 2: A, a billion dollars back in 1972 and over the ensuing forty some years the endowment has been managed to grow to about 10.1 billion now and over that same amount of time, we've given a little over $10 billion in grants.  So it's been, it's, it's the largest philanthropy that's devoted ex- exclusively to improving health in the county, well really in the world.
Speaker 1: Wha- what are the priorities of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation?
Speaker 2: We are focused on building a culture of health and by that I mean making sure that the conditions for people to actually live the healthiest life possible are available in, in our country, that we have the kind of policies and practices that make it possible for people to choose a healthy lifestyle and to have the supports, the social determinants of health, a good job, a good education, safe communities that influence whether or not you're able to get and stay healthy.  So our focus has been on that cultural change in our country, if you think about how easy it is for people in struggling communities to actually be healthy, it's very difficult and we wanna see that change, we want it to be possible for kids to grow up to be healthy, to have a healthy weight.  We wanna see communities that are safe and create the kind of social cohesion that promotes health instead of creates the kind of toxic situations that detract from health.  Now along the way, over our forty year history we've focused on a lot of health problems that were singular problems like healthcare coverage; we've invested for forty years in trying to make sure that everyone had healthcare coverage.
Story_ID: 522075
Speaker 1: We've invested in ensuring that kids have a healthy weight, it really--a billion dollars in reversing the epidemic of childhood obesity (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know that was a big initiative that was launched soon after you joined Robert Wood (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 2: The Johnson Foundation [Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, Princeton, New Jersey], and one in which the first lady participated in, you know, to a great extent, I mean she was, you know, she made commercials and, and appeared around the country, you know, on behalf of exercise and eating the right foods and--
Speaker 1: Shortly after I became president, I really initiated our commitment to reversing the epidemic of childhood obesity.  At the time, there were a lot of debates about whether it was really a problem and we were largely as a country ignoring the, the fact that rates of childhood obesity were steadily going up and the consequences of children being obese at a young age were going to be devastating because all of the illnesses that are associated with obesity like high blood pressure and heart disease and asthma were things that they would start to get at a much younger age.  So instead of getting them, these diseases in middle age, they would--we were starting to see diabetes in childhood and in children in their teens and in their early twenties and that of course could lead to a situation where we were producing a generation that was gonna die younger than their parents' generation, in fact, we are seeing now a decrease in life expectancy.  So we at the foundation and, and really was a signature program under my administration to address childhood obesity and I remember going to meet with Michelle Obama before she was the first lady, when she was Senator Barack Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] wife working in community programs at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And it was very clear that then that she was passionate about this issue and so it was extremely gratifying to see her take that on when she became first lady and to essentially become a champion for good policies for educating parents and for changing the, the ways that communities addressed the health of children.
Story_ID: 522076
Speaker 1: What were some, some of the ways that you tried, tried to change--reduce childhood obesity?  'Cause there, I, I can see it could be, you know, for, for instance, I mean children are, we all know they're getting fatter and fatter, you know, every year there's statistics about that but--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --what--
Speaker 2: --actually that's not hap- that's leveling off--
Speaker 1: Yeah. Is it? Okay.
Speaker 2: --and going down now, I mean how to approach it?  Children respond to their environment, their home environment, their school environment, and so a lot of what we had focused on is making sure that the situations where children find themselves whether it's preschool, their school environment, their after school environments, their communities, they have access to healthy food, many communities, there really is not access to fresh healthy food, it's high calorie, high fat, processed, high sugar foods that are more readily available.  So first, access to healthy food, making sure that there's an opportunity for them actually to be physically active, that means the neighborhood has to be safe, parents aren't gonna let their kids go out if it's not safe--
Speaker 1: Yeah the going trend in the mid-'90s [1990s] was it, was for children not to go outside and play more video games because it wasn't safe.
Speaker 2: And so it's gotta, you've gotta have a safe environment.
Speaker 1: Now also on, on what you said before, the, I mean the media advertises and companies make readily accessible foods that aren't that healthy for you.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: You know, like soft drinks and hamburgers and French fries and potato chips and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --the (unclear).
Speaker 2: --a big, big part of what we--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --need to do is to make sure that we give people information and advertise what's healthy, one of the first lady's [Michelle Obama] campaigns was to drink water and similarly that was a campaign in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Mayor Nutter [HistoryMaker Michael Nutter] and the health department there really encouraged and had active campaigns to say, drink water.  So some of what we can do is from a public health perspective is to make the resources available, but then to in an ongoing way, educate people about what's the, the choices that they can make, and I, I think that--and then realize what some of the trends are that we need to change.  When I was growing up, I think I mentioned I walked to school and kids rarely walk to school now so developing programs like a walking school bus where adults walk the kids to school, therefore creating a safe environment for them to walk to school it's a, it's a 21st century solution to ensuring that kids are more physically active, or, you know, for example we, we know that most people eat out much more frequently than they did in the past.  So it's important for the places that our kids eat out, our families eat out have healthy options and, you know, people in our neighborhood, they have a McDonald's, they have a Kentucky Fried Chicken [KFC], they have a lot of fast food places in the neighborhood, those places now, if you go to them, are offering more healthy options, that's not an accident, they've been pushed to do that and encouraged to do it and many are responding, not all.  So I think that approaching this kind of a, a situation where you've got a populat- a threat to the population, means that you've gotta have approaches that change the culture and the way the whole population responds and not just point fingers at people and say, well you should have more self-control to, you know, not drink that soda or not eat that high calorie food when that's maybe 90 percent of your choices.  So that's the kind of approach that we've taken to try to change the environment, at the same time, subtlety give new messages that help people see how they can change their behavior and therein change what's acceptable in our culture and what we promote in our culture.
Story_ID: 522077
Speaker 1: Right, I know in Chicago [Illinois], Robert Wood Johnson Foundation [Princeton, New Jersey] supported safe neighborhood--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --initiatives and-'cause I worked for one of the organizations that was involved in it.  So, there's--and it, it's amazing sometimes what--we had a neighborhood store on the West Side of Chicago, it was actually selling wax hypodermic needles for children, you know?  And we had--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the South Austin Coalition [South Austin Coalition Community Council, Chicago, Illinois], they had a demonstration in front of the store, it was a bizarre--I had--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I had never thought that I'd see anything like that but--
Speaker 2: Now you contrast that to corner stores in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] that now have what they call smart snack stickers.  They'll put on a snack that is a healthy snack, that it's a smart snack and kids go in and when they choose the smart snack, they get a reward at school for having chosen a smart snack.  So, I, I think one of the things I feel very strongly about is that improving the health of people requires everyone to do their part and it's not just the public health department or the individual doctor or the parents.  Clearly they all have a role to play but so do teachers and so do the owners of small stores, so do the executives of large food companies and, and other companies.  So, a big part of my approach has been to bring everyone into the conversation and figure out what they can do to help our communities to be healthier, particularly for our kids.
Story_ID: 522078
Speaker 1: Now how did the financial apocalypse affect Robert Duke Jay--Robert Wood Johnson Foundation [Princeton, New Jersey] in two--2008, 2007, 2008?
Speaker 2: Well like most endowments we lost a lot of money we--our endowment was down about 20, 22 percent, some took a much bigger hit than that.  The good news is that we've recovered and now have an asset base that's as high as it was at, at our high watermark but we had to make some very difficult decisions during that time and one of them was to continue funding many things despite the fact that our resources, our investments had taken a hit and we knew that it meant we would perhaps be longer in the recovery but felt that the kind of programs that we were funding were essential for the, the long term work that we wanted to do.
Story_ID: 522079
Speaker 1: It was recently announced that you're, you're stepping down--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --as president and CEO [of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, Princeton, New Jersey]?  When you look back on everything you've done to this point, wha- what do you see as your major accomplishments?
Speaker 2: Well, I think really shaping and helping to change the, the conversation and the approach that we've had as a nation to childhood obesity and ensuring that kids have a healthy weight.  The, the way that we thought about it in the past was one of parental responsibility or individual responsibility, and that was pretty much it and there was a, a sense of both it not being a, a big problem and, and also a kind of fatalism that there wasn't anything that could be done to reverse this and by bringing together people from various industries with parents, with educators, with the healthcare professions, I think we've been able to change the conversation and the types of solutions that people see as enduring solutions.  So we now have healthier schools, we now have schools that see it as part of their responsibility to create a healthy environment, we now recognize that safety and safe environments is a critical component to having people be at a healthy weight, they need to be able to be physically active and safety is a part of that.  So it's reshaping that conversation and then what I learned along the way and what our foundation has learned along the way is that that becomes the basis for how we can create a culture in our country that actually promotes health.  Because if we are creating safe neighborhoods, if we're creating the kinds of jobs that give people opportunity, if we're creating an educational system that focuses on health and the wellbeing of their students, those are the basic platforms for us being healthy life long and that's what a culture of health is all about.
Story_ID: 522080
Speaker 1: I have to ask about the, the major health crisis in the country the last couple of years has been the Flint [Michigan] water crisis--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and it, it involves like I think Nestle [Nestle S.A.]?  In terms of buying water rights in Flint, the, the, the govern- the State of Michigan actually selling, I mean selling those water rights to a private source and then using a river that's, you know, you know, through this interim mayor, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I, I, wha--
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) what are your thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: --the, the water situation in Flint is complicated because it, it involves understanding our decaying infrastructure, the cost of water being diverted or received from one river versus another and fundamentally how we treat water.  So there's some technical and public health issues related to that, that the consequence has been a lot of people have been exposed to lead and lead is a very toxic substance particularly for young children and for growing children.  And then there's the political and economic overlay there where Flint essentially was in receivership and did not have representation.  And so you bring all of those things together and I think it shows how vulnerable people can be when basic health in this sense, clean safe water that we all take for granted is deprived and it, I think requires us to look around and, and ask ourselves where else, our fundamental ex- expectations about what it will take to be healthy are threatened or vulnerable and that takes us to ask questions about safety, about clean air, about access to healthy food, about access to green space and the ability to be physically active, those are critical components to any community's ability to be healthy.
Story_ID: 522081
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done at this point, in the career and then the career you have right now, is there anything that you would do differently to prepare for it then you--'cause I don't think you anticipated that you would have this career?
Speaker 2: One of the things that I have learned is the importance of relationships that spanned different sectors and different professions and different people from different walks of life, it's very hard to solve and address, really difficult for any problems with the perspective of just one sector or one approach.  And I think if I had to do it differently from a much earlier stage in my career, I would have much more actively cultivated the relationships and networks across many sectors that I've se- that I've done later in my career.  But I, I probably would have done it earlier and I would have encouraged, I certainly, when I give advice to people that ask me to be their mentor, that's one of the main things that I try to emphasize for them.
Story_ID: 522082
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family, I know you have children, are they--what are they doing now?
Speaker 2: My family is the joy of my life.  I have a husband [Robert J. Lavizzo-Mourey] of now, forty-three years, two children [Rel Lavizzo-Mourey and Max Lavizzo-Mourey] who are both married, one who has two children, my, my grandchildren are, I think every grandmother feels like their children are the joy of their life.  But one of the things that I've learned from both my nuclear family and my family of origin and my extended family is that if you, if you really come together and you can provide a sense of resilience for each other that is invaluable.  We, in my extended family we've had all of the, the struggles and heartaches that people generally have, financial, econom- you know, health problems, behavioral health problems, heartache, heartbreak, but as a family we've held together and I think that resilience has been a source of, of great, great strength for me.
Story_ID: 522083
Speaker 1: Is there anything we need to address before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as someone who lived a life of purpose, was committed and a caring person.
