Story_ID: 220646
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: James Alexander Blakely, B-L-A-K-E-L-Y, Lockhart, L-O-C-K-H-A-R-T--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Just as in 'Lassie.'
Speaker 1: Okay, like in June Lockhart.
Speaker 2: June Lockhart (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  Now can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in French Hospital [New York, New York] May 27, 1936.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: In New York City [New York, New York], did I say?
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In New York City.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired lawyer now; retired corporate executive, actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is August 19, 2004.  It's a Thursday.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are presently in my home on Martha's Vineyard, at 78 Winemack Street in Oak Bluffs [Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 220647
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that they ask me to ask (laughter), and they are short and they don't require, a very long (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --long answer, just a warm-up.  The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Lobster.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite what?
Speaker 1: Color.
Speaker 2: Color?  You know, I never focused on that one.  No, not particularly.  I wear a lot of colors, and there are a lot of colors that I don't like, but, no.  Well, I like this.  My granddaughter likes purple (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: So I have to like this.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My best time of the year is mid-winter in Florida, because it's perfect weather, and when I play golf, I don't like to sweat.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: South of France.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or Cote d'Azur [French Riviera] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  And, lastly, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Actually, I don't think I do, but if you ask my son [Mark Lockhart], I'm sure he'd tell you something.
Story_ID: 220648
Speaker 1: Now I want to ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Edgar Lockhart] side, but I want to start with your mother's side.  And so first, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Margaret Elizabeth Blakely.
Speaker 1: And can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: B-L-A-K-E-L-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: We believe her date of birth was March 19, 1908.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in a rural area called Salters, S-A-L-T-E-R-S, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is a little town near Kingstree, one word, K-I-N-G-S-T-R-E-E, Kingstree, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was the county seat, in Williamsburg County [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: And Kingstree is near what (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Kingstree--oh, I just thought I gave you a big town.  Well, it's on the Black River, but you wanna know what it's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: On the Black River?  Okay.
Speaker 2: --close to?  You heard of Florence?  Florence, South Carolina?  Columbia, South Carolina?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's in the vortex between Charleston [South Carolina], Columbia, and Florence.  It's right in the center.  It's about, roughly eighty miles from each.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's closer to Myrtle Beach [South Carolina], I should say.  You know that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We--we've been to Myrtle Beach actually.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's about maybe fifty, sixty miles from Myrtle Beach.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So what, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  What do you know about your ancestors on that side?  How far back can you go?
Speaker 2: You know, that's something I'm going--I'm beginning to think about and working on, because we don't know a lot about it.  I can go back just maybe one generation, my grandfather and his relatives.  I don't know them very well, but my grandmother's [Catherine Blakely] relatives we know something about.  But the Blakelys, I know very little about.  So Dave Blakely, my grandfather, I don't know anything about his parentage, his--or whether he had siblings or anything, and that's something we have to check out.  My (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you know what he did for a living, or?
Speaker 2: Well, he was a farmer.
Story_ID: 220649
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: --Oh!  He [Lockhart's maternal grandfather] was a farmer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Dave Blakely.
Speaker 2: --yeah, it was a rural area and he had twelve children.  My mother [Margaret Blakely] was the baby of twelve, actually, as was my father [Edgar Lockhart] who was the baby of twelve; that's interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you know your grandmother on that side?
Speaker 2: I knew my grandmother for a brief while and actually she died in my arms.  We were driving to the hospital and I was in the back seat, and my mother was driving furiously to get us into Kingstree Hospital [ph.] [Kingstree, South Carolina].  But my grandmother was reputed to be about eighty-nine or ninety, and she was very old, and she died of natural causes.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Catherine, Catherine Blakely.  But she was a Bennett.  Her maiden name was Bennett, B-E-N-N-E-T-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And her family came from just a few miles beyond that, maybe four or five miles from a little area called Lane; Lane, South Carolina.
Story_ID: 220650
Speaker 1: Now, well, tell us about your mother's [Margaret Blakely] growing up.  Do you know--does she ever talk about how she grew up and what the--
Speaker 2: Not very much, but we've been able to piece together little things here and there, and I don't know anything about her childhood other than she probably graduated from high school in Kingstree [South Carolina] and she migrated to New York City [New York, New York] where she met my dad [Edgar Lockhart], but she went there presumably to study cosmetology, and she worked as a beautician there and--I'm sorry, she wouldn't like that terminology, she likes cosmetologist.  And--
Speaker 1: So she went there on her own when she was a teenager to New York?
Speaker 2: I would imagine she was very young, but not--probably not a teenager.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was probably twenty or so, yeah.  And, and I'm not sure precisely when she left, but she left New York probably near the end of the '30s [1930s] probably about the beginning of the Second World War [World War II, WWII], somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was she a cosmetologist most of her life?
Speaker 2: Yes, and a school teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She taught school in South Carolina--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --all of her life, and she had a beauty parlor all of her life.  She loved it.  Well, not all of her life, because actually she stopped--discontinued doing that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --just before her retirement, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, what was her personality like?  What did she like to do, and--
Speaker 2: My mother was a woman who had an enormous ego, and she wanted to succeed at everything she did.  She just wanted to make a good life for herself and her family, and so she almost always worked.  I--my recollection is that I hardly remember my mother resting.  She was working from morning until late at night.  How she managed to cook and keep house and all that, I don't know, but it happened.  We had--she managed to have a beauty salon and she--at the end of the war when all the women were single and looking for men, and she was too, my father and she, I guess, weren't together, and I don't know the details of all of that.  But anyway, she married a guy, Samuel Lilliewood, who was from Clinton, South Carolina, and my stepfather needed something to do as did most men when they came back from the war because they had nothing to do.  They'd been gone for three or four years and had to start their lives all over again, and so she set up a dry cleaners, All Bright Dry Cleaners [ph.], on Railroad Avenue in Kingstree, for him to have a job and a place to run, which he did.  And the reason I know she set it up is because the only resources we had in those days came out of the beauty shop.  And then later on, we had a restaurant, which she created for an uncle of mine, my Uncle Bill [ph.], who was very ill and we went to Tampa, Florida, picked him up--he was a chef, came back, and she put him in the business.  So we had three businesses when I grew up.
Speaker 1: And she was the, the cause of--
Speaker 2: She was--that's right.  She was--my mother was a big driver.  She drove everybody.  She was very domineering, always right, and she probably was, but very hard to live with (laughter).  She, she kept you moving.  I mean, there was no slack.  My homework had to be done every night, and if she came home from the beauty shop at 9:30 or ten o'clock, and I had already gone to bed, and if it wasn't right--she reviewed it, and if it wasn't right, I had to get up and sit at that desk and get it right.  But she was a real taskmaster.
Story_ID: 220651
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father's side of the family and--
Speaker 2: My father's--
Speaker 1: What was your father's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) name was Edgar Lee--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Lockhart.
Speaker 1: Edgar Lee Lockhart.  L-E-E?
Speaker 2: L-E-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And we know how to spell Lockhart already.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And he was born around May 22, 1906.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in the rural area outside of Louisville, Georgia, spelled just like Louisville, Kentucky, but pronounced Louisville down there.
Speaker 1: Is it near--is it near South Carolina or?
Speaker 2: Actually, it's not--it, it--well, it's not that far.  It's about forty-five miles below Augusta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you know Augusta is right on the--on the line of South Carolina Georgia border.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about the ancestors on that side of the family?
Speaker 2: I don't know very much about the distant ancestors.  What I do know is my grandfather, his father was Moses Lockhart, was also something of an entrepreneur.  He had a farm; he had a general store; he was a painter.  He used to paint a lot of pictures of the family and we have some of those.
Speaker 1: So he was an artist?  Not just a--
Speaker 2: He was something of an artist, yep.  Managed to acquire a large number of properties so that as the children--and as I said, he was the father of twelve, my father being the baby of those twelve, and that area now is called Lockhart area because all the homes around there are occupied by Lockharts.  The streets in the country are now called Lockhart Lane, Lockhart Boulevard, Lockhart whatever.  It's all in the country, however.  But it's all a testament to the land that he acquired, and that's what was divided up later for all the children, and so a lot of them have migrated back there.  As you know, a lot of blacks migrated north after the war [World War II, WWII] looking for better jobs and then--but ultimately, a lot of people have begun to re-migrate back to the South and back to their old homes, and so a lot of that has happened in my family, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And fortunately, they are all back in the same area, so we see each other quite often, you know, which is good.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your grandfather was a very successful, industrious man.
Speaker 2: Well, from what I--all the stories I heard, that's probably true because the, the store was still in existence when I was a very little boy, and I have faint memories of it before it went out of existence.  The farm, of course, was still there, and well, everybody seemed to live well, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --they, they, they were poor and didn't know it but probably by a lot of standards, they were living pretty well.
Speaker 1: Now what about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother is--her name was Mary Whitfield, W-H-I-T-F-I-E-L-D, and she came from--Whitfield family came from an area between Louisville and Augusta, and it's called--and it just comes to me--it's called Wrens, W-R-E-N-S, Wrens, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when was she born?  Do you have a date for her?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know.  She died in, I think it was 1968 and my recollection was that she was somewhere in her really late eighties, eighty-eight, eighty-nine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was she older than your grandfather?
Speaker 2: No, my grandfather was significantly older.  He had been dead--my grandfather--and I don't know precisely--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm getting the grandfathers mixed up.
Speaker 2: --when he died, but he died some time in, in the '30s [1930s], probably the early, the middle '30s [1930s] perhaps.  Yeah, I never knew my grandfather.  I never knew either of my grandfathers.  Both of them were dead before I was born.  As I said, you know, my mother [Margaret Blakely] and my father were the babies of twelve, so there was a large gap in years between them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, yeah.  All right.  No, I had the--I'm sorry, I had the grandfathers mixed up.  So, so we don't have dates for your grandfather--
Speaker 2: I have no dates for my grandfathers, I--
Speaker 1: --and your, your--and your grandmother died in '68 [1968] and she was in her late eighties then, so they were both born in the 1800s.
Speaker 2: Oh, they were in the 1800s.
Speaker 1: In the 1880s maybe?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, easily.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  Okay.  About 1880 and maybe 1870s.
Speaker 2: Oh, it could've been a little earlier, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I don't have a clue how old my grandfather was when he died--either one actually.
Story_ID: 220652
Speaker 1: Can you tell us what you know about your biological father [Edgar Lockhart] and, you know, what did he do and--for a living and what kind of personality?
Speaker 2: My father--my father's an interesting person.  He ran away from home because he hated agriculture work and didn't wanna work on the farm, so he ran away from home at a fairly young age and migrated to Augusta, Georgia, and found a job working for a bishop of a church and who apparently was an extended family member of--maybe, you know, in the South, extended means you're not necessarily related, you're just--so he knew where to go and, and he went to see Bishop Wright [ph.] and became his driver, chauffeur, handyman, and all that kind of thing until he could acquire enough money and then he said, I'm headed to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And I don't know how many years he worked there, probably not terribly long, enough--until he got enough money to get on the train and pay his fare and get to Philadelphia, which he did.  And he lived there for about a year that I remember, with an uncle whose name I forget, and then he migrated quickly to New York City [New York, New York] from there.  So he was--and all I know is he was in New York most of his adult life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he did all kinds of menial work and labor until the war [World War II, WWII].  I don't know much about that, but--yes, I--the one thing I do know is he was working in a laundry in Bridgeport, Connecticut, and this is back, had to be in the late '30s [1930s] as a--they listed him as a mechanic or engineer or something.  In some places, it says mechanic, some places says engineer.  I think he fixed machines when they broke down, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then, he was drafted in the second wave when all the--the war wasn't going well in 1942, so they were drafting older guys.  And so he went in the [U.S.] Army and did a tour there, came out in 1945, and did some work, but soon got a job working at the General Post Office [James A. Farley Post Office Building] in New York [New York].  They call it the GPO in New York, the big one that's right down where Penn Station [Pennsylvania Station, New York, New York] is, and he worked there until he retired as a postal clerk.
Story_ID: 220653
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents [Margaret Blakely and Edgar Lockhart] met?  Do they ever talk about that?
Speaker 2: There isn't, and I haven't been able to find that out.  Nobody seems to--well, I'm sure somebody knows, but they're probably all dead and gone, and I don't know who they are.  And I had a godmother who's long since dead; I'm sure she probably knew, as godmothers would.  And then I had another cousin, Hattie Mazeek [ph.], who's--I never got to, always wanted to, but, but kept putting it off and I know she knows all of that, so I've lost that.  And they were intimates with my mother, but I really don't know that.  They apparently weren't married and so it--there was obviously no record of any divorce or, or marriage certificates, so we know that, and so it made it a little easier for them to separate, whatever.  I don't even know if they ever lived together, who knows.  I have no history on that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So did--
Speaker 2: Frankly, all I know is I always thought for years that my stepmother was my mother.  I never knew that she wasn't my biological mother and then when my father went into the [U.S. military] service, my stepmother, Julia, who was married to my father, Juliet [Mann] Lockhart, she had to send me to stay with one of my grandparents, so I--that's when I first went to live in Louisville [Georgia] with my grandmother, Mary [Whitfield Lockhart], and my aunt, Mary Lou [ph.].  And around 1945, this very pretty woman used to come and visit with South Carolina license plates, and she would bring gifts and food and stuff, and all the things I liked to eat, which I didn't like to eat the country food, and so she'd come down maybe once every two or three weeks, a month, and maybe a year later, my aunt told me, she said, "That's your mother."
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So you didn't--yeah, wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you started off with your father's family and then--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I really didn't know my mother until 1944, and I didn't know she was my mother until about 1945.
Speaker 1: So after you were born, your mother just went back to--
Speaker 2: South Carolina.
Speaker 1: South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Some period there, I don't know when that was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So they never told you how long they--
Speaker 2: No, no.  They never talked about those details.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I'm not privy to them, and I don't know who knows (laughter).
Story_ID: 220654
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) So you started off in New York City [New York, New York] and you were there until about what age?
Speaker 2: Well, that would've been about 1943, so I was about seven.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's before you moved south, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Somewhere in--1942 or '43 [1943], I'm not sure which.  I know that my father [Edgar Lockhart] was drafted in '42 [1942], that we have a record of, so it's somewhere--it coulda been '42 [1942] that I went to live in Georgia.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So when he was drafted, you--yeah.
Speaker 2: So I--because I went to school in Georgia, and I know that, for at least two years, because we had a school up on the hill which my grandfather [Moses Lockhart] built.  It's called Lockhart School [Louisville, Georgia], because he paid for the teacher and everything.  They didn't pay for blacks to have education in rural areas in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I, I went to a school with a, a one-room class, one teacher, and six grades, all being taught in the same room, same time (laughter).
Story_ID: 220655
Speaker 1: And you're talking about the [1939 New York] World's Fair [New York, New York] (simultaneous). Right. Right. The World's Fair in 1939.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my first memory.  The World's Fair, yeah, yeah.  And all I remember is as a little child in 1939 being there and running around, but I--you know, there are no distinct incidents that occurred, it's just that I remembered that, because of the globe, that big globe that-- I remembered it when I was a little boy.  I was so impressed by it.  Of course, it still exists; it's still there, you know, out by [William A.] Shea [Municipal] Stadium [New York, New York] where that was, but that's one.  And then I remembered soon thereafter riding the train, the Atlantic Coast Line [Railroad], going south in the summers to visit family and--
Speaker 1: Okay, so what--you started going south when you were real young--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my dad [Edgar Lockhart]--you know, in those days, we always went south.  You always went to visit your family; that was your vacation because we didn't go on vacations.  We didn't have the money.  We couldn't afford to go to a resort, so families always went back home, especially those who had left home, and that's where they went and spent their vacations.  So I remember distinctly riding in the car a lot whenever there was a vacation, a wedding or funeral, especially funerals, there were a lot of funerals, so we went back home quite a bit.
Story_ID: 220656
Speaker 1: Tell me, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: As a child?  Well, I think one of the most interesting sights I've ever--and I do recall this and I was very young then.  It's probably one of my first trips south in the car visiting my grandmother [Mary Whitfield Lockhart], and the family had a barbecue and a big celebration.  Everybody was coming over and they slaughtered the--you know, the pig, that morning for roasting and preparation of all the food products that they do.  And I remember getting up--my dad [Edgar Lockhart] was still sleeping, because he'd driven all the way.  We didn't stop much in those days, because there were no hotels or motels that we stayed at, so he drove all the way.  And I went in after I saw what they were doing, and I woke my dad up and he said, "What's the matter?"  And I was screaming and I said, "Dad, they're, they're cooking a giant rat."  And he said, "What?"  (Laughter) Well, I'd seen the pig before he'd been boiled and, you know, sheared of his, his, you know, the, the hairs and all that other stuff, and I saw that, and it looked like a rat to me.  That's about all I'd ever seen as a kid in New York [New York] (laughter).  And, of course, he knew what I'd been looking at and he said, "Well, calm down, it's not a rat (laughter)."
Speaker 1: Was this the first time you really came to grips with that animals are actually the food that we, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, that was the first time, yeah.  And then I got to find out--well, the first, obviously I didn't wanna eat any of that, and then as people kept munching and moaning about how great this is and, you know, how people are, "Mmm, very good," you know, so as a child, you say, "well, you know, maybe I might wanna taste some of that."  And they had made--the women ground up the meat into sausages and they seasoned sausages and they were cooking them, and they were making cracklin and cracklin cornbread.  Oh, I thought I died and gone to heaven, never tasted anything like that before.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so how old were you about at that time?
Speaker 2: Probably six or seven maybe, possibly eight because we were there all the time then after that.  But when that incident occurred, I was very young, so probably five or six maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Any, any sights and sounds and smells from New York City?
Speaker 2: Of course.  You know, New York is where I played in the street.  All kids played in the street.  It was too hot to stay inside.  The parents were trying to get you out on the street anyway, and that's where we played, that's where we spent our entire day.  And so, oh, I think stick ball or something that every kid who grows up in New York learns first and, so we played stick ball all day until it was too dark not to play.  I mean, that's all we did.  And then we roamed around the candy store; there were candy stores in those days.  That was a big deal.  If you could ever get a dime from your parents, and you could go buy candy for two cents and three cents or one cent, whatever, and that was a very, very big, important thing for us to do.  We enjoyed that--that was the cream of our day, of course, if we could do that.
Story_ID: 220657
Speaker 1: And the other thing, as we got older, one of the things we used to do as boys is--on Saturdays, is go to the movies, and going to the movies was a big deal because we didn't have air conditioning in apartments in those days; we had them in the theater.  So if you wanted relief, you went to the theater.  But we always went on Saturday, because that was our thing to do.  And in those days, we could go to a movie and you spend virtually the whole day there.  You'd get in there about nine o'clock and you wouldn't come out until four, but you'd see three movies, there'd be three movies running with trailers and all kinds of cartoons, and so we just spent the day.  And when you--I remember distinctly, when you come out of the movies at the end of the day, you couldn't see (laughter).  You know, the sun would be out, you'd be blinded for two or three minutes before you could adjust to it.  And, of course, we'd spend all of our money.  And I remember once we had--we thought we were rich, we had a quarter, our parents gave us a quarter, so we decided we were gonna walk to one hundred and forty--to 42nd Street.  I lived at 142nd, which is a long way, 142nd is all the way up in Harlem [New York, New York] and 42nd Street was where the theaters ran all day and all night, and they only cost a dime in those days, and you could see four movies.  And we walked all the way, ran through Central Park [New York, New York], went downtown, and watched movies.  And then, of course, your mother always said be in by, by dark, so I'll never forget, we just ran like crazy from about 110th Street home because we had to get in before dark, otherwise, you got a tanning (laughter).  Yeah.
Speaker 2: That was a long way to go to--
Speaker 1: It is a long way to go, but when you're a little boy, it's, you know, you're walking.  You're just walking and talking and having a good time, you know, and it doesn't seem that far.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, I barely wanna walk two blocks.
Speaker 2: How old were you then when you were going to--
Speaker 1: Oh, gosh, I don't know.  We used to do that when I was probably ten-ish and eleven-ish and twelve, you know, in those days.
Story_ID: 220658
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were growing up, did you spend like--you still spent some time with your father in New York [New York] and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, after I moved to South Carolina, well, [Louisville] Georgia, and then stayed with my grandparents [Mary Whitfield Lockhart and Moses Lockhart] for a couple three years, and then I moved with my mother to Kingstree, South Carolina, in 1945.  So every summer, I'd go back and stay with my father.  In about 1947, '46 [1946] or '47 [1947], I'm not sure exactly which, but I know '47 [1947], I used to go to Camp Atwater in East Brookfield [sic. North Brookfield], Massachusetts, in the summer for a month.  And the boys always went in June through half of July and the girls came.  They didn't have boys and girls together, so the girls came right after we left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us about Camp Atwater.  What was that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, Camp Atwater was great.  It's in East Brookfield, which is about fifteen, twenty miles outside of Springfield, Mass. [Massachusetts], and it was a place where the Springfield Urban League had set up this camp for summer camp for boys; it had been going on for many, many years, and it was primarily for young black kids and lots of black families would send their kids up there, well if they had the resources.  It wasn't that cheap, but I don't think it was extraordinarily expensive.  I don't really know anything about what it cost, but it was a place where striving black families would try to send their kids so that they could get them out and learn about nature, hiking, swimming, athletics.  And so we used to dream about going to Camp Atwater and that was a lot of fun.  It was the best part of my summers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And of course when camp was over, then I would spend the rest of the summer with my father [Edgar Lockhart] in New York and my stepmother [Juliet Mann Lockhart]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Before going back south to go to school.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That gave my mother [Margaret Blakely] a break, too (laughter).
Story_ID: 220659
Speaker 1: Where did you start grade school?
Speaker 2: Well I started grade school in New York [New York], and I know that I went to at least kindergarten and first grade in New York, and I'm reasonably sure it wasn't second grade because when I was in Louisville [Georgia] out in the country, I went to our [Lockhart] School [Louisville, Georgia] and I remember distinctly that the teacher put me in the third grade, because she thought I was so much more advanced because of my education in New York, and my grandmother [Mary Whitfield Lockhart], one of the greatest disappointments in my life at that time, was when she marched me up that hill to the school the next day and told the teacher, he goes back to first grade or second grade, whatever it was.  I remember putting me back.  I was so embarrassed, and I was so mad, but I--she was right because I was going back chronologically where I belonged.  So I lived through it, but I remember that distinctly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well--
Speaker 2: And then I went to school, public school, at Tomlinson.  They called it Tomlinson High School [Kingstree, South Carolina] even though it was lower grade school, so I remember starting third grade in Kingstree [South Carolina] and Miss Ham [ph.] was my third grade teacher; I don't remember her first name.  And then I remember my fifth grade teacher was a woman named Ruby Murray [ph.]--
Story_ID: 216778
Speaker 1: What was the name of your grade schools in New York [New York]?  Do you remember at all?
Speaker 2: I don't.  I would've been a PS something, you know, I just--I have no record of that or--
Speaker 1: But you were living in Harlem [New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at the time.  Right.
Speaker 2: I was going--I was--I know--I know it wasn't near 142nd Street, where we lived, because when my stepmother would go to work, she'd drop me off at my aunt's who lived at 126th Street between 8th--7th and 8th Avenue, and I spent--I would spend much of the week there because she had three kids, two boys and a girl, and I would spend a lot of time down there, and I'm reasonably sure I wound up--because I saw them all the time and I'm--so it would seem to me that I went--the school I went to was pretty close to that area somewhere.
Story_ID: 216779
Speaker 1: So when you were coming up, now, are you the only child of your parents?
Speaker 2: I am the only child as--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you feel--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm the only child from my mother [Margaret Blakely] and my father [Edgar Lockhart].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father had two other children and so I have an older sister and older brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So they were how far from you?
Speaker 2: They were much older.  My, my sister is eighty--she's sixteen years older than me and I'm sixty-eight, so she's eighty-four, and my brother who was exactly her age also died about five years ago.  He would've been same age.
Speaker 1: So your father was in New York [New York] for a while before he met your mother I would guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, presumably, yeah.  Although, these kids were not born in New York.  They were born down in Georgia, so, he was probably spreading his oats when he was very young.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they, they, they actually lived in Georgia?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  They, they were both born in the Louisville [Georgia] area, the rural area out there where we lived, somewhere, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how, how did this make you feel?  Like--you, you were like with a lot of different people over--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Actually, I thought it was great.  I had a different environment and love from so many different people.  People were always happy to see me, and I didn't have to get bored.  One of the things I remember so well is as a little boy in Kingstree [South Carolina], I couldn't wait until school was out, because that's when I got to go to New York and I didn't have the demands and the pressures of my mother, you know, "Do this, do that, do this," you know, "and do it right," (laughter).  And my mother was a real taskmaster about doing things right, so it got to be a little tiring as a kid.  So I loved her dearly but, I mean, it was nice to get away.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have--
Speaker 2: And we used to go down--the kids who would go away and go north who had relatives north and would spend the summer in New York or someplace like that, we--I remember we used to go down to--we used to count the days before we--the train would leave--the scheduled day for us to depart.  And when we'd go downtown, the train used to--well actually, the town kinda sloped down two hills to a valley, and that's where the train went through, and we used to go down and put our ears on the rail and just listen for the train to come.  You could hear it, you know, from fifteen, twenty miles away.  You could just hear the--it was funny, it was like listening to a telephone call.  You could hear the sound of the train coming on the tracks.  And we used to go down and spend time--"Listen, listen, you gotta hear it.  When is it coming?  When is it coming?"  You know (laughter).  "Only four more days and we'll be on that train," and we used to watch it go by, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, man.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So people who--other kids from that area--
Speaker 2: Would go to visit relatives.
Speaker 1: --would, would go to.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure, sure.
Speaker 1: And so, you had people--would they--would you all stay in touch with each other in New York?
Speaker 2: Somewhat.  Not a lot, yeah.  I had different friends when I was in New York, because we all lived in different areas.  Some lived in the Bronx [New York, New York], some lived in Long Island [New York], some lived in Brooklyn [New York, New York].
Story_ID: 216780
Speaker 1: Was there a steady crew of kids that you knew when you got to New York [New York] every summer that you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in my block, same kids, would play with the same kids every summer.  I mean, they--you know, they were always excited to see me come back.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Some of them beat me up for my money, and some were nice to see, and some weren't (laughter).  You know, it was--it was a kinda rough neighborhood, but you make friends with the right kids, you always had a protector, you know.  When you walked, you're always walking with your group.  They weren't gangs, but you weren't stupid, you know.  You, you--when you went by yourself, you were always with a couple of guys, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Even as children, you knew that.
Story_ID: 216781
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any Harlem [New York, New York] memories you can share with us that, you know--
Speaker 2: Not a lot because, you see, I left early and I went back in summers, and so there are summer memories, not a--not a lot because I didn't really--after that, I didn't really live there except during the summer and for, you know, a month here and six weeks or eight weeks at the longest.  And then I'd go back for--when I was in college, I'd go back for holidays because I went to college [Boston University] in Boston [Massachusetts], so that was my natural place to go for Thanksgiving and Christmas and things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I don't have a lot of distinct memories about New York other than going to plays with my grandmother and things like that.  You know, the first--the first radio show I ever went to, my godmother, Henny [ph.], took me to see Arthur Godfrey, who was probably the most famous man on radio--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and most famous anything in communications in those--he was--
Speaker 1: That's right and people don't--you don't hear that much--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --about him--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --anymore.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: I, I don't think they've done a retrospective--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --on him at all.
Speaker 2: No.  They used to do some--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But I think you're right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --television stuff on him.
Speaker 1: --Arthur Godfrey was the biggest--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the biggest name you could find in entertainment.
Speaker 1: "How are ya?  How are ya?  How are ya?"
Speaker 2: Oh, that's right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And he'd had a little ukulele and he'd play those little songs, and everybody loved him.  I just thought I died and gone to heaven when my godmother had a seat--we were sitting in the second row, you know, at the studio, listening to the show.
Speaker 1: He must've had like two or three shows on didn't he?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He had a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He had a variety show ['Arthur Godfrey and His Friends'], a talent scout show ['Arthur Godfrey's Talent Scouts'].
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I think you're right, yeah.
Speaker 1: And this is on television.  I never--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --heard him on the radio--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but I think the--
Speaker 2: Well, the radio--this was before--well, television was coming but it wasn't big then and I don't think--and then he, he went on television later.  Yeah, like Ed Sullivan and all the rest of those guys, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I had the feeling when I was a kid that his show was simulcast on radio and television at the same time when he had the morning--
Speaker 2: Do you think they--
Speaker 1: --television show.
Speaker 2: --knew how to do that in those days?
Speaker 1: They could--they--
Speaker 2: Think they had the technology for it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  I think they--
Speaker 2: They may have.
Speaker 1: I think they could.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's possible.
Speaker 1: So you went down to the show actually and saw--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Actually went to the broadcast, yeah.  I think it was Radio City [Music Hall, New York, New York] in those days somewhere, somewhere in one of the studios there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now in those days in New York, did they treat black folks--when you--could you sit anywhere you wanted?
Speaker 2: You know, as a child you don't--
Speaker 1: You just don't--
Speaker 2: --you don't--you, you weren't conscious of that kind of thing.  But in New York, essentially you could go to any theater, sit anywhere in public places.  I'm sure there were some incidents in certain places and things.  Well, I do--I know distinctly that, yeah, it was well known that, was it Two Shores Supper Club [ph.], was a very famous place for all the stars and very famous people, politicians hung out.  No blacks could ever go there.  I mean, that-- those were the kinds of things you knew.  So there were clubs and certain restaurants probably you couldn't go to, you know.  But most places I think were pretty open, theaters, public entertainment, that kind of thing, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You didn't sense as a child any kind of discrimination.  I'm not sure I recognized any form of discrimination until I lived in South Carolina and got older.
Story_ID: 216782
Speaker 1: So back in South Carolina, you went to Lockhart School [Louisville, Georgia] named after your grandfather?
Speaker 2: In Georgia.
Speaker 1: In Georgia, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Louisville [Georgia].  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And in South Carolina, I went to Tomlinson High School [Kingstree, South Carolina], which was a one school fits all, you know, first grade through the twelth grade.  But when I got there, it was the third grade and I had a number of teachers there and--but I left there--well, I guess that's where my acting career started, yeah.  I got in a play when I was a young kid.  They had a play called 'The Little Minister' by James M. Barrie [J.M. Barrie].  And I don't know if you're familiar with it or not; it's one of those old plays and, and they needed a diminutive Scottish kid, and they had to go down to the lower grades because it had to be--the guy had to be small.  He couldn't be big like somebody in the junior and senior class, who usually occupied the acting roles in most of the plays.  So I--the guy called me and I went out for the part.  And I must've been in the eighth grade or something like that, and I was on stage the whole play.  But I remembered the whole--all the lines.  I don't know how I did that.
Speaker 1: What was it about now?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: You--
Speaker 2: Well, it was about a Scottish minister who was a diminutive guy who was called to this rural parish, and all of the parishioners were very suspicious of him because he came from London [England] and had all these proper ways and, of course, they were country people.  And I remember the central part of it was that this gypsy was there, and she kept coming by to visit him at his--at the parish house.  And, of course, he fell in love with her and that became a scandal (laughter).  And that's what the play was about and how the--they were trying to get him to resign or leave or stop fooling around with the gypsy.  And, of course, his job was to tell them that I am not fooling around, but I'm ministering to her (laughter).  Yeah, so that--that's--that was the gist of the play.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--all right.  So 'The Little Minister,' right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: By James M. Barrie.  I never forgot that.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the lines now?  I mean do you still--
Speaker 2: No, I'm afraid not.  But I--some scrapbook I've seen not too long ago, my mother [Margaret Blakely] has the book in it; I've gotta find it.  My mother used to avidly save all of my stuff, you know, and so after the years later when I went on to college [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], she would organize scrapbooks and put things in it, and I found them in different places.  I don't know exactly where it is at the moment, but I could find it.
Story_ID: 216783
Speaker 1: So were you considered an advanced child when you were coming along?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I just think that--my mother [Margaret Blakely] would--my mother used to put on plays--I mean, used to act in plays that the same instructor, the English instructor at Tomlinson High, used to put on every year.  And actually, the plays were the central most important thing for blacks in the entire county.  He'd put them on for a whole week, and there'd be a show on Monday night, Tuesday night, Wednesday night, Thursday night, and Friday, and people would come from miles around to sit in the auditorium and watch these plays, because it was the only culture we had as blacks.
Speaker 1: Were they musical plays or just, just--
Speaker 2: Drama.
Speaker 1: --drama?
Speaker 2: Mostly drama, yeah.  And my mother used to act in a number of those plays, so naturally, she would--she was highly excited when, when I tried out for the role and--
Speaker 1: Now that's interesting, because she was so industrious and so busy--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you would think--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --she wouldn't have time, but she--
Speaker 2: Well, she did.  She made time for things she wanted to do.  And she used to produce beauty shows.  She used to have our relatives come down, and she'd scout for pretty girls in the county, and she'd put on a major production for about two or three nights.  And, of course, this was in her self-interest because she was running a beauty shop.  And she would--and she loved to dress.  She had hats galore and loved hats, and so she'd have them do a parade across the stage in all kinds of dresses and outfits and hats and things, and that was a highlight of Williamsburg County [South Carolina] every year.  And my--she'd have my cousin, Mazeek [ph.] from New York [New York] who ran a studio in the Bronx [New York, New York] called Brownie Studio [ph.], and he was the photographer, professional photographer, and he'd come down to take the pictures, and they were excellent, frankly.  Most of those pictures in there of me and her and--were taken by him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So those were the activities that, that really dominated the, the lifestyle.  In a rural area, there wasn't a lot.  There was a baseball team, minor league traveling baseball team that would come through town and-occasionally, and I can't tell you what other--see, we didn't--we weren't exposed to what the whites were doing.  We didn't know what other--any other cultural events, we couldn't go to, because there was no integration.  You couldn't sit in the same theater.  And we had one movie theater in town, I remember, and blacks sat in the balcony, of course, and so if it was a--you sold--if it was a sellout movie, then obviously not a lot of blacks got to see it, because it was a small balcony, you know (laughter), and you didn't mix.  The only difference was if you were an African or a foreign black, you could sit on the--on the ground floor in--you know, in the theater.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  What, what do you make of that?
Speaker 2: Well, because the argument was that you couldn't discriminate against a foreign citizen, because he had diplomatic rights and was protected by his country and his embassy, so that's the one thing.  And isn't that odd?  In the South, they would honor that.  Their idea being, "Well, you're not one of us, you don't live here, so we don't have to--we're not gonna--" You know, you were gonna be gone, you know, quickly.  You're not gonna be around very long.
Speaker 1: So you won't get used to it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Story_ID: 216784
Speaker 1: Let's go back to school.  Now you--
Speaker 2: Sure.  And then I--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I was going to Camp Atwater [North Brookfield, Massachusetts] and one of the things that striving black families wanted was, the kids went to Atwater, they learned about [Alice Freeman] Palmer Memorial [Institute].  And Palmer Memorial was a black preparatory school in Sedalia, North Carolina, and it was the premier black school.  There were several others, many of them were going out of existence, and so is Palmer now, but there was a school in Denmark [South Carolina] called Voorhees [College] in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think Voorhees is still there.
Speaker 2: Is it?  I think that may still be there.
Speaker 1: It's still there, yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't know if it's a preparatory school or not, but it's--I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know its status.  It's a college, supposedly now, yeah.
Speaker 2: Is it a college now?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But I think it's a vocational college, though.
Speaker 1: It's the Episcopal Church runs it.
Speaker 2: The Episcopal Church runs it?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then there was a school, Piney Woods [Country Life School], but that's down in [Piney Woods] Mississippi, and it's still running, but that's not a preparatory school, that's a school for poor kids and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, and they--they're taken care of there and does a great, great job.  That school became famous because of a show called 'This Is Your Life' [Ralph Edwards] and the man, something [Laurence C.] Jones, who founded it, was chosen--
Speaker 1: Oh, Piney Woods?  Is that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, was chosen to go on there and that made the school instantly famous.  People started sending it money, and he got over big.
Speaker 1: Oprah [Winfrey] went to Piney Woods for a minute, I know.  That's what they say.
Speaker 2: Oprah?
Speaker 1: I believe--I believe so.
Speaker 2: To Piney Woods?
Speaker 1: I believe so, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, she grew up in Tennessee.  I don't know if she--she may have.
Speaker 1: I heard that anyway.  I heard that she--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She may very well have, I don't know.
Speaker 1: My mother-in-law went to Piney Woods.
Speaker 2: Because she was--remember she was a cheerleader.  That was the first time they realized that she was--had talent or could act in a sense, because she took over.  I think she was an outstanding cheerleader or something and then she was--she won the state cheerleading contest or the state beauty contest or something, and she was also very glib so they--oh, that's right.  She was in a class for communications and she did a stint as if she was doing radio, you know, student radio, and people were impressed with her, and that's how she moved on from one step to the next that led--from her childhood.  That's a really interesting story, yeah.
Speaker 1: I have to check into that.  I heard--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --she went to Piney Woods--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She--it may have been.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: She was born in Kosciusko, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Somehow I thought it was Tennessee.  Maybe it was--
Speaker 1: It's not that far--
Speaker 2: Maybe it was Mississippi--
Speaker 1: --from Tennessee, but it's not--
Speaker 2: --just across the border (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --probably.  Yeah, okay.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Up near Corinth [Mississippi], near the top--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of Mississippi, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, one thing led to another, parents would talk, and, you know, one of my cousins whose daughter was going to Palmer insisted.  She was one of my mother's bridge club members, and so that that's how I got to go to Palmer, and then--so I left Kingstree in 1950 to go to Palmer.  And basically I just visited Kingstree in summers then, but most of the summers weren't long because I would be spending my time going to New York [New York] then to work in the summertime, get a job working in Atlantic City [New Jersey] or Asbury Park [New Jersey] waiting tables, bussing tables, that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay, those are the resort areas, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  But that's what we all did in the summertime.  Had to make some money now.  You remember I'm getting older now.  I'm thirteen, fourteen years old.
Story_ID: 216785
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a kid?  What kind of a kid were you coming along?  What did you like to do, and--
Speaker 2: Well, I liked to--I liked sports.  I loved sports, but I was never any good at it, so I was always on the bench, whatever it was.  But I played everything I could and desperately waited for coach to say, "Okay, Jimmy, get in there," but that didn't happen too often (laughter), but I got my letters, I got my pictures (laughter) with the teams, and that was my interest, too.  I wanted to--well, you wanted to be one of the boys.  You know, you didn't wanna be known as just--and, you know, in those days, kids kinda, you know, they looked at you and you were always raising your hand, and you always had the answer, and you were the only kid in the class getting As and 100 [percent], and most of the kids were going, "Get outta here," you know.  "Come on, can't you shut up sometimes?  Keep your hand down?"  you know, because they didn't have their homework done or just weren't working hard at it or whatever.  And--but my mother [Margaret Blakely] was a driving force in my life, and I knew--always knew I wanted to succeed.  I knew one thing, I didn't wanna live in Kingstree [South Carolina] all my life, and I wanted to succeed in something and go to college, and so I did fairly well and always had good grades.
Story_ID: 216786
Speaker 1: Now, which place did you like the most coming up?  Kingstree [South Carolina] or New York City [New York]?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know that I liked any one of them--well, I certainly didn't fall in love with Kingstree.  I mean, there's really nothing to do in Kingstree except make up stuff to do, and it's really a primarily rural area.  Kingstree is one of the poorest town--was in those days one of the poorest towns in the poorest county in one of the poorest states in the Union.  And I think the only state that beat South Carolina in those days was Iowa, was considered to be a very poor state in those days.  But South Carolina was poor, dirt poor, and Williamsburg County was one of the poorest, and it produced primarily cotton and tobacco, and it was hard work.  I mean, I worked in cropping tobacco.  We had a farm, and I used to go out there and have to work cropping tobacco and that's--people say, you know--I don't know what you know about cropping tobacco is.  It's to get on the sled who's going down the rows, and you're pulling the stalks down.  And tobacco is tarry and syrupy, and it sticks and stinks, and when it's hot, it's irritating, and it was--it's an awful job, so I knew exactly why my father [Edgar Lockhart] ran away from home (laughter), you know, he said, "I don't wanna do this," (laughter).  And then at the end of the day, somebody has to go and work in the barns, and the barns are heated, they're fired up and--but the barns are made out of like a log cabin with no windows, and somebody has to go up, and usually they got the kids, because you had to climb these beams, logs that were sticking out to go up and take the tobacco which had been threaded onto a rod, which was just a board of wood, maybe an inch by an inch by an inch.  And you--they threaded the tobacco leaves to hang, the women did that, and they hung and then you had to go in there in the heat and take them all the way up to the top of the barn and hang them until it was full, then the next row, and the next row, and the next row.  That's a dirty, hot, stinking job, and guess who had to do it?  We did.  So you were encouraged right away to say, "Look, there's gotta be a better way," (laughter).  So it wasn't easy--it wasn't difficult to say, "I need to find something better to do, so I'm gonna study so I can get outta here," and do this.  And the only--I mean, the only thing as a young black kid that you saw visible as an opportunity in those days if you lived in places like Kingstree was to be an undertaker, a minister or a school teacher, and fortunately, we had a doctor in Kingstree.  And so you begin to aspire obviously by looking at the examples and you say well, maybe I can be one of those, but I'm definitely gonna try.
Story_ID: 216787
Speaker 1: So were there any teachers or adults when you were--other than your mother [Margaret Blakely]--around when you were in grade school [Tomlinson High School, Kingstree, South Carolina] that inspired you, or?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  There was Fannie Bacote [ph.] who was always--but, you know, there, there were teachers who were partial to students.  I mean, you--teachers who--and my mother [Margaret Blakely] did this, too.  I mean, I saw it so often because we actually kept kids where she--if she thought a student--she ran a school.  She was principal of the school in the country, and if she saw promising kids, she knew they weren't gonna go very far in the country, because they were agricultural kids, and the time in school would be very limited, and as soon as the crops had to go in, parents pulled them out of school, so they didn't get a complete education.  And she used to bring kids home, and I grew up with a lot of kids just staying at our house, and they were like foster kids.  You know, she kept them and trained them, and helped them get--go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, I had teachers, a number of teachers, Ruby Murray [ph.] who is still alive, God bless her soul, she lives in Alexandria, great inspiration.  She's an artist, and she was always very inspiring and always, "Jimmy do this, Jimmy do that," and giving me more challenges than they would give other students, because she knew I could do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So the problem with knowing, thinking you're smarter is that people, if they think you're smarter, they make you work harder (laughter), because they give you tougher work and more of it.  But that worked to my benefit.  I didn't know that then, but it certainly helped.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's always a--
Speaker 2: But I read a lot; my mother insisted on reading.  I liked reading.  She used to belong to a readers of the month club, and we got books all the time, and so I'd read adult books, frankly, just to read them, you know, just--and she'd always ask me about the stories.  And so, I learned how to read, and I enjoyed reading.
Story_ID: 216788
Speaker 1: Tell me about [Alice Freeman] Palmer [Memorial] Institute [Sedalia, North Carolina].  Now you go there, and how did you do at Palmer Institute?
Speaker 2: Well, Palmer was a little rough at the beginning, because Palmer was considered an elitist school, and all the kids there came from--not all, but the overwhelming majority--came from very well-to-do families, doctors' families and--up north and some in the South, undertakers' kids, lawyers' kids, and, and they all had fine clothes and, and they didn't have to work.  Well, when I went to Palmer, they didn't have enough money to send--to pay the whole tuition, so I had to work.  I was there on a work scholarship, so most of my time, free time, was spent cleaning the office buildings, classrooms, and working in the fields at the--where we had a--we grew vegetables for the school.  So I didn't have a lot of free time, and I had to work and do that and then study, but I still tried out for all the sports, got on the teams.  It wasn't difficult because we had 150 girls and only 47 boys, so it was--the odds were with me since we had--the grades ran from what we called sub-sub freshman, and I guess that was like the eighth grade--I mean, less than that.  Wouldn't it have been--
Speaker 1: Seventh, I think.
Speaker 2: Sub-sub freshman would be seventh grade, and so we--so you only had a handful of kids who would compete for these.  We barely had enough kids to have two--a replacement for every position on a football team, you know what I mean (laughter) (looks left)?
Story_ID: 216789
Speaker 1: So what did you play?  What kind of sports did you play?
Speaker 2: Well, I played football, and I was very disappointed because he made me a tackle, and naturally all boys wanna be a running back or receiver (laughter) so--
Speaker 1: And were you bigger for your size in those days?
Speaker 2: No, I only weighed 147 pounds, but remember we only had maybe eighteen or twenty guys who were any--who could play football or were eligible to play football, and secondly, who--we only had a handful of guys who were big enough to be, you know, a running back or a center, so we played wherever we need--he needed us.  I remember distinctly, one time I got in a game.  We were in Martinsville, Virginia, and when he called my name, I was so happy.  And I went in there--and Martinsville is mountainous and rugged, and the football field was on the side of a hill, and the stands were on one side, but there was nothing on the other side but gravel and down the hill.  And he said, "[HistoryMaker James B.] Lockhart, you're gonna play in the back."  So then I'm trying to think of all the plays, you know, when I'm carrying the ball, and I'd never done this.  I'd done it in practice a few times, but I had been taught how to play tackle, so--when guys were injured, so I had to fill in.  So I got the ball, and it's a wide out to the right around to where there's no seating and the gravel is, and this guy gave me a tackle, my feet go up, the next thing I know, I'm rolling and tumbling down the side of the hill.  I released the ball.  I couldn't get up.  The gravel was coming down.  I was all scratched up and whatever because we had different kind of helmets in those days, not like today, and I'm all bruised.  And when I get back, when I climb up the hill, they're playing.  Nobody came to see me, nobody came to find me.  They had to play.  They were playing (laughter).  I said, "Isn't this is something?"  Then, I had to walk all the way around the field to get back--of course, I couldn't complain because I wanted to play (laughter).  I never forgot that.
Speaker 1: You were knocked completely out on a play--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and they--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they just send somebody else in and--
Speaker 2: Well we used to--the, the schools in Greensboro [North, Carolina], which is near where we were.  We went to Sedalia, is ten miles in the country outside of Greensboro between Burlington and Greensboro, North Carolina, and the schools in-[James B.] Dudley High [School, Greensboro, North Carolina] and all those schools in Greensboro, they used to love to have us on their schedule, because we couldn't play, and they would--oh, the score would be like 47 to nothing.  And even in basketball, you know, it'd be 49 to 10, and they--(laughter).  You know, but we could get off campus, we could go and do things, and the other thing, the most important thing about playing sports, is that we could get there early, and we could talk to the girls, because on campus we couldn't talk to the girls except on weekends.  So, you know, we--you played sports because you got off campus as much as possible.  So, you know (laughter), it was a big deal.  But--no, [Alice Freeman] Palmer [Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina] was great.
Story_ID: 216790
Speaker 1: [Alice Freeman] Palmer [Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina] was founded by a woman named Charlotte Hawkins Brown.  She was one of those three women called the Three Bs, Mary McLeod Bethune was one, Nannie [Helen] Burroughs was the second, and Charlotte Hawkins Brown was the third.  And these were women who founded schools for kids and worked hard at raising the money and keeping them [the schools] alive, and they were great orators and great educators.  And Charlotte Hawkins Brown when I went there was, of course, very, very old and almost senile, but--and one of the great jobs that you aspired to when you went to Palmer was to be the bell ringer, the guy who got people up in the morning and rang the bell for dining hall and chapel school, and I aspired to that job because you had the freedom to run the campus, which meant that the bell tower, when you rang the bell, was on the girls' side of the grounds and you, you had freedom to go over there.  So the bell tower was kind of a big tower, and there was an opening at the bottom, was kinda closed in, so you step inside, so you had kind of your girlfriend meet you there, and you could smooch.  So I, I got that job for two years in a row, and I thought it was great (laughter).
Speaker 2: Took advantage of it, huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Then the other thing you want to do is be a waiter in the dining hall because you could eat as much as you want (laughter), you know, and boys can never get enough to eat (laughter).  But Palmer--Charlotte Hawkins Brown was a great woman.  She--her theory was that she wanted--she grew up in North Carolina, but she went to school in New England, and she wanted to emulate the preparatory schools of New England and prepare kids to go to the best schools in New England, so that was her goal.  So she wrote out this book called the best--'The Proper Thing To Do, To Say, and To Wear' [sic. 'The Correct Thing To Do, To Say, and To Wear'], and it seems hilarious when you read it now, but it's basically a book on etiquette, but it's finite and it deals with little things about hygiene and everything else that we never heard of or read before, and if you read the book, you'd probably be in stitches laughing about it, but it was very important stuff in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: And that's what she drilled into all the kids.  And she was, I said, was losing a little bit so there was somebody else who was running the institution, but she would wake up in her home and she'd get dressed, a woman would help her get dressed, and she'd have her prepared and have her meal, then she'd come over, find me, and, "[HistoryMaker James B.] Lockhart, ring the bell," for chapel.  I'd ring the bell, and it would just--anytime, just disrupt the entire school, and all the teachers could do nothing about it because she was the institution.
Story_ID: 220660
Speaker 1: You were telling us about Charlotte Hawkins Brown and that--and ringing the bell and--
Speaker 2: Yes.  And then we'd call chapel, and it'd be any time of day, and--whenever she thought about it, and she would stand on the stage and talk about anything that she wanted to talk about.  And it's usually about your conduct, morality, ethics, being good boys, good girls, how to conduct yourself, and then she'd go off and recite a poem or something and bring it for--but the most dramatic thing was, which is why I think most of the kids who went to [Alice Freeman] Palmer [Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina] are self--totally independent and self-sufficient is that she would be looking over here and she would call your name, and you would have to stand up and she'd say, "Now, tell me what you think about--" this or that or the other, or, "can you recite--" something.  And you'd have to stand there, shake like crazy, unless you were self-assured and knew you--knew what she wanted (laughter) you know, and you'd stand up, and you'd have to speak extemporaneously.  And we learned that over and over again because she--you never knew when she was gonna call on--she called on everybody, not at the same time obviously in the same setting, but you never knew when, because you had chapel every day, maybe twice a day, and then she'd do that sometimes in the dining hall at dinner.  And then--and it was good, but then she got out of control and ultimately had to be restrained, you know.  They had to take her away from the campus and--because she was almost, you know, senile, at some point.  But she was very--when she was on, she was good, and you could tell she was a great speaker.  But she used to have [Dr.] Mordecai Johnson there fairly regularly--
Story_ID: 220661
Speaker 1: Few years ago, we were on an island and Ruth [Douglas Lockhart] and I were driving up to the Red Barn [Granary Gallery, West Tisbury, Massachusetts], which is a gallery up near where you guys are living, and so we stopped at the Red Barn and we went in, and we didn't know it at the time, but there was an art display by Lois Mailou Jones, and she was there, and it was at the end of the day, and I was admiring her paintings, and I'd always heard of her, and I always wanted to see her paintings, and so we were just standing and admiring.  She came over up behind us without knowing and she said, "Hi there," and introduced herself and said, "these are my paintings; you like them?" and so forth. I said, "I love them," and she said, "well, are you gonna buy anything?"  And I said, "Well, I hadn't thought about that," (laughter) because they were very expensive, because she was very famous.  And she said, "Hmm, you look like a nice couple," she says, "what are you doing for the next hour?"  And I said, "Well, what do you got in mind?"  She says, "I'm wrapping up here; you can save a lot of money by buying them from me rather than from the gallery," (laughter).  So I said, "Sure."  She says, "Will you follow me home?"  I said, "Sure."  So she got in a car, and we went to her house, and there were paintings everywhere.  And I admired a couple three, and she said, "You like those?"  I said, "I love them," and she said, "I want you to have those."  I should say in the interim before she gave them to me, we were sitting there talking, and she had given me some tea, my wife and I, and she said, "Where'd you go to school?"  And I said, "[Alice Freeman] Palmer Memorial [Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina]."  And she said, "Palmer Memorial?" she said, "that's where I started."  And she said, "I was the art instructor in 1933, and [Dr.] Mordecai Johnson used to visit, and he was doing his tour of the campus, you know, how the--Dr. [Charlotte Hawkins] Brown would take them around, introduce the teachers and the--see the classes, and he saw my art, and he literally stole me away from Palmer and offered me a job as a art instructor at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and that's how I went--" and she--as you know, her whole life was spent at Howard.  I mean, she did many leaves to go off to the Caribbean and paint for a year or two and--but she gave me those.  I ultimately paid her for them, not nearly what they were worth, but they're my treasures.  We have three wonderful paintings from her.
Story_ID: 220662
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So [Alice Freeman] Palmer [Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina] has a great history.  And one of the other things that you will probably be interested in is a lot of famous kids went there, like Nellie Lutcher was famous.  She created the song 'Pig Latin,' and it was a very famous song, and her son went there, and so she would come on her vacations.  Remember, again, blacks didn't have a lot of places they could go for vacation, so they went to these unique institutions, like where she was invited, because her son was there.  So she would spend her vacation on campus for a week or two.  Nat King Cole would spend his vacations very often, every year, at Palmer.  And the, the thing we lived for was when he came to the dining hall at night, and he would play and sing, and we heard this--I mean, didn't have to pay a dime for it.  We were there, and he'd just sing and play.  And Nat, you could tell how much she [founder, Charlotte Hawkins Brown] admired him, because he was married to her niece [Maria Hawkins], could get away with anything.  You couldn't smoke anywhere within ten miles of that campus.  Nat smoked, you know, he was a chain smoker.  He was the only person that we've ever seen smoke in the dining room and smoked while he played (laughter).  But she loved Nat Cole.  He came every year.  We looked forward to that.  Illinois Jacquet, who just died, had a nephew who went to Palmer, and he used to come down and, and sometimes his group would come through on engagements traveling through the South, and they would just jam; it was great.  So we had a lot of exposure to that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 220663
Speaker 1: What were you interested in, in high school [Alice Freeman Palmer Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Well--I had--
Speaker 1: Subject--
Speaker 2: I always--I wanted to be first--when I went to a funeral, I thought it'd be a great idea to be an undertaker.  I said this is fun, you know.  You have nice shiny cars and, you know, (laughter) a clean suit, dressed up and all that stuff, so I used to pretend I was an undertaker.  And then I--I don't know, kids go through everything.  And then I had a cousin who tried--when he came back from the war [World War II, WWII] and he, too, worked on his dad's farm, and it was a disaster.  It was Norbill Bennett [ph.]; his father was just a tyrant and did some really terrible things to him, essentially cheated him, so Bill decided, I gotta find a way out of this.  So he decided to study for law.  And he and two other guys, two of his old buddies, decided to apply to University of South Carolina law school [University of South Carolina School of Law, Columbia, South Carolina].  Well, that was not acceptable.  And, of course, they just simply said no.  Well, then they sued, of course.  They got [Harold R.] Boulware in Columbia [South Carolina] who was a--one of the few black lawyers in, in the state.  There were only a handful who existed in those days.  And they sued, so the state decided to set up at law school at South Carolina State College [sic. South Carolina State University School of Law, Orangeburg, South Carolina] for three students, and I think maybe they had three or four faculty at that time.  But, Bill went to school there for three years; they all passed the bar.  And I used to--he had a night club and, of course, on the weekends he'd come home, and he'd have the law books, and he would be serving at the bar and have all these beer cases, so as a little boy, I used to lie under the bar, and he'd say, "Read those cases to me," and I'd read them.  Then, I'd ask him questions, and while he's serving he would answer, you know, and we'd have this--so I kind of fell in love with the law.  But when I knew I was really gonna become a lawyer was when I decided I wanted to be an ambassador.  Ralph Bunche had become very famous for settling, for the millionth time, the Middle Eastern crisis, which still isn't settled now.  He was on the front of Life, Time, everything.  I mean, he was the biggest man in the world in those days.  He was very, very famous, and so I admired that, and I said, "That would really be nice.  I could be a diplomat."  And my dad [Edgar Lockhart] said to me one summer, he says, "Well, now, you know how you get to be a diplomat, don't ya?"  And I said, "No, how do ya?"  He says, "Well, first of all, you got to have a lot of money, because you got to pay, pay for that job.  You got to contribute to the party."  And so I said, "Well, I need a job that's gonna pay me a lot of money," and I thought being a lawyer would help do that, and so I--that led me to the law.  And then I watched Bill practice, and I was, you know, inspired by all that, so I went on to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] and went to law school [Boston University School of Law, Boston Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 220664
Speaker 1: Undergraduate school, though, first was at--
Speaker 2: At BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], too.  I went to--
Speaker 1: BU, okay.
Speaker 2: --BU business school undergrad [Boston University School of Management; Boston University Questrom School of Business, Boston, Massachusetts].  They had an undergraduate business school, and I went there.  And at the time I went there, Howard--Dean Howard Thurman was the dean of the [Marsh] Chapel [Boston, Massachusetts] and also a professor of theology at the theological school [Boston University School of Theology, Boston, Massachusetts], and the theology school was extremely famous for--a lot of people used to come because not only was he there, and he was a master theologian, a great speaker, but there--he had a great student there, too.  His name was [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] who was getting his doctorate at the time; he was working on his doctorate.  So the school just was flooded with applications, naturally, and it was very famous.  And--but Howard Thurman was such a wonderful speaker.  His words would be that far apart but you would hang on them.  He had this deep, baritone voice, very melodious, but his thought process was so clear and so understanding.  And you felt it, you know, you just felt what he was saying to the point that had to put up loud speakers outside the chapel, and you'd go--if you weren't there first, you had to sit outside and people would stand in the cold.  We stood outside very many Sunday mornings just to hear him speak.  It was one of the most popular events on BU's campus, actually, when he was there.  And so I went there and went to undergrad [undergraduate] school, was anxious to get out fast; I don't know why I was so anxious, so I went summers and did my--they had a program where if you finished three years of undergrad, you could apply to law school [Boston University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts], and if you were admitted to law school, you didn't have to do your fourth year, unless you failed law school the first year, then you'd have to go back and complete your fourth year.  So I took the risk, and my parents [Margaret Blakely and Edgar Lockhart] were very upset; they thought that was a big risk to take and so--I didn't.  I was courageously ignorant I guess or vice versa, but I wanted to do it, so I got admitted to law school and went to law school, and succeeded in the first year, so I didn't go--have to go back and got my degree from undergrad school and finished in '59 [1959].  And my entering class consisted of Barbara Jordan and Maynard Jackson, and there were actually five of us, five blacks in this law school class of a hundred and--I guess it was three hundred of us.  Was it three hundred?  Yeah, three hundred of us in the first year law school class.  And so I had an exciting time.  We were on Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts] at that time, and old--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What, were they like?  What was--what was Maynard Jackson like?  And what was Barbara Jordan like in those days?
Speaker 2: Maynard was even as--now, Maynard was premature--prematurely admitted to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] because he was very smart and had--he got into Morehouse when he was sixteen years old, and he came out early, so he was chronologically not where you should be.  Normally, you should have a little age on you when you go to law school or business school, because your experience in life is supposed to help you understand case law and pragmatic cases that you do in business school and law school.  And so Maynard was very precocious, knew he was smart, and carried himself that way.  So he was a nice guy, we all enjoyed Maynard, but, you know, you--sometimes you just say, "Shut up," (laughter) you know, "you just know too much for your own good."  But he was a great guy, a lot of fun.  I loved Maynard, because I'd suck up to him because [HistoryMaker] Mattiwilda Dobbs [Janzon], his aunt, was a famous opera singer, and when she sang in New York [New York], which was fairly often, I could get to go for nothing, because she would send the tickets for Maynard, send a car, and get to ride to New York, you know (laughter), and we'd go to the opera and see her sing, or her concert, rather.  And so we were good, good buddies always up until the day he died.
Speaker 1: Now, did Barbara Jordan speak the way she uses--did she speak the same way in those days?
Speaker 2: Barbara always spoke that way.  I think she developed that technique when she was teaching at Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas].  She was a professor, probably not a full professor, because she was still very young.  Well, I don't know, at Texas Southern, she could've been a full professor at that time.  And when she decided to go to law school, she had developed this speaking ability, you know, slowing down everything and being very dramatic about her--over-accenting words, but it all was beautiful, and she developed that, and it was very good.  And she used to do that in our study groups and we would say, "Okay, Barbara," (laughter).  You know--you know how we are when we get together.  "Okay, Barbara, it's just us," (laughter), you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Some people would signify a little bit and--
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  But she was very coy, "All right, this is the way--" and, you know she'd just go on and do it anyway.  And she was a good student, did very well and, of course, you know what her career is like after she left BU, so very dramatic.  It was unfortunate that her life was prematurely ended.  She had a--it wasn't leukemia.  I've forgotten what the disease was--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but it was--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --it was a--
Speaker 1: And she was wheelchair-bound (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Slow--
Speaker 1: --for a few years.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a slow killer, yeah.  But she was a terrific woman.  I used to see her regularly when she came to Chicago [Illinois] where I was living at the time, and we'd always go to lunch or dinner or something together and just chat, yeah.
Story_ID: 220665
Speaker 1: Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] was jumping then, I guess.
Speaker 2: BU was a exciting school.  Remember BU was originally built as a Methodist school and so it had some religious history, and out of that, it was one of the few schools that at the turn of the century used to accept black students fairly freely and openly from all over the country and from Africa, so it had that history.  As a matter of fact, this one doctor we had in Kingstree [South Carolina] that I mentioned when I was a child was a islander, and I don't know which island, may have been Jamaica or whatever, short, very stocky, but I remember him--had this very clipping language, very--so I don't know whether it was Jamaica or Barbados--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Trinidad (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) where he was from, but--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I remembered was--as I got older, when I looked at his degree, it said Boston University medical school [Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts].  Now, he had to have graduated from there probably in 1910 or '20 [1920] or somewhere early--in those early years because he was a pretty old guy when I knew him as a child, and that was not uncommon for BU.  And so quite--in my later life, I realized that every time I meet somebody, like  Lou Sullivan [HistoryMaker Dr. Louis Sullivan] went to BU medical school, a whole host of wonderful doctors, famous doctors all through the South today went to BU medical college.  As a matter of fact, many of them own homes here because when they went to BU, used to come down as we all did to the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts], and you fell in love with it, so you wanted to have a house here.  And so many of them when they got their first shekels, they, they would buy a shack or something and started out, and then they--you know, on and on.  Yeah, but you're right.  BU was a great haven.  And Northeastern [University, Boston, Massachusetts] was the other great school for blacks because it's a vocational school.  You go to school for six months, you work for six months, so you could do both, and it was a great place for blacks to go to engineering school.
Story_ID: 220666
Speaker 1: Were there any instructors that stand out at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] that you--
Speaker 2: No.  I--well, I remember their names, but the one thing I learned later in life is that I wasn't aware of when I was in college and in law school [Boston University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts] which is very common in today's colleges, every student knows you have access to a counselor for guidance.  And I didn't know that when I was in school and nobody ever told me that, nobody ever--no professors ever said, "Come and see me," or, "I'm your counselor," or, "you're assigned to me," or whatever.  And I found that that was common with the white kids, and they were getting guidance and help when we weren't, and I always resented that when I--when I thought about it, so I had a little chip on my shoulder for a long time.  I got over it, but--
Speaker 1: So people who were supposed to look--to look out for you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as part of their job (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --didn't do it.
Speaker 2: They weren't extending themselves to help like they were others, so, you know, that, that left a bad taste in my mouth for a while, but I got over it and became president of the BU alumni club [Boston University Alumni Association] of Chicago [Illinois] (laughter).  And then I'm on the board of the Boston University law school now so, you see, I've gotten over it a little bit (laughter), and I give them annual contributions.  So, it's a great school.  It really is a good school.  And even though they didn't give me that little help, I guess I probably didn't need it.  I don't know that I didn't need it, because I might've been another Osama Baraka [ph.], who knows.  I might've--that little step might've helped me to get to law review, you know.  And--but I didn't have any guidance about selection of courses.  See, when you go to law school, you have a selection of courses like you do in undergrad college, and you have to pick.  You have to decide, well where-- what area of the law do I want to specialize in? And I had no clue what I wanted to do, I just didn't.  Even though I had gone to business college [Boston University School of Management; Boston University Questrom School of Business, Boston, Massachusetts], I just wasn't sure what I wanted to do or had--I needed some guidance there and I didn't have anybody to give it to me--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and certainly the faculty didn't, so I felt that that was a big failing.
Speaker 1: Now what aspect of the law did you focus on in school?
Speaker 2: In school?  Just general courses, whatever they generally offered down the middle.  You know, I took the usual things like torts and contracts, and real estate, and extensions of that, trusts and wills, and probate, and all the other things that went with it, testamentary courses, equity courses.  But those were not the things that I later in life needed.  Oh, I needed them, but the things I specialized in, I had to learn later after I got out of law school, but I could've learned that in law school, and I might've focused my career earlier and better and been off and maybe had been shooting off a lot faster.
Story_ID: 220667
Speaker 1: You were saying before we started, you were recruited right out of law school [Boston University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts] by the City of Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous) or?
Speaker 2: Well, no--not, no, I was drafted by the [U.S.] military.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was a bizarre story, because I was--my registration, having been born in New York [New York] was in New York City, and I was persuaded by my mother [Margaret Blakeley] to transfer my registration to Kingstree, South Carolina, and that was because my Uncle Bonner [ph.] Blakely was on the draft board.  My Uncle Bonner was as white as (points) he is, and so he was the only black who could have a shop downtown.  He lived downtown and he cut--you know, the shops in those days, blacks cut white hair and--but you couldn't cut blacks.  They couldn't come to the shop, so only white people came to the shop; it's a white shop.  But Uncle Bonner was looking out for me and so forth, and so my mother said, "Uncle Bonner's on the selective service board, so if we want to be sure you don't get drafted, why don't you transfer your registration to Kingstree?" so I did.  The problem with that was that after my first year of law school, Uncle Bonner--didn't tell anybody, didn't ask me, didn't ask my mother, could he die?  So, (laughter) he died, and as soon as he died, what happened?  My draft number for some reason went to the top of the list.  I got a notice that I was drafted and to report for duty.  So I had to go through all kinds of--my family went through all kinds of connections to try to--you know, with white people--to try to persuade them to give him an educational deferment, so I got that, and I got through law school.  So as soon as I got through law school, I got that notice again, so--but it was a couple of months, which allowed me to graduate, go to South Carolina, go to Florence [South Carolina], work for my cousin [Norbill "Bill" Bennett (ph.)].  I actually had taken the bar long before I got out of law school.  I took the bar the year before, and I passed it in South Carolina.  I just was nervous about that, but he said, "Ah, you can pass that bar.  You don't need to finish law school."  He says, "It's not that difficult."  And I went home one weekend, curled up in the bedroom, and he gave me the statutory books, I read the South Carolina law, and I took the bar Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, and flew back to Boston [Massachusetts] and went back to law school, and the next week I was ordered to fly back and get admitted to the bar (laughter).  And I said, "Oh, that's great, this is easy, I'm not going back."  My dad [Edgar Lockhart] said, "Like hell; you're going back to law school to get a degree.  We want you to have that--" (laughter) "--degree."  So anyway, I went and worked with Bill that summer, and then he just left me there.  He and Judy Mae [ph.] went off on a vacation.  He says, "I haven't had a vacation all my life, and I wanna do this," so I was holding down an office, not knowing what I was doing, learning it.  But it was great, because I'd go to court, I had to figure all this stuff out, I had to study it and learn the sheriff and learn how to do stuff, how to file things, and it was a fundamentally nice summer.  But then I got the draft notice, so I left town with a shingle.  I had opened an office across from his, and I left town owing the person who made the shingle, owing the stationary store; I never paid any of those people, but they just gave it to me on credit.  That's the way life was in those days.  They trusted me.  And, and I used to go back, you know, and years later, I'd be walking down the street, and one of the hardware guys where I got the air conditioner would say, "Well, when are you coming back, lawyer [HistoryMaker James B.] Lockhart?"  (Laughter).  He never asked me for the money; he just said, "When are you coming back?" and they all assumed I'd be back someday (laughter).  So I got drafted and went to Fort Jackson outside of Columbia [South Carolina] for my training, and I was just floored.  I mean, I just--I was a lawyer, and I was just devastated that I had to go through this basic training.  It was just grunt work, you know.  And I kept writing my parents and complaining, and my dad said, "Well, stop complaining to me; write the right person."  So I wrote a letter to Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] who was our congressman, and I said, "I need a commission, and I need to get outta here.  I can't--if I gotta do my duty, I'm not gonna do it as an E-1," and less than thirty days, I had my commission orders.  Well, I had the application sent by them, I put it in.  Then I finished basic training, and they ordered me to Chicago [Illinois].  Actually, I had--the guy said, "Where do you wanna go?"  And I said, "The Cote d'Azur [French Riviera]," and he said, "We don't have no Cote d'Azur--" (laughter), you know, "--station."  He said--he didn't know what it was.  He said, "Where is--" he hollered back for the other lieutenant and says, "What is--where is the Cote d'Azur?"  He said, "What's your other choice?"  I said--we had a family friend, George Lawrence [ph.], who was a very famous lawyer from Salters [South Caroline] who had gone to Chicago and become very famous and a successful lawyer, and I thought of George, and I said, "Chicago, Illinois."  So he wrote out the orders, and I went to Chicago.  And I got assigned to [U.S. Army North] Fifth Army [U.S. Army] Support Center as an E-1 and then I got my orders that I was appointed a first lieutenant in the JAG Corps [Judge Advocate General's Corps], so I went off to University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] and did my training, came back, and was assigned as attorney advisor of the commanding general, to a four-star general, so I was assigned to the JAG Corps at Fifth Army headquarters, and that was a great duty.  It's where my son [Mark Lockhart] was born.  We lived right there behind the army headquarters.  It had two towers called Twin Towers [Apartments] on 50th, East 50th [Street], right on the Lake [Michigan].  So I did my three years there and then moved to Lake Meadows [Apartments, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 220668
Speaker 1: But we were coming back to New York [New York], and the problem was that my [first] wife [Reba Noble] was a nurse, and when she was working at Michael Reese Hospital [and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] and we liked--she liked her job very much and she was moving up the ladder fast.
Speaker 2: Now, when did you get married?
Speaker 1: Got married in 1959.  As a matter of fact, we were scheduled--I met my wife who was at Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and graduated the same time I graduated from BU law school [Boston University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts].  And we had planned to get married in 1960, in June 1960, but when I got my orders to be drafted, I found that I was gonna get something like, I don't know, $180 a month, but if I was married, I'd get five dollars more.  So I called her and I said, "You know, if I get married, we get five dollars more," (laughter), so she said, "okay."  So we got married earlier, just to up that salary (laughter).  It was probably twenty-five dollars, I don't know, but it was not--it was nominal.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, of course, our parents were livid because they--well, her parents were absolutely livid because they just couldn't figure out why we had to rush this, what's up--"What's he up to? Why have you gotta get married to him so fast?" you know (laughter), "are you pregnant?"  You know, that kinda thing (laughter), none of which was true, but--so I got her to--I was assigned to Chicago [Illinois] in December '59 [1959] and then kept calling her to quit her job in at New York Hospital [New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York] and come on out to Chicago, naturally.  And so on Valentine's Day is when she came out to Chicago; I'll never forget it.  Actually, we made every move on Valentine's Day thereafter.  We bought a house on Valentine's Day and bought a second house on Valentine's Day every five years.
Story_ID: 220669
Speaker 1: I had spent my time in the [U.S.] military doing things that you weren't supposed to do, like getting involved in politics.  Paul Douglas was running for United States senator in the 5th ward [Chicago, Illinois], and I admired him greatly and wanted to help him, and I did, because we lived in the 5th ward.  And I--and then I ultimately became a precinct captain and carried my precinct heavily, so when I got outta the military, I got appointed to the City [of Chicago] Corporation Counsel's office as an assistant corporation counsel and represented the fire department and the police department in Chicago [Illinois], and that was my assignment.
Speaker 2: So in those days, the 5th ward, wasn't--who was it?
Speaker 1: Marshall Korshak?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Korshak--
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 2: --and then, later was Leon Despres.
Speaker 1: Leon Despres.
Speaker 2: Despres, Despres.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: He was the alderman, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And Marshall was the ward committeeman who had all the power.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The ward committeeman (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Despres was like a maverick, right in the--
Speaker 1: He was and he was difficult for Marshall to control, and Marshall realized that he had to live with that because that's the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  That's the area.  And it was a highly intellectual area and you just couldn't get a hack to be--to be a ward--an alderman there.  It just wasn't gonna work (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: As a matter of fact [Richard J.] Dick Newhouse, who you probably personally know--knew of since he is now dead, but Dick was one of my law--early law partners and ran off, got elected to the state legislature [Illinois General Assembly], state senate actually it was, and then found that more interesting than practicing law, so we lost him, and he became a professional politician.
Speaker 2: So you were a 5th ward precinct captain.
Speaker 1: Right.  So that--that's--and I should continue that.  Well, what happened was that after I got so involved there, I met a lot of lawyers.  And one of the other things I was doing was spending my free time--there was a place called Illinois [Service] Federal Savings and Loan Association of Chicago; it was one of the premiere black institutions, financial institutions, and they used to have--the Browns owned it at the time.  You remember [HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown [Jr.] and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Oscar Brown, Jr., who became--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: --a famous singer.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  He's still singing and--
Speaker 1: Is he really?
Speaker 2: --his daughter is singing with him now, Maggie Brown.
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Oscar Brown, Jr.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He's still--he's still going.  He's, he--he's getting up there, but he's--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --he's still great, a great entertainer (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's wonderful--
Story_ID: 220670
Speaker 1: --I think I was just talking about Illinois [Service] Federal [Savings and Loan Association, Chicago, Illinois] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and [HistoryMaker] Dempsey [J. Travis] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Dempsey Travis--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and all that.  So as a consequence, I got to know a lot of lawyers, young lawyers, and young realtors, and business people, and, and we liked Chicago [Illinois], so we decided, well we'll stay here for a while.  So I had got--gotten--passed the bar there, and so I'm now a South Carolina lawyer and an Illinois lawyer.
Speaker 2: Was [William Robert] Bob Ming there when, when you were--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Absolutely.  Bob was a leader of the--I mean, Bob was--Bob Ming?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Bob was an outstanding constitutional lawyer of the highest order.  It was Ming--McCoy, Ming & Leighton [Chicago, Illinois]--was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, [HistoryMaker] George [N.] Leighton, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, [Fleetwood M.] McCoy was the old man who put this thing, the leader, but George Leighton was brilliant lawyer, trial lawyer, and Ming was, of course, a brilliant constitutional guy and loved to try cases, take anybody on, anytime, anywhere, great argumentor [ph.].  But because of that, I decided to stay there.  And then I worked for the Bureau of Public--well, actually what I did is I--while I was in the [U.S.] Army and I was getting out, I used to--I made up all these resumes and sent out about a hundred of them to all the corporations and legal departments in Chicago, didn't hear from a single one, obviously.  No, I did get one.  I got one response from Harris Trust and Savings Bank [BMO Harris Bank, Chicago, Illinois], so I went down for the interview, and they weren't excited.  I mean, they weren't--after they saw me, they weren't interested.  So we went through this formality and--because I was black because they didn't--they weren't hiring blacks for those jobs in those days.  And--so then, I said--I said, "Well how much are you offering?"  And he said, "Six thousand dollars," and I said, "well, I got a wife and kids.  You offer everybody at my age and--six thousand dollars?"  (Laughter) He said--he said, "Take it or leave it," you know, so I said, "thank you very much," and I left it.  I mean, I couldn't afford that.  I couldn't live on that.  And so I--the other place I'd heard from was the Bureau of [the] Public Debt [Bureau of the Fiscal Service], which is really a Washington [D.C.] office, but it's--they had a big Chicago office.  It was a bond department of the Bureau of Public Debt.  They issued the bonds for the federal government.  So I got a job there on the legal staff because they offered me eighty-five hundred dollars--no, it was eighty-two hundred dollars, and that was a lot of money.  I mean, that was really okay.  So I worked there for about a year and a half.  Then, I got this appointment to assistant corporation counsel for the City of Chicago.  So I got this letter from [Marshall] Korshak to go see Ray Simon who was on the [City of Chicago] Corporation Counsel, walked in, and what you did in those days--it's all politics.  You get a letter from the ward committeeman, it's like God.  It's word from God.  You don't ask; you don't do anything; you just take it downtown; you hand it to the receptionist; she hands it to him, takes it in his office; he looks at it; he sends it out and he says, "Tell him his seat is over there," and took me to my desk, and that's where I was.
Speaker 2: And so it's a done deal.
Speaker 1: Done deal.  And then some time during the course of the next day, you know, the--one of the assistants comes out, you know, top deputies, and he says, "You're assigned to--" this and that.  "You're assigned to represent the fire department, the civil service commission, and the police department," and I said, "okay, thank you very much."  I didn't know what I was doing, I'd not a clue (laughter), but I had to learn.  Of course, the other lawyers who were there doing the same thing taught me how to--and I followed them to court, learned how you represent these people--
Story_ID: 220671
Speaker 1: What, were there other black corporate--
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who, who--
Speaker 2: --absolutely.
Speaker 1: Who else was there?
Speaker 2: There had been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Earl Neal, of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Earl--that's how Earl made his career.  I mean, Earl became an expert at building codes and building this and building that.  And he was a--he used to write the laws after that on developments and things like that, and Earl became the lawyer to see if you had a problem as a developer or whatever.  I can't remember who else was there.  I'll think of it as I go along, but Earl was probably the most prominent.  There were not a lot--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think you're right.
Speaker 2: --of us in there at the time, but there were several.  And the other thing that that job allowed you to do, which is why it was a premier position to get, is that you did your work and you had a lot of hours free in the day after you did your court service, and your interviews, and you had to bring witnesses.  So lawyers would ally themselves with another office, a law firm so they can start their practices, and you could have a--develop a private practice while you were working for the corporation counsel's office, which is what everybody did, and that was the beginning of my private practice then.  So I started with some fellas that I had met, Garland [W.] Watt and Rufus [L.] Cook.  You know any of those names?
Speaker 1: Garland Watt sounds very familiar.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Garland was an outstanding lawyer, and he's still practicing.  He's not in good health right now, but we practiced--well, he later became a judge.  Now, he's back and--he retired from the bench and became a judge--I mean, became a lawyer again, or started practicing again I should say.
Speaker 1: Rufus Cook, you said?
Speaker 2: Rufus Cook was the guy who actually wrote the new condominium law in those days.  Condominiums aren't old.  He wrote the law.  And then when he wrote the law, I guess he was working for a legislator or something and then he quit and said, "I know how to build--I wrote the law, so I know how to do condos."  And so he came out as an expert on condos, and he got all kinds of business developing condos, and he developed a few for himself and made quite a few bucks.
Story_ID: 220672
Speaker 1: Well, we [Garland W. Watt, Rufus Cook and HistoryMaker James B. Lockhart] practiced for a while, and then I transitioned to another law firm with--and started a new law firm with now Judge Rivers, [D.] Adolphus Rivers, and he and I practiced for a while.  And I started focusing on--in those days, the, the franchising concept was mushrooming in America and it was a whole new opportunity for young business people, and it became a great opening for blacks to get into business.  Buy a franchise whether it--not just McDonald's or Burger King, but it's Midas Muffler--all--most of the major businesses were grown as--out of the franchising concept, and so I started representing a number of blacks who were trying to buy a franchise, and through that I made connections with franchising people, the companies, the people in it, the managers.  And so I made a connection with a guy with Midas Muffler, so I developed the Midas Muffler situation, had a client who was--owned Midas Muffler franchises, but then I later became a lawyer and did some legal work for Midas Incorporated, you know, the corporation.  And that fella--one thing led to another, and he became the executive vice president for Budget Rent a Car corporation [Budget Rent a Car Systems, Inc.], so I started representing them.  And then I became general counsel for Budget Rent a Car corporation.  And one thing led to another, and I did that for about eight years, and we were bought by Transamerica Corporation, and that's how I moved to San Francisco [California] because I--they asked me to come and work for Transamerica and no longer Budget, so I lived in San Francisco for twenty years working for Transamerica Corporation, from which I retired in 1998 after twenty-seven years there.
Speaker 2: Now, at Budget Rent a Car, you were the counsel--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was--
Speaker 2: --general counsel for--
Speaker 1: --general counsel for--chief counsel for the corporation.
Speaker 2: --for Budget Rent A Car.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is before, like--was Budget ever associated with Sears [Roebuck and Co.] by any chance?
Speaker 1: Well, Budget developed the concept with Sears.  We--what we did is--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --we went to Sears and we--this was when I was general counsel, and we developed a marketing plan with them and we presented it to them, and they bought it.  And we said, "Listen, we can put Budget operations on your Sears parking lots," which were ideally suited.  "You don't have to build anything; you just put a kiosk there.  We'll put up the name, Sears Rent A Car, operated by Budget, and you get the money and we get a commission."  And so we--and the reason we did that was because at the time, Sears had the largest credit card in America, and you could only rent a car if you had a credit card.  Most people did not have an American Express, a Diners Club, or a Carte Blanche.  Those were the three cards in those days.  Visa and MasterCard hadn't been thought of yet--I mean, hadn't been in existence.  And the average person in America couldn't, couldn't have one of those because those weren't credit cards.  They were cash cards.  You had to pay them within thirty days, and they were considered premier cards of successful people.  So those are the people who rented cars, because they were primarily business people.  But Budget was developed on the concept that we want to extend that to the ordinary person, so we want to give it to the people who can get an ordinary card and who need a card, and Budget was developed primarily because--well the guy who created the concept said he--people-- that cars break down, and they can't find a replacement car.  They don't know how to get a replacement car; they had to qualify for one.  So he started renting cars at five dollars and ninety-nine cents a day, didn't matter whether you had a credit card, and people thought he was crazy, and he'd go out of business in no time.  He'd go broke.  People would drive off, never bring his cars back, but they did.  And so Budget issued its own credit card so that it could--it could overcome that problem, and then created this deal with Sears Rent A Car to do the same thing.  But as I said, Sears had the largest credit card in the world, and we wanted to tap into that, because we knew that we didn't have to do anything.  The Sears credit card holder would be pre-qualified, would be a great customer, because he's not gonna jeopardize his Sears card because that's where you bought all of your household furnishings, that's where you bought your refrigerator, that's where you bought your child's clothing, you bought your Pampers for your baby, you have--so had your tires, you know, repaired, and all that.  Sears was cradle to the grave almost, since lost a lot of that because of competition, but that's why we developed that, yeah.
Speaker 2: You have all those different Walmarts and Kmarts and other things.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Especially Walmart--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Sam's Club, and all the other different (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Walmart's killing everybody.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah--
Story_ID: 220673
Speaker 1: Walmart is actually a disaster for this country.  I--well, I shouldn't get into politics.  I mean, that's--
Speaker 2: Well, it's your opinion, it's not a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's just destroying small businesses all over.  It's destroying towns to the point that L.A. [Los Angeles, California] just voted them out, said, "You can't start in here.  We're not letting that happen."  It destroys neighborhoods.
Speaker 2: Chicago's [Illinois] fighting it too right now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know.  It's a big political issue in Chicago.
Speaker 2: The union--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the wages--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --that they pay.
Speaker 1: And where I live in Fort Lauderdale [Florida], the town has just said, "Absolutely not.  There will be no Walmarts in this city."  Because we have, you know, neighborhood hardware stores, neighborhood everything, and then--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they all close.
Speaker 1: And they just close down and then they wipe--they just take over.  And now, they have put in food.  Did you see that the other day?  They put in all kinds of food products and everything, so they're wiping out grocery stores.  And they're too big.  They're just too mammoth.  And, of course, this administration [President George Walker Bush administration] won't do anything to control their size, but--anyway, that's, that's opinion.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the whole world--the whole world might, might, might be Walmart soon.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I hope that doesn't happen.  Think about that, you don't have any choices.  You have to go one place for everything.  That's not a good thought.
Speaker 2: We could depend on the kindness of those executives at Walmart, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and do you think they're gonna be kind when they--when they control everything, which they do (laughter)?  They wiped Toys "R" Us out.  Toys "R"--can you imagine Toys "R" Us five years ago?  Everybody--it's a giant.  Everybody goes to Toys "R"--all families.  Now, they're about to go into bankruptcy and close.  They're talking about closing down their operation because they've dominated the--you know, the--what Walmart does is buys stuff at the cheap--they force the supplier to--because the supplier is happy to do it.  He says, "Hey, if I get this exposure, I can sell 29 million dollars overnight," so he takes his price and drops it to the bottom, and Walmart buys it, and he drives everybody else out of business because Toys "R" Us can't afford to, to drop their prices that far.  They'd be out of business in no time, which is what they're going to do.  Babies "R" Us is just about gone, all those stores.  Kids "R" Us is having a problem.  Anyway, that's politics--
Story_ID: 220674
Speaker 1: So you're working for Budget Rent a Car [Systems, Inc.] that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it's purchased by Transamerica [Corporation]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and so you, you move out to San Francisco [California].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what, what year is this when you moved?
Speaker 2: That was 1979.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1979.  Now we, we jumped over Chicago [Illinois]--some of the Chicago--now, you talked--you gave us good instruction on what--about what Chicago politics are like in terms of how you get things done there, but--now, you were there during a good portion of the Mayor Richard--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Daley--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --[Mayor] Richard J. Daley administration.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what, what, what were--he was considered a political boss, you know, and--
Speaker 2: He was a boss.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Absolutely a--I mean, he just--the--his word was law when he came to politics.  He came to everything.  I remember one of the most dramatic things I ever saw was when all inner cities were going through real problems, and a lot of businesses were trying to escape the inner city and move to the suburbs, and to build malls, and to get out of downtown, because that's where the mushrooming demographics were; that's where populations were moving to, primarily the majority population, whites.  And it had happened all over the country, and the trend was beginning in Chicago.  And State Street was declining, the Marshall Field [& Co.] and all the rest of them, they weren't putting a lot of money in investing in their stores, the stores were declining.  They have several other department stores; I'm trying to remember the name.  Gip--not--it started with a G was one.
Speaker 1: Gold--you mean downtown?
Speaker 2: Goldblatt's and--
Speaker 1: Goldblatt's and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and there was another one.  And they weren't investing, and they were having a hard time.  And so, actually north--the [North] Michigan [Avenue Magnificent] Mile and so forth was not there yet.  It was just--they were just beginning the concept, and I remember, because I was at the [Chicagoland] Chamber of Commerce meeting, and they didn't call it the chamber of commerce in Chicago, I've forgotten.  It's called the something else, but it is the chamber of commerce.  And Mayor Daley came to speak there, and he said, "You know, this is not gonna happen to my city, what you guys are doing," and, "you will not move out of downtown Chicago, and I will make life so miserable for you."  And he threatened them, and he said, "I wanna see you guys in my office, and I want you to come in with a plan to redevelop State Street, redevelop Wabash [Avenue], redevelop this whole area."  Daley had that power and they knew that it was gonna be very difficult to shut down their operations or let them decline under his administration, because he had the power to make life very miserable.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: And they didn't.  And they turned around and got together and figured out how to reinvest in downtown Chicago.  And out of that grew--they were having trouble, obviously, but out of that grew the--they started experimenting with--what do you do when you--what do you call that concept when you close off the streets and so there's a walk--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they made it a--the State Street Mall, they called it.
Speaker 2: Mall, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and they did that.  Then that didn't work.  They did that for years and--but eventually because of the businesses they brought back and the redevelopment of the stores and keeping them in fine order and shape, downtown is thriving and, of course--
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah, now it seems to be the center now for--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  And, of course, North Michigan [Avenue], the Magnificent Mile just was developed, and so that whole area is wonderful.  I mean, it's a great city.  But Mayor Daley was the one who kept it that way.  Otherwise, it would be struggling like a whole lot of downtown areas in this country.
Story_ID: 220675
Speaker 1: Now, you were there--were you there when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] came to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: What are your memories of his visit and what are the legal department--
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) what kinda (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --activity was going on?  And--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, you gotta remember, in those days, [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson] was young.  He was trying to start Operation Breadbasket and--which was, you know, the precursor for the current operation [Rainbow PUSH Coalition], and Martin would come to town.  And of course that's where he would come to speak, naturally, before he took on Chicago as a confrontation.  And of course for us, Saturday mornings at Operation Breadbasket was a must, and everybody went there, lawyers, doctors.  I mean, you had to be there; that's where the action was (laughter).  And that was part of the movement, also part of connecting with others and getting to know everybody.  That's where you got to know everybody, Tom Todd [History Maker Thomas N. Todd], and all those guys, you know what I mean?  You wouldn't have known half of those people except reading about it in the newspaper if you hadn't been there, but you knew them personally.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Calvin Morris who was--remember him from--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, and it was a beehive of activity in those days.  And, and Martin was just determined somewhere along the line that he had to take on Chicago.  He--I don't--I guess he just didn't realize how departmentalized Chicago was in its segregation.  You know, he was marching through the South and dealing with it on a massive basis, but then when he came to Chicago, you never--you know, nobody ever thinks about that until you live in it.  And, and you remember when he got--you probably remember when he got to the apartment there.
Speaker 1: On the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  And he said, "There's my base of operations."  Boy, we were all excited about that.  We were scared, too (laughter).  But--
Speaker 1: Was, was the city concerned about liability in terms of all that or?
Speaker 2: In those days?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No.  Couldn't care less.  Just knew that it had to protect the status quo, and be sure everything was peaceful, keep the Negroes under control and be sure it doesn't--you see, one of the things about the Civil Rights Movement is that--a lot of people don't understand is that I don't think that the majority population ever thought that any segment of the movement was gonna explode the way it did and that it would--that it would always end, you know, and then--so we--ultimately, we'd give an inch, and they'd settle for it.  And nobody ever dreamed that things would explode the way they did, the sit-ins, the marches, the demands.  And so what happened in the late '50s [1950s] and the early '60s [1960s] was conceived as, "Well, this will blow over," and, "just give it time.  It'll blow--let them--let them vent their anger and then, you know, and we'll give a little bit, and then it'll be gone."  And, well, it never happened.  I mean, we weren't--we weren't gonna stand for it at that point.  And then Martin came along and said, "No, we're not gonna stand for it," and he became the lightening rod because he was so good at it.  His speeches just encouraged people who were standing on the sideline to say, "I can't stand on the sideline, we've got to commit.  We got to go.  We got to do."  And so, you know, people who were concerned about your careers like I was--my central focus was on my career, and you still had to play a role--
Story_ID: 220676
Speaker 1: --So I got active in the legal side [of the Civil Rights Movement], you know, and [NAACP] Legal Redress Committee and, as a lot of lawyers did, and you had to commit a lot of hours to that work free, you know, just to keep the machinery working.
Speaker 2: Now what was the Legal Redress Committee?  What's that?
Speaker 1: The NAACP Legal Redress Committee was formed by Marshall--Thurgood Marshall, and it was the arm of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], which is now separate from the NAACP, volunteer lawyers that started Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954] and all those early law suits that resulted in the Brown v. Board of Education.  But every city where there were black lawyers had a legal redress committee, and you knew that your time--and this is before, long before anybody called it pro bono; we didn't even have a term for it.  But that was your time to be involved, your commitment.  If you became a lawyer, you had to do that.  That was your commitment to yourself and your people, and so you gave a lot of time to whatever they wanted, the movement said they were gonna do, you had to figure out the legal mechanisms for it and help with it, and file the lawsuits, and give your time, and file the appeals, and--[William Robert] Bob Ming was a major leader in that, so we--he was the one who really coordinated a lot of the work we did in those days.  And he assigned out, you know, what you were to do.  Are you to do the research on this?  Create a brief on this.  Do that.  You appear in court.  You do this.  You handle the appeals.  You do this.  Yeah, he was the--that's interesting that you should mention him, but he was the master who orchestrated this whole thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he, handled something for the--they call it the Contract Buyers League [CBL].
Speaker 1: Yes.  That's right.
Speaker 2: He was like keen on that, and I think he got in trouble in the midst of doing it and--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But they talk about him finally and they also said he's one of the scariest people they ever met (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: I mean, the women that were the volunteers, we've interviewed--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --a couple of them and they, they--[HistoryMaker] Ruth Wells was one of the leaders, talks about how Bob Ming was a brilliant man, but was one of the most scary individuals she ever--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --met.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Said he would curse anybody out and he was very--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: But he was a brilliant lawyer.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Well, he was not unlike Thurgood Marshall.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Thurgood Marshall--you got to remember, those guys worked twenty hours a day, maybe longer.  They didn't sleep a lot.  They traveled in places where their lives were at stake all the time, and they couldn't deal with anybody who said, "No," or, "I can't do this," or, "let's go slow."  I mean, they just couldn't tolerate it, so they'd be--they'd curse you out in a minute because they'd been through the war and they just said--they just didn't have patience with people like that.  They always thought that, "You got to see it my way.  There's only one way.  You're living in hell, what are--what are you talking about?" (Laughter) "You're gonna--you're gonna go slow?  We're not gonna do it that way.  We're gonna do it your way, which is gonna take us twenty years."  And if Thurgood Marshall hadn't been a character like that, Brown versus Board of Education may not have happened for--may never have happened for another thirty, forty years.  But he was insistent on moving this thing forward.  And he took his life in his own hands.  He came to--I was a little boy when he came to South Carolina and came to Summerville [sic. Summerton, South Carolina] to get those parents and get the church to support that lawsuit [Briggs v. Elliott, 1952], the one out of South Carolina.  And, I mean, that was a scary time.  He had to do that at dark, at night, no notices to anybody, because if anybody knew about it, all the blacks would lose their jobs, which they did, ultimately, because their bosses were all white, and so if they knew they were bringing a lawsuit, they were gonna--they were out of work.  The loans on their farms were called, everything.  It was just a disaster.  I remember he--that first meeting he had in Summerton was--I think at the whole church everybody gave everything they had.  It was like fifteen dollars or eighteen bucks.  That's all they could round up.  These are sharecroppers.  They didn't have any money.  Sharecroppers never had money.  The sharecropping concept didn't allow it.  What you did is you worked on somebody else's property, and he made sure that if you farmed that property, and he sold the produce off of that, that you could go and charge at his store or his family's store for your provisions, your necessaries to live, and then by the end of the year when the crops were sold, you settled up and you always owed.  You were never ahead, so you never had any cash.  They were always in debt, other than what he wanted to give you.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: It was a horrible cycle, and it was to keep you in slavery the whole time; that's what it was.  It was just another form of slavery.
Story_ID: 220677
Speaker 1: And as the Civil Rights Movement started to heat up in the South, and some of the barriers started falling, I think--I think it sorta embarrassed some of the northern cities like Chicago [Illinois] that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], other places.  Did --tell me what you--in fact, Tom Todd [HistoryMaker Thomas N. Todd] was a prosecutor in Chicago, a federal prosecutor and he--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --he and some other people got some stuff rolling in Chicago and started dismantling some of the cities.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Yeah--with the police department on the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And Tom's a great speaker and a wonderful personality.  He's a wonderful guy, too.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I just wondered, now you're on the [City of Chicago] Corporation Counsel side of that stuff.  I mean, what, what were they--what were they saying?
Speaker 2: Well, now when--in, in that--remember, I--I'm not--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --involved in it, because I'm representing the fire and police departments and--but at the time all of this was exploding, I was no longer at the corporation counsel's office.  I was only there for a couple of years--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --maybe two and a half years or something like that.  By 1969, '68 [1968] or so, I think I'd left.  I was full-time private practice then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I had my own clients and doing--and focusing on civil and corporate practice at the time.
Story_ID: 220678
Speaker 1: Let's get you to San Francisco [California], I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, now what--and you got to San Francisco in nineteen--
Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979].
Speaker 1: Seventy-nine [1979]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, now that was--
Speaker 2: Jerry Brown [Jr.] was the governor.  San Francisco and California was going through major changes, political changes of the whole state.  The, the city council there as a matter of fact if you recall, it was such a joke that there was a TV show about it, and I don't know if you remember that.  The board of supervisors was on a national TV show.  It was a comedy, came on every week (laughter).  But--no, it was a zoo.  It was--it was really--it was a wonderful place, but the politics was wild.  When I went to San Francisco, I was no longer there as a lawyer.  I went as the [Transamerica Corporation] vice president of public affairs, and my responsibilities were over the lobbying efforts of the corporation in Washington [D.C.] and in the state capitals, so I had a stream of lobbyists who reported to me, and that--my job was to coordinate all that effort and to develop public policy for the corporation, you know, what we were supposed to say, what our position was to the public on various issues, social, political, and otherwise, and primarily be the spokesman for the--for the CEO of the company, you know, for--on public policy and public issues.  And that got me involved in a lot of politics, a lot of community affairs, and--for both the city, the county, and the states where I spent a lot of time in Washington and Sacramento [California], and up and down the state, and--
Speaker 1: That Transamerica [Pyramid] building [San Francisco, California] is the one building that symbolizes downtown San Francisco.  I don't know why--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --why I'm saying it other--it doesn't have anything--
Speaker 2: Well, that's--
Speaker 1: In other words--
Speaker 2: --that was--that's exactly--
Speaker 1: --you're right in the center of everything.
Speaker 2: That's why we built it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: The pyramid on top--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the pyramid.
Speaker 1: --and everything, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a--
Speaker 2: We invested a lot of money in getting people to think exactly that, and so they associate the pyramid not only with San Francisco but with Transamerica, yeah.  So it's a world renowned--anywhere you go in the world, people say, oh, that pyramid, I know that building, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: They know what you do, too.  And at that time, it was a hugely diversified company.  We owned United Artists movie company, United Artists Records.  We owned Budget Rent a Car [Systems, Inc.].  We owned a hotel chain in--which escapes my mind at the moment, down in the islands and out in Spain.  And then we owned an airline, Transamerica Airline.  And we had title companies, health insurance companies, life insurance companies, mortgage companies, finance companies.  We had a whole host of operations and we just overly diversified.  Container leasing company, which you see those big containers, you know, the box cars on trucks and trains.  That's still one of our biggest operations.  And so those operations were headquartered in places like Purchase, New York, and Los Angeles [California], Dallas [Texas], Houston [Texas], Los Angeles, everywhere but San Francisco, and all we had was the handful of about sixty guys who ran the holding company which owned all of these companies and trying to figure out how to manage them all and be sure they made money.
Story_ID: 220679
Speaker 1: I basically dealt with local [San Francisco, California] political establishment, and then when I went there, Dianne Feinstein was the mayor; she was a brand new mayor.  There had been great turmoil because the [San Francisco] Board of Supervisors, as I told you, was a zoo and--actually, they had this TV show that dealt with it, and it was a comedy show, and it lasted for about year, but I used to watch it before I moved there; I thought it was the funniest thing in the world how the supervisors interacted.  They were just funny and crazy.  But they were so crazy that one guy, who said he wasn't gonna run for reelection, chose not to run for reelection, then changed his mind at the last time--at the last minute, and confronted the guy who was running and they--one of them shot each other in--right in [San Francisco] City Hall [San Francisco, California], and he died.  And I forget his name right now, but it became--
Speaker 2: Was that when Harvey Milk was shot (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Harvey Milk, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah--was shot by the other guy, Dan (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 2: Dan White, I think.
Speaker 1: Dan White.
Speaker 2: Dan White.
Speaker 1: And that was a big thing.  I mean, that was a huge issue, I mean, shook up everybody.  And, and finally, people began to say, "We got to bring some sanity to this environment."  And Dianne had just been elected, and she was very stable, very solid woman who had just come out of the board of supervisors, and she had risen to that office--she had risen to become president of the board of supervisors by being elected by them because they couldn't agree amongst themselves about anybody else, so they--she got it by default (laughter), but then that rose--gave her the platform to run for mayor and she won.  Became a very popular mayor, and even though she was popular had a major recall on her--had done absolutely nothing but all the right things.  And, of course, it was in our [Transamerica Corporation] best interest corporately to try to keep her elected, so that's when I first got to know her because I got very much involved in her campaign, raising corporate money for her, getting to know her, working with her, and so we became pretty close friends as a consequence--well, everybody is a close friend as long as you're raising money for a politician (laughter).  That makes you a friend.  And so, we did a lot of stuff together.  I worked on a lot of issues with her, got to know [Reverend] Cecil Williams at GLIDE Memorial [United Methodist Church, San Francisco, California] very well.  He controlled this mass of thousands of homeless people who would--who were serviced by the church and who voted, of course, any way he told them (laughter) to vote.  And the politics there was interesting.  There was no party strength as in Chicago [Illinois], so it was a whole new thing for me because everybody went off and did whatever they wanted to do.  I mean, every supervisor was an independent political force.  And [HistoryMaker] Willie [L.] Brown, of course, was on the rise and he was probably the most powerful politician other than the mayor in San Francisco, because he was very verbose, very articulate, very funny, very witty, and very persuasive, and everybody like him a lot, so he was on the rise then, and soon thereafter became speaker of the California House [of Representatives] and rose to be probably as powerful as the governor was and--just a great guy, too--and then ultimately, as you know, mayor.  So I've known all of them very well and worked with them.
Story_ID: 220680
Speaker 1: But, we [Transamerica Corporation] worked on a lot of issues.  My favorite issues were education and health and I--in the--in the [San Francisco, California] public school systems, my local issues and some of my local staff worked on.  And I was also concerned about visiting schools with my staff and looking at the enormously overweight African and Latino kids in the schools, so we developed some programs working with the schools and the hospitals to do dietary programs with parents, which Transamerica funded to the tune of millions of dollars in the school systems, and did a lot of community stuff like that, worked with GLIDE [Memorial United Methodist Church, San Francisco California]--were major contributors to GLIDE Memorial.  And that's an interesting situation.  Transamerica wouldn't have touched that thing with a ten-foot pole.  I mean, they--you talk Transamerica and GLIDE Memorial in the same sentence, they would've cringed and said absolutely not.  But I had heard about GLIDE.  I heard about this remarkable service, and so my secretary, right after I moved there, said, "You got to go with me to service on Sunday."  So I took my whole family, and we went there as you would to a normal service, and as we were sitting in the pews, we realized that there was a stark difference between the people in the pews and me and my wife and my kids, so we were all sinking down in our pews, slowly taking off our ties, unbuttoning our shirts, disrobing, taking off our jackets, and just trying to look like ordinary people in the pews and then rose up again.  And, I was impressed with what I saw.  This man who was giving his life to all these down and out people who just were so wonderful.  I mean, the service was beautiful, what they do there, and how they bring in people who are--just terrible.  I mean, just--mothers with three kids, homeless, and how they ministered to them and teach them how to get on their feet, get out of drugs, and find some way to get them a job, train them, you know, and it's a marvelous operation, so I got involved in a lot of things like that, so--
Speaker 2: Reverend Cecil Williams, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Cecil.
Speaker 2: Now, just before you got there, I think it was Jim Jones who had taken that group to Guyana, and that had to--
Speaker 1: His, his group [Peoples Temple].  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He had another church.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And that's exactly right, just a few years before that.  It [Jonestown, 1978] was very, very fresh in our minds at that time.  It was just, just a few years before that.  So when I went there, that--they were--they were living through that because San Francisco [California] was hurting from that, too.  There was a lot of trauma in San Francisco at the time.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: San Francisco is quite, quite a place of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.  It's a dynamic place.  It's a place that a lot of people moved to because they can't deal with the establishment where they live, and California is full of that, by the way.  People who'd come from Oklahoma, Texas, and other parts of the country to live their own lifestyle, as there were a lot less restrictions on what you do in California.  People were allowed to live more like you want to live, you know.  So when you want to live a non-traditional life, people tend to escape there, so there are a lot of those people there, millions of them (laughter).  So it creates--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) More of a non-
Speaker 1: --a different kind of dynamic and a different kind of politics--
Speaker 2: Because people do it for--
Speaker 1: --which is why they're so far ahead on the scale of advanced thinking in laws and things to do.  Like, we were in the forefront of no smoking and it started in California.  I mean, you can't--when I moved to California, it was right on the crest of that wave, which was cutting out smoking everywhere to the point that people, you'd go to their house, they'd even have tent cards, "No smoking, please, in my house."  I'd never seen that before.  And, of course, they outlawed it everywhere, restaurants, bars, every--every place, now to the point they're outlawing it in open air theaters, open air sports places, because you don't think about it, but smoke does--but no--and, and I shouldn't go into detail about that, but those are the kinds of examples of things--environmental things.  All the environmental laws with cars have to comply with, manufacturers have to comply with was started with California.  I mean, when you're the fifth largest--or I guess it's fifth largest, if you were an independent country; California would be the fifth largest country in terms of its economy.  Is it fifth or tenth?  Something like that, but it's pretty big.  When you got 37 million people and an economy that's humongous, and they can control a lot of stuff.  So when you sell--got to sell millions of cars in California, you got to do what they ask (laughter).
Story_ID: 220681
Speaker 1: Well, times were different and people have to remember that.  I mean, this is no longer legal in Chicago [Illinois] and probably wouldn't be anywhere.  But in politics, you paid your dues, and you stood in line and waited for a job, and that's what all the sycophants did at ward committee.  They went to ward committee meetings every Saturday in the hope that, you know, the ward committee would call them and say, "Well, John," you know, "you're no longer working for the sanitation department.  We got a job for you behind a desk over in the--in city hall," whatever it is, and it's a promotion.  Higher, higher salary, cleaner, don't have to work on a truck in the cold in the winter or the heat in the summer.  Those jobs were patronage jobs and--as were judgeships.  So many years later--not many--I guess I was probably forty at the time, I get a call and it says, "You need ten thousand dollars, and you'll be ready--you'll be ready to come down tomorrow to be sworn in as a judge."  And I said, "I beg your pardon?"  (Laughter) Said, "No, you're up, it's your turn."  And I said, "Well, I didn't really get on the list.  I'm not applying for it."  I was then the corporate lawyer, I'm doing very well, I just--I would've been had a--I would've had a decrease in income to go on the bench, although that's a great honor, and I would've loved to have done it, I didn't want to do it at forty.  I couldn't see myself sitting on a bench for twenty-two years or twenty-five years until my retirement.  Normally, judgeships are considered an honor and given to you as a premier for your long work and success as a lawyer, and as a good lawyer, and then--but that isn't the way they do it now.  You get it because you want it, because a lot of people aren't successful in their private practice, so they, they fight for judgeship, but they were considerate on it.  So I said, "Come back to me when I'm sixty," (laughter).  But that's the story I'm telling you, because it was interesting, because I had to toy with the idea to--is that something I might wanna do at a young age?  Get the accolades of being a judge, then leave the bench after four or five years and go back into practice.  Because there is a benefit to that.  Clients are impressed with a former judge because they say, "Oh, he's got connections," you know.  "He can--he knows how to get things done."  My wife wouldn't stand for it.  She says, "Absolutely not.  We're gonna reduce our lifestyle?  We got kids going to college.  We can't afford it," you know (laughter).  And it was much too early, but that was the way it happened, and it happens with everybody.  So you--when I was being facetious--I was not being facetious when I said to you earlier about the example, in those days if the ward committeeman called you and said, "All right, it's your time, Larry," you just--you did it.  And usually it was something that you wanted to do, so it was a great, great step forward.  But he controlled everything.  And the letter he gave you introduced you to whatever you needed to do downtown, and it was honored implicitly.  There was never any question about it.  It was a power of a ward committeeman.
Story_ID: 220682
Speaker 1: You retired from Transamerica [Corporation], right?  You, you--
Speaker 2: Yes, I retired--
Speaker 1: --worked all--
Speaker 2: --in 1998, yes.
Speaker 1: Ninety-eight [1998], and now--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what are the highlights of your, I guess, period of time with Transamerica, your career there?
Speaker 2: Well, I think--I think the most important part is the people I met, all the highly placed political people I met over the years, the presidents, the senators, and, you know, spending a lot of time in the congress, and meeting people, and just talking to them on a normal basis.  And one of the nice things about having been in the position I was is that when I walk the halls of congress, I get as much respect as another congressman, because I'm considered what?  A moneybags.  I mean, I'm gonna--every congressman's looking for money, and they don't want to have to ask for it (laughter).  So--some of your, your--when you walk--and that's just not me.  I mean, it's every corporate guy who was in my position was being sought after and cozied up to.  And when they have to raise money, you know, they need a sponsor, they need somebody to make major contributions and put on parties for them, you know, for fundraisers, and so you--that's the role you played very often, you know.  So we spent a lot of time in Washington [D.C.] getting to know people in the highest levels of government.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you had a lot of latitude into what--who Transamerica would support?
Speaker 2: Well, yes and no.  The latitude was the extent to which our interest was at stake, and so you chose to support or not support candidates or incumbents based upon--are they there--is there--is there philosophy consistent with yours, that of the company, and things the company wanted to accomplish?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So you selected your candidates on that basis.  Now, of course, I broadened Transamerica's scope.  I mean, Transamerica never contributed to African American or Latino (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, like Cecil--
Speaker 2: --politicians and--
Speaker 1: --[Reverend Cecil] Williams or--yeah.
Speaker 2: --things like that, both charitably or politically because their philosophy--you know, they were way out on the right on conservatism and business was the ultimate issue, and they never--nobody ever translated to them the fact that you got to talk to these people, because they're votes too, and sometimes they can be a better vote because they--if you haven't talked to them, they haven't been brought into your fold, and they're gonna be in the opposition, but they have to be educated and told what you do right.  I remember distinctly one time the most rude and upsetting situation I ever ran into in my life was when [HistoryMaker] Carol Moseley Braun was elected senator and we had a major piece of legislation pending, and it dealt with controlling the interest rates charged on second and third tier mortgages and loans, and we were trying to--my industry, the finance industry, was trying to be sure that that legislation wasn't so over-controlling that it would run us out of business.  And when I went in with my delegation to see her, and she said, "I can't believe, [HistoryMaker James A.] Lockhart, you're in here with all these, these--" I can't remember the precise words, but these money-grubbing, whorish, white corporations trying to deal a death blow to black people.  And, I said, "Senator, that's not what I'm here for," (laughter).  "I wanna hear--I wanna educate you on what our concerns are about the legislation so that when you decide how you're gonna vote, you can evaluate what is good for the public, what's good for companies, and make a balanced and intelligent judgment."  But, that's what she said to me, and I was struck by that.  I said, I don't think she's gonna last long.  Nobody ever talks like that.  I mean, you--there's a certain amount of civility in life that you have, but just to come out--and she used some pretty derogatory language, by the way, I wouldn't repeat here, in front of a large delegation of white people, so it wasn't cool.  Obviously, she didn't get my support (laughter) or Transamerica's or the industry or anybody else.  It's that, that--those are kinds of experiences you have.  You know, you, you run into good ones, bad ones, but usually they're courteous and usually they're civil.  And most politicians, frankly, aren't candid with you about it; that's the other side of it.  You learn that they'll smile with you, have your--eat your food, take your money, and vote the other way (laughter).
Story_ID: 220683
Speaker 1: Were you ever able to or had an occasion to use dialogue to change the mind of Transamerica [Corporation] about something that they, they wanted to do--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  Yeah, yeah.  That's--as I said, you know, the diversity thing, the approach, the outlook, how do you expand your outlook on things?  And one of our businesses, for example, was finance, and one of the largest businesses we had dealt with secondary loans that's commonly called, as [HistoryMaker] Carol Moseley Braun would say, high interest loans charged to people who can't otherwise qualify for first-class mortgages and loans.  And when I discovered that, in one area, some local managers in New Mexico were giving low-interest loans to people to buy houses, and they were Mexican immigrant laborers who were struggling with families and very little, and they were--they were taking the houses back.  They were foreclosing on the houses within four, six months, because they would sell them houses in--at loans too high for them to pay for, but they didn't realize it.  There was a language barrier, they don't understand finance, and they took advantage of them.  They were doing this on a consistent basis for years.  And it was discovered, because this was the most productive and most profitable operation, and we wanted to know--why were they so successful? And that was just earthshaking, you know.  And then the guys were going, "Well, we don't do that."  I said, "Hey, I got the--here's the information.  We got it on tape.  Here's what these guys do."  And so, of course, that results into, potentially, attorney general saying, okay, we're gonna start investigating and charging Transamerica, so you got a major public issue, and so you get companies to try to realize it.  You know, let's examine all of our operations.  Why are we so successful?  Why do we make so much money disproportionately to other--our competitors?  There's something wrong here.  We got to figure that out.  And if it isn't wrong, we need to know that.
Story_ID: 220684
Speaker 1: How was being in corporate America that long?  I mean, how--did you have to struggle for a promotion or how, how did that work?  Did you see--what did you see--
Speaker 2: Well, I was--
Speaker 1: --progress wise?  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's interesting question.  I--in my early years, I don't know that I fought for a promotion as much as I won it by my work, my diligence, working long hours, seven days a week, devising strategies for doing things that nobody else could get accomplished.  I'll give you, for example, at Budget Rent a Car Corporation [Budget Rent a Car System, Inc.], when I joined it, we were trying to figure out how to expand the business, and one of the guys--one of the--the executive vice president of operations had gone around the table and he was--he said, "Boys, we got to figure out how to penetrate the airports better."  We were off airport operator.  In those days, the--except for [The] Hertz [Corporation], Avis [Rent a Car System], and National [Car Rental], all the other car rental companies had off airport operations, so what you did is you told your customer to put a--put ten cents in the pay phone, dial the company, we'll reimburse your ten cents, we'll send the bus over, pick you up, take you off airport, and dump you in a car, and off you'll go.  That was to avoid paying the 10 percent commission to the airport, but more importantly, the airports had locked us out.  And Hertz, Avis, and National had created contracts for the airports to sign when they signed their leases that said there shall be no others than Hertz, Avis, and National.  Well, I knew from my years in law school, it sounded to me kinda like something called restraint of trade, and nobody had tackled it.  And so I used to go around befriending airport managers and collecting a whole series of these contracts, and eventually got some stories about how they happened because they saw me as a friend; they didn't think of me as an adversary.  So I would wine and dine guys and they'd tell me how these contracts were drafted and so forth.  So I found a nice little young fellow in the Federal Trade Commission [FTC] in Washington [D.C.], and I used to go down there regularly and drop off contracts and samples, give him a brief on how I thought this was something he might want to investigate.  Eventually after a year or two, the kid looked at it and said, "Ah, maybe I can make a name for myself."  So, ultimately, got the Federal Trade Commission to issue a charge.  When they issue a charge, it's like a lawsuit against Hertz, Avis, and National.  And when they do that, the private sector is like vultures, we just follow what they do.  We file private actions for the same restraint of trade, but we ask for huge damages, millions of dollars, and so that was a fight I led, and broke up that so-called cartel of Hertz, Avis, and National, where Budget and everybody else could go and get a concession on the airport.  And the airport managers were no longer bound to those stupid contracts, which they knew were illegal in the first place.  Excuse me.  But, that was a major lawsuit which I got settled favorably, and so I got a big promotion out of that and a huge bonus, naturally, and went on to [Transamerica Corporation in] San Francisco [California].  And, you know, I got a promotion and became senior vice president [of public affairs] and everything.  And then, of course, somebody else gets my job, so he becomes the grunt man as general counsel, and I get a nice, cushy--another job thinking things out rather than working them out and--
Speaker 1: So for the most part, would you say that, that promotions were on merit there--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and for the most part (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's the good part--
Story_ID: 220685
Speaker 1: --Now the downside is, this is nineteen--late '70s [1970s], and so Transamerica [Corporation] offers me a job as the vice president of public affairs in San Francisco [California], and I'm a little reluctant to take this job, because it's outside of the law, which is my field and which I love.  And I then say, "I'm thinking about it.  Well, I'm not exactly sure I like the terms."  "Well, we can work that out."  "But, I'm not sure I want to move to San Francisco, and I don't think I like the position."  Well, I wasn't sure I didn't like the position, I just hadn't had time to think about it.  "Well, you gotta decide."  "Well, I'm thinking--." "Well, how, how would you decide if you had to decide now?"  "I'm thinking against it."  "Well, if you think against it, we've already got somebody who's gonna take the job.  He's a senior black executive in our records company in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]."  What did that just say to me?
Speaker 2: They're looking for a black person?
Speaker 1: They're looking for a black--this is a black position.  We're creating it for a black because we gotta send to the F--the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission [EEOC] a new chart that says we now have a senior black on our executive staff.  So I was reluctant to take it for that reason, but then, of course, they jacked up the salary.  Then, they did everything else.  They met all the terms of my perks.  Now, remember also, after twenty years of work, I'm tired.  I've been running on airplanes for--all over the world for a lot of--and worked seven days a week when I was at Budget [Rent a Car System, Inc.].  I never had a day off.  And so the idea of moving to California--and plus I was tired of the cold.  Chicago [Illinois] had its four worst winters in a row--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did have.
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976], '77 [1977].  They even published a book.  I mean, it was horrible.  I was having serious back ailments and other kind of problems, and I was having serious allergy problems in Chicago, and so these things were getting to me, because I was under a lot of stress.  And my wife kept saying, we gotta move.  So I was looking at it and had been for about a year or two, looking at moving to the southwest or the southeast, you know, the Sun Belt.  So naturally we decided, "Okay, San Francisco is pretty close to that.  It's a nice area, and it's beyond the allergy belt," just barely.  Actually, when I got there, I exploded there too (laughter), but--and, of course, San Francisco is an exciting city.  So, they wined and dined us for about a month and kept asking us to come out, you know, on Friday or Saturday, and we'd go, and they'd take us out, and they'd show this is the wine country, and do all the things that corporations do.  They seduced us, so we said yes (laughter).  And it was a good decision, because it was a different lifestyle, and a different world.
Story_ID: 220686
Speaker 1: Culture in California is unlike any place in America, and we enjoyed it there.  It's--when you're three hours from--from my house to skiing--I could get up in the morning at six o'clock and be on a ski slope by nine o'clock and back at home by six, ski steady three or four hours, and beat the commute traffic, get in the car, drive up to Napa [California], go to a great restaurant in one of the wine areas, an hour drive away, go to the [Pacific] Ocean, go to my club up in the--in the Redwoods [National and State Parks, California] and hang out, you know, with the boys for the weekend or something like that.  It's--it was a wonderful lifestyle, absolutely brilliant.  And in some degree, you know, I miss it.  I go back--we go back for all those things.  We still have a place on Lake Tahoe and we get to go back there with the kids for that, for skiing.  But when you're in that environment, you-- it's a wonderful lifestyle.  And the one thing you learn in California that's unlike the East, you work hard, but you play hard because of the sun and the weather, and the--and all the wonderful things you do there.  People work basically four days a week, or four and--three and a half, and you may say you're in the office on Friday, but you really aren't.  And if you--you, you either don't show up or you show up temporarily, and you're gone by eleven--(laughter) ten, eleven, and nobody questions it.  That--that's just the way the lifestyle is.  And unlike back here, everybody goes to bed early, because you're up early.  You like to start early so you can leave the office early, so you can get some daylight, go running, go doing things with your family, you know.  It's a--it's a whole different lifestyle.  Dress is different.  I learned how to dress casually all the time, you know, and enjoy it.  And that does a lot for your psyche.  I mean, it really calms you down a lot, and that took me a long time, by the way, because I was accustomed to a dynamic, thriving office.  I had people clamoring to get in my office.  "I need to see [HistoryMaker James B.] Lockhart now."  "I need to get this solved now."  "I need a resolution of this issue."  "I need to have a meeting with him today."  And I'm meeting until ten o'clock at night.  I used to leave my office in Chicago [Illinois] at ten at night, go to Gladys' [Gladys Luncheonette, Chicago, Illinois] and have dinner, all the wrong food, my lovely biscuits and, you know, and smothered chicken, and go home and sleep on that and be up at four, back in the car to Gladys' for breakfast, and then headed to [Chicago] O'Hare [International Airport, Chicago, Illinois] and on an airplane flying off to Miami [Florida] or San Francisco [California] or London [England] or, or Caracas [Venezuela] to finish up a deal, and then off--and I mean, it was all--so I was stressed out, and I was ready.  I loved it, but I realized after evaluation with my wife, that you have to think about your health, and you have to think about your future, and so San Francisco [California] became a different lifestyle.  And I was sitting in my office [at Transamerica Corporation] the first time, elegant offices, quiet.  You have a secretary here.  You can't hear a pin drop, anywhere.  I'm used to commotion, people arguing and moving around.  And I called my wife after a month or two, I said, "Honey, I don't think this is gonna work.  I mean, nobody's in my office, I don't do any--I get papers and shuffles, and I have to approve this and disapprove, but I don't talk to anybody, I just sit here and then somebody calls me a week later and says, let's have a meeting.  And it's very--and then we go and sit and talk, and then we go to lunch, and we'd come back."  And I'm used to, you know, doing it, battling with people, arguing out points, and these people, gracefully, "Well, maybe we should re-do the paper and reconsider," and you had plenty of time to do it.  I couldn't conceive of the fact that I'm at the pinnacle, where things are decided at the top level, after everybody's done all the grunt work, and you take your time, because when you make a decision there, it affects thousands of people and a lot of operations, but I was--you know, I was in the mix of making the decision, creating it, doing it, and then getting it done, too.  I had to do both of them, and that was brand new.  So for a corporate guy from--transitioning from a Budget Rent a Car [System, Inc.], an operation, and a very exciting operation founded by Jules [W.] Lederer, was the husband of Ann Landers [Eppie Lederer]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and they were exciting people.  They were funny.  He had all these wonderful Jewish witticisms when he came into the office.  I remember when he first met me, and he came in, and he's a very short guy, and he flew in from his London office where he hung out, and he said, "Lockhart, how do you like your job?"  And I said, "Like it very much."  He says, "You're really enjoying it?"  I said, "Yes I am, very much."  He says, "Great, we're gonna be taking back about 25 of your--25 percent of your salary, because you're really having fun and you ought to be paying us."  I said, "Jules," and he--I said, "I don't think that's the way it's supposed to go (laughter)."
Story_ID: 220687
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my son's [Mark Lockhart] two daughters, six--Blakely [ph.], six years old, is seated, and Callie [ph.) who is four years old is standing beside her.  They live in Richmond, Virginia.
Story_ID: 220688
Speaker 1: You know, in those days, this is early '70s [1970s], you know, like '72 [1972], '73 [1973], and we didn't have--I mean, long distance wasn't like it is now, and so corporations had what were called wide area telephone services or WATS lines, and you may have heard--remember the WATS lines?  So a company could probably--a small company like ours could probably afford two WATS lines, and they would be full-time, twenty-four hours, call anywhere in the world, at a flat rate.  You just paid a flat rate a month, maybe say ten thousand dollars, and all of your staff could use it.  The problem was you couldn't all be on at the same time, so you had to take turns.  As a lawyer, I'm in the office late all the time because I'm flying all day, get in the office, I got to review the briefs with my staff, got to review transactions, contracts, got to sign off on all that stuff before I leave the office, so that means I got to make phone calls and chat with people about stuff before I sign off on it.  So I'm calling all over the world, so I'm on the WATS--I'm trying to get on the WATS line.  I get on, I'm talking to somebody probably in California, and this woman comes on and she said, "Who is this?"  I said, "Oh, excuse me, who are you?"  I said, "This is a Budget Rent a Car WATS line."  She said, "I'm Eppie Lederer.  This is my WATS line.  Get off now."  (Laughter) I was stunned (laughter).  What could I do?  The boss' wife?  "Yes ma'am," (laughter).  "It's yours; you got it," (laughter).  But, you know, you had little, little things like that to deal with, so I had to sit there for about an hour, and, you know, keep dialing to see if she's off (laughter), you know, so I could get back on and do my work (laughter).
Speaker 2: So she, she, she could access it from home--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Oh, she had it right there in the house, yeah, because Jules [Lederer] had it there.  And, of course, he had moved out and moved to London [England], but it was still in his apartment where he--where they lived, had a big, magnificent apartment on Near North Side [Chicago, Illinois], and it was probably about ten thousand square feet, something like that, you know (laughter).
Story_ID: 220689
Speaker 1: Any stories about Transamerica [Corporation]?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: It's like it's so laid back there that there may not be any stories or--(laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, there were--there were just a lot of things that happened there.  I mean, we sponsored--my first CEO was a guy named Jim Harvey [James R. Harvey] and he has--his interest was tennis, he played tennis, so we had a Grand Prix tennis tournament, and the Grand Prix Tennis tournaments in those days were boys and girls, and then nowadays, most of the tournaments are just men and/or women, you know, and one company sponsors this one and that one, but we had both.  And so the--my CEO would frequently be away, so I got a chance to make the awards and presentations on Saturday night, be on television and stuff like that, you know, and it was kind of a big deal, and, and it was a lot of fun doing that.  You--I've got pictures of handing awards to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: John McEnroe and--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, McEnroe and Ivan Lendl, and those guys, and used to always go to those--and I loved tennis in those days; that's all I did.  So I used to spend my week at the tennis tournament.  You know, I'd work in the day, hustle off to watch the matches in the evening.  My wife would come out, we'd have dinner there and just watch those guys play and it was--it was fabulous, you know.  Those were the days when Arthur Ashe, Stan Smith were finishing their careers.  They were the senior guys in those days.  And McEnroe and Lendl were the young pups coming along later, you know, so that was later in the '70s [1970s], but I loved it then.  That's how I met Arthur and Stan Smith, and all those great players and, and it was just a great life.  And then, of course, the company's always owned boxes at all the sports, so I used to have--as the entertainment host, I used to have charge of the box quite often, have all my guests there, business guests, personal guests.  So we had--I never missed a 49er [San Francisco 49ers] game and--
Speaker 1: Those are the--
Speaker 2: --still own my season tickets for the 49ers, haven't given them up.
Speaker 1: Those are the, the heydays of the 49ers.
Speaker 2: That's when we won five Super Bowls, and I saw every one of them.  Yeah, it was fun.  So we had a lot of great times in San Francisco [California].  And Oakland [California] did well.  I mean, the Oakland [Athletics] baseball team was hot in those days, you know.  It was the end of the great dynasty when Oakland was a dynamic team.  Then the [Oakland] Raiders were, were good.  Then they--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Then they left us and moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and everybody got mad, so all of these were big political issues, by the way.  Then, I moved to the East Bay [San Francisco Bay Area, California], so I got to be involved in the Oakland politics a lot.  And the mayor appointed me as a commissioner of the port commission, which ran all the port operations and had the same powers of city council, so I became president of that for four years and ran that operation, so--
Speaker 1: On the Oakland side or?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And--well, San Francisco really has very little to nothing shipping.  Oakland took all of their shipping, so for the [San Francisco] Bay Area, Oakland was the port, yeah.  So I got to travel all over the world for the port and do ceremonies and contracts, and that was a lot of fun, places I had never been before, you know.  In Asia, Europe, places I missed, I made up for (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, it sounds like it.  It sounds like you're having a good time during all this.
Speaker 2: I was; I was.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I thoroughly enjoyed it.  It's a lot of work, but you work, too, you know.
Story_ID: 220690
Speaker 1: --Now you've been engaged with some volunteer activities through the--well, you retired [from Transamerica Corporation] in '98 [1998].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And did--is there anything you want to talk--say before we talk about retirement or, or anything you want to--
Speaker 2: Any--I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: --talk about before we, we get to retirement.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, that's fine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a--oh, I had a--since I retired, I've been involved in a lot of volunteer stuff, you know, and one of them is an organization I belong to called Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity, and one of my childhood buddies became national president or grand sire archon is what the term is, and so I naturally had to carry his luggage and do whatever he needs to support him.  And so he has appointed me to a lot of work things like chairman of his Grand Social Action Committee in charge of developing the foundations, gala fundraiser ball at the Grand Convention, which happens every two years, and we just did it in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in July, and that was a big undertaking.  So for the first time, we didn't have a record company to donate all of our entertainment and our funds, so we had to sell tickets and raise the money, and get corporations to underwrite it, so we raised a pretty substantial sum of money, and that was my responsibility to coordinate that, and so we just did that.  So that--I'm very tired after a year and a half of that work, and I'm relieved, but that's--all goes toward the foundation, and the foundation that the Boule established, and the Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity is called the Boule, that's just common terminology.  So it established a foundation about twenty-five, thirty years ago to deal with improving the community around us, and so we have what's called a social action program, and each Boule or each chapter in each city, there are 110 of them--the men are supposed to get involved in their community, do something for the uplifting of the community.  And principally, they work on African American males, trying to encourage them to get good, solid educations, look for a career, desire a career, and prepare for it.  So they do a lot of mentoring.  A lot of these programs require funds to support them, because we do a lot of things.  We take them places, we provide opportunities for them; we train them; we give them education if we can; support--so we raised about eight million dollars in our foundation to support that effort, and that's principally one of the things that I'm now gonna be in a leadership role on because I just got appointed to vice chair of the board, so they're expecting me to get off my duff and be a good fundraiser (laughter).  But it does require a lot of volunteer time, so I spend a lot of time with that.
Story_ID: 220691
Speaker 1: And my family has a small foundation, so we use that to support all my children's personal efforts and contributions and organizations they support and the ones that my wife [Ruth Douglas Lockhart] supports and I support, so, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, how many children do you have?
Speaker 1: I have two boys.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  One who's thirty-two, thirty-three and the other one who just turned forty-two [Mark Lockhart], yeah.  And so they--you know, we all--they're on our board and we get together and make contributions to things we work on.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So we kind of do social action, too.  My wife's very active with trying to get homes built in the inner city, affordable homes, like Habitat for Humanity does.  She's on a board of an organization called H.O.M.E.S., Inc., in Fort Lauderdale [Florida], and that's what they do on a private basis, raise money, build these house, and hopefully--and you get the people you're trying to sell them to to work on them with you, and then you move them in at, you know, very low market rates and at the lowest possible prices so you can get people started on their feet and build pride.  Pride comes from ownership.  I mean, you don't own anything, you know, it really, you know, it grates at ya.  And people who own things love it.  They take care of it.  They take pride in it, and it makes them work harder at their jobs and more responsible about everything.  So it's a wonderful project that she's on, and that's what we try to do, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Anything else that--with the social action committee of Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], what, what are you focusing on?
Speaker 1: Well, we focus on, on, as I said, the mentoring of young men, young African American males right now.  We call them the endangered species, because so many African American males, young males, are just not driving for education and not doing anything with it if they got it, anything substantial.  And--
Speaker 2: So where do you engage them?  At the high school level or grade school?
Speaker 1: At the high school level, generally the high school level, although we do have programs for scholarships to go to college and programs for graduate school, business school.  And Harvey [C.] Russell [Jr.] who was one of the first African American corporate execs in America, it was with Pepsi-Cola [PepsiCo] early in his career, and we've established in his honor a--well, he has too.  Pepsi-Cola has provided the money to provide a scholarship for a graduate business school student in his honor.  And we--for example, this year, we put aside a hundred thousand dollars for special scholarships in honor of our centennial.  This is our 100th anniversary for the--it's the oldest black Greek letter organization in America, so that's a one-time shot.  And then the eight million dollars, we spend about a quarter million dollars of that in other scholarships for graduating juniors--I'm sorry, seniors going on to college, and we give a fairly sizeable amount to the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] and organizations like that, too.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But at the local level, a lot of Boules or chapters as, as you would call it, they have programs that do deal with health, African American males, doing screening and testing for prostate cancer, which, you know, a lot of our people don't have access to that medical kind of preventive care, and so we've established throughout the country a program where these guys are supposed to--the doctors in the Boule are establishing these programs, a screening program in their community.  It's all volunteerism.  And sometimes we even give spiffs to get the parents in because--and you work on the children, because a lot of men are reluctant to come in, and we have to get wives and daughters to get their fathers to come in for testing, so we provide funds for that to incentivize them, you know, give them a day to go somewhere else too to have fun as an incentive to come in and take the test.  There are all kinds of programs.  It's up to the individual Boule to figure out it's own--use it's own creativity to come up with this program, but the ones I talked about are fairly broad.
Story_ID: 220692
Speaker 1: Now, this is a question we always ask, and--what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I think--I think one of my biggest hopes is that people will listen to Bill Cosby and what he just said recently, that the most important thing in life, and I learned this as a child, and I told you over and over about my mother [Margaret Blakeley] and my father [Edgar Lockhart] and people in my family who said, listen, it's about being the best.  You've got--you don't have time to waste and that's why I was always in a hurry.  And you got to--you got to get there, you got to get on your feet, and you got to do it on your own.  You can't sit back and blame the world for everything that goes wrong.  It's always gonna--something's gonna happen to everybody that's a negative, but you have to use that as an opportunity to say, "Look, I'm gonna fight this, beat it, get myself on my feet, and survive and do what I want to do."  "My goal is here and I'm gonna get there, to the stars through difficulties," that's what Charlotte Hawkins Brown always said.  And those are my hopes, that we can get people to realize that, and most importantly, African American students to realize that this education is free at the beginning.  It's totally free.  Use it until the maximum, because that's where your future is, you know.  I mean, that's how you, you can have a life and be successful and not worry about your children and raising them and educating them, and--but if you don't get the preparation, you can't get there.  It's a struggle.  You can have a family, but it's gonna be hard.  They make it so difficult for them to--now, I realize that's not everybody, but the--it's disproportionate amongst our people.  And so that's where we--I hope to spend a lot of time, and we do.
Story_ID: 220693
Speaker 1: Now, when you look at your career and business and the other things you've done, at this juncture, would, would there be anything major that you'd do differently?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I probably would not have left Budget Rent a Car Corporation [Budget Rent a Car System, Inc.] to go to San Francisco [California] and get out of the law practice, which I now realize I loved dearly, and I probably should've made the decision not to do that.  I probably would've wound up going back into private practice or taking another corporate job, but, you know, that's the way life is.  I mean, I would've enjoyed doing that a lot more, I think.  Now, I enjoyed what I did, but the ultimate satisfaction wasn't there.  I missed the law practice tremendously, yeah.
Speaker 1: You don't have the ability to win a case and that sort of thing, and, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I didn't try a lot of cases.  I was basically a desk lawyer, but I did try some, rarely ever lost any.  I can't recall losing a case.  I may have lost an eviction case or something.  When I was a very, very young lawyer, one of the first accounts we had in our office was the [Kate] Maremont Foundation and Corporation [Chicago, Illinois].  The Maremont Foundation owned a lot of major affordable apartment buildings in Chicago [Illinois].  And the Maremont was an offshoot of the Sears Roebuck [and Co.] families and they put this money in this foundation to do that, so they had these affordable housing operations.  And, and very often the people who moved in there, they were lovely places, but they couldn't afford it or whatever and they frequently ran into trouble.  You're always gonna run into trouble.  They had thousands of tenants.  And so we represented them on the eviction court.  And Edith [S.] Sampson, Judge Edith Sampson, whose name you probably remember, former ambassador to the United Nations [UN] and delegate to the United Nations, and very outstanding woman, became a judge, and she was in charge of the eviction court.  And, of course, I had the contract with the client for that, so I was there every day, and Edith and I became very good friends.  And I learned a lot about people in that court and dealing with evictions.  It was just an interesting experience, and I learned a lot about her, and I learned what--here's a woman who came from basically nothing.  I mean, she was poor as dirt and rose to become at that time, the pinnacle of her profession, a lawyer, you know, and a judge, and delegate to the United Nations.  I mean, they didn't appoint black people to things like that in those days, and it was marvelous.  And I was leading up to something and I've forgotten my point (laughter).
Speaker 1: Eviction court--eviction court--all right.  All right.
Speaker 2: No, when I brought it up, though, I was--I was gonna make another point--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --and I can't tell you exactly what it was, you know (laughter).  It'll come back to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When, when it does, just--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Pardon?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: A case I lost--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Oh, I may have lost, yeah.  I may have possibly lost a case in her court because the tenant complained too loudly that the apartment wasn't in great condition, which--and Edith would say, "That's not possible is it counselor?"  And I'd say, "I wouldn't think so, but it's possible," (laughter).  She'd say, "All right, dismissed," (laughter).  She was, if anything, fair.  Yeah, so I--but I tried thousands of those and they were minimal.  I mean, you'd stand in court for ten minutes or--I mean two minutes a case, so it was fast.  I wouldn't consider it a loss, actually, but technically you'd say it was a loss, yeah.  Being fair is never a loss.
Story_ID: 220694
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done up to this point and you're still doing things, you're pretty active, but what would you consider to be your legacy at this point?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.  I don't know.  I don't know that there's a legacy.  I just--you know, I've not done anything extraordinary.  I'm--it was a pretty ordinary life and, and I think if anything, I just--my mother [Margaret Blakely] would be proud of me because she'd say, "Well, he's self-sustaining, he's able to afford his meals, and he's got a decent home, and he's supported his family, and educated his children, has a lovely wife, and basically is healthy and they are too, and never been arrested, been in prison."  You ever been in Joliet [Correctional Center] prison [Joliet, Illinois]?  It's awful.  I went to see a client.  You know, I was appointed by the court to go.  I said, "If they'll ever let me outta here after all these doors kept clanging, I don't think I'll ever come back in here even as a lawyer again," (laughter), you know.  Just miserable.  But it makes you think that--I think that if, if a lot of people saw that and saw what life could be like on the other side, I don't--I think they'd give up some of the things they're doing, you know.
Speaker 1: You'd think, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You'd think that'd be true.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But--no, I don't know.  I couldn't think of anything I'd want on my tombstone--good father (laughter).
Story_ID: 220695
Speaker 1: That leads almost to the last question, which is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: That's it.  Good father and a great grandpa (laughter).
Story_ID: 220696
Speaker 1: That's my father, Edgar Lee Lockhart, and my stepmother, Juliet [Mann] Lockhart.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Circa, I'm gonna guess, 1945, '6 [1946], '7 [1947], somewhere around there.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That I'm not sure, but it would probably be in Springfield, Massachusetts, or somewhere around New York [New York], probably New Rochelle [New York] maybe if it's not in downtown.
Speaker 2: New Rochelle, that's--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I--that--this is my mother, Margaret Blakely, then married to Lilliewood whom she's sitting with, and that's my stepfather, Samuel Lilliewood.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And that's around 1946, '47 [1947].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Eminence (laughter).  And I think that's pretty close to '46 [1946], '47 [1947] also.  I think I'm probably about nine-ish there, maybe--I don't think I'm ten yet, could be.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: No, the photographer's my family cousin from New York, Brownie Studio [sic. Brownie's Photo Studio], on Boston Post Road in the Bronx [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: That's my graduation picture from [Alice Freeman] Palmer Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina, in June 1954.
Speaker 1: Me in college.  I think that's law school [Boston University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts], so it's probably 1956 or '57 [1957].  I look pretty scared, so it's probably 1956, '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right.  And this is a picture of my wedding to my first wife, Reba Noble [ph.], and on the left is my father, Edgar, my mother, Margaret, behind Reba the bride is Reverend Parker [ph.] from the Baptist church, Reba's mother's on the right and her name is Millie Noble [ph.], and that's her brother, Handy Noble [ph.]  who has since deceased, and her grandmother, Carrie Noble, C-A-R-R-I-E, and she's dead, too.
Speaker 2: And the little black spot on the left there in the second row, that's me (laughter) at Judge Advocate General [JAG] school [Judge Advocate General's Legal Center and School] at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville, Virginia, and that would be July 1950--1960.  Yes, July 1960.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah?  Really?  Ah.  Yeah, it's still--
Speaker 1: And that's November 1960 at a club ball--no, actually it's a [Sigma Pi Phi] Fraternity ball for the man who's my son's godfather, and my wife and me, Reba and Jim [HistoryMaker James A. Lockhart], and I was still in the [U.S.] military, so I'm wearing my dress blues as a first lieutenant.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And my early dabbling in politics, and that's me standing behind the 5th Ward committeeman Marshall Korshak in Chicago [Illinois] at a Democratic function.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's me as a young lawyer in Chicago in a picture being taken by the Illinois State Bar Association for its then 50th or 100th anniversary publication.  I think it's in their publication, I guess, yeah.
Speaker 2: --the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California], and this is our--one of our annual dinners in which I chaired the dinner, so it lets you know I have--did a little bit of community outreach.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Of the Bay--Bay Area Urban League in San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: (Unclear) in 1993.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Mayor Tom Bradley of Los Angeles, California, who was running for governor of the State of California, and that's me on the left and [HistoryMaker] Gen. Harry Brooks [Jr.] on the right, who was at that time a executive vice president for the Amfac corporation [Amfac, Inc.] in San Francisco, a major, major corporation.  And that picture is about nineteen--that's November 1997, and that's you know who--
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Dusty [Baker] (laughter).
Speaker 2: Dusty, is that Dusty Baker?
Speaker 1: Dusty Baker, the manager--currently, the manager of the Chicago Cubs, but he was then the manager of the [San Francisco] Giants and I was the emcee at--giving him an honor, an award in San Francisco.
Speaker 2: And that's me introducing the then--at that time, he was not mayor, he was the speaker of the House [of Representatives] of the California [State] Assembly, [HistoryMaker] Willie [L.] Brown.  That's about 1997 also.
Speaker 1: Now you're not in this one, but these are two--
Speaker 2: No, I'm not, but I--it was a party I had given for the Democratic Party and speaker, [Representative] Tip O'Neill, on the left from Massachusetts, and--we can do without this one.
Speaker 1: Isn't that [Senator] Robert Byrd?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You wanna do that?  And--
Speaker 1: Robert Byrd who was just recently in the news criticizing--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead with that one.
Speaker 1: Uh, let's pass on this one.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Me when I was president of the chamber of commerce for San Francisco, actually the Downtown Association, we called it.  And I was chairman of the board, and I was doing--emceeing their annual dinner--or luncheon when the [San Francisco] 49ers had just won their second Super Bowl in a row, and I was giving an award to Bill Walsh, the coach of the 49ers at that time.  And Barry MacKay who was a tennis commentator was helping me because we gave him a wonderful award for tennis, a racket.
Speaker 2: This is Senator Harry [F.] Byrd who has been senator almost all my life from West Virginia [sic. Virginia], and he was also at the Democratic National Convention at one of the parties I gave and sponsored for them.
Speaker 1: Okay, you can just put it right here, that's fine.  And we were--this was the anniversary of Martin Luther King [Jr.] Day in San Francisco at GLIDE Memorial [United Methodist Church, San Francisco, California], and we had Coretta Scott King, his widow, there and it was at the church that--at GLIDE Memorial where [Reverend] Cecil Williams who's standing behind Dianne Feinstein who was then the mayor of San Francisco.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) and me and I--it won't stand?  Well, we don't have to do it.
Speaker 1: I think this is a reception I gave on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] for [Senator] Dianne Feinstein, who was senator at the time and [HistoryMaker] Ron Dellums was there and he was my congressman when I lived in Oakland, California.  That's probably around 1976, '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: And I was chairman of the board of the City Club of San Francisco [San Francisco, California] and I had as my guest, [Representative] Dick Gephardt, who I knew fairly well and he was then the majority leader of the House of Representatives of the United States.
Speaker 1: And, [President] George [Herbert Walker Bush] number one was president at the time and, of course, we were--my company was a supporter, so this is a typical kind of picture they do with sponsors who give major contributions.
Speaker 2: And, of course, similarly when [President] Ronald [Wilson] Reagan was president, we did a--when he was out visiting in San Francisco, we did the similar kind of pose.  Actually, I used that picture myself in a--my retirement announcement.  And in that picture, I said, "Come to my retirement party and my sixtieth birthday, and remember we're gonna have fun, because I know how to enjoy myself.  I still have my marbles even though he doesn't."
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Did you?
Speaker 2: That was--my Republican friends didn't like that.
Speaker 1: I guess they--
Speaker 2: And there's a picture at the 1984 Democratic National Convention in San Francisco, but the picture was taken in the Transamerica Pyramid [San Francisco, California], and that was Jim Harvey [James R. Harvey]  who was living then, and he was the president and chairman of Transamerica [Corporation], and Tip O'Neill, in whose honor we did the party, he was speaker of the house in that--those days.
Speaker 1: And this was in our private apartment in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] in about nineteen--I'm gonna guess 1994 or '95 [1995] when [Senator] Bob Dole was the power in the [U.S.] Senate.  He was the leader of the Republican majority in the senate at the time.
Speaker 2: And this is an award I'm giving to the then Mayor Lionel [J.] Wilson, who was the first black mayor of the City of Oakland, California, and that would be somewhere around 1992, '93 [1993].
Speaker 1: And this is a pose with the then governor, [Governor] Pete Wilson, of California, and I--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my son Mark Blakely Lockhart who lives in Richmond, Virginia, and is now forty-two years old.
Speaker 2: --Blakely Lockhart with my law school [Boston University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts] classmate, Elliot Rosenberg [ph.], in Hartford, Connecticut.
