Story_ID: 10188
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer.  Scott Stearns is the videographer, Samuel Adams is the observer.  And I'd like sir for you to state your name and spell it for us and your date of birth, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm Richard Alexander Long, that's R-I-C-H-A-R-D, Richard Alexander A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R Long, L-O-N-G, and I was born February 9th, 1927.
Speaker 1: And I'd like today's date and our location?
Speaker 2: Well we are in my home in Atlanta, Georgia, 883 Edgewood Avenue, Atlanta, 30307.  And I never know the date but it is March and the fourteenth today?
Speaker 1: Fifteenth.
Speaker 2: The fifteenth, you see I don't know the date.  Now normally a few years ago one would have known that date cause income tax was due that day.  But March 15th, 2002.
Speaker 1: That's great, okay.  And your profession is what?
Speaker 2: I'm a university professor.
Story_ID: 10189
Speaker 1: Now I want to start out with talking about your parents and your mother's name, her maiden name?  I know it was Lee--.
Speaker 2: Her name was Lela Washington was her maiden name.
Speaker 1: And can you talk about her, you know where she was from and you know what you know about her?
Speaker 2: Well, I won't have very much information about that because my mother was in fact an orphan.  She was born in 1892 in Columbia, South Carolina, I think.  It is not real clear who her father or mother was.  I think the family tradition is that she was actually reared by friends or relatives of her mother, but the mother apparently died quite early and the father was never on the scene.  So we know very little about her origins.
Speaker 1: Did she ever talk with you about growing up?
Speaker 2: No, and I don't know that she ever talked to anybody much about it.  But in my case she would not have talked at all with me because my mother died when I was six years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, now your father, his name?
Speaker 2: Well my father's name was Thaddeus B., the B stands for Bartholomew, both names I think come from the Bible, Long.  And he was born in 1889 in Union, South Carolina and came with his family, his mother, father and older sister to Columbia, South Carolina probably around 1890 or 1891 because I think he was still an infant when he came to Columbia. Because his, his older sister, his aunt, whom I knew and with whom I lived for four years when I was in college in Columbia, South Carolina described to me on one or two occasions her memory of that train journey from Union to Columbia, which was not a very long journey but for young children it might have been.  And she remembered that my father was a babe in arms at that point.  So he actually grew up in Columbia without any recollection of Union, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Did he--do you know much about his background (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, yes I know of course a great deal about my father's background because I knew my father's family.  His father was trained as a blacksmith.  His father would have been born around 1865.  And his mother who was also from the Union area and I don't know very much about her family, but she would have been born around the same time, around 1865 and so on.  And they had--my grandfather and grandmother had quite a few children.  And they--the later, my father's later siblings of course were all born in Columbia.  Wel,l my grandfather had what was apparently a successful blacksmith business in Columbia, South Carolina and all of his sons were apprenticed to that business.  So my father was actually apprenticed you know to the blacksmith and became himself a professional blacksmith.  And when he later migrated again with my older siblings who were born in Columbia to Philadelphia around 1918, he got a job with the city of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] working in what was then their blacksmith services.  Of course that collapsed in the early '30s [1930s] and from that he had an unsuccessful transition to dealing with automobiles and things of that sort.
Speaker 1: Now do you know why did the family move to Philadelphia?  What was the--?
Speaker 2: It, it was a part of the general migration of World War I.  I don't, I don't think they were in an particular problem in that well after all they were urban people and had other successful relatives in Columbia, South Carolina.  But I think they just you know bought into the dream of greater prosperity and so on in the north and so he came north because it was a general movement at that time.
Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Well, they met as children I think in Columbia, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Columbia and they married after that?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  I think that my--they married fairly early I think probably when they were still late teenagers but they knew each other as children.
Story_ID: 10190
Speaker 1: What were some of your earliest memories growing up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Well, my--I have recollections of all kinds of you know the conditions of life in Philadelphia.  I remember of the you know the way that bread was delivered.  More or less milk was delivered all by horses in, in the early '30s [1930s].  In other words, I was born in 1927 and I'm sure I have recollections from about 1931 if not earlier.  And I remember for example the radio and the fact that at 7 o'clock [ p.m.] I think 'Amos n' Andy' came on and Kate Smith came on and so on.  I remember the fact that the streets were lit by gaslight and the gas lighter had to come by every night and light them, this was before automatic gaslights and so on.  And of course I have also recollections of you know my--of church and so on.  My mother and father were Episcopalian so actually my father--my, my mother had been reared by Episcopalians.  My father came up in a Baptist background but he became an Episcopalian after marriage.  And so I went to the St. Augustine's Episcopal Church in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and I have good recollections of the church from the time I was about four or five years old.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your mother's [Lela Washington Long] death at all?  You were six years old (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was six years old but I was already in first grade I think.  And she had to--you know I remember her, of course her having to go to the hospital. And by this time my mother and father had separated, partly for economic reasons.  And my mother had gone to live with my sister and her husband and along with me and my younger brother.  And at this time my sister already had two children.  My--so I have two nephews who are very close to me in age and therefore with whom my relationship is more like that of a brother.  And so my mother had been ill for, about off and on about a year I think and went to the hospital and died in the hospital of cancer.
Story_ID: 10191
Speaker 1: And can you give your siblings' names and the order--you're second from the young, I mean the second youngest?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm next to the youngest.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes, my oldest sibling is my sister Inez Etta Richardson, Inez Etta Long Richardson who is still alive.  She is ninety three and is in very, very good shape in terms of you know being--her health.  So far as I know she's on no medication and she doesn't go to the doctor very often and she lives alone in her own apartment and she had to stop driving about two years ago.  But she lives in Columbia, South Carolina.  Ironically after having grown up and lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], she went to Philadelphia of course when she was about ten or twelve.  But later her older son went to Columbia to become a teacher, schoolteacher.  He had begun his career as a teacher in Philadelphia but found that environment very, very unpleasant.  And we had cousins on my mother's side, that is cousins of the people who had reared my mother who were schoolteachers in Columbia, South Carolina and they suggested that he come to Columbia where they thought school teaching was very pleasant.  And he followed that advice and moved to Columbia and did find it all right.  And his mother later went there, visited him frequently and eventually she moved back to Columbia so that's why she's in Columbia, South Carolina today.  But to return to my sister, she's as I said, enjoys excellent health and is living in Columbia now.  My next siblings, all brothers, all deceased.  My next sibling was Herbert Elliott Long who was two years younger than my sister.  And the next sibling was Thaddeus B., Jr., two years younger than Herbert and he is deceased.  And then the next sibling was Wilson Rogers Long, two years younger than Thaddeus, who was known as T.B. incidentally.  Nobody, most people , most of his friends knew him as Thaddeus.  And he is deceased.  There was actually another sibling who died as an infant whose name was William, named for my paternal grandfather.  But I was born in 1927, so that means that I was, I'm twelve years younger than my surviving, or the then surviving sibling, Wilson.  And then I have a younger brother born two years after I was.  His name is Curtis Weldon Long and he lives in San Diego [California].
Story_ID: 10192
Speaker 1: Now you said that your parents separate--you were with your mother [Lela Washington Long]--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --when she passed away?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, but then my mother was living with my sister [Inez Long Richardson]--.
Speaker 1: Sister.
Speaker 2: --who was already a married woman with two children.
Speaker 1: So you, did you get raised by that aunt or did you get raised--what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, basically my sister [Inez Long Richardson] was responsible for rearing me and my brother for several years.  My mother [Lela Washington Long]  died in 1933.  In 1938 however, after--we occasionally visited relatives in Columbia, South Carolina.  Actually visited the maternal adopted relatives.  But by this time my aunt, my father's older sister, oldest sister in fact, who in fact was the one who told me about coming by train from Union to Columbia was living pretty much alone.  Her son, her husband had died.  Her parents had lived with her, that is my grandfather and grandmother.  My grandfather had died.  My grandmother had gone to New York to stay with one of her older sons where she stayed for a number of years and so this aunt was alone, and largely because of the weight of having two younger brothers in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and so on.  My sister decided that it would be not a bad idea if the two of us went to South Carolina to live with the aunt and this is what we in fact did.  And so I was in Columbia, South Carolina for four years during which I went to high school and finished high school.  My younger brother after about two years decided he didn't like it much and he went back to Philadelphia so he spent two years in Columbia, but I spent four years.
Story_ID: 10193
Speaker 1: So you--now let's go back just to schooling.  And where did you go for elementary school?
Speaker 2: In Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] I went principally to the elementary school known as the, the Arnold School which is in North Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Actually there was a brief period--life is extremely complicated.  A brief period when we, when my brother and I rejoined my father after he remarried briefly, but that marriage didn't take very well.  And during that period we actually went to other schools.  But basically my elementary education was at the Arnold School in Philadelphia, a school which was in keeping with the general pattern in Philadelphia at the time, a completely black school.  So I had the, you know, the advantage of having a totally segregated education in Philadelphia from pre-kindergarten through the sixth grade because the other schools that we went to well these were also black schools.  And so after I left Philadelphia and went to Columbia, South Carolina I was able to be promoted one or two grades and I began really my freshman high school at Booker T. Washington High School in Columbia, South Carolina.  So then for the next four years in high school I had a completely segregated education.
Speaker 1: Do you--what was the Philadelphia that you were in like at that time?  You know do you have a sense of that?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think that both my natural curiosity and the advantages that came from going to the kind of school I went to gave me a lot of exposures and so on.  For example we had frequent field trips to museums and to the zoo and this kind of thing.  And after a very short time, I guess from the time I was about ten I could move all around the city alone without any supervision or without any--it was not unusual for a ten year old.  This was before babysitters had to be around until you were fifteen or whatever, you know and so on.  But it, it--the word babysitter was unknown at the time you see, what have you.  Anybody who could sit up was fairly responsible for himself.  So, so at age ten I could walk over much of the city myself and you know to the places like the museum and so on.  So I set up my, pretty much my own schedule and I wasn't very much molested in that respect.  I was basically a person whose life was absorbed by reading and you know other activities and--.
Speaker 1: And why do you think you were attracted to reading?  Is it just that you know, what--was that something that you know your, alot of your family members or was it school or what were--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Well school, I would say nothing interfered with it.  I had the vague impression that I was a little unlike many of my peers and siblings but it was nothing anything that bothered me to any great extent.  I mean occasionally somebody would say, "Don't you think you're going to get blind if you do all that reading," and so on.  But apart from that it was, I wasn't interfered with very much.
Speaker 1: What were you reading at that point in time?  What was it you--what did you like? (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Well, that is an interesting question because actually I have less--I, I became a member of the library quite early.  I think you could get library cards at about eight or nine, or maybe younger and so on, because I have a very you know distinct recollection of two or three different public libraries that I went to in Philadelphia.  And I read all of the standard you know boys' books and so on, but I was also interested in history and with you know historical accounts.  Anything around the house I read and so on.  So by the time I was you know about twelve, eleven or twelve you know I had read a great many things.  And of course I read the newspapers you know passionately and so on and was pretty much up on public affairs and so on.  I have a very distinct recollection for example of the Ethiopian War and of the Spanish Civil War, all of those things, all of the events leading up to [Adolf] Hitler in Germany.  All of that was something which was quite familiar to me cause I avidly read the newspaper.
Speaker 1: And did you--you know you say you were an introspective person.  I mean within the, you know pride of your life what things did you, did you have a great imagination or were you, what things were you contemplating in your quiet times is what I'm trying to go for?  Did you dream of things?  Did you, you know fantasize about things?  Did you, you know--?
Speaker 2: I can't really put my finger on my imagination during that period.  I was interested in the things that I read and heard about so I think I had a great interest probably in, in travel, the places that I read about far away I was you know interested in seeing and going to and, and so on.  But--.
Speaker 1: And Arnold School you went to and 'til what age?
Speaker 2: Well I would have started there about five in kindergarten.
Speaker 1: And then--?
Speaker 2: And I was there until, actually to the age of eleven when I came out of sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then you, you--?
Speaker 2: Then I went to Columbia, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: To Columbia, South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 10194
Speaker 1: The other thing I'd like to just ask, that I ask people and this could be you know I would like to say Philadelphia but I'm wondering what sort of sights, smells and sounds reminded you of you know, reminded you of your childhood.  You did talk about the, you know the people with the lamp--.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Lanterns, lighting of the lamps.  I'm just wondering if there are any other like smells or maybe sounds?
Speaker 2: That's again a very interesting question and I think that--but I wouldn't be able to describe myself as being profoundly introspective and sort of focused on things that are going on around so that I seldom have occasion to sit down and think about you know what things were like.  But I, I observed on people whom I know who had very distinct recollections of their childhood and memories of childhood and so on, but that's never anything which has involved me to any you know considerable extent.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you go back to Columbia, South Carolina had you been going back and forth all during that period?
Speaker 2: I (unclear) had at least two, two visits there I think maybe in the summers of maybe '36 [1936] and '37 [1937].  My sister [Inez Long Richardson] had gone there with the four boys you know me, my brother and my two nephews to spend maybe a month, six weeks or so on because it was a way of having a vacation and her getting away from the routine because she was a basically a housewife.  She--her husband's employment which was with Horn & Hardart [Philadelphia based Automat restaurant] as a cook or chef was enough to pay you know her basic expenses so she was a housewife.
Speaker 1: Now did that represent much of a change because you know you had become sort of a northern person.  You know Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and Columbia is different.  But you know you get, you were in segregated schools (unclear) places.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Was there much of a change or any adjustment that you remember?
Speaker 2: I--now Columbia was physically different from Philadelphia, physically quite different at the time, much less so now, maybe not at all now.  But I didn't have any sense of culture shock or anything like that.  I was able to you know resume some of my other habits particularly when I went to school.  I didn't feel in any way different or alienated and not remember, don't remember any particular you know problems in connection with that.  And there was in spite of everything a branch of the library that blacks could go to in Columbia which I became acquainted with.  And I would say one way or the other became the chief basis of my developing intellectual life in Columbia because the high school itself didn't have a very impressive library at all.  I vaguely remember a library possibly at the high school.  But the public library which had a woman whose name I don't remember but a very understanding librarian, did have things.  I certainly remember reading you know, withdrawing [Ernest] Hemingway  from that library and a number of other contemporary novelists.  And of course there were standard books on history or anything else I would listen to.
Story_ID: 10195
Speaker 1: Then in the college, in, in the high school itself I had teachers who had collections available in the classrooms and, and so on.  And so I think I had a very, very excellent high school education.
Speaker 2: When you say collections, what kind--?
Speaker 1: Well for example my English teacher was a member of the Book of the Month Club and the Ante Meyer (ph.) Anthologies which were very important collections of American and British poetry for the period were anthologies which I knew, you know very well and other kinds of contemporary books.  But I had a series of very good English teachers and quite early I had decided myself that I would become an English teacher.  But I could mention two or three English teachers that I had in high school who were quite remarkable people. There was a woman named Thomasina Thomas who was I think a native Columbian and who, I remember hearing about her, from her in my earliest years about Carson McCullers, whose novel "The Heart is a Lonely Hunter" had just come out.  And I probably read that with her.  I had another English teacher, Harriet Sawyer Rogers who was a graduate of Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and who I later found out, well might have even known at that time but was, had been a pupil of Sterling Brown at Howard.  And later when I had the opportunity to know Sterling he remembered her as one of his very, very bright students.  And she of course was, was quite a wonderful person, and quite a few other you know remarkable teachers in Columbia.  The principal of the school himself who was a very involved principal, J. Andrew Simmons of Charleston, South Carolina, a graduate of the old Avery Academy and he was a very, he was a Fisk University, [Nashville, Tennessee] graduate who was a very hands on principal.  He actually spoke, I think he, seems to me he spoke to the school everyday.  That may have been--but anyway he spoke very frequently and he had a lot to say about a lot of things.  But I, I you know found him an admirable gentleman.  And so, and I think subsequently after that point he went on and earned two Ph.D.s and eventually became the head of children's services in one of the institutions in New York and so on.  And many of my teachers in that high school did other things.  My high school mathematics teacher was later my physics teacher at Howard so I think that you know I had the advantage of a very, very superior high school education.
Story_ID: 10196
Speaker 1: Now what other things were forming you at that time?  Do you, can you speak to those?  I mean was it your readings, was it other exposure, was it church or other people you wee interacting with?  I'm just trying to--.
Speaker 2: Well, I would say that you know the center of my life was really reading, church and, and a sensitivity to you know everything that I could find out about.  I was very, very curious and I frequently pushed envelope of segregation.  I went to the various house museums around Columbia and people were surprised when I appeared at the door but didn't have any regulation that said I couldn't come in.  For example Woodrow Wilson had lived in Columbia [South Carolina] and there is a Woodrow Wilson house there which, which you know I visited.  But any kind of institution that was available to you know be visited and so on, I, I would find out about it and would go, you know, just without any self-consciousness and so on.  And I think that occasionally people thought that I was a little peculiar and so on, but I wasn't you know doing any harm so therefore nobody disturbed themselves.  I visited the, the--for example there was an observatory at the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina] which was open two or three nights a week and so on.  When I found out about that I went to look at the stars and so and I'm sure that no black, in retrospect, no black person had been on that campus doing anything of that sort, since you know reconstruction.  But at the same time I you know remember that my very presence provided I think a surprise and so on and white people dealt with that.  They--so on.  But then I can remember going out and finding the one Mormon congregation there to see what they were doing and so on.  And I was--and then church took up a great deal of my time actually, the St. Luke's Episcopal Church.  I was an altar boy as I had been in Philadelphia.  Once I went to church I was just very regular.  And through the church, you know heard and met a number of people and then I developed a great interest in religion.  I even think, thought briefly about possibly becoming an Episcopal priest, but I didn't.  But my great interest was really becoming a, a teacher and becoming an English teacher.
Speaker 1: Now were you doing any writing during those years?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did lots of writing.  As a matter of fact I understand from (laughs)--I was in Columbia some years ago to sign my book, I guess "African Americans, a Portrait".  And one of the people who came up to the desk was a woman who said "Do you remember me?", and so on.  And then I made a rapid deduction and I was able to call her name.  She had been one of my, one of my classmates and so on.  And then later on there was a discussion.  She said you was always writing.  But I didn't remember briefly writing all that much.  But I should say that under the principal of the high school, Mr. Simmons, later Dr. Simmons, the faculty was engaged constantly in various kinds of experimental things.  And they had developed an experimental program for English during the period that I was there.  In other words instead of the standard program, freshman, sophomore, junior, senior English, they developed an alternate program for the junior and senior years in which they program was built around a, some activity all together.  One was a speech program in which all the activities were speech oriented.  So you got your literature, you know you got your you know grammar if you needed it and other such things but it was all did around speech so we spent a lot of time studying you know speech, public speaking of various kinds and so on.  And out of that program you know I became, I won the boys' speaking contest at the school and was sent to the state boys' speaking contest at Orangeburg, South Carolina, South Carolina State College, didn't win that.  A girl won that.  But I remember the speech I had to learn because you either learned a speech or didn't--you know make up your own speech.  It was a passage from Robert G. Ingersoll, who was one of the great orators in the nineteenth century. But he wrote a famous oration on "Beholding the Tomb of Napoleon" and so on.  And so I--you know he describes you know going up the steps and leaning of the balustrade and looking down on the tomb and all of that and so on.  And so I did that, and of course not too many years later I found myself in Paris [France] leaning over the balustrade looking at the tomb of Napoleon.  I would say there were not more than six or seven years between the time I learned that speech and the time I was in Paris looking at the tomb of Napoleon.
Story_ID: 10197
Speaker 1: So we had, that was a very, very interesting thing.  And then the very next year I went into the class of Ms. Rogers, Harriet Sawyer Rogers who had a graduate and her class was based on journalism so we produced the school paper out of that particular class.  And so that of course was a focus for a lot of my writing in the work for the school paper and so on.  And I think I must have spent two years in that particular program.  Here again around you know journalism, around producing the paper.  So I, you know I learned to write newspaper articles and so on there while I was in school.
Speaker 2: And all this time you're still thinking that you want to be an English teacher?
Speaker 1: Basically.  I don't think I ever had any other you know notion that stayed on my mind very long.  Also there was very brief of the notion of me being a priest.  A lot of people told me including members of my family, well you're so smart you ought to be a doctor because they were thinking you know in, in, in the normal black bourgeois kind of thing.  The position was at the top of the heap.  But never for me there was not a moment in my entire life that I ever thought I wanted to be a physician.  And so--.
Speaker 2: You weren't attracted to the math or sciences either were you?
Speaker 1: Not particularly.  I did all right in them but I wasn't particularly attracted to them.
Speaker 2: Now I don't want to--so here you are.  You're in high school.  You're very active in reading, you know and what is your thought about going to school after that, you know going on to college?  What's influencing your decisions?
Speaker 1: Well the people that I knew you know my teachers, other people in town, people at my church and so on had gone to a variety of schools, both in the north and in the south so I was aware of the existence of these various schools.  And I had always, I considered it a possibility that I would return to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and go to Temple [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was a school that I had known about people going to and so on.  So that was always a possibility.  Actually I took various examination and so on and I was, I think admitted to--the admission was a little different than from what it is now.  But I think I was admitted or won partial scholarships to two or three schools.  I think I, I think I took a test for Howard and may have gotten some sort of partial scholarship for Howard and for at least one or two other black schools.  But it seemed to me and to my family in Philadelphia that I could probably go to Temple if I returned to Philadelphia and you know because Temple was a school that you could pay you know your tuition in, in bits and pieces.  You didn't have to pay, produce it all at the beginning of the year.  You had two or three different payments dates and so on.  And I would go back to Temple, go back to Philadelphia, get some kind of part time job and be able to contribute to going to my home school.  So I actually did that.
Story_ID: 10198
Speaker 1: I returned, I was admitted to Temple [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and went and for two years with great difficulty in terms of finding jobs and so on.  I actually stayed at Temple for two years.
Speaker 2: Okay, two years?
Speaker 1: Yes and, when my, remember--I entered, I entered when I was fifteen.
Speaker 2: Right, you were--I knew you were young.  I didn't know you were that young.
Speaker 1: Yes, I was fifteen.
Speaker 2: Okay--I knew you were younger--(simultaneously).
Speaker 1: Yes, I came out of high school when I was fifteen and so I went to Temple.  But it really was kind of hard, you know and--(simultaneously).
Speaker 2: So you were working.  What jobs were you getting?
Speaker 1: Well, first fairly menial jobs in two or three different places and not producing enough money.  But fortunately or unfortunately the war came and jobs became available in the government.  So I was able to get a clerk's job in the government I guess when I was sixteen, which paid enough money to pay for my tuition and so on, but which required so much time that my school work was not going, going very well.  So it really--I, I reached a point where I really was sort of fagged out.  Then something else appeared on the scene which looked like an excellent deal that is the army had created what was known as the training corps, ASTP, the Army Specialized Training Corp.  And through the Army Specialized Training Corps, they were preparing people to do things like become German translators, Japanese translators and also to do various things in the way of engineering and so on.  That program though as it was defined at the time, one had to be eighteen to get into.  But then they created the Army Reserve Specialized Training Corps or the Army Specialized Training Corps Reserve, which you could enter at seventeen.  So I actually entered the army at seventeen and was sent off to train but the--then I had my first disappointment because I was not sent off to train.  Maybe no seventeen year-old was sent off to train, to learn languages, which is what I wanted to do.  I wanted to either learn German or, or Japanese.  Instead I was sent to Howard [University, Washington D.C.], all of the black students all over the country who were admitted at seventeen and there were about two hundred of them were sent to Howard University to study engineering.  So I spent three quarters at Howard from the time I was seventeen or seventeen and three months to about eighteen and three months studying engineering. So I did a lot of mathematics and engineering, drawing and mathematics through calculus and so on, physics and chemistry and it was there of course that my high school mathematics teacher shows up as my college physics teacher.
Speaker 2: That's an amazing story.  And so, and it's all because you were--this was being financed by the government?
Speaker 1: Oh yes, yes--.
Speaker 2: And then what happens at that point then?
Speaker 1: Well, at that point after you became eighteen the first, the quarter after you became eighteen you had to go into basic training.  And then I--they hadn't thought it out very, very carefully so I went into basic training and I actually remained in the basic training for about six months or eight months, whatever.  By this time however, the war [World War II] was over and I didn't really need to be in the Army any longer.  However, I think I probably would have been shipped somewhere or the other just out of , you know, meanness except that I was shipped to California.  And in California I came down with a violent case, an allergy you know serious allergy.  I was always allergy-prone throughout my life.  But I met California ragweed and that had a considerable affect you know on me you know by you know had all kinds of, nothing that interfered with normal living but my eyes, you know my sinuses were clogged.  So I had to go to a hospital.  Well this point since the war was over they didn't care whether you got cured or not.  They said well he's too sick to be in the Army.  So I got a, I got discharged from the Army when I was eighteen, but having been in long enough to qualify for the GI Bill.  So I returned to Phila--to Temple where I was able to finish in about a year and a half, how it worked counting and so on and the result was that I went to Temple and I actually finished Temple in spite of everything when I was twenty.  Otherwise I would have finished at nineteen, every, everything had gone normally and well.
Speaker 2: Now what did you, what was your degree in then at this point when you--and what--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 1: Oh I went back to major in English.
Speaker 2: In English, okay.
Speaker 1: And I graduated with distinction in English.  And Temple that very year inaugurated a system of using graduate assistants which they hadn't before so I qualified for that and I became a graduate assistant and I entered the masters program and I got my masters in one year so I got my masters when I was twenty one.
Speaker 2: So then what are you thinking at this point?  Are you thinking that you want to, you know you want to definitely go into teaching?
Speaker 1: Oh yes.  Yes--and I was able, and fortunately I was able to begin teaching immediately after I got my bachelor's degree as the graduate assistant teaching freshman English and stuff like that.  And I was very happy with that situation and looked forward to continuing perhaps even at Temple.  But Temple was not yet ready and so my, but when I got my masters, you know they of course would not have hired me with my masters.  I did for one term teach at least part time at Temple and by then I was admitted to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in the doctoral program and I began working on the doctoral at the University of Pennsylvania.  However, at this point it was obvious I wasn't going to get a teaching job in Philadelphia at the college level which was the only thing I was interested in so I got another government job with the, I guess the Navy department or one department or the other, either navy, Navy/Army, I--Navy.  Actually I was with the Navy very briefly.  I didn't like the Navy and I got a job with one of the Army programs.  And I suppose I worked for almost a year in that.  Well actually I, I'm going a little ahead of the story because when I spent--finished my first year at Pennsylvania I did not have a job and that brings us up to 1949.  So I applied for and received a position at West Virginia State College in Institute, Virginia which of course is one of the Southern land grant colleges.  And I went to West Virginia, so I taught for one year full time in a black college, teaching what is, was the typical heavy load of the--and diverse load 'cause they didn't care much what you had studied.  You taught what they had to teach, what had to be taught what they had to teaqch--what had to be taught.  But I enjoyed myself.  I had some interesting colleagues there and found it a very, very rich experience that one year.  But I knew I didn't like it long--very much for a variety of reasons.  However, the end of that year I signed up for a summer course at Oxford [University, Oxford, England] through the Institute of International Education so I went to Europe that summer and I spent a total of nine weeks in England, three weeks in London going to the theater and more particularly to the ballet and then I spent six weeks at Oxford and then after that I went to Paris for three weeks and returned home.  But I didn't have a job or anything when I got back cause I had declined to you know go back to West Virginia.  I had told them I would not be back and at this point I had to get another government job in Philadelphia.
Story_ID: 10199
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about the experience in England and Paris.  Was that sort of life changing in some respects?
Speaker 2: (nods head no).
Speaker 1: It wasn't?
Speaker 2: No, because remember I had, I mean I knew--(simultaneously).
Speaker 1: You knew?
Speaker 2: --what, I knew about England, I--(simultaneously).
Speaker 1: You had read but you hadn't experienced.
Speaker 2: I have seldom found anything different than what I read (laughs)and what real life was no matter where I've gone.  I mean I do heavy reading and all--you know and did,  so no, I wasn't very surprised.  I mean it was pleasant and delightful, I enjoyed it and I learned.  But I didn't really come across any new thing.  And remember in spite of everything I was very young but I had a master's degree and so on, so I was fairly, I was a fairly sophisticated person as a college freshman as a matter of fact.  I remember many years later one of my teachers at Temple [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] I met, oh years later, and he said, you know I never told you this but you knew more English words than any freshman I ever met.  And oh, there was no inkling while I, while I was his student that he had any such opinion.  But I--you know I found this to be the case.  So no it wasn't, no sense, it was just, it was fulfilling, but nothing, no, no, no radical inspiration and so on.  I just liked it you know and very, very much, you know.  I learned a lot you know.  It was a summer of tremendous amount of learning.  But for example I mentioned when I visited the tomb of Napoleon I'd already spoken about it you know eight years before due to Ingersoll and so on.  I mean I, in my French classes in high school you know we read stories about going to the various train stations in Paris [France] and so on and all of that.  So the city of Paris didn't have many surprises for me.  You know a great surprise was my French wasn't so good, but you know I could read it quite all right.  I read it fairly well but you know my speaking skills were a little, were deficient.
Story_ID: 10200
Speaker 1: So when I, when I came back I had another year in Philadelphia most of which was spent working for the, actually for the, for the army.  However, in the meantime one of the people that I met in graduate school at the University of Pennsylvania was the professor at Morgan State College.  And I think that in that fall of '51 [1951], fall of '51 [1951], I had actually gone with my nephew, older nephew who is three years younger than I and somebody else on a trip to Canada to French Canada to (unclear) and we came back and there was an urgent message for me.  And I had taken you know leave from my job, an urgent message for me from Baltimore [Maryland] from Morgan State [College, now University, Baltimore, Maryland].  They had a vacancy or it wasn't really a vacancy.  They had underestimated how many people they needed and they had several classes that needed, needed a teacher.  And my, the friend with whom I had been in several classes urgently you know told them you know they really should, should get me and they, they tried.  And fortunately I got back in time to get the, the message and I agreed that I was ready to come and I left immediately for Baltimore and I've had a job ever since.  That was in October, late September, early October of 1951 I went to teach at Morgan State College.  Now it was a temporary job but next year it became you know a regular job and I was there for fifteen years.
Speaker 2: So now, but in that, that was in 19--?
Speaker 1: '51 [1951].
Speaker 2: --'51 [1951].
Speaker 1: September or October '51 [1951].
Story_ID: 10201
Speaker 1: In the mean time though, you become a Fulbright Scholar.
Speaker 2: All right, that happened some years later.  I went for two or three summers I returned to University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to work and I finished what we, what we call the ABD, all but the doc [doctorate], all but the, all but the dissertation and so on.  But getting, I was working in primary and medieval studies and but I simply was always distracted by you know the day to day work of teaching and it was a lot of teaching to be done.  And I had many challenges in the teaching and many things that I did which were very interesting at Morgan, but I was not making very much progress at, at Pennsylvania.  Then when I became eligible after being at Morgan six years I was eligible for a sabbatical, so for the sabbatical of course I decided I would go back to Europe.  In '54 [1954], I went to, on a European tour and spent at least five weeks in Paris and where I improved my French.  You know I took a French course, what they call the civilization course at the Sorbonne, and with of course you know not only literature but a lot of work in conversation and so on.  And so I improved my French you know vastly during that period in '54 [1954].  Then by '55 [1955] I'd gotten interested in the Caribbean and I went, made my first trip to Haiti around '55 [1955].  So in '57 [1957] when I was eligible for a sabbatical I applied for and got the sabbatical and I went, and, and I also applied for a Fulbright.  So the combination of my sabbatical salary and the Fulbright Scholarship enabled me to go and spend twelve months in Europe primarily in, in France, primarily in Paris.  But I was able in Paris to continue my work primarily in medieval studies but also to do some work in phonetics which sort of oriented me a little bit toward linguistics.  And then I spent a summer at the University of Poitiers [Poitiers, France] in Medieval Studies and decided that whenever I got my doctorate I would come back to Portiers or whenever I was able to continue the doctorate, I would return to Portiers.  I could not return to Portiers as a matter of fact, again until my next sabbatical, which was 1964.  But I did go back in '64 [1964] and when, because of the French system and because of the degree that the French had instituted by that time called the 'doctorate of the third cycle' which is based upon writing a dissertation and a certain number of seminars which I had basically already taken at, at Paris.  I was able to devote myself that year primarily to writing a dissertation in medieval studies and I got my doctorate degree that, in October of '65 [1965] at the University of Portiers.
Speaker 1: You know what was your dissertation on?
Speaker 2: My dissertation was a study of English translations, 14th century English translations of two French 'chanson de geste' [songs of heroic deeds] poems written in the 12th century, 12th or early 13th.  I discovered that two of these chanson de gestes, which were very popular in Europe, I mean in, in France and other parts of the world--other parts of Europe had become very popular in England. And in the 14th century each of them was, had, was translated at least three times into English.  So there are three English translations of the chanson de geste known as 'fierabras' and there are three English translations of the chanson de geste known as 'otinel'.  So I did a stylistic study of these English translations of the French chanson de geste.
Speaker 1: So what interested you in medieval studies?
Speaker 2: Well I had had a passionate interest in all aspects of life, medieval life from very early on.  I would say even, for even in high school I knew about the Middle Ages and had great interest in it and so on.  So that really involved me all, all throughout my training I had a certain amount of you know exposure to medieval studies but really at the beginning of the graduate level when I took at Temple a year's course in [Geoffrey] Chaucer  and so on.  And then at the University of Pennsylvania I did mainly Medieval Studies.
Speaker 1: And were you teaching Medieval Studies--or what, oh, you weren't-- (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Oh no, I was teaching in undergraduate and you know you would be teaching very general, very general things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't have an opportunity to really teach Medieval studies until many years later when I came to Atlanta University [now Clark Atlanta university, Atlanta, Georgia] to graduate school when I was able to teach Chaucer and teach you know occasionally a course in Medieval drama and so on because it was a graduate school and graduate level course.
Speaker 1: Now also what appealed to you about that period?  What was it?  Was it just the writings, was it--you know it's sort of a theatrical or it appears to be even--(simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, the writings I think that certain writers you know of the period were intrinsically interesting.  I mean of course one of the greatest English writers Chaucer is in that period.  And then in--now the other thing of course which appealed to me about it was of course it's a period in which France really dominates European thought in that period, the French many of the forms whether they are the chanson de geste, whether they are the French historians writing chronicles and so on, all of this had a great impact on the rest of Europe and so on.  That is repeated again and again though in European history where what happens in France becomes very important for other people.  So I had a great interest in French and a great interest in English literature and the relationships between the two and so on.  So I found it just a very sympathetic area to work on.  And, and also something of a challenge because I was not--you know what was distinctly modern seemed to be very, very recent and you know very, very easy and essentially unchallenging.  So I did also have a great interest in Shakespeare.  I took, my masters essay was written on Shakespeare.
Speaker 1: In what aspect of Shakepeare--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: That was, that was on Richard II, the play Richard II and you know ideas of kingship and so on in Richard II.
Story_ID: 10202
Speaker 1: Now when you, your time at Morgan State [College, now University, Baltimore, Maryland], what other things did you consider significant about that time period--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Well the marvelous thing about my period at Morgan is the reason I was able to stay at Morgan because the school wasn't growing very rapidly at the time.  They were also entering a period of curriculum expansion of revision or innovation and one of the things that took place at this period is that all over the United States in higher education there was some notion what maybe that they had been doing in higher education did not really produce educated people.  And so there was considered to be a general deficiency in general education in the colleges. That you know the specialized education people were, were serving its purposes but people were not coming out as generally cultivated people and so on.  And this had been triggered by a report published around nineteen, oh in the 40s [1940s] by Harvard University called General Education in a Free Society.  And one of the, one of the practical recommendations that came out of the Harvard Report was that in colleges there should be an introduction to the humanities, an introduction to the social sciences and an introduction to the sciences which fulfilled certain expectations and so on and so on and so on.  So this was taken up seriously in a number of places and at Morgan where I was, they took up this challenge as it were and decided to produce a course in humanities and I think a course in social sciences and so on.  But when they began to discuss what was involved they had a committee together and the committee I think had, was meeting the year that I came there and they, following the dictates of the Harvard Report and so on came up with the, the outline of the kind of course they ought to have and so on.  And when they finished it they said now but who is going to teach it and so on?  So fortunately some people in my department in the English department where I was said well we think Richard Long could do it, you know let him, and so on.  So they--so I was being trained to develop the course in humanities so that meant that for the next two years there I really worked on a, to doing a pilot course in the humanities.  And then following the--my two years of piloting it became the general course replacing other requirements in English and so on, so I was directly involved in that and that was the center of my activities for six or seven years.
Speaker 1: So how, in developing that what did you sort of you know pull together or rely on?  How--?
Speaker 2: Well the--of course the great notion was that you had to bring together the arts and the literature from various world literature and so on and of course because of my own interests I was able to talk about you know writers other than English writers.  I had a great interest in art and in music and so on and I you know developed a program in which we looked at various periods including the medieval period but certainly the classical period and renaissance and all of that and looking at certain monuments which were there.  And then, and at the same time that I was doing the pilot course I was also running a kind of ongoing in-service course for my colleagues you know suggesting their reading and we would meet and so on.  And at the end of about two years we were able to start a course where a number of people mainly from the English department and of course it was practical cause it was, their course was primarily being displaced by the new humanities course and so on.  And for several years it actually ran the way it was you know--.
Speaker 1: It was supposed to.
Speaker 2: --conceived and after that it fell to pieces because people go back to their old evil ways and so on and they have nothing like that now.  It just fell all apart.
Speaker 1: So essentially what you were doing was trying to offer--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: To integrate a course in humanities, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, well rounded?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: An integrated course in humanities.  And for myself as I said it was a continuation because I all--you know I had an interest in, in music and in visual art and so on quite independent of what anybody taught you know in schools.  And as a matter of fact the minute I moved to Baltimore [Maryland] you know I joined the Baltimore Museum and what have you, and you know went to concerts and so on in, in the city and by '54 [1954] I was able to go back to Europe for the summer and did an art historical tour of Italy and then came up to France.  I had mentioned coming around to France in summer of '54 [1954] but I actually took the whole summer, mapped out a course based upon the history of architecture and the history of the plastic arts and so on.  I actually left New York on the Andrea Doria and went to Naples and worked my way up from Naples, you know, two or three days in Rome and then Florence and in Venice and in Milan and so on and up through France to Paris where I stayed for the period of this course but also having the chance to really use the Louvre and so on.  And then went on from there to Scandinavia where I took another short course.  I think it was a short course in, in Denmark and finally ended up in England and so on.  So it was three months in which--and that was all contributory to my getting the kind of grounding that I needed to lead an integrated course in humanities.
Story_ID: 10203
Speaker 1: Now--the whole thing of creating this curriculum, that's what put you on the map within Morgan State [College, now University, Baltimore, Maryland]--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  And then why did you end up leaving Morgan State, why?
Speaker 2: Well remember I did in fact stay there for fifteen years and by that time you know I was a little bored.  But there's another thing, very important thing which as you know I was only, I was interested only in college teaching.  I never did anything other than college teaching and ultimately I was really interested in only dealing with advanced students.  And I had taught enough freshman English.  Well, actually I didn't teach very much freshman English cause eventually I taught the humanities course but that was pitched at the sophomore level.  And my intellectual curiosity, you know,  led me to do all kinds of things that I wanted to you know be able to deal with in the classroom and so on.  So after I returned from France the second time, and this was already after, on my second sabbatical so I had completed you know fourteen years in effect on the contract to Morgan and so on, I really began to think seriously about moving to a place where there was more graduate work.  Actually Morgan had initiated graduate work on a more general, a more general category the year that I came back to work and I actually did a graduate course for teachers and so on that year but still you know some distance ago.  And I had really set my ambition on coming to Atlanta University [now Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] which of course is the, was the primary and the first graduate school for blacks in the south and in general you know in the country you might say.  And I knew about, I had learned about Atlanta University from the time I was in high school you know because another thing I loved to do and which I will still do whenever you know the time advances, read college catalogs cause there's just a tremendous source of information and so on.  So when I was in high school I read college catalogs whenever they fell into my hands and so on.  So I learned about Atlanta University when I--and so that's a place I didn't particular--wasn't really interested in coming to Atlanta to go to either undergraduate school or graduate school.  But I thought that's a place I would eventually like to teach.  And remember when I first read the Atlanta University catalog back in the '40s [1940s], [W.E.B.] DuBois, was on the faculty at Atlanta University.  You know I knew who he was and two or three other names of people I recognized and so on.  So that was always in the back of my mind but I never got to Atlanta until 1966.
Speaker 1: '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: No, I came first in '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Oh, you came in (unclear)(simultaneously).
Story_ID: 10204
Speaker 1: And then I--but the point is that I, over the years of course I had become active in the College Language Association which was an association founded back in the late '30s [1930s] by [Dr. Hugh M.] Gloster, who just recently passed.  And that was founded for teachers in the black schools, teachers of languages, English and other languages because they were not welcome at the regional meetings, professional meetings. And Gloster and some other people felt that they would benefit from having this contact with an annual meeting so the College Language Association came into being.  It had another name at first and so on.  And it had pretty much revived its energies by the time, by the '50s [1950s] and that's when I became involved with it and I was directly involved with it for many, many years and so on.  Well through the College Language Association which met in various black college campuses around the country and so on, I got to know many teachers of English and of foreign languages integrate many of our schools including people who were teaching at Atlanta University [now Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and so on.  And by and large you know I felt very much at ease with these Atlanta colleagues and felt that I would really like to come to Atlanta to, to work.  When I decided after I got my doctor's degree that I really would like to come to Atlanta and work and teach medieval literature for one thing, my colleagues were able in--to recommend that you know to the school but the school wasn't yet ready to employ someone in that, in that role.  It was more complicated even than this.  But as a consequence I went to Hampton [Institute, now University, Hampton Virginia].  I went to Hampton because a friend of mine had gone there a few years before as assistant to the president and she thought that I would you know bring something to Hampton.  And she said,"Well you should consider coming to Hampton," and so I said okay you know.  But I was ready to move someplace you know after fifteen years at Morgan [State College, now University, Baltimore, Maryland] and so on.  And Hampton was a school of course with its own history and its own traditions and I was very interested in that.  So I actually came to Hampton in '66 [1966] and shortly after I got to Hampton the person who was running the museum left and Dr. Gloster whom I've already mentioned, was in fact the dean at Hampton at the time.  And I said well I know enough about art you know to run a museum on an interim basis so I informed Gloster that if I could be relieved of two classes I would be very happy to you know to run the museum and so he was happy to have someone in that role.  And so I became the interim director and therefore, and the director for two years so that was--and so my work at Hampton for the two years I was there involved teaching advanced courses in English, teaching [Geoffrey] Chaucer among others, History of the English language, things of that sort.  And after--ultimately maybe teaching one or two courses in French the next year, one or two graduate courses in French, but my primary activity for my own point of view was running the [Hampton] museum.  And we did a lot of things in the museum the year that I was there. (simultaneously).
Story_ID: 10205
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yes.  For one thing the museum, Hampton Museum [at Hampton Institute, now University, Hampton, Virginia] had sort of been in storage for many years and had just been restored to one of the houses on campus so there was a lot of planning toward moving toward the new museum so I was able to you know contribute to that.  I was also able to organize a few exhibitions.  Specifically I did two or three things when I was there which had significance in terms of the history of the institution. Hampton was conducting a campaign, a capital campaign and very professionally conducted, so professional indeed that they had a New York office for the campaign.  The president of Hampton at the time of course was a man with an enormous you know professional skills in many, many contexts, [Jerome H.] Bud Holland who later became a member of the stock exchange and Ambassador to Sweden and so on, so you can see the circles in which he could move.  But, when they opened this New York office to--we met the people who were running the office and so on.  So I said well the museum ought to be involved in this in some way and Hampton has the artifacts which are virtually unknown to the wider world and would be of interest to the wider world and so on.  So I drew up a plan to do an exhibition from the Hampton materials in New York and that actually came to pass.  We did a museum called Primitive art, which was a term used at that time from the Hampton Museum because the Hampton Museum had African art, it had Oceanic art and it had American Indian art.  And we were able to get an exhibit area in the Union Carbide building in New York [New York] which had at that time, across from the Waldorf [Astoria Hotel, New York, New York] which had a magnificent exhibition area on the main floor.  One of Hampton's trustees was Margaret Mead [anthropologist] and so I was able to convince the president and Dr. Wood that we should ask Dr. Mead to be the honorary chairman.  And I went up to--they said well you can convince her you go right ahead.  So I went up to see her and told her about it.  She said I have no time.  And so I said that's all right, we'll carry everything.  We just want your name.  And so she agreed and she signed the letters to other people who were to be on the honorary committee and so on.  She got so involved with it later though that she got a--commissioned her photographer friend who had worked with her on some books to go to Hampton and to do a set of photographs paralleling a set of photographs which had been done at the beginning of the century by Francis Johnson.  So we had a double exhibition of photographs.  They had photographs by Francis Johnson and photographs by Kent Hyman who was Margaret Mead's associate.  That was on the lower level.  And then on the upper level we had this magnificent exhibition of artifacts from Hampton and you know had made a real impact.  That would have been in 1967.  In '68 [1968], in the spring of '68 [1968], I had a colloquium, a symposium on African art occasioned by the fact that there were a group of African art objects there which had been brought in mainly in the 1890s from the Congo and which were not again widely known.  And so that was the lure to which I could bring the leading authorities in African art to Hampton and so we had a symposium.  Now because, for a variety of reasons that symposium has become a recurring thing.  It takes place every three years, the triennial symposium on African art.  And for the first three or four times I did the whole symposium myself including one here in Atlanta.  Subsequently the emerging organization, the Association of African Art Scholars took it over and of course it's now done as an association thing.  The last meeting was this past May in the Virgin Islands and I, I was asked to come to get an award as the founder of the organization and so on.  But all of this was you know done you know from Hampton.
Speaker 1: So were you surprised or did you know ahead of time really before the days of Hampton, before your doctorate, did you know how extensive the, I mean how--?
Speaker 2: No, I was able, I found out after you know I got there what the, what the situation was (unclear).
Speaker 1: And how had those things come to be with them?  Were they because of the Board, you know the trust--I mean how do they have a collection going back that (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well Hampton of course had been founded right after the civil war.  The founder, General Armstrong, had himself actually being born in the Hawaiian Islands where his father was the Administer of Education in the Kingdom of Hawaii.  And his father had developed a kind of industrial school for Hawaiians and that was the pattern that he really carried there to Hampton.  When he opened, developed the school he based the school on the patterns of New England and other places and one of the things that schools had at that time, some schools, small schools, larger schools too were collections of exotica from around the world so that the students would know what the rest of the world was like.  So among the first things--so quite early Hampton had the idea of a museum and among the first things which they had there actually were things from the Hawaiian Islands so things came from the Pacific.  In fact those earlier things were burned in the fire so they no longer exist.  But this became a tradition at Hampton to bring together things you know exotica for people to look at.  In the 1870s or early 1880s, Hampton opened up for students Indians, Native Americans and some members of the faculty all whom were white of course were drawn to Hampton because they were interested in Indians, not because they were interested in blacks.  And those are people who spent time in the west and they brought back Indian things so many of the Indian things there had come back from the 1880s and so on.  It's very interesting that Booker T. Washington's first job at Hampton after he left and came back as a teacher or as a staff member was to become, come back to being the supervisor of the Indians' dormitory.  His title was Prefect of the Indians and he left there to go to Tuskegee.
Story_ID: 10206
Speaker 1: And the collection from the Congo came from where? (simultaneously)
Speaker 2: A Hampton student who had become a missionary, a black Hampton [Institute, now University, Hampton, Virginia] all Hampton students were black, all the rest were Indian, a man named W.H. Shepard who was a southern Presbyterian and his great passion all his life was to be a missionary in Africa and he was finally able to go to Africa around 1890, 1891 to the Congo and there he collected artifacts and, among other things and he bought them back and gave lectures to Hampton and exhibited them at Hampton.  He eventually gave them to Hampton, later sold some of them to Hampton at a later point.  There's an interesting connection between the Congo or particularly between the Kuva who were the people from who the most interesting artifacts came, and African Americans.  I did an essay on it not too long ago because there was a woman missionary from Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] who spent time among the Kuva and introduced the Kuva dictionary and grammar and so on.  But anyway these Kuva objects were you know among the earliest objects brought out of the Congo by any Westerner and so on.  But they had just fallen off the map so far as people (unclear).  And they're not entirely unknown.  Some of them had been exhibited in New York in 1935, but you know after that, that year that memory of that exhibition disappeared and so nobody--so it was a great surprise to people.  And the example of how great a surprise it was is that I, when I was in Belgium the--in the summer of '67 [1967] I guess, I went to Europe or at this point throughout the '60s [1960s] I went to Europe every year for the whole summer and mainly to France but I traveled around.  I went to Belgium to visit the Congo collections at the museum there, Tervuren [Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium] enormous collections there, enormous collections.  Well, I had become very acquainted with the Congo art from the collections of Hampton so I was very anxious to visit other collections of Congo art so I visited of course the British Museum and I visited Tervuren and I visited theultimately, the museum in Berlin [Germany] and so on.  And I went to the museum and talked to the curator and talked to him about you know what was the situation in Hampton and so on and so, and I you know returned the next day.  So when I returned the next day he said," I have somebody here who will, who you know would want or wants to, wants to meet you," and so I met this gentleman who turned out to be a Belgian, a historian, a specialist in the Congo who was then teaching at the University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin] and of course one of the leading historians of the Congo in our time, Jan Vansina.  But Vansina, you know, had been doing research on the Kuva for many, many years and he knew about this man W.H. Shepard who had been there and all of that.  And he had been looking for several years for relatives or friends to find out you know if any of the artifacts that he had taken away were to be found anywhere.  And he had been totally unsuccessful in finding members of the family and what have you.  Only to find out to his you know astonishment that actually that many of these things were at Hampton and so on.  But this was the case that you know somebody who is actively looking for them and not being able to locate it 'cause his you know research had not led him to, to Hampton.
Speaker 1: So this exhibit and then the, you call thecolloqu--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Colloquium or symposium--
Speaker 1: --symposium really put you on the map in many ways that ,you know-- (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: In, in the area of African art.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: In the area of the arts--
Speaker 1: How far does the study of African art go back really?
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: In the United States?
Speaker 2: In, in the United States I would say that among the, the earliest person--a few anthropologists have written about African art but as anthropology so that our people didn't know anything about that.  In fact Hampton Institute had a publication called "The Southern Workman" which is a very interesting publication which lasted for forty or fifty years. And articles on Hampton materials appeared in that in the 1920s and earlier I think an article by W.H. Shepard even appears there.  And illustrations of the artifacts, all of this is done but nobody knew about "The Southern Workman" except for Hampton alumni and stuff like that and they all sort of filed away.  But in terms of studying African art, the earliest, just about the earliest person who writes about African art as art to be studied was Alain Locke in the 1920s.  And we have his essays which appeared in "American Art" and so on so he was really one of the first people to talk about them.  Of course the African art which he knew, he knew mainly from the European museums, museums in Paris and the museum in Belgium that I have referred to and the museum in London and so on because these were all things he knew very well.  So he is in many ways I would say the father of African art studies in the, in the United States.  And I emphasized that in my early symposium.  The third one of the symposia was held at Columbia University and at that symposium I had presentations on various kinds of pioneers.  And I asked Hale Woodruff,  the painter, who was himself a collector of African art and who had been introduced to African art directly by Alain Locke to talk about Locke.  And I asked a student of [Melville Jean] Herskovits, who of course was a very important anthropologist who studied Africa and who would also who studied art and his wife studied art and had someone to talk about, about him.  And I think that we designated a third pioneer for somebody to talk about so I have--and I've written a great deal about Locke in various things over the years and so on and including in that.  But his article in the--he has an article in "The New Negro" called The Ancestor of Arts and so on.
Speaker 1: Alain Locke was a very interesting person I'm told.
Speaker 2: Yes he, well he, he was a polymath and he had a passionate interest in, in all of the you know all of the arts.  He knew about of course music and the visual arts and so on.  And even though from our current perspective he is the, you know the mentor of the Harlem Renaissance and the person who was profoundly involved in all aspects of African American and expression and so on, you know.  Nobody was more mainstream than Alain Locke and so on.  But and--so I knew Alain Locke and as a matter of fact I have a copy of his book, "The Negro and Art" signed by him.  It's not on the table however.  On the table there's another edition which (laughs)--and so on.  But he was a you know a--).
Story_ID: 10207
Speaker 1: So what took you away from Hampton [Institute, now University, Hampton, Virginia] then? 'Cause you stayed there--?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: --two years and--then--?
Speaker 2: In many ways the atmosphere was a little restricted there--?
Speaker 1: Compared to what you would have been used to. So, no?
Speaker 2: No, not compared to what I'd been used to.  Restricted in terms of what I wanted to do.  I really wanted to function primarily as a teacher in a graduate school which was my interest in coming to--.
Speaker 1: And not as head of the museum?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oh, I thought you enjoyed that?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed it but I don't believe in any nine to five.  Being in a museum is not nine to five.  No, I enjoyed doing it as an interim activity.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I didn't mind organizing art shows and that kind of thing, but I mean I didn't want a job like that and so on.  I mean it was not, and it wasn't restrictive at all.  I mean I was on my own schedule partly because I was participating in the capital campaign, so I spent at least one weekend in New York every month and so on, so I, I was able to move around quite a bit.  And the--as we would playing, in '67 [1967], as we were playing the show the president had bought fully into the idea of the show and he'd help find the space in New York and all that.  But he was really upset when he heard I was going to Europe for the whole summer.  He said how will this show get together?  Dr. Wood assured him that I had everything under control and that the show would go on without a hitch.  And I went to Europe for three months and so on, but he was very unhappy.  He thought I should be at Hampton hammering on something or what have you and so on.  But everything, I had an excellent student assistant and I left detailed instructions, virtually day by day.  Beofre I got back, it was a very, very beautifully installed show and (unclear) but I wasn't about to you know stay home.  So then--but my great interest was coming to Atlanta.
Speaker 1: So talk of, you also published "Negritude" right in that period?
Speaker 2: "Essays on Negritude"--
Speaker 1: And that's the period that you were at Hampton, right?  No, am I wrong?
Speaker 2: Oh that was a--that was also the work that, yeah that was a collaboration.  That was a book that I edited, co-edited with Dr. Barrion (ph.).
Speaker 1: Right, right, right okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the Hampton project.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you come, you decide that that's too restrictive an environment.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I want to be in Atlanta.
Speaker 2: No, not being around.  So, but now when I first came to Atlanta in 1966, I taught summer school here in '66 [1966].  What happened was that we had our CLA [College Language Association] meeting here in Atlanta [Georgia] in '66 [1966].  But earlier in '66 [1966] while I was still at Morgan [State College, now University, Baltimore, Maryland], the very Festival of African and Black Art organized by the Negritude people by [Leopold] Senghor and Alioune Diop of Presence Africaine took place in Senegal. This is an idea which had been germinating in the mind of Alioune Diop and others for years and said 'let's have a big international expedition and bring everybody here, invite everybody'.  They met Langston Hughes and Duke Ellington and the leading authorities on African art by that time and so on.  The dance companies from everywhere, the drama companies, it was a huge exhibition and that, but nothing like it has happened since.  It was a month long festival and so on.  And the American side of it was being provided or being supported by an organization which has ceased to exist, but it was called the American Society of African Culture and it was sort of dominated by people from Lincoln University in [Lincoln] Pennsylvania.  But one of the people very active in it was Horace Mann Bond who later came here and, Julian Bond's father, and, and a number of other people who were--but somebody like, another member of that organization was William Neal Hansberry, who was considered a pioneer in African history studies, taught at Howard for many years and was not much appreciated most of the time.  He's the uncle of Lorraine Hansberry and so on.  So the Society of African Culture booked a, chartered a plane to take its members and friends and so on and I went you know, I had a friend in Baltimore [Maryland]  at Morgan [State College, now University, Baltimore, Mayland], James Lewis, an artist whose, one of whose pieces I have here.  He's primarily a sculptor however, and so on.  So he had been very active in the organization.  He had already made a trip or two to Africa.  So anyway, so many of, so a number of us at Morgan, there were a number of people from Morgan there.  As a matter of fact I was responsible indirectly for these two or three other people from Morgan going because I had spoke to a group of Morgan, a group of ladies which included, who included several Morgan wives.  And I happened to mention, they asked me what are you going to be doing?  So I said well the most exciting thing on my schedule now is to go to Africa for this festival.  And one or two or the ladies were horrified that they hadn't--because they, they knew everything.  They hadn't heard about this festival and so on.  And one of them said well I can't go but my husband is going to do and another one said, my husband is going to go.  Neither of them went, their husbands went, but they decided you know.  So I heard from one of the husbands and they said you have gotten me into some trouble.  I hadn't done anything I just mentioned the thing you know, but these determined wives.  And one of the husbands incidentally was Benjamin [A.] Quarles. Ms. Quarles was too busy a woman to, I mean to go to Africa but she said "Benjamin shall go!" (laughs) And so Ben, Ben, he never complained.  He was a very pleasant gentleman.  But another one of our colleagues said you have gotten me into this difficulty, but he had to go.  Anyway so we had a lot of Morgan people on the trip and what have you and so on.  But anyway while I was there in an, in, in a travel office I ran into a very charming lady who was from Atlanta.  And I said well that's very interesting.  I'm going to be in Atlanta in a few weeks because I was already on schedule to talk about the festival at the CLA meeting.  The CLA meeting was taking place afterwards.  Somebody said well it will be very interesting at the luncheon if you can talk about the festival. And I found out she was going to talk about the festival so immediately I knew who she was cause I knew who else would be talking about it.  This was Mrs. Jordan, Millicent Dobbs Jordan whose photograph I showed you, who was one of the Dobbs' sisters [sister of Mattiwilda Dobbs] and was teaching at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and so she was there.  She's a great aficionado of everything African.  She went there many, many times, once in later years with me and she--so I met her.  And then when the CLA conference took place in Atlanta in April of '66 [1966] I came and it was my first visit to Atlanta.  And I you know talked about the festival at the thing and I met, went to her house and so on, had a very pleasant time.  While I was here in Atlanta, the Dean of the School of Arts and Sciences at Atlanta University said we have just found out that the person who was scheduled to come to teach this summer cannot come.  Could you come?  And so I said yes.  And so I actually taught here in the summer of '66 [1966] and, but this was after I'd already learned that they couldn't get me an appointment for the fall of '66 [1966] but taught here in the summer of '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Then you came back here--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: And then I came in '68 [1968].  In '68 [1968] as a, you know a full professor.
Story_ID: 10208
Speaker 1: --there in 1928, '29 [1929] when Langston [Hughes] was a student.  And he in many other black schools had black faculty members.  At this point, most of them did.  And he you know did a sort of agitating pool said, "Don't you think there ought to be black faculty members at Lincoln [University, Lincoln, Pennsylvania]?  And he found the majority of students said no! (laughs)  That was, that was, those were the students back in 1928.  Now other students, you had a lot of student unrest in the 1920s at a number of the schools and one of the demands that they made were for more black faculty members and so on at Lincoln.
Speaker 2: And that's the thing you think of Lincoln and all the people that came through its door--(simultaneously).
Speaker 1: No, no Langston was there agitating. The people didn't--now they did eventually hire a black faculty member, a distinguished graduate of Lincoln, Joe--Joseph Newton Hill.  He had been a graduate around 1924 or something like that and he was then of course a very brilliant student.  He was hired eventually as a teacher of English and I think he started around '32 [1932] or something like that, but it took that long and so on.  His daughter eventually became the dean--the director of, of the Museum of African Art in Washington [D.C.], Sylvia, Sylvia Hill, what was Sylvia's last name--Sylvia, Sylvia Hill-Williams.  And the current director is one of my former students and a Hampton [Institute, now University, Hampton, Virginia] graduate, Rosalyn Walker.
Story_ID: 10209
Speaker 1: At--when you got to Atlanta University [now Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] in 1968, you found it a little more --did you say these are my stipulations or were you just trying to get out of Hampton [Institute, now University, Hampton, Virginia]?  I mean did you say that I--you know because you said I wanted to you know teach advanced--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, more and more.  I--I wanted to come to you know an undergraduate school.
Speaker 1: And you liked Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked Atlanta University. So I didn't know anything, all about--I had no direct knowledge of Atlanta itself as a city, but I was coming to the university and I felt that it was, you know, a very nice place for me to come to.  But already, by the time that I came or was even contemplating coming in '68 [1968], there was this tremendous ferment in the realm of black studies, you know, nationwide.  There was a tremendous agitation and so when I came to Atlanta, even before I came, I said I think that one of the things that Atlanta University ought to be doing in terms of its history and so on is to at least have some central role in the shaping of this consciousness and so on.  And so I proposed before I came to the dean who was Richard Broxfield (ph.) that we organize a conference, to be called the Conference on African and African American Studies.  And this is--and he agreed.  And so the minute I got here in September I was already organizing that conference which was to take place in December and we had a huge conference.  And the first, and the conferences went on for the next ten years and they became one of the major forums for people meeting in various colleges.  A lot of--the, the people who came from the white colleges first were usually advanced students, some graduate students, some you know advanced, undergraduate students and so on.  And I was able on the basis of people I know to set up panels where various topics, which these people by and large did not know had ever been discussed could be discussed.  And of course I was able to draw on people in the Atlanta University Center, many of whom had you know Afrocentric interests or African American interests and so on.  And when the you know--and you know when they didn't I convinced them that they had and so on.  So we had regular conferences for ten years.  Now, the records of those conferences and so on I think are all in the archives at the Atlanta University Library, Woodruff Library--
Speaker 1: They were taped, audiotaped?
Speaker 2: Oh no, nothing like that was done but I mean it was the programs and some of the position papers and so on.
Speaker 1: Now this--I'd like to just talk about that just a little bit in terms of there's a lot of, at that point in time there's a lot of activity on all of the campuses.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And everyone's literally throwing programs (unclear)(simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Yes, yes!
Speaker 1: There's no structure ,the demands of students--and people they are just finding people to plop in places--.
Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah--there was a lot of that.
Speaker 1: And so what--were these conferences to sort of give structure to this, what was defined as sort of a new area?
Speaker 2: Well, to provide information and to provide even things as basic as the biographies and so on and to provide a forum for the various people to make their presentations in and so on.  And of course in the black colleges and in Atlanta there were a number of people who had you know done studies and even if that they hadn't published they had their own graduate degrees and so on based upon the various kinds of work.  And of course Atlanta University itself had been a place where for over twenty years, actually by the '60s [1960s] we're talking about so thirty, thirty plus years.  A number of graduate theses had been produced on, you know, all kinds of things relating to the African American experience and so on.
Speaker 1: Now Dr. Long,  it's one thing from the background you can--maybe a lot of your colleagues can.  But were you somewhat, were you alarmed at all about you know some of the Northern schools and the programs and the curriculum that was coming out of that?  I mean were you or did you guys serve as a feeder system?  I'm just saying that you know there were a lot things being thrown together.
Speaker 2: Yes, and that was inevitable.  Of course it's a mistake to think that things aren't thrown together in other fields as well.  There's a lot of throwing together.  But we felt that we were really making a contribution in the annual conferences.  And I would say that for the first five years between 1968 and say '72 [1972] or '73 [1973], our conferences were quite crucial for people.  Many of the people who we, who were specialists in various subjects and whom we invited were invited to other schools on the basis of people having met them at our conference, you know.  So our conferences became--we had attempted no control or you know or survey or what have you but our conferences became kind of recruiting places for people who were doing things.  For example one of the professors who ended up the University of Chicago was a friend of mine, active in CLA [College Language Association] who did the scholarship on Richard Wright and those people and students from the University of Chicago who came you know, and said this man is so smart he ought to be in Chicago.  And without the traditional trappings which they would normally require at Chicago he went to Chicago and of course he held his own.  Unfortunately he died of cancer after a few years and so on. But he was rather bright and (unclear).  He had been, he had been teaching for a number of years at a small college in, in Connecticut--Quinnipiac College [Hamden, Connecticut], which I think maybe be in New Haven or near New Haven and so on.  But he was quite, quite an excellent person.
Speaker 1: Are there other important things that came out of the conferences?  I mean you know are particular disciplines that you brought into it or did they stay the same, you know throughout the twenty years?  I'm just--you said that--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --several important things that came out of it (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Yes, well I think that by showing both individuals who were of significance or who had significant contacts and by providing panels and sessions on a variety of subjects in literature and sociology and so on, whenever I you know can think of a topic that could be explored effectively and found people who could do it, we would focus on it throughout the whole time we looked say sociology and anthropology because that's so important in African American Studies.  And we had sociologists here in the AU Center, anthropologists that we drew on.  Now one of the colleagues that I was able to bring down on a number of occasions was a colleague at Morgan [College, now Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] who had actually been at Atlanta during the period of the '30s [1930s] and had worked with [W.E.B.] DuBois, Irene Diggs.  She had been DuBois' assistant from about 1933 to 1943.  And after that she went to [University of Illinois] Urbana and studied and then came back and she taught at Morgan.  So she had been a colleague of mine at Morgan.  And I was able to bring her down two or three years to talk.  One person who got involved quite early in the conferences and who made every conference was [Dr.] John Henrik Clarke, who of course was, you know, autodidact from Georgia originally but had gone to New York as a very young man and so on and he never missed a conference.  He made every one.
Story_ID: 10210
Speaker 1: But you know, the other question I have for you, so how did the whole area of dance and your specialty you know study of dance come along in this whole--You know I understand the visual arts. But I'm just wondering how the dance part came in to, to the mix?  I mean--.
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: --it said that you were a lover of the arts.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, okay--
Speaker 2: Yes, and from a very early stage in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] after--when I was in college you know I followed not only all the dance that was going on, on the stage so to speak but I was interested in people who were teaching and studying dance and I became you know very friendly with the, particularly one of the Philadelphia dance teachers and spent a lot of time with her and, and you know observing classes at the school.  She said well somebody has to write about all this stuff you know.  And I said well I'm thinking about it.  So I, but you know I had a direct involvement not only with dancers on the stage but with dance people who were studying and all of that.  That particular friend has, I had never written about her.  A number of people have written about her lately, is named Marian Cuyjet and Marian Cuyjet of course is Judith Jamison's  teacher.  And Judith Jamison never mentions anything about her background without mentioning Marion Cuyjet.  Judith says, "I had three parents, my mother, my father and Marion Cuyjet," and so on.  But Marion Cuyjet was a very important figure in teaching dance in Philadelphia and taught many other well known dancers.  As a matter of fact--but I, you know, just had an enormous interest in not only in the dance on the stage but in people who were involved in preparing people and so on.  And a lot of exposure to, you know--and I never missed dances as I went to most art exhibits and to some of the concerts I went always to dance events too you know.  So I had an enormous exposure to dance all along before I sat down and began to write about it.  And when I sat down to write about it, I, I knew almost everybody that I mentioned, you know, by their work and what have you.
Speaker 1: Okay, I didn't know that it started that early.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes.  You bet.
Speaker 1: Now the other thing--so you're having this annual conference you know on African--(simultaneously).
Speaker 2: African American studies--
Speaker 1: And then you're doing also at the same time you still have the triennial--.
Speaker 2: The triennial yes, which was started at Hampton [Institute, now University, Hampton, Virginia], yes about every, every three years .
Speaker 1: And then what else is happening then?
Speaker 2: Well then, then about three years into the '70s [1970s] we had an event here that started primarily with Morehouse faculty people a production of 'Treemonisha', the opera by Scott Joplin.  Now 'Treemonisha', they got a grant to produce the opera.  The person who arranged, orchestrated it was T.J. Anderson, a very distinguished composer who was then composer and resident of the Atlanta Symphony and a visiting professor at Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia]--at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  So, and so they decided, again I was not a party to this at all at the very beginning that they would have you know a number of people come in and have a big conference on music and so on and what have you.  And then about three or four months--no, not three or four months, about six or eight weeks before, I think in December, we found out that the financing that they thought they needed for this conference--music conference wasn't coming!  So Wendell Whalum, who was the you know director of music at Morehouse and T.J. came to see me and said "Well now you know do you have any ideas about--?"  I said, "I put on all my conferences without money (laughs) so therefore I know we can have a conference without a grant."  So I said," I will arrange the conference."  So we got, you know--well certain people were coming to Emory just used the people we had and musical people coming inand we had a rather nice--music workshop.  And so then, so that inaugurated about ten music workshops that we did every year and that drawing from the four schools at the Atlanta University Center [ref. to Spelman College, Clark College, Morehoue College, Morris Brown College; all Atlanta, Georgia] and bringing somebody to honor.  Now the honoree the first year was [James Hubert] Eubie Blake and that was under the big financing and all that.  But subsequently every year we bought somebody in.  The very next year I honored [actress] Etta Moten and then subsequent to that, [U.S. Congressman] William L. Dawson.  And coming on down to the composer Howard Swanson whom I had known in Paris [France] back in the '50s [1950s] and who had, had been born in Atlanta, left when he was nineteen and never been back.  And he was of course in his sixties, way, way up in his sixties at the time and so on.  So we had a conference every year--music conference every year for about ten or twelve years and I got that together, drawing heavily on my colleagues in the [Atlanta University]Center but you know honoring a number of outstanding composers, performers and so on.
Speaker 1: So you were sort of the leader of the symposium and conferences.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: The bringing together of all these (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm notorious for that.
Speaker 1: And Atlanta University allowed you to do that?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: It was a much better, it was a much better environment (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, very.  Yes, it--yeah Atlanta University you know professors were from quite early on were relatively free to do anything you know as long as they didn't disturb other people and so it was great, great freedom.  Anything I wanted to do at Atlanta University I did.
Story_ID: 10211
Speaker 1: And what other things from a publishing standpoint came out of this time for you?
Speaker 2: Well, eventually actually it was after the conferences had sort of died down that I turned to sort of bringing things together in terms of publication.  You know the first book that got a lot of attention was my "Black Americana" which was later refashioned as "African American as a Portrait."  And that came through an inquiry that somebody in England made about you know--and in, after two or three stops it got to me.  And the idea was they wanted to produce a book with lots of photographs and so on cause they, they would do the photographic research and so on.  So I agreed that I could do that and I did it.  I was able to do that, turn it around in about six months or so with getting up early in the morning and so on and then back and forth through England.  I insisted upon going to England before, and seeing it before you know they actually produced it and got there in time because they were about to two or three things which was all messy.  But, but the book that was produced was a very beautiful book.  You've seen that?
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --seen "African American as a Portrait" which was a second version of it.  But, but I knew that I wanted to produce a dance book in those same terms you see that, and so on and I had to do that because they, they were not at all interested in a dance book.  I had to beat up on them a long time, but they eventually produced the dance book which with a few defects is you know a very excellent survey of, of that.  In the meantime before any of this of course I had co-editored an anthology of African American literature first of all, but that, the impulse for that came from the press from the university press and they had actually turned to Dr. [Hugh] Gloster who was the president of Morehouse College [Atlanta,Georgia] who was you know a distinguished authority on African American literature and who had an, a New York University association, did his Ph.D. there.  But of course Gloster was much too busy to you know do anything of that sort and so he told them to ask me.  And I you know, then I needed a collaborator and I turned to my colleague Eugenia Collier in Baltimore [Maryland].  We did work together at Morgan [State College, now University, Baltimore, Maryland] you know for many years.  She later worked at Morgan and at Hampton and eventually came back to Morgan and then finally to Coppin [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] .  She's retired now of course.  And so we produced that anthology and later a second edition of the anthology and one volume came out of the Pennsylvania State University Press where I learned a few years ago it earned more money per year than any other book they had.  That doesn't mean it earned any money, it just meant that University Press doesn't, doesn't earn money on its books and so on.  But it still had been printed in spite of the fact that we had actually had a third edition in process and even finished and then they realized that the northern anthology was coming out which was going to be a much you know bigger thing and they held off.  They had, they, they had taken so long to get the copyright permissions and so on that they just let it slide so that's another thing that I thought out.  And then of course most recently I brought my essays on the Harlem Renaissance together for a very small level of publication called (Unclear) Deep.  And I'm now organizing a number of essays and studies to be published by the Clark Atlanta University Press which is a new press that--and so on and I also have another project to do, an album on Maya Angelou.  I was just up to see her last week and to talk about it and so on.
Story_ID: 10212
Speaker 1: So let me ask you, now if--I have several questions but one of--well I'll ask the Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia] question first.  What did Emory, you start double dipping between Emory--not double dipping but you were affiliated with both institutions for a period--(unclear)(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The Emory affiliation was, was of course through the Graduate Institute of Liberal Arts, a joint program, a joint--cooperative activities were started there as early as 1970 or '71 [1971].  And several of us at Atlanta University were involved in that and I was involved in it more prominently and more deeply than some others cause I actually taught courses at Emory and eventually you know was involved in doctor al dissertations and so on.  So I have a, an association with Emory going back to about 1971 or '72 [1972].  During all of this time I never gave a thought to leaving Atlanta University you know and so on, but Atlanta University went into deep crisis about fourteen years ago and--fifteen years ago.  And when they were considered, they had two unfortunate presidents and you know they--anybody with half a sense could have seen that they were unfortunate presidents.  But the boards of these schools you know frequently you know going on, driving on half a gallon, you know, half a tank and so on.  So after two disastrous presidents the school was about to fall apart and the only solution to the school was to do this merger.  The merger would have change completely the character of the school that I came to.  On the other hand I, the Graduate Institute of Liberal Arts at Emory had never really succeeded in recruiting a senior person who could do some of the things that I, that I did even though I, in no sense would I go to teach African American studies.  That was the common delusion.  But I went as a professor of interdisciplinary studies, which is what my title is and so on. But I was very happy to be there in the middle of African American studies and any, anything else.  So my affiliations were with many different programs there and I turned out quite a few students in African American studies, but my interests you know extended far beyond that.  While the advantage of course was the Graduate Institute of Liberal Arts at Emory was a, was a very free place, it's less free now than it was when I went there.  But when I went there it was totally free.  For example when I arrived, when I, it was decided I would go and the school made an offer and in which I, in any way I could not refuse because they, AU [Atlanta University] had fallen to pieces you, you know under my very feet.  And so I did say to the, you know to the current director I said,"Now was there anything in particular you wanted me to teach?  She said, "Oh no you can teach anything you want to," and so on.  So I mean that's what it was.  I mean I, I'd never been required--well one time I was asked if I would teach the introductory course maybe two or three times but mainly as a team teacher and so on. But never was there anything there.  Now in recent years there have been subtle pressures on people.  About four or five years ago there was always an understanding that some members would teach at least one undergraduate course and then we heard two undergraduate courses, and then we heard three undergraduate courses and so on but I never figured any of it applied to me and so on.  And my one or two undergraduate courses except those that I made up myself were disasters and so on.  But I was teaching sort of the standardized ones and so on.  I've taught one or two undergraduate courses that I proposed.  I proposed one in World Dance for example which one or two people appeared and so on, so those, those went off all right.  But there again under no--I had absolutely no you know restrictions or constrictions for whatever the whole time I was at Emory.
Speaker 1: So that was a great place too (unclear)(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely yeah, no, no complaints.  And even though I've now retired as of the thirty first, I still have my office and my computer and (unclear) and a budget and everything cause I have, I'm winding up a project which is not an Emory project per se even though I still have several students working in dissertations.  But I am this year the program chairman for the Society of Dance History Scholars and that's the kind of thing that you can thus do from an academic you know position and using the computer and occasional secretarial assistants and so on.  So I, I am just sort of winding up the program right now to get off to Philadelphia where it's going to take place.
Story_ID: 10213
Speaker 1: So what kinds of things that you haven't done that you would like to do now?
Speaker 2: Nothing in particular.  The only thing I mean I just want to finish a number of book projects that I've been working on.  For example my research a good bit of it for the last ten years has been on dance in Asia, Southeast Asia is Thailand, Java and Bali and I go to Thailand twice a year.  And I have been to Java and Bali many, many times and I now am on top of all of that material that I'm interested in, in this connection and so on.  So I have to get those sort of books sort of out of the way and so on but I mean everything is just wanting to finish all of those things that you know cross my mind.
Story_ID: 10214
Speaker 1: you know Dr. Long, what is interesting is that--I want to ask you really you know the fact that first you start in Medieval studies and you know you are a true academic.  It really doesn't matter so much the subject matter you know as long as (unclear).  But I want to ask you, you know in the '60s [1960s] there became this whole sort of black power movement. And I think someone like you would say that that was sort of a restrictive time period you know and not sort of global so that's one question I have for you.  But the other is, is that in the larger dominant community--the world, community there has been the belief that things African or things African American had no value you know had no history.  And so I'm just, I'm very curious about your view of those things because you hold, you're very, very strident about, that this is you know I'm not even an--I don't teach African American studies, what is that, you know sort, you know this, cause you see it as part of sort of the whole--(simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --view of things.  And I just would like you to, you know to articulate that a little you know about one, about this whole, the thing that sort of the black power movement ?
Speaker 2: Yes, well it's true that it seemed to me that beginning in the late 60s [1960s], in the middle '60s [1960s], many of the people who were talking about what academe should be or what, or defining blackness were doing so in a, in a very, very narrow and restricted way.  And I raised my voice I think in opposition to any kind of restriction on anybody.  I think people should be--I did not believe in prescription.  People should be, you know, permitted, should be encouraged to do what they wanted to do.  And it's perfectly natural that people who were--who live in a world which is, in which black people are, are prominent or visible would have curiosity and concern about that.  But I always insisted that it had to be done in a spirit of comprehensiveness in terms of knowing what you were doing and a spirit of openness to the various, you know, possibilities.  But on the other hand I wasn't ever really profoundly upset by this because I knew that it couldn't you know couldn't last indefinitely.  In other words, once you get into anything you know if you're serious about it, you know you will continue until you see the connections and so on.  And if you aren't serious you're going to do something else anyway.  So I saw that the, I felt that the people who were doing some of the shouting were not really scholars and never were going to be and you know they would disappear from the scene which has in fact happened.  I thought that the others who were really profoundly interested in things would, you know would find their way and I think that has pretty much happened as well.  Now it is true that a few people, a few very young people undoubtedly were hurt by this, by being told you have to proceed in this fashion and this is the only fashion you can proceed in and I, you know I've heard of some instances where damage was done.  But by and large I don't think a lot of damage was done.  I think maybe some time was wasted and I think that maybe you know some feelings and sensibilities were bruised.  But, by and large, I think people sort of came out of it without too much damage.  And you see today there are some you know you have a kind of official school of Afrocentrism and so on, but I think that that involves a very small number of people.  And then you got--and some of the people who were regarded as an example as the people who were the leaders of the-- of, of these various Afrocentric schools were themselves anything but restricted in their own understanding.  You take somebody like my friend John Henrik Clarke you know who knew a tremendous amount of stuff about all kinds of things and was interested in relating the African experience and the African American experience to a much broader experience and so on.  And I think, and you know and I remember in, in later years John insisting well you see, see, said black is not a culture it's a color, you know and, and the culture is something else.  The culture is African, African American and so on.  Now I myself within the whole range of African American studies have always insisted upon the understanding of the diaspora and I was using that term a long time before it became generally used to refer to that.  And indeed I organized a series of diaspora festivals, beginning, the first one in 1978 where we went to Brazil and then in '79 [1979] to Haiti and then in '81 [1981] to Suriname and so on and this is just one of the diasporic activities that I have you know engaged in and so on over the years.  So that, I always emphasized the total openness and my only interest in the Caribbean for example and in the diaspora goes back to the 1950s when I first went to Haiti and then in '59 [1959] I was able to get a grant from Morgan [State College, now University, Baltimore, Maryland] to come through the Caribbean and at that time I was fascinated as I got from island to island everybody I ran into thought I was a little crazy 'cause I had been to one of the other islands.  They didn't go to the other islands.  Back in the, in the '50s [1950s] most cultivated people in the Caribbean had never been to another island, you know.
Speaker 1: They hadn't ?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no I mean, you know the, the Trinidadians--
Story_ID: 10215
Speaker 1: Now, I want to go back to the question that I was asking about.  Well, you were getting ready to talk about black studies?
Speaker 2: Well I was saying that, that my interests and what I've always focused on is the, the, the importance of the African American experience within the global African American experience, within the experience of the diaspora.  And I think that's something which is not only very important but I have always emphasized it even in naming the conference, the 'Conference on African and African American studies'.  And I was using African American at that point to really mean the African American world not, and including the United States and the other parts of the African American world.  And there has been some, the--I have, you know, resisted somewhat the attempt to use 'African American' to describe only people in the United States. Because up until that time we had previously Afro American, which also could be applied to the wider world but at least it, anthropologist used it to apply to the wider world.  But in, in the United States you know Afro American meant pretty much the people who the Afro American newspaper appealed to and, and so on. But these terms will slip and slide and, and go on and create problems.  Now the African American of course, some people ascribe that to Jesse Jackson [Sr.] you know.  In fact, Jesse did, had, had, did not have anything directly to do with it at the beginning.  It was proposed as a strategy term by--oh, the woman who was then head of the Urban Coalition in Washington [D.C.] as well as--I know her.  She's from, originally from Atlanta, was married to a Boston [Massachusetts] physician from whom she is now divorced.  And I, and I know her extremely well, but the name will not come to me at the moment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But at any rate it, and she present, presented a position paper and proposing this and at the press conference to release it she asked Jesse Jackson to appear, and Jesse as usual of course takes over the conference and what have you and of course you wanted his support and he gave his support and so ever since then Jesse Jackson but of course actually it--Ramona.  Ramona Eterland (ph.).
Speaker 1: Oh, Ramona Eterland?
Speaker 2: Yes, and it actually came out of a position paper written by Ramona who ,you know, is a lady with training with philosophy.  I think she may have done her dissertation on [W.E.B.] DuBois.  I think actually had a copy of her dissertation for years here and have sent it to a library to the, you know Auburn Avenue Library [Atlanta, Georgia].  But it was, and it came out of a project that Ramona developed cause I got a copy of the position paper several weeks before this press conference.
Speaker 1: But so what's, what is your view of African American I mean in the global view?  What would you say it is, the whole study what it--what the term means?  You say, I--you know--.
Speaker 2: Well, see I have gone beyond even African American in my concerns and in my intellectual analysis.  I am now interested in diasporas and I think that you look at a cultures and peoples you know where they are, where they have gone and what has happened to them and the processes and I regard all of these diasporic communities as being communities in process but also in interaction, creating new spaces and new communities.  And I think that if one wants to really deal with African culture--African American cultures, one has to look at the totality of the culture, totality in the anthropological sense.  What do people do?  You know, what do they eat?  What do they wear?  What do they think, and so on, all of these things.  And then what do they create you know, what do they spend their time doing and so on and using that and looking at the African diaspora we can see how important music has been, how important spirituality has been in defining these communities and in keeping them going and in molding and shaping their contributions to the larger community.  But at the same time when you are looking at these diasporas you are also looking at diasporas of other people.  Now from one of the seminars that I did at Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia] just a few years ago, was looking at the Caribbean as a site of diasporas and as a source of diasporas.  As a site of diasporas because in the Caribbean, of course, the African element is very, very strong but of course the Caribbean obviously has a very, very strong and very important European contact, which is what most people talk about.  But the Caribbean also has had considerable numbers of Asians, people from India, present in considerable numbers in Trinidad and Guyana where the Indians are the majority.  They may be in the majority in Trinidad as a matter of fact, and to a lesser extent a place like Surinam.  You have the presence of the Chinese, who have been not overwhelming numbers, but still strong in Trinidad and Jamaica to some extent, in Guyana and in, and in Surinam and so on.  And all of these of course are, are examples of things which are going on.  Now the Caribbean however, itself you have developed in the Caribbean what I might call the 'Caribbean man', 'Caribbean woman' in various varieties.  And there are people have come out of the Caribbean and have in a sense virtually colonized Toronto [Canada] and London [England] and looking at it from another perspective, France, people coming from the French, West Indies and so to say nothing of what's happened in the southern part of the United States with the Cuban president and so on.  So I think that if one has sensitivity to the movement of peoples and what they carry with them and what they find and when they go and so on, you have a much more satisfactory way of looking at cultures in the world and so on.  And of course the obvious things which move of course all the way is expressive forms you know.  We live in a world dominated by all of these various kinds of music which are the results of all of these movements of people and, and so on.  And then there are other ways of looking at it.  There are, you know there's a certain amount of age grading within the Diasporic movements and so on.  But I have examined and continue to examine and have directed you know a great deal of work on these things.  One of the dissertations I directed to them a few years ago was on the Chinese in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: The Chinese in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Yes, and the young woman who wrote it is, was herself from the People's Republic of China and spent several years at--she's still working at Emory in a, in a staff capacity but spent several years in (unclear) the study and that's what she wanted to do.  She had several courses with me and I recommended her dissertation which has since been published on the Chinese in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: And how old was the history?
Speaker 2: The earliest Chinese really are like maybe 1910, 1915, Cantonese and just a few.  And the, almost the conventional things (unclear) I mean the laundries and the, and the native restaurants.  But beginning about thirty years ago we began to get large numbers of Chinese and now of course you have a tremendous presence here.  I think we may even have a Chinese bank in Atlanta and newspapers and you know publications and so on.
Story_ID: 10216
Speaker 1: So okay, but I--then what about the larger view that things African are primitive and things African American have no value and no history-- (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: I mean how--I don't--okay--.
Speaker 2: I'm not terribly disturbed.
Speaker 1: You're not?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: I, you know--(unclear).
Speaker 1: All the symposiums, all the things that you've done to give credence--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --And lift these things up so that they would--.
Speaker 2: Well that's for the benefit of those who want to know better.
Speaker 1: Well I mean wait a minute, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 2: But I, I'm not going to--.
Speaker 1: I cannot beleive--(simultaneously).
Speaker 2: I'm not, I'm not terribly concerned with other people who don't want to know things.  You can't reach them anyway.  It's a waste of time.  I'm never, I'm not worried about reaching people who can't be reached.  I don't see how, you know to-- what, what do they think, you know and so on.  Now if they have--you have to, there's a question of combat if they indeed exercise great power over you and that's one thing.  But I think we've passed the point but we really have to worry about what people think as devoid, as distinct from what they do and can do, and so on.  So I've never been--I mean I think it's very important for black people to have a sense of who and what they are, but I'm not worried about white people one way or the other in this, in this respect.  And I think that to the extent that black people define their priorities in terms of what white people think.  Now if you define in terms of what they can do, then you direct strategies from what you know, toward what they can do.  But what they think is just something that's not all that terribly important.
Speaker 1: So what do you feel is the turning point then, the things (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Oh the, the turning point is, is the political action which brings, which brings legal change.
Speaker 1: And you think once that happened it didn't matter after that--I'm just saying that--?
Speaker 2: What, what, what they think don't matter very much, doesn't matter very much what they think and so on.  I mean you, you have to effect changes in power relationships but to the extent that you can do that you have made the fundamental thing and then whatever, whatever thinking is involved comes later.  Now somebody just sent me a email I guess today from the "Washington Post" and apparently there was some, some event at the White House involving Mrs. [Laura] Bush and maybe the President as well.  And I had forgotten--well, but one of the people present was Arnold Rampersad and it was something about Langston Hughes.  And I've forgotten exactly what Arnold said.  He said,"Well, I suspect that you know thirty years ago President of the United States had never heard of Langston Hughes.  But we know the present President, in spite of his limitations, whatever they may be, has heard of Langston Huges, and certainly his wife was a librarian and reads, you know so on and we got a Langston Hughes stamp you see, and so on.  So that you--and time, times change, things change but it's the power of relationships involved in this kind of change rather than changing people's thought.  Can't change their thoughts you know but you can change the power relations and once you change the power relations then you know what they think.  Something good they don't think it's good and so on.
Story_ID: 10217
Speaker 1: Now I want to go back, when you look at at writ--well I know you're past this point but if you look at African American writers, who would you consider the most --and who do you like?
Speaker 2: Well in terms of the American, overall American sensibility I would say that the writer who perhaps has most, who is maybe most significant is a very peculiar gentleman, Ralph Ellison.  His, his one, one novel cause there's only really one you know really brought everybody who was concerned about reading who could read into the mix so far as the African American sensibility and so on was concerned I think more and so on.  The fact that the book would not go away you know and received, has received so much honor and veneration and so on is I think a very, very strong indication of that fact.  And of course it's a book which becomes totally out of the fact of you know Western fiction.  He didn't try to create any new form or anything he just you know presented a, a situation that he knew and presented it in a very, very powerful manner.  And you see it's a book--and he got into a lot of trouble during the Black Power Movement because, I mean, the wrong kind of book in the wrong kind of way and the wrong kind of language and all of that you see.  But the book was there and it hadn't gone away whereas all of the folks complaining about it, either shut up or put up and so on.  So I don't, I don't, I, I, you know that's you know, that's a very, very powerful statement.  Now I know that other writers of course have done important things.  I certainly never underestimate the significance and importance of Toni Morrison, who is again is you know pursuing her own path, but deep down, I don't know whether I should say this in public or not, I don't think Toni has really read that much about people.  I think Toni is read about and talked about and so on, but her stuff is very, very, very hard to read when you get right down to it.  And after you read it you don't know exactly what you read, whereas and so that's you know another thing.  But it, it falls within a, a certain corner of present fiction is perfectly well to operate in that fashion you know but I don't know what the impact on large numbers of people are of Toni's work.  I think the impact of you know who she is, and so on, has been a very great one but whether you know she has really entered the experience and the consciousness of a very large public, I doubt seriously.
Speaker 1: And you know 'cause every--but I found Ralph Ellison such a tragic figure in some respects cause he never writes again I mean he--(simultaneously).
Speaker 2: That he never wrote another novel.
Speaker 1: He was captive by his own--(simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Yes, but that's not a--(simultaneously).
Speaker 1: That's not a bad thing?
Speaker 2: That's not a bad thing and not an unusual thing.  It maybe unfortunately of the individual but you can point to that happening to a lot of people.  It happened to Alvin Ailey with [dance] "Revelations".  Alvin would wake up some mornings and say, you know, sometimes he'd try to get rid of Revelations.  I mean would'nt  put it on the program you know and all of them folks stayed home. "Ain't doing 'Revelations', I ain't going," you know, and all that.  So it haunted him throughout his entire life.  I think somewhere I have a, may have a photograph with, with Alvin and one of the, one of these things and so on, but that really bothered him.  It really bothered him.  And then I know other people who have done other things and they are bothered by the fact that someone thinks--so it, it's not unusual that there are people who could do--you know get a lot of things going, you know somewhat famous choreographers like [George] Balanchine.  Balanchine had lots and lots and lots and lots of ballets and you can't even say what the most important Balanchine ballet is you know.  But I'm afraid that with Alvin you know it's 'Revelations' and so on.
Story_ID: 10218
Speaker 1: James Baldwin was one of your close friends.
Speaker 2: Yes, in particular, later years.  I mean I met him in 1955.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I saw him frequently only beginning in the '70s [1970s] and then finally the last decade of his life he came to the States frequently.  He came to Atlanta [Georgia] fairly frequently and he usually stayed with me when he came to Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite James Baldwin story that you'd like to share?
Speaker 2: Not really, except to point out that Baldwin of course was a person who hated to move from one spot to the next.  Wherever he, wherever he got that's where he was supposed to be and then he had to be you know literally picked up to be moved to the next spot so he was very bad on keeping appointments.  Yet you really had to assign somebody to him if you wanted him to keep his appointments.  And an example of that was when he came to--well he actually came was on his way to Atlanta at the time that Hoyt Fuller passed, and he didn't even know about it until he was in the air, was reading the paper and found out.  So when he, you know, got here he was staying here.  He, so he had a number of writers came in and I, I had to, I was one of the few--programs, a memorial that I had to be involved with.  I wasn't involved with the funeral but this is, was within the same time frame of the funeral.  But we had about at least twenty writers here and with two friends of mine, Bennie Ivy and Jan Douglas, we arranged the memorial.  And since we had about twenty writers all of whom could talk a whole lot, I said everybody has to have what, two minutes or three minutes ,otherwise we'll never get out of there you know and so on, you know.  So I told Baldwin said," Fortunately we're going to go alphabetically and you'll be first and you have to set the tone, so three minutes," and so on.  So he sat right here in my solarium and he wrote out you know his three minutes and he read it to me.  He sat right here in my solarium, I said that's fine, three minutes and Jimmy got up and he did his three minutes and that helped us get through the whole program.  But among the people who were here you had Sonia Sanchez and Gwendolyn Brooks.  Gwendolyn arrived a little late.  She was coming from someplace else so she didn't, she wasn't in her alphabetical order but she got here for it.  Houston Baker, Mari Evans they were all here for that.  Abena [Joan Brown] was here of course with me.
Speaker 1: And what sort of--he spent most of his time in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: He came to Atlanta about I guess '78 [1978] or something like that and he was here about three years and then he had this massive heart attack and died.
Story_ID: 10219
Speaker 1: Now, what about your friendship also with Romare Bearden, that was--I mean the thing about you would be all around the place.
Speaker 2: Well, I knew a lot of people.  I know a lot of painters, a lot of musicians, a lot of writers, a lot of dancers and so on and of course a lot of college professors.
Speaker 1: But what about, what about, what was--?
Speaker 2: Well I met Romey during the period I was at Hampton [Institute, now University, Hampton, Virginia] when I contacted several of the artists who were concerned with you know who had either come to the museum or concerned with the museum and so on.  And I was able to visit New York fairly frequently during that period so I invited him and his wife to come to Hampton and we you know, we had a policy of asking them to contribute something to the museum.  So they came and we found out we got along very, very well and so they said you have to come and see us when you come back to New York and I did on a regular basis.  And then eventually we reached a point where I saw them you know not only every time I went to New York but they came here to Atlanta several times to visit me and so on.  And I talked with them you know, to him every week for years.  When he and his wife got a house in St. Martens I visited them down there two or three times a year.  They would be there you know at Christmas and during the summer and so on and what have you.  So we'd talk about all kinds of things and we knew a lot of people in common and of course he had had a very rich and diverse experience so he was a person who was perennially interesting.  He was a marvelous raconteur.  He had the most wonderful stories about all kinds of people and all kinds of things and so on.  So he really was quite a remarkable person to know.
Story_ID: 10220
Speaker 1: And Katherine Dunham you had spent, you've spent a good amount of time around Ms. Dunham, right?
Speaker 2: Well in later years, again in later years.  I first saw Ms. Dunham you know appear, dance, I think I even have a signed photograph of her upstairs from around 1947 or '48 [1948] and so on.  But I actually began seeing her only in the years after I started going to Haiti particularly beginning in the '60s [1960s] when she was frequenting a residence in Haiti and I was there fairly frequently.  And so actually our, our encounters were mainly in Haiti--over the years(simultaneously).
Speaker 1: But that's a different point in her life.
Speaker 2: Oh yes after, after she stopped dancing.
Speaker 1: --dancing and--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: She stopped dancing after, she stopped dancing in the early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: That was her humanitarian effort she was going to stay right--?
Speaker 2: In Haiti.
Speaker 1: In Haiti.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was but she liked you know Haiti and all that and she lived, she had a very lovely house there and she had well a succession of two places in Haiti. And the, you know the last place was called Residence Katherine Dunham and was very, very lovely.  And, and adjacent to it was a kind of community of people who were you know a ritual community and so on so she had on her property also the, the (unclear) where the services could be held and all of that.  So she remained in close touch with this community of people and so on.  But she had a lot you know all kinds of ambitions for Haiti but there was no kind of support.  None of Dunham's activities had ever found support.  I mean you know she supported them herself when she was earning money and she had some you know friends who could be donors but her projects were never based upon a sound financial basis so none of them has continued.
Speaker 1: Right, but her dance when she was touring the world that, that had never--I mean it was a struggle right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.  Oh yeah, because again the company made it on its own earnings, which was very unusual and so on. Which means a lot times they didn't get paid and so on.  But they, they were all devoted to her and so on.
Speaker 1: And still are today?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: (laughs) They're in New York waiting on her.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, yes indeed.
Speaker 1: (laughs) It's sort of cute to see.
Story_ID: 10221
Speaker 1: But you know so in, in the area of dance do you have any favorites there, any you know--ones that--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say that you know among the African American choreographers I think one of the very best to develop and had an unfortunately short life was Ulysses Dove who choreographed, his works are best known from those which are in the [Alvin] Ailey Company .  And the Dayton Contemporary Dance Company [Dayton, Ohio] has a number of his pieces but he was a very inspired choreographer.  He'd been an Ailey dancer.  He went to France and taught at the Paris school in experimental section but he developed his choreography and he developed some very powerful pieces, about six or seven which are very highly thought of in France as well.  And of course I'm terribly interested in you know, and a friend of, Bill T. Jones, but Bill covers the waterfront and I actually like some of his earlier pieces much better than I like the later pieces.
Speaker 1: Well what about in the area of music?
Speaker 2: Well now music I know you know performers and composers and so on.
Speaker 1: Can we talk about composers first?
Speaker 2: Well, among the composers, most of the composers of course are definitely avant-garde composers or very modern composers.  And I think like a large portion of the people who support music, a little avant-garde goes a long way.  And so we still are listening or we still have ancient ears.  You know we're still listening to Beethoven and maybe to, to [Claude] Debussy.  But for a public performance in this country you know and worldwide we had to pay anybody who is past Stravinsky  and we don't play [Igor Fyodorovich] Stravinsky's most advanced works.  We play the, you know, play thesentimental--the 'Firebird' and things like that, you know the sweet Stravinsky and so on.  And so the other , unless composers are writing in the older mode they don't get much hearing and, and so on.  But of course very few contemporary composers are ever heard period and so on.  The, the public is not there for them.  That said of course I have two or three friends who I think are, are admirable composers, one of which is T.J. Anderson who I mentioned earlier who composes full time who lives now in Chapel Hill, North Carolina.  And then another composer friend of mine is Dorothy Rudd Moore who lives in New York, the wife of Kermit Moore.  Kermit Moore is also a composer himself but perhaps even better known because he orchestrates the work of Gordon Parks [U.S. photographer and film director].  All of Gordon Parks' you know work and films and so on is orchestrated by Kermit.
Speaker 1: I didn't know that.  Okay, okay yeah.  Now, okay do we--okay, what about performers?
Speaker 2: Musical performers and so--well of course I, I love Jessye Norman who is just you know a marvelous you know singer and I know him as a--and I know you know a number of fabulous pianists, most of them are not you know terribly well known because of you know there's only--the stage can only take one or two pianists at a time and so that's just the way it is.  The world is full of fantastic musicians and almost never heard of or heard from in, in the larger sense.  So, there's a lot of them.
Story_ID: 10222
Speaker 1: Are there any others tha,t you know, you would consider favorites of yours in any discipline?  Any favorites, significant  movements so you know--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Yes, but as I said I, I know so many people that it's very hard to, to zero in on them.  I'll mention one or two very remarkable people that I know who you may not, general public may not hear about at all.  For example here in Atlanta [Georgia] there is a woman who has taught at Spelman now for many, many, many years but she's not ancient 'cause she started teaching when she was eighteen, Joyce Finch Johnson. Who is both a remarkable virtuoso pianist and an organist and a very, very, you know, pleasant and charming person along that, along with that and so on.  But you know she, instead of fighting for her career she's very happily married, married you know a few years after she started working.  And she's always just been available to you know, as a teacher and as a willing teacher I would say more than anything else.  But she can actually perform.  She's performed with the, with the symphony and with other symphony orchestras and she's you know taken her organ tours of Europe with the American Guild of Organists and all of that and what have you but always without you know necessarily attracting a whole lot of attention and what have you.  At one point she would do a brief organ recital every Friday at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] in the chapel and so on, but you know at the most ten people would show up you know and what have you.  And she did that for years and I think finally decided well maybe you can go home on Friday.  But, and so on, but that's one, that's the kind of--and the field of music is skilled with people like that.  I have another friend who was retired from Morris Brown College who is a marvelous salon pianist and he, of course he still plays--he, I, I urged him for hears to produce a C--a CD.  He finally brought out one or two CDs and so on.  And occasionally they play it on the radio and what have you, but he owns like six or seven hundred songs and so on.  Just you know throw out anything at him and he can, he can play it.  And all that he's been playing for fifty, sixty years.  He's used to Bach and so on and is a marvelous, you know, piano stylist.  But he was the chairman of the music department in Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  He was the minister of music at the Congregational Church where you know he played the organ for years in his time.  He was an excellent choral conductor because the Morris Brown choir, which did do one recording while he was directing it years and years ago you know sounded very, very good under his direction, so on. His name is Johnson Hubert, he's in--he's also a Morehouse graduate and [Charles D.] Hubert Hall is named in Morehouse 'cause he--all his family went to Morehouse.  One of his brothers was, was [Dr. Charles D.] Hubert dean [dean of the Morehouse School of Religion] when you were at Morehouse? Oh that was his cousin, his first cousin, Will--Willis Hubert was.  And, but he came from an extraordinary family about which a book ought to be written because they had this extraordinary grandfather who had all of these, had twelve children and each of the twelve children went to college and graduated and so on and many of them became college professors and so on.
Story_ID: 10223
Speaker 1: Now, so looking back over your life is there anything that you would have done differently?
Speaker 2: Yes, possibly I would have perhaps been a little more industrious and gotten my doctor's degree much earlier.  But I have no, no regrets about the way it, it worked out.  And I, the only thing I regret is that you know that I perhaps you know should have done more, produced more stuff than I have up until then.  But it isn't a harsh regret.  It has never kept me awake.  I sleep very well and so on.  Never have, seldom gone through sleepless nights and so on.  So I have no enormous regrets.
Story_ID: 10224
Speaker 1: And when you look at the black community, I know you're playing on a world viewfor the most part, but when you look at the black community do you have any hopes or concerns about the community you know and, you know in the community a lot has changed over the last forty or fifty years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, my real concern which is that there is still not enough seriousness in the pursuit of education at all levels.  And what happens you know in the schools, elementary schools where you get kids who after five or ten years in school can't read the newspaper you know.  I just, I find that you know just frightening.  It's not anything that I myself, I never aspired to you know social leadership, political leadership or anything of that sort so this is not anything that I have sat down and thought a long time about as to how you bring about a change.  But it does seem to me that if it became a high enough priority for enough people in the community, something would be done.  And I have a very strong feeling that the black church which is the largest component of the black community has been relatively ineffective in dealing with this world.  Now one can always make the statement and the claim that the church is really not about this world it's about the next world so maybe it's doing a good business.  But nobody can check what they're doing about the next world you see, but in this world not much.  And I think the black church receives much more credit than it is due because what it has done is really very, very, very limited.  Our--I think we thought that you know if every church could just draw a circle of like one quarter mile and say we will, we'll prove everything we can within this quarter mile, that would be a contribution, a considerable contribution, improve everything in terms of--and then I think the ineffectiveness of the church in responding to things like AIDS and so on is most, most deplorable so I think we have a very, very serious problem of facing up to responsibility.
Speaker 1: You don't see the church as having a role of education do you?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes.  I think that what happens within the--I mean the church can effectively educate the people that, who fall within its immediate purview.
Speaker 1: A lot of the leaders of the church are not themselves educated people.
Speaker 2: Well that is--why we would allow that--but those who are educated I think are underperforming.  Now of course the question of the ignorance of the leadership or the lack of schooling of the leadership has itself been a very important question in black thought for the last one hundred and fifty years.  There is virtually no black thinker or leader that you can go to and you--that will--and not find somewhere in his remarks or reflections his concern with the ineffectiveness or the lack of education of the, of the churches' leaders.  But they're not leaders of the church who have a sense of what they are about who you know we can hold responsible for failing to do what the can do.  So I think that's, that's one of my great disappointments.  And, and I don't know that I have a lot of hope about that but, you know. But if there were something to hope about that's where hope should be directed.  That is the--cause after all it is the largest institution still,  and I say that with a thorough knowledge of the fact that most black people are not churched.  You know there is this illusion or this stereotype, this clich of all black folks going to church.  That's not true.  Never was true.  And I think most black people are safely outside of the church and I don't know what we do about them but there are enough in the church to make a difference.
Story_ID: 10225
Speaker 1: Do you think though about also having spent a good part of your career, a majority of it in an HBCU [historically black college/university] supported, I mean HBCU environment?  What do you, what are your thoughts about their future and survivability and their importance in, you know in this society?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think they can, that the school, H--the historically black colleges should or can survive simply because they have, up until now.  I think they have to operate in terms of, you know, the present realities.  And I think that they need to be, there needs to be a sense of the history of the institution, but there also has to be a strong sense of purpose in them.  And unless you know the institutions have a sense of purchase and can operate in the modern world, they probably have no expect--no reasonable expectation of being able to survive just because they have survived up until this point.  I mean it's a relatively natural thing for schools which are weak to sort of fade away.  And some of the historically black colleges have survived in the past because people had to be propped up.  But I don't think that there's a justification for that because the people who may have served can find education somewhere now, which was not true before.  So, I think that they have to earn you know really the right to say they should be supported.  They have to be doing something.  Now, I think most of them probably are and there are some which, you know, are terribly weak and it may not be to anybody's advantage that they continue.
Speaker 1: Now do you, what, do you see any keys to their survival you know in the new--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Well, simply providing a good education to people who want or need it.  It's very likely that in the foreseeable future that will be mainly black people, but the schools have to be good enough and interesting enough to draw anybody who can come to them.  Now for example, some of the black colleges in the past have done a very important service,, you know in providing education for people from Africa and and from the Caribbean and they can continue to do that but both in Africa and in the Caribbean of course there are, you know, schools.  Africa of course is not in the best shape at all but schools in the Caribbean of course are quite up to rendering the kind of service that they ought to be rendering.  And so I'm very well acquainted with the University of West Indies for example, particularly the branch in Jamaica.  Indeed a very close friend of mine is the vice chancellor of the University of the West Indies now, Rex Nettleford, but he was also incidentally a dancer and a choreographer and a, the artistic director of The National Dance Theater of Jamaica.  But a scholar who has you know risen to the very top in, in scholarship and in social commentary.
Story_ID: 10226
Speaker 1: And--I think that I'm can get a move--one of the philosophical questions but the whole area of black thought, do you, I mean what--do you have a commentary on the whole area of sort of black thought?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that to the extent there is black thought it's about the situation and condition of the black people.  Beyond that, I can't quite see that there is, you know, there exists anything that's black thought because most of the problems that black people have or many of the problems are problems that people who aren't black have.  So thinking about these problems is thinking about the problem and it is not the exclusive area of black thought that is involved.  However, blacks have had to think very seriously about the situation of black people.  As that situation has been modified or ameliorated then there is less and less a province of black thought it seems to me.  So you look at a man who is clearly very, very bright, very, very like [W.E.B.] DuBois who is a classic case, most of his reflection was on you know the black world and black problems and so on.  And that's a considerable body you know of material but even though he thought about other things as well and, and expresses himself about other things.  I think that a present day scholar of the same character or the same weight now, there are many, has, probably has to think in terms in a much broader category.  So I don't see that, an ongoing stream of black thought.  I think the, the extent to which a certain number of people seem to be perpetuating what we might call DuBoisian thought is a reflection less of their ability to really deal with the world than of their ability to try to find a place to stand and be noticed while they're standing there.  And I ain't gonna call no names, but we have a lot of public you know a lot of posturing in, in the, in the, in the cause of blackness which is not fully justified it seems to me in terms of the present situation of black people.  And DuBois was addressing very, very, very serious problems and there are still serious problems,, but I don't see some of the people who are talking expressing, dealing with those problems you know.  They simply are you know, sort of repeating DuBoisian positions and analyses and so on.
Speaker 1: I hate to belabor this but it's just that I find your answers different than what I thought they would be.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But that says I don't know you.  But I'm just--so black studies, black thought ,I mean, do you--I'm just trying to figure out where you see it's place.  You say it's place is, it's like it's antiquated.  That's what you keep--.
Speaker 2: No, I'm not saying it's antiquated but it, it's in the larger world.  I--it's not, it's not, it's not a province you see or it's not provincial.  The problems that we're, that, it seems to me that we are working on in the, a broad area of African or diaspora studies are the problems of human beings and so on.  And we can't isolate them from those larger problems and so on.  But I, I was never interested in creating a black specialty (unclear) specialty.
Speaker 1: You weren't?
Speaker 2: No, no,no.
Speaker 1: Okay, but that says that it's arrived already and you feel that it's arrived and it's matured.  I don't think that's the case.
Speaker 2: Oh--.
Speaker 1: The field has arrived and matured.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So it will have its place--.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: That's a--do you believe in first, second and third worl?
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: I mean you know, I'm just trying to understand?
Speaker 2: No, I don't believe in the first, second and third world.  I just think of it as a world and there's some variations and, and differences in it and so on, you know.  But I think first, second, third world serves the purposes of people who want to keep it that way and so on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you see--well let me address this one last question and I'm going to ask the legacy question.  But do you see any important developments occurring , I mean,  in the area of African American studies?  You know do you see any important developments occurring within the whole diaspora?
Speaker 2: Well,that's a very good question but I don't know what developments would occur after you-- I mean in other words--I don't think that there are methodologies or even problems unique to the study of African American migration.  In other words, study has an object.  It doesn't exist for the sake, for it's own sake.  And I think that the study has to respond to the conditions and the situations that has this object.  Now if your study is the condition of black people then obviously if you develop more penetrating, more sophisticated ways of looking at that then that's desirable but that isn't necessarily you know anything other than refining you know your study and so on.  Remember for a very long time the full range of black life was not considered an object of study.  But it seems to me it now is.  There's hardly any aspect of black life now which is not an object of, of study in, in places where studying is done.  It's true that fifty, sixty years ago a lot of study was done outside of the academy.  One studied only the pathology of black people in the academy.  But now through for a variety of reasons, everything is studied within the academy and that's the way it should be.
Story_ID: 10227
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be--(unclear)(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: I'm not President Clinton (laughs).
Speaker 1: That's a shame.  Why are you being this cantankerous (laughs)?
Speaker 2: See I'm not very, I'm not very egotistical and I don't go around thinking what my leg--.  I mean I you know lived, I've enjoyed myself.  I've been helpful to a lot of people and so on, but I don't think in terms of any legacy except, except what, you know, I have produced and, and written.  And unfortunately that's not a whole lot, so I need, I'm continuing to do it.
Speaker 1: Is there anything you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.
Speaker 1: Let's see.  Is there anything you that you want to say (laughter).
Speaker 2: (laughs)
Speaker 1: Is there anything you might be remembered ?
Speaker 2: Well I'm not going to speculate on that either.  No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not into legacy and so on.
Speaker 1: You're not into legacy.
Story_ID: 10228
Speaker 1: What would you like to tell young people who are coming up in the academic world today, do you have a message(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Just work hard.  I mean that's all that--I mean you know work hard and enjoy yourself and be nice you know, be kind, be considerate and so on.
Speaker 1: Okay what about.
Speaker 2: I mean what I have to say, anything I have to say is a platitude and I--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I, and self evident and obvious.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Work hard.
Story_ID: 10229
Speaker 1: Okay, you see the work that's coming out the [Henry Louis] Skip Gates camp?
Speaker 2: Well somewhat yeah.  I don't pay too much attention to it but I--(simultaneously).
Speaker 1: And what do you think of that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it's, I mean you talking about the encyclopedia?
Speaker 1: Right, that and just the, you know the, it's the largest African American studies department anywhere they had all the money come(simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Yes, they have had the money and so on.
Speaker 1: The money , the resources.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yes--
Speaker 1: But I'm just saying is, is--do you--oh that's never mind.  I can't--I'm trying to get you to comment, I know, what I'm trying to see, what I'm trying to--turn off the camera.
Speaker 2: Sure. ( break in tape)
Speaker 1: I put, this is me--.  (Brief pause).
Speaker 2: --and so on.  I think things are going on but in the humanities-- (simultaneously).
Speaker 1: But what things are going on, that's what I'm saying.  They just don't what things are going on?!.
Speaker 2: Oh, I think things are vibrant enough across the board.  You have people who are painting, people who are writing, people who are composing and so on.  I think that there's a tremendous amount of contemporary creativity in the African American community but I think that creativity is perhaps less self conscious about blackness and being black than was true in the '60s [1960s].  Indeed there is a certain sense of alienation I think among artists coming along as of the '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s] vis--vis this earlier period.  And indeed of course this is another thing that I don't suppose to get into at all, you have a few artists who have gotten a lot of attention who defined themselves as post-black, which I must confess I don't understand that part very well.  But the fact is that there are people doing things and so on.  I don't, so I don't, I don't think the creativity is gone into any kind of decline.
Story_ID: 10230
Speaker 1: Well, [Henry Ossawa] Tanner died in 1937 and in his later years he hadn't really sold very much work at all.  His New York gallery was The Grand Central Galleries in New York and they probably had several paintings on consignment from him when he died.  And indeed I know that in the early '60s [1960s] or certainly the last '50s [1950s] they still had in their stock as it were one or two Tanners which nobody had bothered to ask about for many, many years.  However, by the '60s [1960a], mid-'60s [1960s], people began to ask about Tanner.  They were looking for icons and so on and Tanner is an artist who, you know, everybody knew about.  He was never unneglected, never neglected in the whole realm of, you know--people knew any African American artist they knew Tanner and so on.  So people began to ask are there any Tanners around you know who has some and so on.  And of course there weren't any around and the director of the Gallery, a mister, what was his name now, forgotten, I had it a few minutes ago and forgot it.  At any rate, he called Tanner's son was still alive, Jesse Tanner and or wrote him and all were brilliant and said are any of your father's paintings available for sale?  And, and Jesse Tanner wrote back, "When my father died in 1937 his--everything in his studio was put in storage and it's all still in storage and it's never been opened up."  So when--Mr. Barry I think was the gallery man's name and he wrote back and said "Would you be interested in selling any of them?"  And he wrote back, "Everything."  So they shipped the entire contents of the studio to New York and there were so many things they had to have two exhibitions in succession.  And they had these two exhibitions and of course everything in the exhibitions sold and people you know showed up in great numbers.  The greatest body of the material was bought by the brother of Warren Robbins and went into the collection of the Museum of African Art, then a private collection, which means that those items all went to the federal government when the Smithsonian [Institute, Washington, D.C.] assumed control of the museum and those items are now in the Museum of American Art from which they have been used to make one or two exhibitions in recent years.  Another purchaser was Merton Simpson, a dealer in African art, himself an African American artist and his friend and my friend Romare Bearden said to Merton, "You ought to go there and buy some of those paintings."  And Merton did so and he bought several of the larger paintings.  I myself bought two or three smaller paintings for Hampton Institute [now University, Hampton, Virginia] and of course bought several for myself and the Atlanta University Center [ref. to five college consortium in Atlanta, Georgia] had a representative at that time who actually purchased several for the Atlanta University Center.  So those are the ones whose destiny I actually know about.  I think that you know probably the records of The Grand Central Galleries might very well show where the others went.  I assume that the gallery continues or at least it's archives are somewhere and what have you.  But there were also within a very short period of time and this was in 1966, '67 [1967].
Story_ID: 10231
Speaker 1: Okay, and just one last question that 'Conserve the Legacy' [exhibit] do you think that was an important exhibit?
Speaker 2: Oh yes I thought it was very important except that it was organized basically by my former student Richard Powell who is the chairman of the art department at Duke University now.  And of course a draw--and another protg of mine was very involved in the projects preceding it namely Tina Dunkley who was the curator or director of the museum at Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia], formerly the Atlanta University Collection and so on.  But I though it was a very significant show and I think it has an interesting and important impact.  I came to Chicago [Illinois] while it was in Chicago and I did a public presentation at one of the forums in Chicago.
Story_ID: 10232
Speaker 1: One last question.  Do you have any thoughts about reparations?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think it's a fascinating idea and ultimately it should raise consciousness.  I don't think there's any legal basis for the reparations and I'm not even sure that there's a firm historical basis for it, but it's a nice thing to have discussed.  Nobody will be hurt by the discussion of reparations.
Story_ID: 10233
Speaker 1: As a true a academician are you, do you have thoughts about it's sort of progression along, you know cause you're pretty much a renaissance person.  They don't, they don't (unclear) that much anymore do they?
Speaker 2: Well no, I think, I think that most people who are in academic institutions are pursuing a very narrow path of study.  That's what they want to do and so on.  I also think that traditionally institutions at least throughout the twentieth century have had some illusion or delusion of producing well rounded people or highly cultivated people.  And there is an inherent tension between the attempt of the university or an academic institution to provide this well, this broad, really cultivated individual and what can on and what does go on.  Of course there's another emphasis which we find in academe and that is the emphasis upon critical thinking and that's a term I have no idea what that it is but that's a term I have heard throughout you know my, my time.  But in the course of over fifty years of teaching I have been through a lot of curriculum meetings and curriculum projects and curriculum evaluations and so on and I am so happy to be rid of the whole thing that I ought to have a special celebration just for it because in fact very little has changed.  I think very little has changed in the fifty years, same questions come up so on.  But of course different people are bringing them up, and maybe there are no solutions to the questions which is why they keep recurring, no answers to such.
