Story_ID: 304285
Speaker 1: First of all, Dr. Lucas [HistoryMaker Dr. Henry Lucas], I would like to thank you for agreeing to his interview.
Speaker 2: Well listen, thank you.
Speaker 1: And I, I know we're going, it's gonna be a wonderful time.  So we're gonna get started.  First of all, my name is Loretta Henry.  And I'm going, going to be doing the interview.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And Scott Stearns is going to be doing our camera work.  So, could you please state your full name (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay, it's Henry Lucas and no middle name, H-E-N-R-Y, L-U-C-A-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your date of birth and where you were born?
Speaker 2: Okay, two, twenty-seven, thirty-two [February 27, 1932].  And I was born and Rahway, that's R-A-H-W-A-Y, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date is?
Speaker 2: Is, what, April the 1st, yeah, isn't it interesting.
Speaker 1: April the 1st--
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter)--
Speaker 1: And (laughter), and the year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen--I mean 2005.
Speaker 1: Two thousand and five [2005] okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: ---thank you.  And the location of this interview, the address?
Speaker 2: Oh, this is 1375 Sutter Street, that's S-U-T-T-E-R Street, San Francisco [California]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --94109 (laughter).
Speaker 1: Very good.  Okay, and your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a dentist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 304286
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you some questions.  They may sound a little silly, but just bear with us, okay.  What--could you tell me what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: My favorite food. It's interesting. Probably macaroni (laughter), collard greens, and fricasseed chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's probably my favorite food.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: The winter months.
Speaker 1: Pardon?
Speaker 2: The winter.
Speaker 1: I wonder why.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I'm a big skier.  I usually, there's times, there's times I take off like right after the holidays, you know, when the whole family gets to together (unclear) and usually don't come back until like, you know, May 1st, April.  And then they might drop down every now and then to see how things are going.  But, I come back out of the mountains every now and then and see how things are going.  But I take, I take my laptop with me, and I can take care of everything in my laptop, like everything in this office.  I can get all the schedules.  I can just run it from, from wherever I am with my laptop.
Speaker 1: Oh, pretty good.
Speaker 2: I just, so I'm all over Tahoe [Lake Tahoe], Colorado, Utah, Whistler, Canada.  I just run it that way.
Speaker 1: Ah, that's wonderful, okay.  Sorry about that.  Okay, and your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably blue (laughter), probably blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, good.  When you go on trips, what's your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy, that's an interesting one.  My favorite destination probably was Courchevel, France, is a ski area, Courchevel.  That's where the 1992 Olympics [1992 Winter Olympics Albertville, France] were, and so, incredible place, incredible.
Speaker 1: Is it?
Speaker 2: I've been there numerous times to ski.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there are six of us who have been skiing together for twenty-two years.  And Frank Green [ph.] is one of 'em.  You know Frank.  And, and so, we've been there a couple of times, and it's just incredible.
Speaker 1: Okay, sounds wonderful.  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Favorite or saying, favorite phrase or saying.  Well, I do have one: it's better to have it and not need it than need it and not have it.  That's probably what I tell all my children.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a good one.
Speaker 2: And I always tell them also: never be a, never be on the, on the edge of anything.  Always be ahead of the curve.
Story_ID: 304287
Speaker 1: Now we're gonna talk, explore your family background a little bit.  Could you please tell me something about your mother?  What was her name?  Where was she born?  Where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: Okay, my mother was named Margaret Williams [Margaret Williams Lucas].  That was her maiden name, and she grew up, and she's from Jacksonville, Florida, originally.  And I'm trying to remember, I guess her mother [Cecilia Williams (ph.)] moved to New Jersey probably, I guess maybe she was ten years old, eight or nine.  I don't, I don't really know, but somewhere in the neighborhood, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Could you, how would you describe her?  What was she like?  Do you have any stories to share about her?
Speaker 2: My mother (laughter), interesting--you ever--was a child.  She always was that way.  She was, my mother grew up that way, and she enjoyed, enjoyed being that way.  You know, my father kind of, you know, was always, you know, the, the person in charge.  My mother liked being not in charge (laughter).  And my mother right today, she'll be ninety in September.
Speaker 1: Oh, wonderful.
Speaker 2: She lives with my sister [Vivian Lucas Hurling] in New Jersey.  And my sister kids, I have, I call, usually call them every week and talk to my sister.  And my sister says you know something, she is healthier than I am (laughter), you know.  But yeah, yeah, she's, she's still the same.
Speaker 1: She, she didn't tell you any stories about when she was growing up, what it was like?
Speaker 2: Not, you know, I, I don't really recall much of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I really don't recall much of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because (unclear) my [paternal] grandmother [Sarah Lucas (ph.)] raised me for the most part.  And I don't, I just don't recall much of that.  You know, my mother got married young, fifteen years old.  And you know, and she--I was the oldest, and you know, my grandmother, for the most part, raised me.  So, I don't remember much of the, I don't remember much of the stories that, that, that she would relay back to us.  I, I just don't remember.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us something about your father?  What was his name?  Where was he born?  Where--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father--
Speaker 1: --did he grow?
Speaker 2: --was Henry.  I'm a, I'm a junior.  He's Henry Lucas [Henry Lucas, Sr.], and my father was born in Savannah, Georgia.  And I guess they came New Jersey at an early age, probably, I guess he was probably thirteen or fourteen, somewhere around there.  And I know he, my mother, they got married very young.  He probably was sixteen or seventeen; she was fifteen, something like that.  And my, my father I think, if I recall, finished high school in New Jersey.  My mother never finished, finished, finished high school.  And that, that's, that, that, that's about what I know about it.
Story_ID: 304288
Speaker 1: Have you been able to trace your ancestors?  Do you have a family tree?
Speaker 2: Well, we've been working that for years.  The far--to answer your question, yes and no.  And when I say, when I say yes, we've been working on, but no, because I don't, I can't go back any further than my great-grandmother, who was from, also from Savannah [Georgia].  And I used when I was younger I spent a couple of years down there.  I, I vaguely remember her.  I really almost don't remember her, but I remember going back to Georgia (unclear) in those days.  A couple of times my father [Henry Lucas, Sr.] took me down there.  But, but I really don't think, I, I, I, I can, I can kind of see her visually, but I really don't remember much about her.  And she used to talk to me about slavery, you know, when we were down there.  And it was a, if, if I remember, the--what you call it?  My grandmother always referred to, to, to, to them as Geechees.  I think you know what Geechees were all--and they, they, they, they lived off the, off the coast of Georgia, in those island [Sea Islands] off the coast of Georgia.  And that's what I remember most about that, about, about my grandmother and my great-grandmother always referring to them as Geechees, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where they came from.
Speaker 1: How interesting. You had mentioned your grandmother raised you.  Could you tell us some, is, she's your mother's mother, right?
Speaker 2: No, my father's mother.
Speaker 1: Father's mother.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, could you tell us something about her?  What was her name?  What was she like?
Speaker 2: My, my, my grandmother's, grandma's name was Sarah [Sarah Lucas (ph.)].  And, and she was a wonderful person, a very religious person.  We used to go to church sometimes three or four times a week (laughter).  But she was very, how shall I call it, very devoted to me.  And I (unclear) time about education.  You know, she (unclear) was, was a big thing about getting educated.  Well, what I didn't know at the time, at the time I did not know this until I was, I was, I, I felt almost embarrassed about it.  I was a sophomore in college at the time, and that's why I remember my grandmother could not read or write.  She could not read or write.  Here I was a sophomore in college at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and that's when I found out.  She, she used to send me, I thought she'd be writing me letters or send me care packages, you know, at school.  And, and I remember when I was a sophomore that I got this letter, and I noticed her handwriting was different.  And I, I didn't think much about it at first.  But then I got a letter like two--three weeks later--handwriting's different again (laughter).  I said this is really strange.  And I get another letter about three, two weeks later, and this handwriting is different again.  So I finally decided to call my aunt, who is my grandmother's daughter.  You know, everybody, we all had these secrets in the family, you know.  They all knew that she couldn't read or write, but I was not supposed to know that.  And so when I called her and told her about this handwriting.  Well, she says, "Now well, let me be honest with you and tell you the true story."
Speaker 1: That's a wonderful story.
Speaker 2: And my grandmother was, I, I mean I couldn't believe it, and, and the way she handled things, the way she'd count up money, the way she very thrifty and the whole bit, and I mean it was, just blew me away, for me to be a sophomore in college and not know that.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.  Did you know anything about your father's father, your grand, paternal grandfather (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't know him.  He had passed away before I was born.
Story_ID: 304289
Speaker 1: And what about your mother's [Margaret Williams Lucas] parents?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother's, my mother's, my mother's mother I knew very well.  And I didn't know my mother's father although 'cause he, he had passed away before I was born. We all lived in the same town, New Jersey, my, my and both grandmothers, my father's [Henry Lucas, Sr.] side and on my mother's side.  We lived in this small town, in Rahway, New Jersey; we all lived there.  So, you know, we were all, we were a close family at the time.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Cecilia Williams [ph.] her name was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I always called, I always called her--oh my goodness, this is terrible.  They always called her CeCe, CeCe, Celia, yeah.  Yeah, that's been quite a while.
Story_ID: 304290
Speaker 1: Okay, now we're gonna talk a bit more about you.  Could you please tell me your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory of growing up, I guess I, I guess what I remember most, I, I must have been about five years old at the time.  And I was at home with my mother [Margaret Williams Lucas] and father [Henry Lucas, Sr.] at the time.  And I--either I was being scolded for doing something by my, something, but I-I thought it was wrong (laughter).  And I said well, I was very upset about it.  I said I'm getting out of here.  I'm going, I'm going to grandma's [Lucas' paternal grandmother, Sarah Lucas (ph.)] house.  And I took off in the front door.  And we--we weren't even that far apart, maybe a mile or so.  I took off and ran to her house (laughter).  And of course she comes down there, you know, looking out for me (laughter).  Even though I was probably wrong.  But, but I remember that.  That's the other thing I remember most, you know, and my grandmother and I, you know, just, just the two of us 'cause everyone was older.  My, her, her children were already out, you know, grown and had children.  And my grandmother and I used to take, we had a great time together.  In the summertime, you know, she used to grow in her garden.  She, we had garden.  She had, there were trees out there, pears, and, and we had grapes out there, and so we didn't so and so, so in the, and in the summer, we would, we, she, she would can things.  We'd can all of the fruit, and make wine, and can, can, can the vegetables.  And she used to have a saying that she could never get any of the rest of the family, either my other brothers [Marvin Lucas] and sisters [Lenore Lucas and Vivian Lucas Hurling] or other people to come help out.  And she'd always says that's all right, she's telling me it's all right.  They don't have to come, because when you don't, if you don't work, you don't eat (laughter).  And when the wintertime came, you know, she always said they're not coming up here, not getting anything up here (laughter).  And we had a wonderful time when the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did she stick to that?
Speaker 2: --snow--huh?
Speaker 1: Did she stick to that when she--
Speaker 2: Oh, she stuck to it, boy.
Speaker 1: Did she real--
Speaker 2: She, oh, believe me, she stuck to that.  And when the wintertime came, you know, and even then when there's a lot of snow up there, and, and school was closed, she and I would sit in there and eat all those beautiful (laughter) fruit that we had canned during the summer.  And she always reminded me: you don't work, you don't eat.
Story_ID: 304291
Speaker 1: I know you have brothers and sisters.  Could you tell us about your siblings' names in their birth order and maybe--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have--
Speaker 1: --something about them?
Speaker 2: --I have two sisters and one brother.  My, my sister next to me, and we're all two years apart, she passed away quite some time ago.  And I have an--
Speaker 1: What was her name?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Her, oh, I'm sorry, her name was Lenore, Lenore, L-E-N-O-R-E [Lenore Lucas], and she passed away about twenty years ago I guess.  My, the next siblings was, was my brother.  He's still alive.  I don't see, I don't, he and I don't, I don't see him.  I haven't, my sister tells me about what he's up to, but I haven't really talked to him in years and years.
Speaker 1: And his name is?
Speaker 2: Marvin, his name is Marvin [Marvin Lucas].  And my oth- my youngest sister is named Vivian [Vivian Lucas Hurling], and she is, takes care of my mother [Margaret Williams Lucas].  She, she, my mother lives with her now in New Jersey, and she takes care of her, and they all live together.  And (laughter) I, I, I, I, I, I kind of feel somewhat sorry for my sister because she's got to put up with all this.  You know, as you know, we get older, we're not, we're not always the most pleasant people in the world.  And she calls me up and tells me about my mother.  And she says my--my, your mother, she's a trip; she's this and she's that, you know.  And so, we, we--it's interesting.  But my sister takes good care of her.
Story_ID: 304292
Speaker 1: Could you tell us something about the street that you grew up on?  What was your community, your neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember two places.  There's only two places I know I remember living in Rahway [New Jersey].  We lived on a street called Dock Street, D-O-C-K, and the river was next to us, see.  And it was like this little tiny apartment building.  It was like a, it was, it wasn't a project, like.  It was just, I remember there might have been four or five houses in this one area there.  And I lived there, we lived there 'til I was about--oh, I live there, but I lived there, between there and, and my [paternal] grandmother's [Sarah Lucas (ph.)] house.  But at that house, I was there I think, I think, I think 'til the year I graduated from high school [Rahway High School, Rahway, New Jersey], when we lived at that house.  And then we moved across town.  (Unclear) my father [Henry Lucas, Sr.] finally bought a house on the side of town; it was, which was an all-white neighborhood.  And I never lived in that house, though, because I, I was away at school, and I was with my grandmother most of the time, so I never really lived in that house.  My sisters [Lenore Lucas and Vivian Lucas Hurling] and brothers [Marvin Lucas] did, but I, I never really, you know, I'd come back every now and visit.  And I didn't come back to visit very often, frankly.
Speaker 1: Okay, when you were growing up did you--kind of games did you, you and your friends, what did you and your little friends do?
Speaker 2: Well, (laughter) that's a little interesting story, bring that up.  I was, I was, I grew--playing--my primary as a loner because of my grandmother.  My grandmother didn't, would not allow me--first of all, there weren't that many black people in town to begin with.  But even those who were there, my grandma would not allow me to hang out, hang out, hang out with the boys, hang out on the corners.  And so she made me do other things.  You know, she got me into listening to music and, and going to see the, the, the theater and all kinds of stuff.  That was her way of keeping me away from what she thought was not in my best interest.  I, I was very unhappy about it (laughter). You know how it is; you know how you growing up.  But when I look back on it, it's the best thing ever happened to me, but not at the time.  I didn't think--I was very upset about it at the time, but hey, I wasn't about to go against my (laughter) grandmother, no way, no way (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm sure.
Story_ID: 304293
Speaker 1: Are there any sights, or sounds, or smells when you come in contact with them they instantly remind you of, of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Sight or sounds (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sounds, um-hm, or smells.
Speaker 2: Smells, well, I, smell is probably a better, a better category.  My [paternal] grandmother [Sarah Lucas (ph.)] always was, always cooking all the time.  And it was, it was always, it was just a beauty to walk in that house and she'd have all kinds of, you know, biscuits and all kinds--it was just, it was great, you know.  And I, I, I never felt, you know, we were poor, but I never felt poor growing up because I didn't know, I didn't know what the difference was.  And as far as I was concerned, my grandmother gave me what, whatever she thought I needed.  I didn't find out I was poor 'til (laughter), until I went, went away to school [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 304294
Speaker 1: Are there any other memories you have of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, we used to go--my [paternal] grandmother [Sarah Lucas (ph.)] was a big churchgoer, and she always took me to church with her.  And I can recall one day.  I guess I was about, maybe I was twelve years old, thirteen, somewhere around there.  And she said to me one day, you know, it's time you joined a church.  I said grandma, I, I don't need to, I don't, why I got to join, join a church?  And she just hauled off and, and slapped me like you won't believe.  She says don't you ever question the Lord ever again.  I never did again (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I joined the church and yeah.  I, I--grandmother, she was quite, she was quite a discipline, discipline, disciplinarian at the time.  I, I, I, I didn't get in very much trouble because of her, but when I did she would say to me, go outside and get a switch, if I did something wrong, and make sure it's not, it's not, not a tiny one.  Go, if a tiny one, go back and get a big one.  And, and the thing about it was that she would take it and she would, "Put it in the corner over there, put it in the corner."  And I said to myself, you know, I'm waiting for this, waiting for this whipping.  She said, "No, I'll, when the time comes, I'll let you know when."  That was the torture of not knowing when.  And, and, and--day to--one day would pass, another day would pass, I never get it.  And day she would say to me, "Okay, go over there and get that switch, and take your pants down" (laughter).
Speaker 1: Be hurt.
Speaker 2: That was quite a--that's what I remember most, that type of discipline.  So that's why I tried to be good most of the time (laughter), because of that.
Story_ID: 304295
Speaker 1: Your elementary school, do you remember what its name was--
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) something about it?
Speaker 2: --I was, I was, yeah, I went to Grover Cleveland Elementary School [Rahway, New Jersey].  And as I said, the town I grew up in was--I don't think, if I remember correctly, and this, and I was in the first, kindergarten, first grade, I may be the only black student in the class.  There might have been two max.  The school was white basically, you know.  It was that way all the way through, through grammar school and through high school [Rahway High School, Rahway, New Jersey], primar- primarily.
Speaker 1: Do you recall any of your teachers?  Did any of them influence you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I do recall (unclear).  There was a teacher who, who--in fact there are two teachers I remember.  One of 'em, I guess was maybe I was in the first grade or second grade, I think her name was--what was her name--Ms. Miller [ph.], if I remember correctly.  And for whatever reason--I don't know what the reason was; even to this day I'm not sure--she took a liking to me.  And she always went out of way, went out of her way to make sure that I was able to--how do I put it--I was able, you know, whenever it was necessary in a class, she'd see to it that I--she'd come, she may take me over--she lived right across the street from the school.  She'd make me come over to her house and make sure that, you know, I learn what was necessary.  She--clothing that was either from her children or somebody, she'd bring it to, give it to me.  So, it was kind of a, you know, she looked out for me.  The other teacher I remember most was when I was in high school.  He name was Ms. Berno [ph.].  And her father owned a, a pharmacy in, in that town there.  And some reason she had a--those teachers I remember most.  And she always looked out for me, you know.  And her, her, her co- her concern was about education, you know.  And she said, always would say to me, "Well, you know--I don't know how we're gonna do it, but you one day we're gonna find some way to get you to go to college," you know.  And that was always her, her, her, her thing.
Story_ID: 304296
Speaker 1: I started working at about ten years old.  And I worked in a department store [Mark Harris Department Store, Rahway, New Jersey].  This, this, this gentleman's name was Mark Harris.  He came from Poland at the age of, well, I guess maybe nine or ten years old.  He had a sixth grade education, and he came as an immigrant to New York [New York].  And at that time, he had no parents at the time.  And he made a living by selling handkerchiefs and scarves on, on the streets New- New York--used to tell me these stories.  And, and so, and somehow or another, I started working there.  I'd sweep the floors, clean the place up, you know.  And over time, you know, he took a liking to me and, and start teaching me about the business, you know.  And, and I, I, I think I, I, I, I probably stayed there for at least--I might have been nine years old--probably 'til I was about eighteen, nineteen years old.  And over the time, you know, he would show me the business.  We, I, I, I, he'd take me into New York with him.  We'd go buy merchandise.  You know, he'd always tell me, yeah, why?  At the time, I had no idea, But he once said to me I know, I, I, I couldn't--I guess I must have been about fourteen or fifteen years old.  We had come back from New York one day, and we, we unloaded the car, bring all of the merchandise into the store, and he said to me one day, he says, said, "Look around here, look around you."  He says you know, "You see what's in this store?  All my stock is on the shelf."  He said, "Everything I have is on the shelf.  There's nothing up here," he said.  He said, "So don't you ever put your stock on the shelf."  At the time, I, I never, I never, I, I didn't understand what that mean, but I understood later.  And, and he was always, his, his determination was to see that I went to school one way or another--college one way or another.  And, and sure enough, when I, when I got out of high school [Rahway High School, Rahway, New Jersey], I went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And he paid for my room and board for the four years I was there, the four years I was there.  Every, every month he'd send me a check to pay for room and board at, at school.  But what I found out later on was about a, well, I guess I'd better, I guess I was about a junior at the time, was that I'd gone back to New Jersey for something or other.  I stopped by the store.  And, and I used to go by to see him all the time.  He, he said--one day we were talking.  I was thank, I was thanking him for what he did for me all these years 'cause at that time I began to understand and, and, and began to more realize, you know, how fortunate I was.  He says to me, he said, "Well, you know something?"  He said, "I gotta tell you something."  He said, "You're--the money I sent you every month, he says that wasn't my money; that was your money."  I said, "What do you mean it was my money?"  He said, "Every time you work, when you get paid I used to take a little bit out from your check and put it away."
Speaker 2: So he had a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so the money I sent to you was money I had saved for you.  And that paid--
Speaker 2: So you had a college fund (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for all your time at school.
Speaker 2: Oh, that was nice.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That was really, very--
Speaker 1: It was quite a--
Speaker 2: --very special.
Speaker 1: Oh, it was a very special thing.  It was, he was, and he had three sons, and he always wanted his sons to go off--they all went to college, but they always came back to the business.  He never wanted that.  He, he always tried to keep 'em out of the business, 'cause he said don't ever keep your stock on the shelf, and he wanted 'em to become lawyers or whatever, you know.  And, and I think that's (unclear) I don't know why, but that's maybe another reason why he was so interested in me.  And I guess, I guess he died when I was, I guess when I was in, at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] I guess it was, somewhere early in Meharry.  But, I stayed in touch with the family all these years, and I'm still in touch with them because they're all retired.  I think the older brother's a--I think there's only left.  So, so two of them have died.  The other is living down in Florida now.  And I guess about ten years ago the older son and his wife always wanted to come out to California, see what, what, you know, what happened with--and of course, I invited them to come out here to see, you know, what, what I was doing.  And they came here, this very facility.  And they were always, they took all the pictures and went back to New Jersey.  And they were, they were so proud about what, how I turned out.  You know, it was, it was quite an event.
Speaker 2: It's a wonderful story.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He was--took such an interest in, in you 'cause he wanted you to go to college.
Story_ID: 304297
Speaker 1: What kind of a student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a good student, but I didn't know what a good student I was, very frankly (laughter).  I went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  Where are you from again?
Speaker 1: Ohio.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, I'm sure you--I, I don't know if you knew much about Howard back in the days in the '50s [1950s], what, what Howard was, was like.  How, Howard was a, was a, a school that catered to people of color who are very fair, and people who were dark like me weren't, weren't, you know, weren't, weren't really, basically (laughter) weren't welcome.  I didn't know that.  I'd have never New Jersey.  So I (laughter) get down to Howard one day.  I'm walking on the campus (laughter).  And somebody walks up to me and says, "What are you doing?  What are you doing here on this, what are you doing here?"  And I said, "Well, I'm, I'm come, come here as fresh student."  They said, "No, no, no, no, no, we don't, we don't want no black boys here on this campus."  I'll never forget that (laughter).
Speaker 1: My (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I'll never forget that.
Speaker 1: My.
Speaker 2: But that was my, that, that was my determination to make sure I stayed there.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Because when I got to Howard, you see, you had all these students there (unclear) from the South who were all valedictorians and salutatorian, and I, and it's, it's kind of scary.  I'm like God, how am I gonna make it here?  I'm just come out of this little ti- tiny school [Rahway High School, Rahway, New Jersey] up in New Jersey, you know.  And so I was really, I was really frightened about how am I gonna make it.  At least--at least I could say well, you know, if I don't make it, I'll go back home.  To me, there was no such thing as going home, (laughter) you know.  But I, but I, but I wound up being a top student end of the year.  And, and what happened here was that, you see, growing up in New Jersey, I had seen a, a black doctor or a black teacher, black anything.  I never knew anything about black history.  It was like, it was like it just, none of this, none of us existed.  And so, and that's why when I got to Howard it was like, I was like a, it was like a, you know, how shall I put it?  I was like being in a candy store full--it was really, it was, I was amazed when I, when I, when I got to Howard.  I saw all these black people there who were Ph.D.s, doctors.  Now it was just, it was another world.  And I think I became very angry at that particular point in my life because all this had been denied me, and I knew nothing about it.  And so during my sophomore year, I spent my whole sophomore year, most, for the most, knowing I could make it, in, in the what they called the Moorland,  Moorland Room [Moorland-Spingarn Research Center] at Howard University, which was the black history room.  And I--learning black history.
Story_ID: 304298
Speaker 1: We were talking about Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  We're gonna just--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --backtrack a little bit--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --if that's okay.  Could you tell us about high school [Rahway High School, Rahway, New Jersey]?  What was your experience in high school?
Speaker 2: It wasn't a very good experience for me, because high school was basically all white.  There were roughly three thousand students in the school and twenty-five blacks in the whole high school.  And I kind of, I knew things weren't right.  I, I nev- I didn't quite sure know what wasn't right (laughter), okay.  And I guess I had to be a sophomore.  You know, you, I guess, well, I must have what, what, fourteen, fifteen years old, I guess about time, then you begin to become aware, more so aware about what, the difference between black and white people all of a sudden, and you see those things, okay, and, and I, I guess, I guess not seeing any professional black people around, no black doctors, no black professors, no black anything.  I mean most, most black people were like my family.  They were domestics or they, you know, that, that's what it was all about.  And that didn't seem right to me.  Something about that wasn't right at the time.  And, and as I got older, you know, junior, sophomore, by the time I got to be a senior, I made up my mind that I was, I was never going back to anything white.  I had, I had, I had been accepted to all these white colleges back in the East part.  But, but having, had no history of being black or black history, you know, I just--some, some, someone told me about Howard University.  I'd never been there.  I had never been to Washington, D.C., but what I heard was enough.
Speaker 1: Did it make you wanna (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I'd gotten a scholarship to Howard, and--
Speaker 1: What was it like being a black in New Jersey?  What was this, was, what were the race relationships (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well see--
Speaker 1: --in the town [Rahway, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: --to do, there was--that's interesting you raise that question because there was, there's, there was, there was really no--we, at the time, growing up, you have--you, you're not aware, as far as I'm concerned, everybody got along great (laughter), you know.  There was no, there was no, like in the '60s [1960s], there were no, there were no clashes, you know.  You, you, we're looking at back in the early, late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s].  There was no, there was, there, there was, there's no real--it was there, but it wasn't there.  You weren't, at that time--let's put it like this: you weren't mistreated, but at the time I didn't know I was mistreated (laughter), let's put it let that, okay.  And most of my time was spent working in a department store [Mark Harris Department Store, Rahway, New Jersey], you know.  By the way, the whole town was Jewish, by the way, and that's probably why, why, why practically all, in the store I worked in, this Jewish, Jewish gentleman [Mark Harris], and all the stores--I mean we're small town, and most of the Jewish stores were Jewish there, and the town was pri- primarily Jewish, okay.  It's right out, we're outside of New York, about twenty-some miles outside of New York.  And, and as I, as I learned, you know, as I learned, go earlier--older, you learn about the history of the Jews and, and blacks.  And so, you see, you know, you look back on it you can understand the, there was no, no, no confrontations basically.
Story_ID: 304299
Speaker 1: What other activities did you take when you were in high school [Rahway High School, Rahway, New Jersey]?  Were you on the football team?  Were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  They wouldn't let me.  Grand (unclear) my, my [paternal] grandma [Sarah Lucas (ph.)] wouldn't let me.  Oh, I wanted to be badly, boy.  Oh, my grandmother said, "No way.  You don't need to be wasting your time playing football or basketball or--."  No, but her, her, her, "You go home; you go, you go get some books to read."  That was her thing.  Now here, here she couldn't read or write, but, but she made sure she'd take me, take me down to the, to the, to the library or bookstore.  And she go pick out a book, like, like, like she knew what was there, and take it home and read it, me to read it.  I didn't know from, you know, I thought she was a, you know, educated, intelligent woman.  That's what she did.
Story_ID: 304300
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Rahway High School, Rahway, New Jersey], what did you, what were your aspirations?  What did you think you were gonna be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Well, that's an interesting story that you bring that up because in the, in the yearbook--I guess by that time I was a high schooler, I was very, I had began to learn the retail business very well.  And I used to--and, and there was a, there was a, a gentleman who came to the department store [Mark Harris Department Store, Rahway, New Jersey] to, to dress up the windows all the time.  And so he taught me a lot about mannequin making, all that kind of stuff, you know.  And (laughter) I guess, I guess at that point my aspiration was--at least I was oh, I'll grow up and I'll learn the retail business, and I'll dress up mannequins, and I'll be this kind--that, that, that's, you know.  And so all the, all the, all the--used to--some of the friends I knew in high school who were white, always associate me with this store.  And, and so, and, and so, I remember in, in, in, in the yearbook it said something about I was gonna wind up being a--what do you call it, a--oh my God, I can't think, think of the exact word.  I was gonna wind up working in the department store dressing, dressing windows, basically, and that's what it said.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you changed your mind, and you decided to go to college, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: I didn't change mine.  That's, that's what they (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Oh (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no, no, I had never changed my mind.  But that, that was their image of what I would wind up being, and you know, you put it--in the yearbook.  That's, that's, that was never what I was gonna wind up being, to me personally.  I mean I was gonna somehow or another find a way to go to college one way or another.  I don't, I didn't know.
Speaker 1: What did you--what were you planning--what did you want to study in college?
Speaker 2: It didn't mat- I didn't know, time.  I didn't know at the time.  But somehow or another I guess my senior year, and my mother [Margaret Williams Lucas] worked as a domestic, and she worked for a dentist one time.  And I can remember going with her every now and then I'd leave my [paternal] grandmother's [Sarah Lucas (ph.)] house and go down there, you know.  And she'd go to clean up these offices.  And somehow or another that kind of stuck with me because it was independent.  You didn't have to depend on anybody, you know, and you didn't have to report to nobody.  You were your own person, and that kind of stuck with me.  So, so I got to, to, to, to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], you know, they asked the (unclear) what do you want to do and you know, basically.  So I (unclear) I said you know something, I kind of want, I think one of these days I want to be a dentist.  So they pushed me into, into, you know, a--but I was a chem [chemistry] major, and, and I stayed that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I stayed that way for a different reason.  I stayed that way because of the fact there were, there was this whole thing about being independent and being your own thing and not having to rely on anybody.  It was more that than, than being a dentist, frankly.
Story_ID: 304301
Speaker 1: Before our first break, you had alluded to, how can I say this, at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], you know, the, the light-skinned blacks and the dark-skinned blacks (unclear) this separation.  Could you, could you elaborate a little more, or, or is there anything else you want to tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah and it was very prevalent on the campus at the time.  And I'll never forget, you know, sor- sororities and the fraternities, you know (laughter).  And here were the girls' school where all the light girls in one fraternity; the other girls who were the dark girls in another fraternity, and here are the fellows who were the light fellows in one fraternity, you know (laughter).  I guess I, I'm just being spiteful.  I, I had got, got, I had gotten to be a good student, so you know how they, they rush students at the end of the--in your sophomore year they, they, they go for the better students.  And here I am an honor student, and this fraternity sends me a, a, a note about coming to one of your rush parties.  Well, guess they didn't know what color I was (laughter).  So anyway, I go there, and this fraternity is all light people in the fraternity.  It was Alpha fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], by the way.  And one (laughter), one of the people walked up to me said, "What are you doing here?  And we don't allow black boys in this fraternity" (laughter).  I didn't forget this.  Well, that made my, made up my mind, said well, fine, we'll see, and I went to join the fraternity.  And they, they promised that, that I wasn't gonna make it.  I ultimately became president of the fraternity.
Speaker 1: Oh, you did?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter) ultimately.
Speaker 1: That's must have been something
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: When you were president of the fraternity--
Speaker 1: That was my student senior year.
Speaker 2: --and did you change how people were accepted, or were, what did--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What, what did--
Speaker 1: --in some respects I guess.  I went out of my way to deliberately to, to, to have the fraternity involved in things that, that, that, that, that begin to mix people up more because I guess I'm my own (laughter) background about what happened to me, and we used to talk about it sometimes.  I'd say, you know, we, we can't have this in the fraternity.
Story_ID: 304302
Speaker 1: Coming from this very small town [Rahway, New Jersey] and going to [Washington] D.C., which was larger (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, it was like (laughter)--
Speaker 1: --and there were lots of black people there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did, how did you feel about that.
Speaker 2: Oh, I felt wonderful.  I mean it was like a, like being on another planet 'cause I did not know that black people existed like this, I mean professors, teachers, beautiful women, you name it.  I was like, you know, I was so excited about it all.
Speaker 1: And you started studying black history [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: What kind of things did you discover?
Speaker 2: What did I discover?  Oh, everything.  I mean I started going back to days of slavery and the whole bit, you know, going back into the 17- 1600s, you know, and what happened, you know, how slave system came about and the whole bit.  The more I read, the more angry I got (laughter).  Oh, I really got angry.  I can't begin to tell you how, what it did to me.  I, I got over that though after a while because I was determined that that anger had to be turned into something more positive.  And, and I, I don't, I don't know philosophically what caused that, but that's--you know, you go through being angry because you don't know anything about your past, and you know, and, and, and, and, and the fact that, that no one ever told you about it.  You know, my mother [Margaret Williams Lucas] and father [Henry Lucas, Sr.] didn't, never told me anything about black history.  In fact, you know something?  The more I think about this, I think back in those days, black people were, were embarrassed that they were black.  I, I more--I'm more convinced about that than ever before because my mother and father, and no, no one ever, you know.  And I think, I think that that's, that was part of our history, so we never talked about it.  I think that slavery was, was something that, that black people didn't talk about because they were embarrassed to be, to be, to have been slaves.  And the sad part about that is, is that, that, that they should never have been.  And I think that in today's world, I think things are a lot differently today.  I think it, it's not one of punishment or one of, of revenge, but I think that, that today, in today's world, black people should never let the world forget slavery, just like Jews will never let the world forget the Holocaust.  It's, it's not one--it's, it's some, it's, it's a, it's a thing that happened, and, but the world should never forget it.
Speaker 1: That's right--
Speaker 2: And that's, that's part of how I feel about it, and that's probably why I've done all the things I've done over the years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You mentioned you had all this anger, and was there anything that made you want to--and then you channeled it into something positive.  Was there any spark, or how did you go about that?  Was there any one thing, or just over time you just kind of--
Speaker 2: No, I, I think, I think that, I guess where I channeled it was being, was being the best, top student, top wherever I could be.  And that was, that was my, you know, because of what I learned about slavery and what have you, my attitude was then hey, I'm gonna wind up being the best, not mediocre or whatever.  I was, it was--I, I mean I'm not sure how, how it all happened, but that's, I think that was like--that's probably was my attitude.
Story_ID: 304303
Speaker 1: All right, so you finished Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then you went on to--
Speaker 2: At the time I finished Howard--it's an interesting story you'll remember.  When I finished Howard the Korean War was going on at the time, and I had been, I had been accepted to, to go, to go to dental school.  But at the time, I decided not to go to Howard [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.].  It's (laugher) an interesting story why I didn't go to Howard.  I didn't go to Howard because, 'cause I, I felt that I had to get away from Howard because there was too much partying and playing going at Howard.  I had to get, I had to, I had got to go somewhere people were more serious (laughter).  So I remember I said I gotta get out of here.  See, at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], we only had thirty-five students, as opposed to Howard where you have eighty-some students in a class.  And Howard was big, you know, and the whole school campus on Meharry, the whole campus didn't have more four hundred students in the entire, for the whole four years, the first time--you know, both down in the medical school and the nursing school, so it was tiny.  And everybody was serious, and it was, it was a different system down there.  I mean, at down there and Meharry you, they just dumped everything on you, and everybody worked hard during a week.  And of course weekends, we partied and went out, but during the week, boy.  And, and, and, and, and where at Meharry, if you, if you flunk something, they, you were gone. Where at Howard, you can come back the summer and make it up.
Speaker 1: Oh, really (laughter)?
Speaker 2: And of course, when I went to, when I went to Meharry we were on a, we were on a quarter--we were on a quarter system, where Howard was on the semester system.  So you had, it was a different thing.  It, it was, it was, you know, every day it was move, move, move.  You, you, you miss one day or a couple of 'em, you, you (unclear) you, you might as well pack and go home.  That's the way the attitude was down, down there.
Speaker 1: Sounds like a good school.
Speaker 2: It was, it was different, but it wasn't good from the point of, it was good, yes, but it wasn't good from the point of view of, of having--what shall it call it--outstanding professors who were, who were exceptional.  It was good from the point of view of the, the discipline.  That, that's what it was done there; it was the discipline down there.  They made you--you know, if you walk, if you walk into a class, for example, and you, you might be given eight or nine books.  Ain't no way in the world you're gonna read all eight or nine books for this one class.  It's impossible, but it taught you how to, now to sift out what was important versus what wasn't unimportant.  And the guys who, who didn't sift out the unimportant stuff didn't make it.
Speaker 1: Was--
Speaker 2: And of course, I, when I first went down, went to, by the way, when I first went to Meharry, there were no, there, there were very few written exams.  There, everything is oral.
Speaker 1: That would be hard.
Speaker 2: It was, but it was, but it was, it was, it was challenging (laughter).
Speaker 1: You have to think on your feet.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Story_ID: 304304
Speaker 1: Sounds like a good school.
Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was good.  (Laughter) I, I can remember, I can remember; I'll never forget it was Dr. Roth [ph.], he was head of, he was dean of medical school at the time, and he was head of physiology.  I'll never forget this.  And he'd--you see, at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], the medical students were together, and those were together for the first, almost three years, and then we keep everybody separated, depending on what you wanted to do.  And one, one is that because most people who had--most students at Meharry would go out in rural areas.  So you had to, you had to be able to, whether you were dentist or, or a physician, you had to be able to, you know, to, to, to, to deliver a baby if you had to, okay.  And so that's why it was that way.  And (laughter) I'll never forget this.  My way of, of dealing with the temp- the intimidation, I would go down and buy a brand new--I'd get dressed up every time we had an exam, and go buy a brand new tie, and get me a, or either go buy a used tie.  That was my way of being, looking like I was a doctor (laughter).  I'll, I'll never forget.  So I'd go to the room and the Dr. Roth, he'd call me, ask me, he say tell me--I remember, I, I remember one particular question he called me and ask.  He asked me what, what is a mechanism of sight, and I didn't know.  I didn't, I didn't--you know mechanism of sight?  I thought I knew.  I stood up and gave this long speech about mechanisms of sight.  And it was just as wrong as it could be.  I, I kind of knew it was wrong (laughter).  He said, "Well, doctor," he said--he called everybody doctor--"Doctor. Anyway, you were wrong.  You were wrong, but one thing about you, you look like a doctor, so I'm gonna give you another chance."
Speaker 1: That's a great story, that really is a great story.
Speaker 2: And, and, and to me that meant that, that, what that said to me was that you always got to at least look the, look the part (laughter), even if you were (laughter)--
Speaker 1: It's half the battle.
Speaker 2: That, that's half the battle.
Speaker 1: It's lucky you were--
Speaker 2: That's something I learned from all that.  That's, that's half the battle.
Speaker 1: When you were there, there were, are there medical students there?  Did you make lots of friends there--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean lifelong friends or--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  The, the friends I, I mean, to me Meharry and, and, and Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] were, were to me the most cherished thing to me, and particularly Howard.  Howard, I'll never forget Howard.  Howard was, you know, it's, it was--that they're, you know, they're probably friends for life.  You know, I mean I, I, I just went back to the fiftieth anniversary this past year, you know.  And it was interesting (laughter) because people look at me say, wait a minute.  What are you guys doing out there California.  You look, you still look so young.  And most of our classmates looked old.  Some of 'em were wheelchairs and you know.  I felt (laughter)--it was interesting; it was very interesting.  But, no, Howard was, to me was best thing ever happened in my life to me.
Story_ID: 304305
Speaker 1: And then after you finished medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], what did you do, could you tell us?
Speaker 2: I went in the [U.S.] military.
Speaker 1: Which branch?
Speaker 2: [U.S.] Air Force.  Let's go back to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, sure.
Speaker 2: --for a moment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was telling you that, that the Korean War was going on and, and that the only way to, to, to get out of going in, going in the military, you either had to get accepted in medical school, dental school, or the school of religion, okay? To get an exemption, period.  But that year, they went, they didn't exempt anyone because they were short of military people, pilots in particular.  And I was in the Air Force at the time.  Andy Young, [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young was at Howard with, with--Andy was ahead of me.  (Laughter) And I'll never forget this story, boy.  We, this day you still can't tell Andy about it.  I saw him about, about a cup- about a month or so ago.  He didn't get into medical school, so he went to school of religion [Hartford Theological Seminary; Hartford Seminary, Hartford, Connecticut], got in (laughter).  And he, he got exempted, okay.  And we kid him this day.  He, he wind up going to some school up in Connecticut somewhere.  And, and I'll never forget when he graduated, he had a, he was up at a church in New York.  And a lot of us go off, fraternity brothers [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], you know, we all went up there just to sit, to, to sit in church for his first sermon (laughter).  It was so funny because we all remember how we were at school (laughter), you know.  But we never, we never forget that.  We, we, it was a, it was a great time.  Howard was a great time (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was he glad to see all of you?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  We're, we're, we're close today; Andy and I are really close.  We're, we're, yeah, we're very close.
Story_ID: 304306
Speaker 1: Okay, so then you joined the [U.S.] Air Force, right?
Speaker 2: No, so I went--
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: --in the Air Force, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had to go.  We had to go in the Air Force, and (laughter) then as, as, as the government does when they don't usually know what, what they're doing, I, I was in, in Air Force training for about three or four months.  And all of a sudden, they called all of us together and said okay, all you, all you stupid doctors--you know, that, that, that's how they play the game--wind up outside, and we don't need you anymore.  And so all of you guys who've been accepted to school, you want to go back, go back, but you'll be back here 'cause you gotta come back.  And I guess about, I guess maybe a month before that, some, some instructor got killed in a, in an acci- being crazy, going on a bridge.  And I said to myself, I'm gonna, when it happened, I said I'm getting out.  At that, I packed up that night.  I left.  I got out of there it wasn't funny (laughter) and went, went back to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  And in September, I had to go back.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then I got out, which was fine with me 'cause then I was a dentist, you know.  And, and I was doing the residency in all surgery, so it was fine.  It was great, in fact.  It was, in fact, the best thing that ever happened because it got me more training and all the rest of that stuff that I never would have gotten otherwise.
Story_ID: 304307
Speaker 1: Where were you stationed in the [U.S.] Air Force--
Speaker 2: And I was--(laughter) that's another interesting story.  The day I had grad- graduated from Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], the next day my orders came, and I was gonna be, sort of be going into Bangor, Maine.  And so these orders came.  I, I didn't bother to open them.  So I said to my wife, so I said I'm not opening, I'm not gonna open that letter.  I said you know, I'm just--we, we came to California.  I just never opened it (laughter).
Speaker 1: When you came to California, you just--
Speaker 2: 'Cause my sister, the one that was here at the time, and we came to visit.  And so I, I, I decided I (unclear)--
Speaker 1: You weren't in trouble because you didn't report (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I was.  After a while what happened, I had been here for about, I got a month, maybe a month and a half.  And the Secret Services comes up to the house (laughter) looking for me.  And they said to me well, you're--and they come to me--I, I want, you know, all it's about, they said well, you're AWOL [Absent Without Official Leave].  I said what do you mean AWOL?  I said you know (unclear) you had, you had orders to report, and you never reported.  I said I never got those orders (laughter).  But the point was I wasn't gonna--Bangor, Maine, is--you know anything about Bangor, Maine?
Speaker 1: The end of the world (laughter).
Speaker 2: No way, no, not only there are no black folks up there, nobody, anybody.  So, so I decided, I said you know, I am not going up there.  So we were here in California.  They went and got me new orders.  They're going up there, and I said okay, what are we gonna do?  So we got in the car and drove all the way to Washington, D.C., just drove all the way straight through.  And my wife kept saying what are you--I said I don't know what I'm gonna do, but I, I'm not going up there.  And so I go back and I, I go up to the, to the, to the, to the general who, who assigns everybody, you know.  And I go in there, and I walk to the secretary, and she--I told her I wanted to see the general who was assigning everybody.  She says, "Well, do you have an appointment?"  I said, "No."  She probably looked at me.  She says, "Well, you know you can't just walk in here like--."  And I, I guess, I guess that it's, it's kind of, I'm sure it might have been odd to her to see some black man walk in there and ask for this kind of appointment.  So she went back and told the general, said well, this man is here, you know, and he doesn't have an appointment, but and so and so on.  I guess she told about me, and so then for some reason the general said, "Well, come, bring him in here."  So I walked in there and she--and the general looked at me.  He says, "Well, you know you don't have an appointment, right?"  I said, "Sir, I don't, but I said this is an emergency.  I ha- I need to tell you what the problem is."  He, so he said, "Sit, sit down."  So I said, "I got these orders to go to Bangor, Maine."  I said, "Bangor, Maine, is way up north."  I said, "But, and, and people up there probably seen another black person."  I said, "I will never be able to, to, to live anyplace in the, on the facility, nowhere near it.  I might live in the other state."  I said, "So, so it's gonna be a problem, and it's gonna be a problem for me; it's gonna problem for Air Force--," and the whole bit.  So he listened to me.  He says, "You know, you're, you're probably right."  He said, he said, "Well, you know, I just got an order.  Somebody who, who's ill was supposed to go to a residency program in New York--I mean in Illinois."  He said, "Would you like to go there?"  I said, "I'd love to go there," and that's how I got there [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].
Story_ID: 304308
Speaker 1: So how long were you in Illinois?  What was your experience?
Speaker 2: I was in university of--I was over right at that Urbana University of Illinois [sic. University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].  That's where we was residency (unclear) was, and the, and I was at Chanute Air Force Base [Champaign County, Illinois].  It was all a part, part together there.  And I was there for, what, almost three years.
Speaker 1: How was your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bu--
Speaker 1: --experience in the [U.S.] Air Force?
Speaker 2: Excellent experience, excellent experience, for me it was.  A lot of people didn't like it.  I liked it because, you see, my goal was to learn.  And every chan- every opportunity came to learn to something I was ready.  And I, I, I always just go ahead and do something.  A lot of guys will get a little upset at me.  I said hey, listen, look, look, guys, let's get something straight.  We're here, I'm here for a purpose, and so are you.  Now let's not be, give me a hard time because I want to go volunteer to do something.  Now you guys wanna sit around, that's fine.  It's, but don't, you know.  And that kind of ended that.  And I, I enjoyed it.  It was, that's the experience I had, and it kept me out of Vietnam and everything (laughter)--so, you know--
Story_ID: 304309
Speaker 1: So after you finished your--what do you call it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I finally got, I finally was able to get out and I came to California.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was always coming to California.
Speaker 1: Oh, you were.
Speaker 2: I was always coming to Cali- no matter what.  I, I wanted to go to--(unclear)--if, if California had been Hawaii, I would have been in Hawaii, okay.  But at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], a lot of us in the summertime would work on the trains between, it go to Chicago [Illinois] (unclear) a train, the, the California (unclear) come out to California--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --you know waiting tables and what have you.  And so I had a chance to come out here and, but I always, I was always coming, always--I want--I was never going back to New Jersey.  I was never going back to New Jersey.
Speaker 1: What was it about California that attracted you?
Speaker 2: It's different.  It was wild.  It was different, you know, the West.  You know when you see this country, just (unclear) come place, come to a place like Arizona, Nevada.  It's, it's, it's, it's, it's desolate (unclear) you know, it's, it's like you're on another planet.  I, I'm always adventuresome, so I was always coming out here.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you moved out to California.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And did you move to San Francisco [California], or what did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I would, I came out here, and I was living here with my, my brother [Marvin Lucas] and sister-in-law here.  They were over in the [U.S.] Navy, and I was working at, temporarily over at the hospital, VA Hospital [Martinez Outpatient Clinic] in Martinez [California].  It's, Martinez probably, maybe--you know where Martinez is.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I also was going back and forth to San Jose [California] because I had another relative down there.  And we were deciding where to live, and, and, and, and I said there's no way, no way for me to live in San Jose because--to go up here, that, to make that trip every day, that's just crazy.  So, bottom line was we decided to stay here in San Francisco.  And at the time, Dr. Collins [HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins] came to me, and he was after me to come with him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's how it all happened.  If it wasn't for him, I'd, I'd be, I'd been down in San Jose somewhere.
Story_ID: 304310
Speaker 1: When we finished our last tape you were just telling us that you had moved to San Francisco [California], and you met Daniel Collins [HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Oh, could you tell us some more about that?
Speaker 2: And so, Dr. Collins kept asking me about, said, "Well, you ought to come on and join me," and so I finally did.  And I worked for Dr. Collins for about three or four months.  And I, then I said to him that, well, you know, I, I'm the kind of person that either I'm gonna be involved in something, or I'm gonna move on, and I told him that.  And so at that time he offered me to become a partner, and then we became partners.
Speaker 1: And how long were you in--
Speaker 2: Eight years almost--
Speaker 1: --in this partnership?
Speaker 2: --eight years, seven, eight years, yeah.
Speaker 1: Where was your partnership located?
Speaker 2: On, on, on Sutter Street, by the way, 2449.  We're out, we're in, next to Mount Zion Hospital [San Francisco, California], on the same street where I am today, but it's, but it's--let's see, that's, what, 1100, 1100.  This 1300.  That was 2400.  And, but we, were there after, after, after we, the partnership was over, I went back to school.  I went back to school because I wanted to--I was always in a--I've never practiced, I've always been a group.  And at the time, they needed somebody to do orthognathic surgery.  And so I had, so we all flipped to go back to school, and I won the flip, or I lost the flip rather--I call it that--and I went back to the University of the Pacific [San Francisco, California] for orthodontics.  And that's what I did, and then I became an orthognathic person, okay. And then I came back to the--and then we built a new office over at, at--(unclear) Davies Medical Center [Franklin Hospital; Davies Medical Center, San Francisco, California].  That was over, over here on Castro Street.  It's a brand new building that was built there.  And I stayed there for about, actually, we weren't in the there that long 'cause I had a very bad accident--
Story_ID: 304311
Speaker 1: I had horrible accident.  They--that's another story.  I had a, I almost got killed in this accident.  And so I don't know where you wanna go, how you wanna--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --you wanna get back to--
Speaker 2: You could explain--
Speaker 1: --'cause--
Speaker 2: --your accident--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, this goes--
Speaker 2: --now, and then we can go back.
Speaker 1: --'cause we got, we gotta go back to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to deal with this.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: When I was at Howard, you know, Howard was segregated.  I mean the school was, town [Washington, D.C.] was segregated at the time.  And there were, we had a lot of students from, from Africa, particularly Nigeria.  One of my, one of my, one, one of my classmates was, was, roommates was there.  And for, for me, they go downtown to the theater or something like that, I had to go with them and dress up in Arab--African, you know, clothing in order to get in.  That's the way it was.  You went down there as an African--as, as a black American, you couldn't get in.  But they could get in, so we, that's what, that's what we did.  I mean it was something else (laughter).  So any--I'll never forget this.  I'm here; I'm a senior now getting ready to graduate.  And oh, Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] was president.  We couldn't going--see, we can't go anyplace one day.  The next day he signs a piece of paper, and now we can go every place.  And I said to myself I said you, you're telling me that all this slavery and discrimination, and somebody just sign a piece of paper and I can go, I can go anyplace I want to go?  That, that's what made me become politically aware, and that's how I decided to get, get into politics.
Speaker 2: So you got into politics just, could you explain?
Speaker 1: Well, what happened was that a ver- very dear friend of mine who's since passed away now, his name was Don Powell.  He, we were on the frat [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] together.  And we decided--fraternity decided we're gonna make him the president of, of, of the campus, and, and I'm gonna be his campaign manager (laughter), the same as that Eisenhower situation.  Yeah, so I says--so that's, that's how I got into all this stuff, and I kind of liked it.  I said well, you, you can do things; you can make things happen.  And the Eisenhower thing always stuck to me.  And so when I find--so when I got out of the [U.S. military] service, you know, I kind of stayed with this kind of thing, and that's how I--and I, I kind of got involved with the Republican Party and what have you, and that's basically what happened 'cause I, I was Republican at the time.  And I finally got here [San Francisco, California], and I was, you know, got in the, got involved with practicing, and I, I just had, I had an unusual group of patients, you know.  And I just happened to, to get to know people who were in the Republican Party, including Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Regan], I, and, and, and, and, and Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon].
Story_ID: 304312
Speaker 1: Oh, what can you tell us about them?
Speaker 2: Well, when I had this very bad accident--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --I had went back to Washington [D.C.] at, at a meeting at the White House.  And I was leaving there, going to a, going to the Republican National Committee.  And I was in a, I was in a, a taxicab they, get, got rammed by a bus.  And I, I never really knew what happened.  I wound up, when I woke, next day I was here in San Francisco [California] in the hospital and 'cause someone had gotten a hold of my relatives back here.  And Dr. Bates [Dr. Ernest A. Bates], who is a good friend of mine, is a neurosurgeon, and they had me airlifted back here.  And I stayed out for almost five years.  Yeah, that was really--they told me, they told me I could never practice again; I couldn't ski again; I couldn't do anything anymore. That I, I probably will always have to have a, have a cane or a crutch or something.  And it was pretty bad; it was pretty bleak.  And they finally operated on me, took out, out four (unclear) S1, L4 and 5--three, three, four disk out of my back.  And I was slightly paralyzed on both of these legs here temporarily.  And I finally got into physical therapy, and the--I was on all kinds of medication 'cause it was horrible pain, you know.  And I was going to physical therapy three times, they had me coming three, three times a week.  Well, I decided, in my own mind--I went seven days a week.  I was determined that this is gonna, this too is gonna pass.  And I'll never forget one day I was sitting over in the, in the, in the pool.  I was having pool therapy, and this woman who had her leg amputated a little above her knee, and we sit in the pool--outside one day she said to me, she said, "You know, doctor, you, you, boy, you, you, you'd better stop taking all that, all that pain, that, that medicine.  You're gonna get, you know, in trouble, hooked on that stuff."  I said, "Well, you know, I just, nothing else I can do because the pain is so bad."  She says well, she, she says, "Let me show you something; let me show something.  Why don't you try something here."  She reached in her bag and pulled out a, a bottle of wine, a glass of, of, of, bottle of wine.  And so I--she said, she says, "I've had a long history of having pain, cancer and what have you," she says, "And wine has done a tremendous thing for me."  So I drank this bottle of, this glass of wine, and I'll tell something: I've been drinking wine ever since, even, even 'til today, to this day.  Now I have numbness, still I have numbness in this leg.  I mean I've had three back surgeries over the years, you know.  Every year it gets worse, but I still go do what I do.  And, and over the years, I've overcome all of this.  And I don't want to go through all the little details about it, but, you now.  And after five years I just, you know, I finally decided to come back to practice, and here I am (laughter).
Speaker 1: What, what else, when, during those, that five years, besides, you just went to physical therapy?  Is that what you did, or, or were you involved in any other activity, any businesses or anything?  You just--
Speaker 2: I, I wasn't involved in, I wasn't practicing or anything like that.  I was kind of recuperating, but, but I was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --involved in other activities I was involved in, you know.  I was involved in political activities and things of that nature.
Story_ID: 304313
Speaker 1: Could you tell us a little--you, you had alluded to Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Regan] and Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon].  What was your experience with them?
Speaker 2: You mentioned Frank Green [ph.].  I had some friends who were Republican friends at the time back in 1968, somewhere around in there I guess it was, and who were, who were politically involved.  And we were good friends.  And I got politically involved with them, and then one thing led to another.  I had a dear friend of mine who was the executive vice president of Shell Oil Company [Houston, Texas], who was the head--and I had him as a patient at the time.  And, and we got--I got involved with him because he was very deeply involved with the whole Nixon situation, and one thing led to another.  And after the election, when they won the election I had been involved, you know, as part of campaigns and what have you.  And when the election was over, I was back in Washington [D.C.], and, and you know, everybody's--how should I put it?  I guess every (laughter)--how do you put this?  Everybody's trying to get their piece of the pie (laughter), let's put it like that.  That's a good way to put it.  At the time, there were some people who, who, who were, who were basically saying well, and what are we gonna do for, what are we gonna do for black people?  You know, they weren't known to be doing things for black people, et cetera.  And a couple of us came up with this whole concept of black capitalism.  So I got deeply involved in that, and that's how Frank and I got to--that's how Frank--that's how I got to be known by Frank real well, 'cause Frank was in business, run his own companies, things of that nature.  And one thing led to another, and Watergate came along (laughter), as you recall.  And I guess about that time, I had this back thing--so I'm, I'm recovering at home.  I'm home in bed by this time.  And those us who were involved during those days were basically--how do you put it?  We have been on the fringe of, of, on the fringe of that whole Watergate thing, because nobody really knew what, what-- particularly the people who were black, had any involvement, all right.  And so they had--there was an investigator came out from South Carolina.  I'll never forget this.  They, they weren't sure about me (laughter), about what I was doing, okay, I this cam- whole campaign.  I was out raising money, you know, for the, for the part, for the party and what have you.  But they, they, they, they suspected that my role was to, to, to help raise money, and in return, if we ever, ever got elected, I was, I was gonna help black businesspeople get contracts with--in the government, what have you.  That, that's what it was, was, what, what it was about (laughter).  So anyway, that's really what, what, what, what, what the suspicion was, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Ooh.
Speaker 2: So anyway, I had my first surgery I guess it was--I guess it must have been right after the first surgery.  And they sent out this investigator, and, and so he called the house, and he knew I was ill.  He said well, you know, it's, it's not, you know (unclear) why don't we put this off for a while.  I said no, let's get this thing over with now.  Let's not--so they come to the, to the house.  I'm in bed, and so he starts to talking about the campaign and what was going and what my role and the whole bit, you know.  And he's all beating around the bush, you know.  And I, I said to him, I, so I said, "Let me just say something to you.  What you really are here for, you wanna know to what extent did I go out and help raise money from various businessmen, black businessmen around the country, and promise them in return if we won the election, they would get all of these contracts."  I said, "That's, that's what you're here for."  I said, "So let's stop beating around the bush, and let's, let's just lay it out like it was."  And I said to him, I said, "No, I didn't do that."  I said, "But you need to under, you understand why I didn't do that.  And the reason--," I said, "Let me tell you. You have to understand this very clearly."  I said, "The reason I didn't do that, because people in the, in the, in the political structure where the, where the Democrats and Republicans, and this time it would have to be Republicans, are still so prejudiced that they wouldn't allow me as a black person to be crooked."  He just, he just, he, it just floored him.  I said, "Yeah."  I said, "I'm, I'm not sure that--."  I said, "If anything, I should be on, on TV when that--on the Watergate thing."  I said, I said, I says, "If you really--."  I went on to say to him, I said, "If, if--then, then, then we really would, would have truly had, had, had, had a, had a, had a fair society because then it's all people of all colors would have been involved in this thing."  I said, "But they wouldn't let me be crooked," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Maybe you were lucky (laughter).
Speaker 2: I do, I did, I did say to them later on, later on I said I was lucky 'cause who know, who knows what may have happened?
Speaker 1: Right, you might have been in jail with some other people.
Speaker 2: Who knows.
Story_ID: 304314
Speaker 1: You had mentioned that a group of you came up with a concept of black capitalism.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, so what hap (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Could you explain this?  Maybe some people don't--
Speaker 2: Well, well, what it--
Speaker 1: --understand.
Speaker 2: --what happened was that--and, and so, so do so, so, the Nix- the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon], during the Nixon days, they, they launched a thing called black capitalism.  And what, what happened, those, those of us who were on the committee, us who were involved, we, we helped put together legislation so that black businesspeople could, could get government contracts, first time that ever happened, and, and it was very successful.  A fellow named Bob Brown [Robert J. Brown], I know you met--I don't know if you know him.  Bob was, Bob was, was, was an aide to President Nixon at the time.  And, and Bob was a very im- very--and we were all deeply involved in all of this stuff.  And that's how Frank [Frank Green (ph.)], that's how Frank and I got to know this very well.  And so, and so, and so in a sense, my reputation kind of preceded myself because I was heavily involved in this thing, so people knew about.  And that's, that's how all this came about.
Speaker 1: How exciting.
Speaker 2: And we created more businesses in terms of black contractors than at, in the history of this country.
Speaker 1: Really?  You must be very proud of that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was something that we created.
Speaker 1: How exciting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Frank, Frank was a big, big person in this whole thing.
Speaker 1: Was he?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: About how many of you were on the committee?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy, let me think here a minute.  It was Bob, myself, maybe about a half dozen of us I think, somewhere--and I'm trying to remember who all was on the committee at the time.  But I had, but, but, but we had, we had a little rule.  I had a, I had a, I had, I, I, I made a point to never take a job in any, any, any administration because somebody had to be inside, side, be on the outside.  See, I wasn't concerned about, about philosophy; I could care less.  I didn't care about Democrats or Republican philosophy.  The name of the game was to have access to resources, okay, and that was my whole--and that's what I used to tell people.  You know, you can, you, you get all hooked up with this political stuff, that philosophy.  Don't you understand we all pay taxes.  It's your money.  We, you gotta sit at the table.  You gotta be a part of these resources, you know.  And 'course, even then today we still aren't--can say it enough to be doing it, but, but that's what it was all about.
Story_ID: 304315
Speaker 1: You mentioned that you worked with Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] and Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan].  What about the Bushes [President George Herbert Walker Bush and President George Walker Bush]?  Have you been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hmm?  Yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --involved with them?
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: Could you explain?  Would you care to tell us anything?  It's okay if you don't want to.
Speaker 2: I knew George, George Bush--George W. Bush very well personally.  And as part of the whole, whole campaign, took him around the country, introduced him to other people, other fraternities, sororities, other black professors that--you know, as part of--and I, in fact, I remember the National Medical Association was meeting.  And, and, and he's from, and he's from Texas (unclear), Houston [Texas].  And I called a couple of people I knew at the time and got George Bush to be the keynote speaker at the National Medical Association.  And, and it sure was interesting.
Story_ID: 304316
Speaker 1: You have such an, a really interesting, interesting life.  So we kind of took a little sideway there, so maybe we could backtrack.  So you've, you've got your--back to your professional life, I'm sorry.  So you, you, you know, you've, you've, you've recovered from your accident.  And you've come back to work, right?  Did, and did you join the same practice you were in, or did you change?
Speaker 2: No, we, we created a new one at the time.
Speaker 1: New one.
Speaker 2: Because of all of the injuries I've had, I have, I, I just, I, I kind of became the--how shall I call it--the--and because of my background, I have, I have a, this unusual training background.  And, and as I said, we always had, I've always been in a group, so there was, and right now there are six of us in this group.  And so I've been kind of like--what shall-I've been the kind of senior partner in a sense.  I've been kind of the, the, when we, we pull different things, cases together, I've kind of been the one to, to look, oversee everything and, and, and see to it that if everything is right, we go with it.  I, I'm kind of in the, the quality control person I guess you wanna call it, something like that, you know, because of my background.  And you know, you've been seeing--what do you call it--those shows extreme, extreme makeovers ['Extreme Makeover'].
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: We've been doing that for years, those kind of things for years.
Speaker 1: Really?  What kind of--could you describe some of the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, we had--
Speaker 1: --things?
Speaker 2: --my background; we had two, two other oral surgeons here, and another surgeon here who's both the M.D. and the DDS in this group.  And you know, so we getting (unclear) got one, one of these kind of cases, and that, that, that's the beauty; that's the fun; that's the, that, that's, that's the excitement of, of changing people's lives.  I mean it's just, I think it's worth more than money.
Speaker 1: Do you?
Speaker 2: You see people's lives that they're totally changed.  And I, I have a case here about a couple of years where this man was thirty-five years old.  He never smiled because his face was all--he had, he had no teeth across the front of his mouth.  They were all up in, up in his palate and up in his, all up in here, and he never smiled.  I just happening to be walking by one day, and one of, and another doctor seen him.  And, and he, he was talking to one of them about, you know, that he was told nothing ever could be done.  I said I just happened to walk by, and I walked in there and said to him, I said, "Well, you know, there, there are wa- ways we can do things, you know."  I said, "If, if you're interested, and you take a look at my background, and if you're willing to, I, I want to go in there and see if we can't change, change your--," and we did.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's wonderful.
Speaker 2: This man, he was so--how can I show you a picture of--well, well, I don't have it here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So anyway, those type, that type, those type of things are very, very satisfying.
Speaker 1: And how long have you been in this practice?
Speaker 2: Twenty years, and this, we've been here twenty years in this particular facility.
Story_ID: 304317
Speaker 1: When you were talking about when you were in rehabilitation and the woman gave you a bottle of wine.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did, did that change your feeling about medication, about pills, or, or anything?  Did it make you, have you, do you investigate like other avenues--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah--
Speaker 1: --instead of just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I'm, I'm a--
Speaker 1: --cosmetic--
Speaker 2: --okay, not--now that you mention that.  I'm, I'm a, that's what I call myself, a alternative, really alternative medicine person.  I was that way long before I even, this, these accidents.  I mean I, I, I've been that way I think ever since I got out of school.  I almost got kicked out of school (laughter) because I was so alternative.  But anyway, the point is, I don't know if you remember, but there was a time when, when hospitals served wine to patients.  This is back in the early '70s [1970s], um-hm, because they thought it was so medicinal.  Then they stopped.  I'm not sure what, I don't know the reasons why.  And that's about the time I got involved in this thing.  And I found that by drinking wine, particularly white wine, I, I, I just took probably 80 percent less pain pills, 'cause it relaxes you, relaxes the body.  You know, it just, you know.  Then I, you know, I got involved in (unclear) like hypnosis and what have you.  You know, to control all these things, but, but you find that wine, if you, if you look through the history of wine, you'll, you'll see that from medicinal point of view, particular white wine, white wine is very relaxing to, to the nervous system.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, it worked well for me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Any other forms of alternative medicine that you liked to use?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Are there any other forms of alternative medicine that you liked to use besides wine?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, boy (laughter).
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Let's put it this way, I'm, I'm in, I, I, I do like to get involved in one of the other, all the other alternative medicines.  And I'll just mention one, and I don't think I would go any further about that because it's very controversial.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You ever heard of chelation?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I'm a strong chelation person.  I've been doing it for twenty-some years, because, why--because, of myself.  And basically, chelation very quickly--right today, if, if a child would, had lead poisoning today, che- che- chelation would be used to take all the heavy metals out of the system right today.  That, that's still the--this was discovered way back in, what, eighty and ninety years ago in, in Germany.  It, you, it's, it's an IV solution that takes the metals out of the body.  Well, we've done a whole lot more since that by adding heavy stuff to it, vitamin C, I mean, I mean huge, like hundred thousand milligrams.  That's what I take at times.  You can't take that in your stomach.  You take an IV and it just keeps you healthy.  It's almost like the fountain of youth (laughter).
Story_ID: 304318
Speaker 1: You were named one of the top ten dentists in the United States.  Could you tell us something about that award, how it came about?
Speaker 2: You know, I'm not sure (laughter), to tell you the truth, I'm really not sure.  I guess, I think what happens is that people hear about you and, and hear about what you're doing.  This usually--and, and if you're doing things that are different, and we were doing things that were different, you know.  And, and then, you know, people hear about your background and training.  See, no, I, I, I guess part of, part of the thing that happened to me was that, because of, I would have noticed anyway, but because of accidents and things of this nature, I, I've, I've always been a student, yeah.  And I'm, I'm leaving here tomorrow going skiing, but I'm also going to a North Atlantic surgery meeting.  It's all going at the same time.  So I'm always doing these kinds of things, and so people hear about you, you know, at, over time I guess, you know.  And I guess you just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What, what was involved with the award?  Did, did you received, what did you re, was it an, just an award or did you get monetary or--
Speaker 2: No, no, you don't get any--
Speaker 1: --was it--
Speaker 2: --no, nothing monetary.
Speaker 1: Was it written up in--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it's written up in all the, the journals, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you get a lot more patients because of it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, yes, yes, yeah, oh yeah, definitely so, yeah, yeah, yeah, you do (laughter), you do.
Story_ID: 304319
Speaker 1: Okay, I also (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's, it's, it's a matter, it's a matter of, of reputation I guess.  That's, you now, people hear about you, and that's the truth, you know.  And so that's what those type of things do, do for you.  And, and then people hear about the kind of people you treat over the years, you know, and things you've done, you know.  And so I've had an unusual--I guess, I guess, you know, part of life is with being, part of life is being at the right place at the right time, you know.  In fact, the more I think about life, life really has to do with relationships.  I mean my involvement when, when Dr. Collins [HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins] (unclear) when I, like being on the board of Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] when the school is about to be closed down.  One, one, one of the reasons why, why Dr. Collins wanted me to come down there so bad because I had such a personal relationship with President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan].  And, and Ron- and, and never in history of any, of any, of a black, in a historical black school [HBCU] did anybody ever come up and, and, and, and do what he did.  He, and as, as quiet as it's kept even today, the school's giving 'em, we've got the school to be giving over, over $50 million to say this, keep schools from being closed down, you know.  And, and the, and it was, again, it's relationships.  I just happened to know him very well personally.  And when I went back and talked about the need that we had at the school, you know, he got one of his aides, said let's take a look at this and see if we can be of help.  Over time, you know, we looked at the things, kept looking at it, and, and they found a way that we could be of help.  And, and, and eventually that's what happened.  And they came down to Meharry and--see, Meharry built a brand new hospital.  And eco- Equitable Life Insurance [Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States; AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company, New York, New York]--Dr. Collins was, was key to this.  He was the one who helped get Equitable to, to finance the, the hospital.
Story_ID: 304320
Speaker 1: So, we're back, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We were talking about Mary [ph.] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that you and Dr. Collins [HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins], he encouraged you to be on the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, if it wasn't for Dr. Collins (Simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) project to re--
Speaker 2: --wasn't for Dr. Collins, none of this would have happened; none of it would happen because Dr. Collins is the one who convinced me to come on, get on the board [of Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], see what's going on.  At the time I, I, I said "Dan, I, I got two others I'm doing," I--you know, but he said, "Well, this is your school.  You gotta come down here and help us out.  He says you know, you, you, you know the president [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] very well personally, and, and no one else can, you know.  You're the one who can go back there and, and, and--weigh, weight--put out our story.  Let's look at it." And so Dr. Collins convinced me to come back on the board, and that's what happened.  And, but if it wasn't for Dr. Collins none of this would have happened.  I'm, I'm not sure Dr. Collins' school would be closed today.
Speaker 1: Oh, really?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: It was, it was quite bad.  It was desperate.  It was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What had happened?
Speaker 2: Well, because you know, we owed all this money out, and the school was being, was broke and could not raise any money.  At the time, back in those days, the, there was a lot of problems going on between the city hospital and the other government hospital that, that we, we were not allowed to go to right on Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee].  The VA hospital [Nashville VA Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee] was actually on this campus, and they kept us out of it, oh yeah (laughter), really, I mean through politics.  And this is, this is in the '80s [1980s], oh yes, indeed.  But there was another hospital out in Murfreesboro [Tennessee]--community hospital.  That was the old one.  When they built the new one and put it on Vanderbilt's campus, so, so what the president, after he, after he got us the money to, to pay off the loan $29 million for the hospital that we had never paid a dime on, and then putting up another, almost another twenty-something million for us to renovate some stuff in the school, renovate the old VA hospital there so we could, so our students could, could go out there, and, and, and, and that's what saved our accreditation.  I mean it was (laughter), oh yeah.
Speaker 1: A lot of work.  How long would, how long did this project (unclear) how long did it take you?
Speaker 2: Oh, let me think here.  I think about a year, but, but by the time we--it might, it might have been about a year and a half by the time this thing got completed.  And yeah, it was about it, I would say about a year and a half it took, you know, when they finally made everything available to the school and, and, because let me think here a minute, '81 [1981]--
Story_ID: 304321
Speaker 1: I guess I was--let me think here.  I think I'd just come off the Iranian hostage commission [President's Commission on Hostage Compensation] at the time, yeah, somewhere, somewhere, somewhere in there.  You remember the Iranian hostage--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --situation.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) some, yeah, I do remember it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I noticed you were on the commission.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Could you tell us something about that experience?
Speaker 1: I can you some about it, but some of them I can't.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: When, if you recall, on the-Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was president at the time, and he was trying to get the hostage freed.  And we had, we had sent in, sent in a couple more helicopters, and they got shot down and the whole bit and a couple of days before.  And this was a couple of days before Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] was, was inaugurated.  And that afternoon, Reagan was over at, at New York [New York].  The air raid was at twelve noon.  And I think probably with, within the, I guess it was in an hour at the time the hostages were freed.  Well, during the Carter administration the [U.S.] Congress had, had passed legislation to create a commission to deal with this situation.  At the time, no one knew what was, was gonna be--I mean who was gonna win the elections, and it was bipartisan at the time.  And depending upon whoever won the election would, the, the ruling party would have more seats on it than, than the out, outgoing party.  Well, when Carter left, he left Cy Vance [Cyrus Vance], his secretary of state.  And you remember Ms. Tricia Roberts [Patricia Roberts Harris]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she, the two of them were--left on the committee.  And so I get this call, and (unclear) coming to the White House [Washington, D.C.] and (laughter), and Mike [ph.] and them said to me and Neesom [ph.] to me, you know, we need a favor.  And we need you to go on the Iran, Iranian hostage commission.  I said you gotta be crazy.  What's wrong with you guys (laughter)?  I said you must be nuts.  I don't wanna give out any hostages.  I said come on, I, you know, I'll do anything I can to help, but I don't, I don't need this thing.  And they said well, we, we just got to have some people.  And there's another fellow who, who was Reagan's chief of finance at the time.  I knew him.  He and I were there at the time, and so it was he, myself, and another lady from--oh--what was that?  I know her.  She's since passed away, from South Carolina.  Anyway, so three of us got, got put on this commission.  And it was, it was--they assigned this lieutenant general to us to teach us about terrorism.  It was, it was just unreal.
Story_ID: 304322
Speaker 1: Can't imagine.  So, so then what did you guys do?  You were--when hostages were released you were helping give the compensations out.
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was that--how would I put this?  The, they're approximately about, there were something between 45 and 52 hostages--some were military, some were government officials, some were civilians, and, and, and, and frankly, the country did not know about that part of it.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And the, the [U.S.] Congress and I guess the country was, was figuring out how do we--these people were captured.  They were imprisoned.  I mean how do we compensate these people?  That's why, that's why they called it Iranian hostage commission, Iranian hostage commission [President's Commission on Hostage Compensation].  And there were all kinds of complications.  You know, there were--the country was, was, was, was liable for suits of all kinds.  The Iranians had huge, huge assets in this country, huge assets.  I can't begin to tell you.  I'm talking about billions, almost trillions of dollars in this country.  And so what, what the commission did, and I, I can tell you this part because that, that didn't, that's in the record.  The commission immediately, at our first meeting, took all the assets and moved them to the Bank of England.  And the reason that was done, because various people or various companies, or where they could, could attach, go to court and attach the assets of the Iranians in this country.  And order--so, so, so we moved it in the Bank of England in order to help protect these things.  And that was probably the most controversial part about all of this.  And, and you know, to make a long story short, we spent all this time trying to decide what was happening 'cause there were people who needed psychiatric care, people needed medical care.  I mean it, it was just, it was all kinds of messes.  But the bottom line was that we decided that we would declare all the hostages as prisoners of war.  And under the, under, under the, under the, the War Act, prisoners of war are treated a certain way, okay, and you're only entitled to certain types of compensation also.  And, and so by my, my including them all of them as prisoners of war and made it either--how do I call it--either fair but a lot easier to deal with the situation, including, including the civilians who were not supposed to have even been there.
Speaker 1: That sounds like a very good book (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, everybody's telling me I, I need to write a book about all this, but a couple more, couple more people gotta pass away before I can write this book--(unclear) (laughter).  Anyway, but, and then of course the, the, the, the, the, the, the, what do you call the Iranian, the people who were taking over Iran?  I, I you know, I guess they put out a--what they call it?  A, a jihad on the commission, I guess they call it, yeah (laughter).  Oh, it was, it was a mess; it was, it was a mess.
Speaker 1: So you were--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --you were nervous for a little while there (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, let me just tell you something: I never left this country without some protection, you believe that.  I wasn't allowed to; in fact, none of us were.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was quite a time.
Story_ID: 304323
Speaker 1: You have this wonderful practice.  And I know you were talk--we were talking during a break about how this building came to be.  Are you involved in the other business activities or ventures?  I think I know a couple.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I've been on the board.  I was on the board of Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] for almost twenty years.  I'm now currently on the board of trustees at Drew University [Madison, New Jersey], and we're trying to solve some problems down there now.  And I think we're gonna be successful with stuff in the air.  I've been involved in--I do a little different things.  We've, it's, it's an organization, which I've been the chairman, chairman of the board of trustees called the Health Professions Education Foundation [Sacramento, California].  And what we do, we give out scholarships to nurse, to nurses basically.  It's gone for about fifteen years, and it's a nonprofit organization.  And, and what we were able to do here in this state, there are about six hundred and maybe--between six hundred, seven hundred nurses in this state.  And every time they renew their license, they donate five dollars to us.  Now five dollars doesn't sound like much, but when you add it up, we get, we get between seven and eight hundred thousand dollars a years from that five hundred dollars--from that five dollars.
Speaker 1: Gosh.
Speaker 2: And we give out scholarships to nursing students, and we give out scholarships to other people.  And we, we also do what we call loan repayment.  If you had (unclear) regarding the school, and you paid all your, you've paid for your tuition and what have you, and you want to come working under a certain area, and believe it or not San Francisco hospital right here is underserved (laughter).  You, Oakland Hospital, Children's Hospital [UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital Oakland, Oakland, California], all (unclear) underserved, so you don't have to worry about going out in the boondocks.  But so what we will do, our, our, our, our foundation will, if you come work for three to four years, well, it's a minimum of two, but usually people are there for three to four years as a in diverse communities like West Oakland [Oakland, California] and what have you, we will pay back all your tuition.  It's called loan repayment.  Now we did, we do that, we do that, we did this same thing.  But I also been part of the National, National, National Service Corps [National Health Service Corps].  We've been doing that nationwide across this country.  I have been on every Indian [Native American] reservation in the, in the United States as a part of this National Service Corps thing.
Speaker 1: Well, can you tell us about the reservations?
Speaker 2: It's sad.  You know, you know, how this country--well, I don't want to get into that.  That's just, it's so sad.  I mean you, when you look at the, the alcoholism and the unemployment, I mean it's just, what, what, what this country has done to the Indian race or Indians in this country is just, it's almost as bad as slavery.  But anyway, that's a whole 'nother issue.
Speaker 1: It certainly is.  It certainly is.
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: You, you belong to several organizations and groups.  Are there any that you'd like to tell us about or fraternity brothers you, anything?
Speaker 2: Well, there's, there's one, there's one that I'm very proud about right here in town.  It's called the, we called it PACT, P-A-C-T [PACT, Inc., San Francisco, California].  It stands for Plan of Action for Challenging Times, Plan of Action Challenging Times.  Way back in the late '60s [1960s], a friend of mine, a friend and I, another friend of mine, we, we, we formed an organization because in San Francisco [California]--how long you been in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California]?
Speaker 1: Twenty-three years, twenty-five years.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, you, you may, you may remember--back further than that 'cause the organization, we're celebrating our fortieth year this year.  And what we, what we've been doing all these years is, is counseling children, kids to go to, go to, go to school.  And so we're having a big celebration in end of April.  And this is our fortieth anniversary.  We've been around for forty years, and Dr. Collins [HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins] is also part, a big part of this.
Speaker 1: About how many kids have you helped?
Speaker 2: Oh my God, thousands, oh, my goodness.  You know, I just--literally thousands.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we're having a big celebration this year.  And no one ever thought it would be around, and we we're still here.
Story_ID: 304324
Speaker 1: I know you have three children.  Could you tell us something about your children?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have three children.  My youngest and my daughter, she's also a dentist.
Speaker 1: And her name is?
Speaker 2: Kimberly [Kimberly Lucas Benton] (unclear) she likes--everybody calls her Kim.  She didn't like Kimberly, so we all call her Kim.  And she's practiced here with me at one, for a while, but then, and we decided to build another office, which is out in, at Daly City [California], out tor--toward the airport.  And, and then probably we did that because this office was just too big.  She didn't want to be involved.  And she has young children, and she wanted to have, spend time there, so we built this other office for her out there.  And it's about five years ago, so she's spent the most time--when I'm gone from there, I'm gone next week, she'll come over here and kind of look after things, you know, and what have you.  But my son's a computer engineer.  He's, he still lives in (unclear) Los Angeles [California] in Rancho Cucamonga [California].  He works for Sprint.
Speaker 1: And his name is?
Speaker 2: Kyle [Kyle Lucas].
Speaker 1: Kyle.
Speaker 2: Kyle.  And I have another daughter named Karen [Karen Lucas Brocon].  She's older, and she lives in Sacramento [California].  She, she's right, she's at, I guess Karen, she's a nurse.  She's a nurse assistant, you know.  That's the three of them.
Story_ID: 304325
Speaker 1: Beside all your professional duties and, and your practice and your family, there's something else that you really, really enjoy doing.  Could you tell us about your hob--your avocation--
Speaker 2: Skiing.
Speaker 1: --your life passion (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Skiing, skiing, skiing is, skiing is a thing to me.  I, you know, I--people say, people tell me that, say you, with all the trouble you had, all your injuries and your what have, how in the world can you keep skiing?  Here you are in your seventies and--I said you know, I said you know, life is short.  You gotta enjoy every moment of it.  You know, I wake up in the morning, I said gee, it's another day.  I, I gotta do something.  And well, people say well, doesn't, doesn't it bother you in terms of all the pain--I, I, I was saying to them, I said you know something, the exhilaration of the skiing far exceeds the agony or the pain, and it's true.  You're sitting up on top of a mountain at 10,000 feet, and that's all you hear is the wind all by yourself.  It's just, and Dr. Collins [HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins], we skied a lot together for many years.  He, he, he quit skiing quite some time ago, a long time ago.  But I'm still doing it, and I think I told you about the six of us been skiing for twenty-two years.  And so I don't know how long I can keep going, but I want to keep going.  There is--
Speaker 1: How did you become involved in skiing?
Speaker 2: Well, the first time I went skiing I was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  I was in, I guess I was a senior.  I really didn't ski much there, but you know, just a tiny, very little.  I had gone maybe once or twice up in Pennsylvania, some of those, those little hills of Pennsylvania (laughter).  I like to be out here.  And that, that, that kind of got me into it a little bit.  And then when I got in the [U.S.] military I did more skiing.  And so when I finally got out here, that was, that was it.
Speaker 1: So (unclear) where are some of the places you've been skiing?
Speaker 2: I've been all over the world, except New Zealand.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite place?
Speaker 2: Courchevel in France.
Speaker 1: Why (laughter)?
Speaker 2: There, oh, it's just, they, they call it the Les Trois Vallees, The Three Valleys they call it, because there, there are three valleys put together.  And one is called Courchevel, the next one valley is called Moutiers [France]; the last valley is called--oh, my goodness.  It'll come back to me.  This thing is so big.  First time, first time I ever went there, I said, I said this thing is so huge.  Who owns this, I said to myself.  This is right after the Olympics in 1992 [1992 Winter Olympics, Albertville, France].  Well, the French government owned everything because they, they, they went to, they took on the Olympics.  It, it is just incredible.  I mean the, the beautiful hotels and the restaurants, all in the slopes, and, and engineering that you see there is--I mean they are so far ahead of us in terms of how they engineer mountains and things like that.  Well, I think the Germans were some of the best engineers.  This is back, you know, during the war, before World War I [WWI] and World War II [WWII].  And you see all that stuff there.  But, but it's beautiful there.  The next, the next best thing to me is up here in Canada at Whistler and Blackcomb [Whistler Blackcomb, Whistler, Canada].  You know, you fly into Vancouver [Canada], and you, you go up.  It's about two-your drive, hour and half depending.  Then they're gonna have the Olympics up there, you know, in the year 2010, and that's a beautiful place.  And you should see the dune up there.  It's just beautiful up there.  So I get up there a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you have six friends that--I mean the group is six of you, and you've been--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --together for--
Speaker 2: Twenty-two years, and this, this year was the first time I've ever stayed in California, first time we decided to stay here, and--
Speaker 1: So was California okay (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was okay, but you know; it was okay.  I mean we've been a lot of places that, that had not been as nice as California--oh yeah.  This is okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we, we, we have enjoyed this.
Story_ID: 304326
Speaker 1: Okay, is there anything you'd like to add that we haven't touched on?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know what's gonna happen in this country in terms of the race situation in this country.  I'll tell you a little story.  I, I, I'm, I've been, I've been writing about reparations for many, many years.  I feel very strongly about it.  I don't have any use for affirmative action, very frankly.  And I, I see because, you know, capital resources, we, if, if the, if, if the government had followed what they said in the (unclear) you know, you know, forty acres and a mule.  Just that alone, we would be a whole different situation in terms of capital behind our, our, our group of people.  And so I, I don't know where we're going, but that issue's gotta be settled.  And I have a good, actually some friends of mine, we, we go have lunch down here downtown.  And they'll, they call me the reparations man all the time, okay (unclear) here comes that reparations guy, you know, here he comes, you know.  These are my Republican friends.  And so one day I walked in there.  They said, one guy said to me, I think some white guy called me Hank, said, "Hank, tell me, you been talking reparations.  What's it gonna cost us to get be, get behind all, get behind slavery?  Let's get this behind us.  What's it gonna cost us?"  I said, "About, about $5 trillion."  He looked at me, he said, "You must be out of your cotton-picking mind."  I said, "Wait a minute, don't ever use the word cotton-picking to me.  You can call me anything you want.  Don't ever--."  He said, "Oh, I didn't mean anything."  I said, "No, just don't use that word ever again."  I said, "Well," I said, "let me tell you something."  I said, "You know, that's not a lot of money."  He said, "What are you talking about?  That's a lot of money to come out of the public treasury."  I said, "No, it's not."  He said, "What are you talking about?"  I said, "Let me ask you a question."  I said, "Do we, do we make, do we make, we, we make shoes?  We have big factories to make, when you make shoes?"  He looked at me.  He said, "Come on now."  I said, "How about su- how about supermarkets?  Do we have all the Safeway store in town?  Do we, you know, do, do we make cars?"  They said, "Come on, don't be--are you crazy?" (Laughter) I said, "Don't you understand?  The black community in this country, we don't make anything.  We're, we're just consumers."  I said, "So, so, so, so if they take your reparations and give us five point, whatever millions, billions, you'll get it all back," (laughter). So this guy, so he looked and he says, "Wait a minute.  Am I, am I hearing you right?  Are you telling me that we can solve the problem of reparations in some form or some, some--we don't know how we're gonna do it, and see to it that the black community gets money that their, their grandparents went out, who have worked as slaves, never got any pay, et cetera, et cetera, and we can solve this problem, and we'll get it all back?"  He said, he said, "You know something," he says, "My God, that sounds like another defense bill."  Right away these three people who, who are staunch anti-reparations were for reparations.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: See, it's all about money.  The fact that they could take the money from the treasure, give it to us in some form or another, and get it all back because we don't produce (laughter) anything, think, think about that.
Speaker 1: That's, that's scary.
Story_ID: 304327
Speaker 1: So, if you, you envision reparations as being building of like factories and giving people jobs, not just handing people a check.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, not just handing people checks.  I have a theory about reparations.  I think this should, this, this should never be a welfare program.  In fact, that, that's the worst thing that ever happened in this country, and, and people still don't understand how welfare came about.  You see, welfare came about, as crazy as, as, as, as it seems, the unions created welfare in this country.  Oh, you don't know, you don't know about our story?  (Laughter) It's interesting.  You hear right now about the undocument workers coming into the labor market and what have you, and people complaining how they taking our jobs, and jobs going overseas, what have you.  Well, the same was going on back in those '40s [1940s], late '40s [1940s] when welfare came about.  The unions got together and went to, went to [U.S.] Congress and put together legislation to have welfare, which automatically took us out of the, out, out of the marketplace.  It's that simple, took us out of the marketplace, I mean black people who, who would work at less wages, right.  No, you, you wanted a job.  You want to take care of your family.  And so they were paying ten dollars an hour.  You come work for five.  Well, that, the unions weren't gonna put up with that.  Think about what happened.  See, people don't, a lot of people don't understand this, don't know what happened, so this whole bit about Republican--it's crazy.  It's about resources; it's about access to resources; it's about--and so that's how welfare came about.  And so, so what has happened to us now, as, as a race in this country?  Not just us as, as black, but also whites, 'cause they're more white people on welfare than our black people on welfare.  What it did, what it did, it allowed young children to tell their families to go to hell and they go on welfare (laughter), all right, fifteen, sixteen year-olds, babies raising babies, both black and white.  Look, look what's happened.  Look where we are today.  Now the story you're hearing about the unions, how, that they created--you'll never hear that story, rarely hear that story, if you wish to go back and dig way back into what actually happened.  But think about it.  It's not illogical (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, no (laughter).
Speaker 2: Very logical.  It's no different than what's going on today.  Everybody's bitching about undocumented workers coming here taking jobs.  Oh, the truth of the matter is that the jobs that are being taken, we weren't gonna take 'em anyway.  The difference was though you see, when welfare came about black people were willing to work.
Story_ID: 304328
Speaker 1: You're a very young man, very, very handsome young man, and you have lots of time in front of you.  How do you, what, is there something you want to do with the rest of your life besides ski--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) every day (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  I guess I got to tell you the other story to kind of--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --tell you what I really want to do.  One day I was on Air Force One (unclear) President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], and we were coming back from Europe.  And, and something, something was going on, and we're coming, flying back.  And we were sitting there.  He was sitting there talking to me, and--when, was it Europe or, maybe it wasn't Europe.  I think, I think, I think we were going to the--I (unclear) but we're going, we were going to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  He was making a speech there.  I mean it's one of the two.  It's either one of the two.  And you know, several times I've been, I have been all over the world with him in a lot of different things.  But anyway, and one day we're sitting there talking, so he raised a question to me about, he says what, he says what can we, what can we do to, to do something about this race problem?  What can we do, do for black Americans in this country?  And it, it came to me a real surprise that, you know, that he would even be thinking about it, he'd come, he put it that way.  And, and I was really caught off, caught off guard about it, so I said (laughter), and I just said out of--I think I said, "Well, you know, we, we need to level the playing field."  That's what I said, and I didn't even realize what I, what I was saying.  And as, as time went on we did a lot of different things.  And, and after the Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] situation, I had been back in Washington [D.C.] one day.  This was like maybe two years after all this happened.  And then we--I was doing something else there, and he happened to say to me, he said, he said, "Doc [HistoryMaker Dr. Henry Lucas], how we're doing?"  He says, "Are, are we leveling the playing field?"  I was shocked that this man would remember that statement years ago.  But he was very naive, but he was a very--interesting enough.  If a man who, who, who, who, who did what he did, was he--on the other hand, he was so naive about race, I mean naive.  A lot of people would never believe that.  I can tell you.
Speaker 1: Was he really?
Speaker 2: Very naive about race.
Speaker 1: What, he, he, he thought it would be simple to solve the problem?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I always told him, never, it's never gonna be simple.  That, that was my thing, until people admitted, admitted to certain things.  I said once you admit to certain things it'll be simple then, you know.  But, but he was naive; oh my God, was he naive.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Was he?
Speaker 2: But he was a, he was a wonderful person though, but he was so naive about race.  And so anyway, so he said to me (laughter) how, "Have we leveled the playing field?"  I said, I said, "Well, Mr. President, I said we haven't leveled it yet, but, but we're getting there."
Story_ID: 304329
Speaker 1: Before we--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --we ended, I asked you what you would like to do for the ra--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --so you can--
Speaker 2: I, I guess what's, what, what's left of my life, what, what I, what I want to see, I, I mean, and I don't, I don't think I'm gonna see it during my life time, I really want to see, and I'm getting back to the point of view, I want to see this country really begin to level the playing field.  It hasn't begun to touch it yet.  I mean black people have, have, have--African Americans, black people have had, have, have, have survived in spite of all the, all the obstacles put up against them, not because the country's been so, so encouraging.  So my view is that if the country just do, just, would just start thinking about being encouraging, what, what a great, what a wonderful world we'd, we'd be able to live in, we'd have.  And so that, that, that's what I'd like to see.  I, I probably won't see it in my lifetime.  I think I'm gonna see more of it, a lot more of it between now and the time I leave here.  But, but that's--
Speaker 1: How'd you--
Speaker 2: --and that's why I do the things I do.
Speaker 1: Okay, so all the little, all your--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --outside activities are--
Speaker 2: Right, right--
Speaker 1: --all geared toward that?
Speaker 2: --right.  See, see, and see and the key here about all this is that, that, that, that, that we--and, and the reason, the reason I, the reason for all this is that, see, I go back to my life.  You know, nobody makes it by themselves.  I go back, I think what happened to me, from being the ten-year-old, nine-year-old, my [paternal] grandmother [Sarah Lucas (ph.)] working in department store [Mark Harris Department Store, Rahway, New Jersey] with, when Mr. Harris [Mark Harris] helping me, you know, get to college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], helping me pay my--and see, and so, you don't make it through life by yourself, you know.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: And I, I think there are too many of us who, who have an attitude that, that well, I, I got mine; you get yours, you know.  And you know, it's, it's like a, it's like a, it's like a, a football team or a baseball team that, that, that, that's, that's a champion, but has a heck of a bench behind it.  Well, see, we don't have a bench.  We're just, we, we, we're thin, really thin, we're really thin out here.
Speaker 1: Are we?
Speaker 2: And we haven't built the bench that can carry on after you and I and all the rest of us leave here.  And that's why this whole thing is so important--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --[The] HistoryMakers.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: That, that's why, 'cause I, I want--
Speaker 1: Where are you going?
Speaker 2: --my children, grandchildren, everybody will see this is something that, that they're all gonna profit from.  So, that's, that, that's what it's about.
Story_ID: 304330
Speaker 1: As you think back over your life, do you have any regrets?  Is there something you would have liked to have done?
Speaker 2: You know, it's interesting you raise that.  My son [Kyle Lucas] one day asked me that about, about three or four years ago.  He said to me, "Daddy, said you know--he said I don't know how you got involved in all these things, but, but you know, it's been unusual."  He said, "If you had to do it all over again, is there anything, anything that, that you regret?"  I had to think about it.  I said to him, I said, "Well, you know something?  No, I don't regret any of it."  I said, I said, "In fact, it wasn't supposed to happen," (laughter).  I said, "So how can you regret something that turned out to be good that, that, that, that no one, you or anyone else, whatever, anticipated it happening."  And that, that was my answer, so I--I had no regrets, none.
Story_ID: 304331
Speaker 1: When we were off-camera you alluded to your feelings about a higher power and how it's helped you.  Could you explain, you know, as, as you've gone through this life journey, you've become more convinced that there's something helping you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I--
Speaker 1: --something behind you.
Speaker 2: As I've gone through this journey of life, it, it, it, it's, it becomes clear to me that, that there's a higher power directing my--whatever I'm about, 'cause I didn't feel that way all the time.
Speaker 1: Interesting.
Speaker 2: And I think a lot of us didn't feel that way.  But as you get older, you look back on life, and you know, you see things.  And, and you know, and all of us have a--all of us by the way, have an inner--what shall I call it--an inner soul that's there, but we don't know how to tap into it lots of time.  We don't know how to listen to it.  And I think as you get older you tend to listen more and more to what some people call their gut or whatever you want to call it.  I think as you get older it begins to happen to you.  I mean maybe that's life.  May, maybe when you're young, or younger, or middle age it's, it's too young to--you, you gotta have a certain amount of experience before you recognize it.  So I don't, I don't know, but, but, but I think as you get older--I know at least I feel that way--that there's always, there's, there's a, there's a, there's something guiding.  You know, I mean I, I, I every, I think I, I think every, every, everybody has a, has, has, has a, there's a purpose in life, even for those who died young or who died tragically or whatever.  You know, there's, I, I don't know, but, but that's how I feel about it--
Story_ID: 304332
Speaker 1: You had talked about, just a few minutes ago, about wanting to level the playing field.  Do you have any other hopes or concerns for the African-American community?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do.  I think that--excuse me a moment--I think that (blowing nose)--I think that thirty, forty years ago, we as a group people were more inclined to, to be, to, to want to be educated than we are today, and that's the sad part about it.  Education is the key to any group of people.  You look at immigrants coming over here.  The thing they want most is education.  People coming here can't read or write, but they'll see to it that their children--you know, the, the thing, thing that I find that has been the most vexing to me in the last twenty, twenty-five years is, is the Vietnamese community.  These people came over here, you know, the boat people, et cetera, there are more Vietnamese children who've gone through high school, graduated from University of California than African Americans, than Filipino, whole lot of others, because they recognize that being educated is the key to moving on.  So that's, that, that's--so, so when, when I say that, to me, I, I (unclear) gets through this too.  I, I think maybe we're slowly turning around, okay.  Maybe we, we--I, I, I think that, and I believe in this too, when, when, when, when you had the decision, Brown v. the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], I think that, that a lot of us thought it was right.  But I think today all of us will, will, will go question, go question it.  And a lot of us will say, at least I feel and what my friends feel, we should have, we should have demanded, demanded that we get rid of segregation, but we never should have accepted forced, forced integration.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Because, see, diverse--there's nothing wrong with diversity.  There's nothing wrong with different people with different races.  I mean it should be celebrated to me.  You know, it has, did a lot to offer here.  And, but forced integration, what it did to us in our community, it, it, it, it ruined our, our top schools throughout the South, throughout other places.  I mean it just--and, and who is--Dr. Collins [HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins] used to always say this to me--go back to Dr. Collins.  Dr. Collins says, always used to tell me this.  I, I think about this, and I, I'm gonna mention him tonight when I talk to him.  Now if you'll allow, if you allow another, another race of people to raise your children, you'll, that, that race will never survive.  And you--that's what's happened here.  And so you, you, you see people now who were right down in Atlanta [Georgia] right now, in Atlanta, other places, their talking about let's, let's go back to the old system because this forced situation is not helping our children (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's true, very, very true.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  But you know, we go through life and you make mistakes, you live, but hey, that's, that's part of living.  I think that the, the key is as time goes on is to recognize maybe what there has been and, and, and try to correct them.  And I think people, that's what people have done today.
Story_ID: 304333
Speaker 1: Well what are you views about the Civil Rights Movement and the progress that blacks have made since then?
Speaker 2: Oh, I--I think blacks have made tremendous progress since the Civil Rights Movement, but, but what has happened to us in the last five to ten years I think is, is very, is tragic.
Speaker 1: Do you want, I--what do you think has happened in those five or ten to change everything?  Was there anything that, you know, all of a sudden our, our, edu- schooling levels went down?  Was there a, some factor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it all went down--
Speaker 1: It just, everything (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) to, to me, and it went down--
Speaker 1: --kind of went--
Speaker 2: --I mean the so-called--
Speaker 1: --at once?
Speaker 2: --the so-called quote, I don't, I don't, I'm no strategist, but the so-called quote leadership in this country to black leadership, you know, they were, they were disappointing.  They, that they were on, they were on the wrong track.  They, they, they were, they were too, being too what they call self-aggrandizement in terms of their own issues, rather than dealing with issues of people.  I mean all those things happened.  The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was gone broke.  The [National] Urban League was falling apart.  Fraternities on college campuses were doing the wrong things.  Scholarship wasn't key anymore.  I mean all these things happened, you know.  And so I, so I think now particularly younger people are starting to relook at some of this stuff.  I think older people (laughter) are, are still, are still sort of lost.  But anyway (laughter) to, to the youth.
Speaker 1: That's where your salvation is.
Speaker 2: That's where your salvation.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 304334
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, does anything stand out more than any--what stands out the most?
Speaker 2: What stands out the most to me is, is the--what stands (laughter) out?  What's the world I'm looking for?  Is the accident, accident of my life, 'cause that's what it is, that's what it is.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).  What (unclear) as you've gone on this life journey, what values do you find that are most important that have helped you the most?
Speaker 2: The value I think, frankly, that's helped me the most is being self-disciplined, regardless of, of whatever the, whatever the (unclear) to be, you know, not accepting that, that you can't do something or you can't overcome it.  That's, that type of discipline is, I think that's what's helped me the most and, yeah.
Story_ID: 304335
Speaker 1: I know you have three children, and I'm not sure if you had grandchildren yet.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: You have grandchildren.
Speaker 2: I have an interesting--you mentioned that my daughter [Kimberly Lucas Benton], who's the youngest, she has, her, her, she has two children: one is thirteen, and one is just turning sixteen.  And the sixteen-year-old now, he's in the East right now.  There is a group of--you, you're familiar with them here--who that they have the college tour, and he's with the college tour.  And he's lucky this year because, you know, they only take seniors as a rule, but they, they take, usually they, those, they'll, they're taking four juniors this year and had a contest.  And he was able to win the contest, so he's one of the four.  And he, he's quite a, he's quite a young man.  And so they're back there now.  They, I think they left here last Wednesday, and he's part of the tour.  And my granddaughter, she's the thirteen-year-old.  She's still a thirteen-year-old.  But then my son [Kyle Lucas] (laughter), he--actually we thought he never was gonna get married.  He finally, he got married late, like about thirty-six years old, something like that.  So he has two young children.  His daughter is just turning, gonna be turning five this, this coming year, and the one is ages eighteen months old.
Speaker 1: Jealous (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Is there any message or lesson you'd like to, to leave to your children, your grandchildren, your great-grand, grandchildren?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I want to leave a message to my grandchildren, the same message I gave my children, is never be on the borderline of anything.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Never be on the borderline of anything, 'cause when you're on a borderline, then the opposition can justify pushing you, pushing you the other way.  But when, when you're the best, it's awful hard (laughter).  I don't care how much prejudice against you--it's hard to--when you're, when you're the best.
Story_ID: 304336
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I--that's interesting.  I don't know.  I, I hope that people will say that, that whatever I did, I tried to, to make, make a difference, make the difference for all of us.
Story_ID: 304337
Speaker 1: Well, thank you for sharing your story with us.  It, it has been--
Speaker 2: Oh, this has (laughter), it's my pleasure.
Speaker 1: --it's been very--
Speaker 2: This is--
Speaker 1: --very interesting.
Speaker 2: --this is has been, no, I, I've enjoyed these things.  It's--
Speaker 1: Good, I'm glad you did.
Speaker 2: --and I mean I, I, I, I--this whole concept of the, of the program is, I think is just outstanding because it's just, just this is what we as a people need--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --because even today you, we don't, we don't tell our children about things that are--
Speaker 1: How we got here, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, how we got here.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so, this to me is so, so important.
