Story_ID: 317351
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Shawn--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Wilson.
Speaker 1: --Wilson, Shawn Wilson.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] David Levering Lewis, D-A-V-I-D, Levering, L-E-V-E-R-I-N-G, Lewis, L-E-W-I-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, and is Levering another last name in, in your family that's passed along or--
Speaker 2: It, it has been a family name, yes.  Most males on my mother's [Alice Bell Lewis] side have, have bore the name Levering.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Five, twenty-five, thirty-six [May 25, 1936], Little Rock, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Professor of history.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you're currently at--are you still are Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] or--
Speaker 2: No, currently, I'm at the Julius Silver University Professor and professor of history at NYU.
Speaker 1: All right, New York University [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  It's March 9th.  Is it--
Speaker 1: Tenth.
Speaker 2: Tenth already?  Yes, March 10th, that's right.  The 11th we leave--2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in a building that is part of Teachers College Columbia [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York], at, at West 121st Street, 517, to be precise.
Story_ID: 317352
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, they compel me to ask these five simple People magazine-ish type questions that only require a short answer.  The first--
Speaker 2: If I fail the interview's over, is that (laughter)--?
Speaker 1: I, I don't think you could fail these.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food, and what is it?
Speaker 2: Favorite food?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, that's a hard question.  Let's say I'm very fond of lamb.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I would say fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color?  It seems to be blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, the, the Costa del Sol [Spain].
Speaker 1: Okay and the last question is do, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, I have too many I think, to instance one in particular.
Story_ID: 317353
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [John H. Lewis] side.  And we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, Alice Urestine, with a U, U-R-E-S-T-I-N-E, Bell, B-E-L-L [Alice Bell Lewis].
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Well, she is long deceased, and so I'm afraid I, I can, I can only give you a guess and say that it was about 1898.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in, in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace those ancestors?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a project that I'm just about to embark upon next year or the following year.  I've been meaning to go in, into genealogy.  It, it goes back to Charleston, South Carolina, probably the end of the 19th century, I'm sorry, the beginning of the 19th century, the end of the, the 18th century.  And my first documented material relative to my maternal ancestors is about 1820, the census of 1820 in Charleston.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know what they were doing in Charleston in 1820?
Speaker 2: What they were doing?  Well, it's somewhat embarrassing.  They were sufficiently successful, that they were, in fact, slave owners.  They were people of color.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they owned thirteen slaves at the time, so I imagine they were involved with, in agriculture.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You say it's somewhat embarrassing, but I, I guess I can understand that on some level.  But do, do you know much about how they became slave owners or how they got involved in, in that?
Speaker 2: I can only imagine that (cough), and there was a time in South Carolina history when there was an intermediate class of people who were neither white nor black and who, therefore, had a kind of margin of maneuver within that feudal, feudal arrangement.  And they, so, they must have been the descendants of property holders.  I believe, I believe there was a Scots ancestor involved.  But all of that is murky.
Speaker 1: That's, that's--and we were just discussing this before you came in.  Before we started the interview, we were talking about the American Colonization Society and the need for these plantation owners in the South and politicians and leaders to get rid of people they'd freed--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --many of which were their sons and daughters and offspring.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, this is similar to--I mean because they didn't want that, that class to develop the way it did in the Caribbean.
Speaker 2: Quite, exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So--
Speaker 2: Well, and that actually there was so much schizophrenia for a time, there, that class was used as an ally against the larger bonded population, and I suspect that after one or two slave incidents, the Denmark Vesey and then the, the more famous one, Stono [Stono Rebellion], I think, I may have my dates wrong at that point and certainly by the time of Nat Turner.  In other words, I think 1830, in the 1830s, there's a shift, and that population then is perceived as rather a threat than a potential ally.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's, that speaks somewhat I guess to the, that speaks to I guess the need for people to be free, I guess in some ways, huh?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so they, if they're, they're in the middle they're not gonna necessarily aid the slave master but aid the slaves, I guess so.  So, okay, so, do--what were their names, those--
Speaker 2: Bell.
Speaker 1: Bell, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Bell, John [John Bell (ph.)] and Martha [Martha Bell (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Okay, and so, okay.
Speaker 2: And they can be tracked in the 1830 census, and then there are no slaves, which is quite interesting.  And by the Civil War there is a split and some--the family passes over and into whiteness.  And the other branch leaves and moves to Atlanta where Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] was being established for that population.
Speaker 1: Are any of the Bells like Philip Bell or James Madison Bell related to that side of the family?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Story_ID: 317354
Speaker 1: As you go further into his history, what do they, what do they end up doing?
Speaker 2: In Atlanta [Georgia], a successful businessman, my grandfather [John Bell (ph.)] was.  The congregational church, the First Congregational Church [First Congregational Church of Atlanta, United Church of Christ, Atlanta, Georgia], I guess the oldest in the South, was sort of a family God box.  And he (laughter) was I think involved with the Heman Perry enterprise [Service Company, Atlanta, Georgia], which was the first real estate development activity to, to take place in Atlanta.  And it was, in many ways, the forerunner of Atlanta Life [Atlanta Life Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia].  And my grandfather committed suicide about 1922 or '23 [1923].  Perhaps it was business related; maybe it was domestic.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what about your grandmother [Martha Bell (ph.)]?  Do, do you have any--did you know your grandmother on that side?
Speaker 2: No, my grandmother passed early on.  I have only a photo of her.  And I believe her maiden name was King, and she, too, was the descendant of a prominent slave-owning family in Georgia.
Speaker 1: And that's interesting.  This, it seems like such a coincidence, you know.  There, there weren't that many of them for them to--yeah--
Speaker 2: No, I guess they sort--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --themselves out.
Speaker 1: Could be.  Do you think that they kept in contact with each other on--I mean did they, they, they actually knew, you know, the, the blacks--
Speaker 2: Yes, I think--
Speaker 1: --slave-owning--
Speaker 2: --I, I think so.
Speaker 1: --owning families actually saw each other?
Speaker 2: No, I have no doubt they did, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, 'cause they were like a minority then, was right in the middle of everything I guess, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did your mother [Alice Bell Lewis] talk about growing up, in, what, what did she say about growing up in Atlanta?  Or did she grow up there?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  It was a tight-knit community.  You know the, the, the history of Old Auburn Avenue.  Well, they were part of that Old Auburn Avenue.  In fact, the house was right there on But- between Butler [Street; Jesse Hill Jr. Drive] and Auburn.  I think the Walter White's family was, if not next door, down the street.  And we were interrelated in that Walter White's aunt, maternal aunt, was my step-grandmother after my grandmother died.  Neither person did I know, of course.  So, they went to the preparatory school at Atlanta University and then went on to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  My mother took a normal degree, because the suicide of my grandfather impacted on family finances.  And so the, the career as a musician was adversely impacted.  So she became a teacher, and she became head of the mathematics department at Booker T. Washington High School [Atlanta, Georgia].  And she was pretty gifted.  She put dance groups together, and she wrote plays, and played the piano whenever she was stressed out.  And then she married my father [John H. Lewis] in 1930 I guess, something like that.  And then they--she moved with him to Little Rock [Arkansas], and that's where I come on the scene.
Story_ID: 317355
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents [Alice Bell Lewis and John H. Lewis] met?
Speaker 2: I'm sure there is.  I only know that my father's first wife [Eva Walker Lewis] passed.  She was diabetic.  Again, this is history.  I certainly did not know her.  After producing three boys and one girl, my half brothers and sister, when she passed my father needed help, and so he remembered the young and vivacious teacher back there at Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia].  And whether it was a formal proposal or whether it, it was passionate love at first sight, I don't know.  They certainly were deeply in love as far as I could tell.  So, they, there was a marriage and, and a relocation.  He took over the principalship of the first school, public school for African Americans in Little Rock [Arkansas], Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And that was funded, in part, because the state had better things to do with its money than to underwrite public education for blacks.  It was funded by the Rosenwald Foundation [Julius Rosenwald Fund], largely, and so my father was chosen by the Rosenwald Foundation to be the first principal.
Story_ID: 317356
Speaker 1: Let's maybe go back and get his full name and, and the spelling of his, of his name (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, John Henry Lewis, Sr. [John H. Lewis].
Speaker 1: Okay, John Henry Lewis, Sr., and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Americus, Georgia, or Oglethorpe [Georgia].  I'm not, I'm not quite sure, either Americus or Oglethorpe, Georgia, and I guess it would have been 1890.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I can't go much far, farther back than my father and uncle and, and his sisters, my, my aunts, whom I did know, Aunt Susie [ph.] and Aunt Mazie [Mazie Lewis Wingfield], who were teachers in one of the small Georgia towns, Valdosta [Georgia] or something like that.  And I think my father's mother was, was quite a, a personality.  And I believe they owned a store, one of those stores where sharecroppers came to buy their equipment and that sort of thing, somewhere in Ellaville, Georgia, because there is now a school named after my father, a public school, John Henry Lewis School [sic. John Lewis School, Ellaville, Georgia], in that, that part of the, the country.  And, and, and I can't put my finger on a spot on the map, but it's somewhere down there near Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] town, whatever that town was.
Speaker 1: Plains.
Speaker 2: Plains.  It's--
Speaker 1: Plains, Georgia.
Speaker 2: --yes, it's somewhere (laughter) near, near there.  They escaped as soon as they could, my father and, and uncle, and came to Atlanta [Georgia].  My father went to Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia], and then went to Yale Divinity [Yale Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut], and then went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] for a master's degree in sociology.  And, and so for his life he was a college administrator or a, a pastor of churches, depending on how things turned out.
Speaker 1: That's, that's quite a rise.  Now, he, he, you know, came from this little town in Georgia and--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --from a family that didn't have a lot of education--
Speaker 2: That's absolutely--
Speaker 1: --I take it.
Speaker 2: --true, yes.
Speaker 1: And, and this is a meteoric rise.  I mean he really--
Speaker 2: It, it, it, it does seem to be impressive.  And he would often remind me (laughter) of just how impressive it was, sort of I'm a self-made man, and you know, you've got to have character, and you've got to build yourself up, which--
Speaker 1: Is there--do, do, do you not know anything about his ancestors, I mean in terms of going back--
Speaker 2: I'm afraid I do not.  I have a, a photo somewhere of his mother.  It's a wonderful photo, and she has a kind of bowler hat on and a corncob pipe in her mouth.  And she looks like a tough old gal.  But I think her name was Hattie, I believe so, and probably her maiden name was Sims [sic.], Hattie Sims [Hattie Smith Lewis].  But, but my, my grandfather [Sims Lewis], I, he's very vague.  And so that must mean that my father said very little about him but a good bit about his mother, and this was true of his fam, brother, Smith Milton Lewis, or Uncle Doc, who had the same kind of ascent.  He went on to Howard medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and then became one of the more successful physicians in, in Atlanta.  And so they both were very proud of their--they would evoke their hardship days back there in Oglethorpe.  And there were members of the family did not ascend, become talented tenthers and so they talked about Uriah [ph.], who was last seen seated on a log whittling (laughing) or someone else (laughing), who wasn't sober and you know, these were, these were emblematic of, of failures, that you had to step around these guys and move on.
Story_ID: 317357
Speaker 1: Did your father [John H. Lewis] ever discuss who his heroes were, in terms of that kind of rise?  Did he like idolize Booker T. [Booker T. Washington] or, or Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] or anyone?
Speaker 2: No, that was a family problem.  My mother [Alice Bell Lewis] was quite visibly upset whenever Booker T. Washington's name was mentioned.  And in fact, she once said that when she had taught summer school in Tuskegee [Alabama], that Dr. Washington had been unduly familiar (laughter).  So, but I don't know that she would have thought of him any differently, even if that incident, alleged, hadn't occurred because she was deeply devoted to Du Bois, who taught her in high school.  And they were, her group felt that Booker Washington was very bad news.  My father was far more pragmatic.  And at the dinner table when we, an occasional, occasionally had these explosions around Booker Washington or people who were in his camp.  And I can remember my father always pointing out the advantages of what, of this particular strategy might be and waiting to see how it turned out, that sort of thing, whereas my mother felt that this was all so deplorable not to be, to be in, encompassed, really.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so when they, they finally got together, they moved--well, well, your fa--let me go back to one thing you, you said about, your father went to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and got a degree in sociology.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That was at the, near the birth of sociology, was that?
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: When Robert Park [Robert E. Park] in--
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: --the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: --sociology was born.
Speaker 2: --yeah, he would have been there about 1911 or 1912, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did he ever discuss those days?
Speaker 2: He talked more about Yale [Yale Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because that, that was, he's--the, the, the course there as a three-year divinity course I think, so that was, after two years at Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], really his undergraduate experience.  And he, he developed some friendships there, and one of them was a man who became, I don't think he became the dean of, of Yale Divinity.  Oh no, he did, he did.  And perhaps I will recoup his name as we go along.  But I remember this, this, this man coming to Wilberforce [Ohio] to address the Payne Theological Seminary graduation class.
Speaker 1: Now this is a white man, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, right, yeah.  And he and my father had been close and exchanged correspondence and that sort of thing.  He's a fairly famous theologian, but I--
Speaker 1: Not Dewey [John Dewey]?
Speaker 2: --and I never--there was a, there were books of his on the shelf I can remember, one book in particular, which had nothing to do with that man was, was, of course, Bill Buckley's 'God and the Man at Yale' ['God and Man At Yale: The Superstitions of "Academic Freedom,"' William F. Buckley, Jr.]  And I'm, I'm amused because my father's politics would certainly not have comported with Bill Buckley's nor mine.  But that book was a book that he kind of cherished, and of course, it came out much, much after he had finished Yale.  But he was, thought fondly of Yale, and he thought that I would go to Yale.  And at one point, we made a kind of pilgrimage to New Haven [Connecticut]. (Laughter) He's rather funny--with a friend of mine, a childhood friend.  I was still in my teens.  And the Irish man who had made the beds of the students in those days was still there.  And there was that interesting meeting of the two of them, because both were, as it were, subject populations in those days, the Irish having a hard time way back there and certainly people of color.  So I imagine they were, they probably gossiped a lot in the halls or something like that way back.
Speaker 1: That's something.
Speaker 2: Oh, the Irish and African Americans are both in, had a very difficult time with each other too, so that made it--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --even more exceptional.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a complicated relationship I guess, coming over--
Speaker 2: Indeed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right.  Especially in, in New England seemed like that there was a lot of friction in (unclear) and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 317358
Speaker 1: So your parents are married in 1930, and they, they immediately almost, you know, moved to Little Rock [Arkansas] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Little Rock.
Speaker 1: Right, where he became--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --principal of Dunbar--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Little Rock, Arkansas].  And, and I didn't know that the public school there was funded by Rosenwald [Julius Rosenwald Fund], so I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was some state money, but of course, there was the municipal money, but the bulk of it came--throughout the South, you know, that was happening, 'cause Rosenwald was funding education, black education.  The deal was usually one-third from the state, one-third from the foundation, and then one-third from the black community, the churches.  And oftentimes it was not one-third, one-third, but that was the idea.
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Alice Bell Lewis] teach school there in--
Speaker 2: She did.
Speaker 1: --Little Rock?
Speaker 2: And she moved right in and, and taught Latin and mathematics there.
Speaker 1: She had a normal school degree, but she's teaching Latin and--
Speaker 2: Well, she did, but she did something quite eccentric and probably unique.  Because she had a normal degree and not the college degree, and wanted it, and she would have gone back to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] for that purpose, in 1929 Atlanta University abolished as undergraduate institution, and it became the graduate institution of the colleges, Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], Atlan--Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  And the people who had, the alumni of Atlanta, old Atlanta University, resented this.  And they believed that the Rockefellers had sold out to the Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington] people, and that the abolition of Atlanta University was a way of putting a ceiling on the talented tenth.  It's all very tribal.
Speaker 1: About what year is this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is 1929.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It came out of a major report from the general education board, restructuring black higher nationally, creating three centers: one in Atlanta [Georgia]; one in Nashville [Tennessee]; and one in Louisiana, in New Orleans.  And the three found, each foundation was assigned the job of funding and honchoing this.  The Rosenwalds were given Louisiana and a little bit of the, the upper South; and the Carnegies were given Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]; and the Rockefellers were given Atlanta.  And when Atlanta University ceased to exist as an undergraduate institution, there was great consternation.  And my mother refused to go to Spelman because it was on the Booker Washington plan.  You had to iron clothes before you could graduate, and that's, or something like that.  It's, it's really so byzantine that it does have humor now.  So she wouldn't demean herself, and so she petitioned the board of trustees of Morehouse.  And so she and a female colleague were admitted to Morehouse.  And since they didn't have to be residential, that wasn't problematic.  And so she is a Morehouse man.  She received her B.A. degree from Morehouse, and so she did finally get her college degree.
Speaker 1: So your mother becomes a Morehouse man (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right.
Speaker 1: That's really something, okay.
Story_ID: 317359
Speaker 1: You're born in 1936.  Do you have any brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: No, half brothers and sister.  It was from the, my father's [John H. Lewis] previous--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --marriage [to Eva Walker Lewis].
Speaker 1: So how many were in your household altogether?
Speaker 2: Only me because World War II [WWII] comes along.  And so they're off fighting to save the world for democracy.
Speaker 1: So they were much older than you.
Speaker 2: They were, they were.  They, well, they were teenagers, and all were drafted.  The oldest brother was in the [U.S.] Navy.  The other two brothers were, of course, in the, in the infantry [U.S. Army].  And one brother was enormously talented musically.  In fact, he finally ended playing with Louis Armstrong and Milton [Mezz Mezzrow].  And so, he, his assignments were far from the battlefront, that's what I'm saying.  And the other brother fought in the Italian Campaign.  My sister [Anita Adele Lewis] was at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] at that time.  And then--
Speaker 1: Did she teach there or was she--
Speaker 2: No, she was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) a student?
Speaker 2: --matriculating.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, so, so, in, in a sense, I was an, an only child in, in, that sense, that I didn't com, compete for the assets of the, of the household as it were since they were absent.
Story_ID: 317360
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well, I have one or two.  My earliest memories are racial.  I had to think about this when The New York Times was about to run a series on class.  And the question is: what is your oldest and first memory of, of a sensibility for, to class.  And for, you know, a person of color, it's inescapably imbricated with race, and so I had to think about that recently.  And my first memory is in Little Rock [Arkansas] going to buy shoes with my parents [Alice Bell Lewis and John H. Lewis], buying the shoes and leaving the store.  And the woman who had waited on us or perhaps a man waited on us, but she was observing; she was part of the staff.  She came out and caught up with, with us, and she said, "I have to tell you something: you have to get your child out of the South as soon as you can.  He's bright, and he'll come to no good end," or something like that.  And it was a just startling thing for any, anyone to say, you know, sort of presumptuous even.  But I have that, that clear memory and then of my parents talking about this.  And so, that, that is a memory.
Story_ID: 317361
Speaker 1: Let's go back to your mother's [Alice Bell Lewis] growing up.  We wanna talk about her reminiscences of the riot.  We were talking about that during the break.  And--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and what, what did she have to say about the Atlanta [Georgia] riot?
Speaker 2: The, the, the riot took place on their street, 'cause the riot began at Butler [Street; Jesse Hill Jr. Drive] and moved up Auburn [Avenue].  They witnessed it.  They, the, the family lore is that, just like Walter White, his account, that the men armed themselves and positioned themselves on the porches waiting to protect their, their property.  That is the story that, that I hear of, of my family.  Now, I have to say that since I have a graduate student who went on to write the biography of Walter White ['White: The Biography of Walter White, Mr. NAACP,' Kenneth Robert Janken], which has recently appeared, Kenneth Janken, he went deeply into the validating the memory of, of, of the, the account that Walter White leaves, and it may be that it's been aggrandized somewhat, and I'm quite ready to concede that that may be true in the case of my own family's memories.  But the memories that were retailed to me were of courage on the part of men armed and ready and indeed turning away when the, the crowd sees the, the mob sees the glint of the, on the barrels, it gives that place a pass.  In any case, the totality of the riot was, of course, horrendous.  And everyone had someone who was roughed up or knew someone who had been killed.  And the greatest devastation took place, of course, at, on, near the, the neighborhood where Clark College [Clark-Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] was, was founded before it moved to the west side of Atlanta, that now is the scene I think of Gammon Theological Seminary [Atlanta, Georgia].  In any case, that community was ex- it was rather like Tulsa [Oklahoma] in that it was so self-contained, barbershops, pharmacies, physicians, you name it, great prosperity, home, proud homeownership and all of that.  And so that was put between the crosshairs of the mob with great resentment I think.  And the depredations there were quite serious.  My, my own family history is, again, bizarre, in that my uncle, my mother's brother, and she were, spent the riot in the governor's mansion.  And again, that was because of these intricate relationships that defied the color line based on ancestry.
Speaker 1: So they were relatively safe in there.
Speaker 2: They were.
Speaker 1: Yes, okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: All right.  And those are, you know, the, the layers of all those relationships are really sometimes I guess--you ever heard, I think it was J. A. Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers] who said that to be an expert on race in this country is the first qualification is to be crazy (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: But this is, but it's so many--it's a complicated discipline.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, out, out of that, the, the, after the, when the smoke cleared, of course, Jim Crow really came to Atlanta.  It had not existed before in the public transportation business and in public space.  It was still fuzzy.  After that, of course, it was rigid segregation and back-of-the-bus regimes were imposed, so that my mother never rode another public conveyance for the rest of her life in Atlanta nor did any of her friends.  And so, although the, the high, high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia] where she taught was on the west side, and her home was on the east side, she walked.
Story_ID: 317362
Speaker 1: You touched on it briefly a little while ago, but did--what were her [Lewis' mother, Alice Bell Lewis] reflections on Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois]?
Speaker 2: It were, they were affirmative.  She was uncritically admiring of Du Bois.  She believed that this was the right program for advancement.  She read his stuff in the The Crisis, as did my father [John H. Lewis].  They both were devoted to the Du Boisian enterprise.  I think that it must be the case because the last letter written to Du Bois in the Aptheker collection of three volumes of correspondence ['The Correspondence of W.E.B. Du Bois,' Herbert Aptheker] is my father's letter to Du Bois.  And I guess he felt deeply appreciative of Du Bois', what Du Bois stood because in Little Rock [Arkansas] my father got into a lot of trouble, and we had to leave Little Rock, not ahead of the mob, but figuratively so because of a position my father took in a civil rights case that Thurgood Marshall argued which was won by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and so we had to leave.  And Du Bois wrote a piece in the Chicago Defender or something like that or Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], not mentioning my father but talking about the man who stood up.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.  We may as get your account on that.
Speaker 2: This particular--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --event?  Well, you know, teacher's salaries were racially scaled in the South so that black teachers made a third less than white teachers.  And so when the NAACP brought its first cases, equalize, salary equalization cases, this was the second one, and this was in, in, in Little Rock.  And the crucial issue was whether or not the principal of, of the black high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas] would testify that this was a policy that could be justified, rationalized in any way.  And it was expected that if we wanted to keep his job and keep his home, he would read from the script.  He did not, and his testimony was therefore useful in the, the decision.  And the decision in that case, the NAACP prevailed, but he was immediately fired.  And there was great unrest I think in, in the black community.  We became somewhat pariahs because the whites obviously were in a vindictive mood.  And so, I think it was fair to say that people kept their distance from us, both black and white, for opposite reasons.  And so, after a year's time, we found ourselves in Ohio.
Speaker 1: So there's no, very little popular support for a brave stance like that.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, people would say, "I'm with you, brother, but don't say anything."  That sort of thing, yeah.
Speaker 1: A lot of fear.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me, what--can you describe growing up--
Speaker 2: Oh, but I, I should add that, that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that this case was brought by a very courageous teacher [Sue Cowan Morris], black teacher.  And so my father in no way initiated this; he simply, when it came to taking a position, was unequivocal.  But there were courageous people in the community, and I, I don't remember the names.  But I do want to share that.  I don't--it, it, it was not a sort of David and Goliath phenomenon with my dad (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so he wasn't--
Speaker 2: --against the world.
Speaker 1: --by himself, all right--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --okay, all right.
Story_ID: 317363
Speaker 1: How long did you live in Little Rock [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Born in 1936 there, and we were out in '48 [1948], I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were about twelve, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, just shy of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, can, can you describe your neighborhood, the neighborhood you live in?
Speaker 2: In Little Rock?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, I can because I was invited back as (laughter) one of the historians associated with the Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] historical project.  And the, there is a plaque of my father [John H. Lewis] in front of Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock Arkansas].  It's no longer--it's now called a--it's one of these schools which does special training.  You want Latin, you want Russian, then you go there.  'Course Central High [Central High School, Little Rock, Arkansas] is the, is the school for everybody.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: This, this is a, it has a term which I'm, I'm blocking.  And in front of the building is a--
Speaker 1: A magnet school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And in front of it is, is a plaque to, to, to my father [John H. Lewis], acknowledging his principalship there, nothing about the suit of course.  But when I returned, the people around the Clinton establishment knew of this history, and so there was a kind of red carpet business and you know, we're sort of glad you're down here.  And in fact, I'm invited back, and I'm not going back (laughter).  So, just before going, a retired lawyer [Grif Stockley], white, wrote to tell me that he had written a book about the Elaine riot of 1919 ['Blood in Their Eyes: The Elaine Race Massacres of 1919,' Grif Stockley], one of the--
Speaker 1: Elaine, Arkansas.
Speaker 2: --bloodiest of riots in the South--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Elaine, Arkansas, right?
Speaker 2: --and that he was having trouble getting it published, that the University of Arkansas Press [Fayetteville, Arkansas] might go along with it if he could get up the right signatures behind him and, and might he send me the manuscript.  He did.  And it's not beautifully written, of course, and it's a powerful document.  And this guy, being a descendant of planters himself down there in the Delta, but a real kind of Clarence Darrow type, who has ruined himself by fighting good cause, civil rights causes, he had access to all sorts of stuff.  So it's a, it's, it's quite a document.  So I wrote an enthusiastic blurb for the book and talked to Jenny, a woman at the University of Arkansas Press, so it was published.  So when I arrived, the book had just, just come out.  So this guy, whose name I can't recall, is sort of a Gregory Peck type (laughter) in 'To Kill a Mockingbird' shows up, and he says I've just got to show you the, the good and the bad of Little Rock.  So we spent a day together driving everywhere.  And he said, "But where did you grow up?"  And I said, "Well, let's go find it."  So it was 1204 Ringo Street, and the house is still there.  It's in terrific shape, and the neighborhood is being gentrified.  It, it looks to be a pleasant place, it was as I recall it then, can't say more than that about it.
Story_ID: 317364
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to Catholic school, elementary school, for a time.  And I can remember being disciplined by the nuns.  I'm not Catholic.  That didn't mean that I got more discipline than the others.  But you got your knuckles rapped by, by rulers.  I can remember that.  And I was not very bright in, in those years.  I couldn't read, and so, I think people decided I was retarded.  And so at some point my mother [Alice Bell Lewis] took me out, and I got some homeschooling, but I still didn't learn how to read.  So, when we moved to--so I had been pretty well written off as a, as a dumbbell.  When we moved to Wilberforce [Ohio] though, I remember the family saying, "You can't embarrass us.  Your father [John H. Lewis] is dean of the school of theology [at Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  You've got to, to read; you've just gotta read."
Speaker 1: Doctor, wait a second now.  You're saying by the time you were twelve, you still weren't really reading?
Speaker 2: By eleven I was, I, I was really not, not, not reading at all.  And so I went to the preparatory school, and I started reading, and I haven't stopped since.  So, that was clearly psychological, psychiatric, or it may have been--we're learning more and more about the, the brains of, of adolescents, especially adolescent males and the wiring coming on late; who knows?  But it was quite bizarre.  Now, of course, although I couldn't read that well, my mother would sum up everything I needed to know.  And so, actually, I didn't have a bad bargain because I could, I could answer.   As long it were verbal, it was verbal, I had no problem.  And so if I had to stand an exam, I could do it orally, but I didn't read.
Speaker 1: So, like, well, that must have affected how you--well, you couldn't write either I guess if you were, couldn't read.
Speaker 2: I did very little writing I think, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean, I could spell my name, you know, that sort of thing, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you, you weren't really, you know, so--
Speaker 2: I was non-literate.  I was sort of like, you know, vast populations in this country (laughter) who fake it.
Speaker 1: No one would ever--that's why this is, this process is important I guess, this oral history process, 'cause no, who, who would guess that, that--
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: --at this--
Speaker 2: That, that, that would be--
Speaker 1: --at this junct, juncture.
Speaker 2: --would not, you would not credit it, but it is true.
Speaker 1: In reading the materials for this interview, I mean I, I, I didn't have a dictionary in the room, and I (laughter) kept looking around for one because (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 317365
Speaker 1: The question I asked initially was what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in the--?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see, my best friend was a white guy in a trailer camp down at the end of Ringo Street, Tommy [ph.].  And we were best buddies.  He probably couldn't read either.  And the, and I, it's a painful memory because the only time I had been back to Little Rock [Arkansas] before this Clinton thing [at the William J. Clinton Presidential Library and Museum, Little Rock, Arkansas] was when, when we went back for something just very briefly, it was maybe three years later, after being expelled from the place.  And I phoned Tommy as soon as I got in.  And, but by that time, we're staying with a, a family.  Of course you didn't stay in hotels then.  And my other friends were coming around, three, three fellows.  I can't remember--yeah, Preston, one was named Preston Torrence, I remember, since I've seen him later, as he ended up working with Maynard Jackson.  The two others, well of course, we were all black.  And the family we were staying with said have you forgotten the way we lived down here?  What are you gonna do with Tommy?  And we were all going to a movie.  Well, the movie's segregated.  So, I, to my eternal shame, I copped out, and we left.  And the parents [Alice Bell Lewis and John H. Lewis] told Tommy--what was it?  They told him a lie and that--and so, so that was that.  So here was this good friendship and just ten minutes you make a decision we're gonna lie your way out of it, so.
Story_ID: 317366
Speaker 1: What did you like to do when you were growing up?  You weren't reading, so you didn't go, I guess you didn't read a lot, but you--what, what did you like to do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, let's see, what--there was a little baseball; there was a sandlot, and being left-handed, I naturally had a curve when I pitched.  And so, I wasn't very good, but that, that was an asset.  What else?  There was no swimming to speak of.  There were no pools around that I, I can recall.  I'm sure one could have gone somewhere.  Certainly, the high schools did not have a pool at that time.  And there was a lot of roaming around aimlessly, as males do.  I can't say that, that I can fill it in much.  It becomes much richer once we were in Ohio.  But Little Rock [Arkansas] is all a bit of a blur.
Speaker 1: Had you--I take it from what you were saying earlier, that you cultivated a decent memory.  I mean you had a pretty good memory if you could actually pass courses by, you know, memorization.  And so, so do you think that that was an exercise?  I mean because you had to do it then I guess because you had to compensate for not being able to read very well.  But did that serve you well, I mean later on, I mean did you really have to try to remember things hard or did it, did it come easily?
Speaker 2: No, no, I had really an amazing memory until past two or three years when it's all begun to go away.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.  Did you, did, did adults tell you stories of, of life in the South in those days (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, my father [John H. Lewis] not really.  You'd, you'd pick up snatches of things at the dinner table.  And I must say the--when people say oh, you know, we never spent much time around the family table, that in, in, I note that because the distinguishing aspect of my growing up was that we came to dinner and we talked about things.  And I was allowed to participate as though I knew what I was talking about.  And I have strong opinions, and I think my parents were--I was fortunate in choosing them in that regard.  But it was my mother [Alice Bell Lewis] who had this fabulous memory and who would, who was enormously well read, and that she had a lacking basis, and French was spoken in the household, though she was not--there is some French ancestry, but it's too remote to bother with.  But she taught French, and so, the, the, the canon of literature, Byron [Lord Byron] and of, of Hu- Victor Hugo and stories of that sort, Greek mythology, all that was just the staple of growing up.  So, so I got a pretty good grounding in literature and, and also in geography, which is something I note my students these days, graduate and undergraduate haven't a clue about.  But we would imagine places around the dinner table, you know, where is Balochistan [Pakistan], and what's going on there?  This was before Scrabble came on.  I guess that was our surrogate, substitute for it, for it.  So those were aid, memory-enhancing exercise for sure.  And I guess it intuned, tuned me to I have a, a, a good ear for--I was once very good imitating people's voices.  And, and I suspect going back to fill in your Little Rock question about growing up, I think I was quite a clown.  And people would say, "David [HistoryMaker David Levering Lewis], imitate so and so," and I'd probably do that.  But I can't remember who they were now at all.
Story_ID: 317367
Speaker 1: When you're twelve you, you, your family moved to Wilberforce [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And how did you like Wilberforce after living in Little Rock [Arkansas] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wilberforce was an idyll.  It was, it was paradise.  The campus was--then there was only one Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] then.  It had beautifully sculpted grounds.  The buildings were well-maintained.  It was a self-contained universe.  When you went to the movies, you went to Galloway Hall, which now has been blown down I think by--
Speaker 1: That's right.  The, only the tower remains.
Speaker 2: Only the tower is there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So you'd see movies and news reels, my gosh, news reels about everything.  And then you'd go into, into Xenia [Ohio] for the movies as well.  The families there were, we were all academic types.  My best friends were the, the Carboys, William and Alfred [ph.].  William is still living in Detroit [Michigan].  I haven't seen him in a thousand years.  Alfred became a [U.S. Army] Special Forces medical captain, and I saw him in Germany when I was doing my tour of duty in the [U.S.] Army.  His sister still live somewhere, beautiful woman, but I haven't seen her a long time.  And there were--you, you went to school at the, the, the preparatory school there, so we saw each other every day.  Gosh, I can't remember these names now, but it was a good, pleasant environment, and very safe, of course, very, very safe.  So that and curiously enough, we, I guess people like, like me in that situation grew up with all the things that middle-class Americans grow up with, except it was a black world, and we were totally unconscious of it.  And even when we went to Xenia, we weren't particularly reminded of it because the college was good trade for the town, of course, and so people were, were more mindful of the protocol of good relationships I suppose.  At one point, the preparatory school ended though when the split [to Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] came, you know, con, there was a ravine dividing the campus.  And the ravine had a particular name, which is featured in that, in, in some writing.  But with the divide of the school between church and state and my father [John H. Lewis] believing that Charles Wesley [Charles H. Wesley] had made a very foolish mistake, and he and Wesley were very close, but from that point on they were not.  And the retrenchment of, of resources as a result of that split resulted in the preparatory school having its last year ended I think.  And so we then went to Wilber- to Xenia to the first year of high, ah, the first year of high school in Xenia, that's right, preparatory school, high school was abolished, and so we went there.  And we were taking violin lessons, the Carboys and I.  And so as we got off the bus, there we were with our violin cases and did get the usual (laughter) sort of look at the sissies with their violin cases and that sort of stuff.  So we'd have a gamut to run, but we kept up with our violin lessons, though none of us was any good at all.  I don't know, I guess that was some mother's idea.
Story_ID: 317368
Speaker 1: --There's another famous Wilberforce [Ohio] resident played the violin.  I think it was Charles Young, a colonel, was a violinist.
Speaker 2: Well, Charles Young's widow [Ada Mills Young] lived just down the street.  And I always admired the colonel's sword, infantry sword, above the mantel.  And I always hoped that I'd be able to get it from her.  She was a, a rather sad woman, but, and, and of course, that was the story that we knew quite well, what had happened to Charles Young, our general that they took away from us.
Speaker 1: That's right, right, another person who Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] actually defended in, from--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the pages of The Crisis.
Speaker 2: Quite, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now, who else was--I know Hallie Q. Brown [Hallie Quinn Brown], did you ever meet her?  She's a--
Speaker 2: She came to teach poetry at the prep school.  She must have been a hundred then, and I can see her boun- levitating as she would recite the poetry that she had recited to Queen Victoria (laughter).  I mean now that seems--I mean, what a moment.  Here is someone who recited to Queen Victoria, giving you the poetry, but we just thought (laughter), boy she's as old as Queen Victoria.  Yeah, she was there, and she had a nephew who taught something or other.  And he was a very swish [ph.] guy and, and very charming.  And, and we, we delighted him because he, he was such a good teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, well, you--how did you turn the corner in terms of reading?  I mean is there, is there a moment where you, is there an incident or, or something--
Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's going into that classroom and having to read, and so I read.
Speaker 1: Well, you were classrooms before, and you supposed to read, but you didn't (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I think was--
Speaker 1: But, but what happened?
Speaker 2: --I think I was actually in and out I, I believe because I seemed to be such a dunce that I was allowed just to stay out a good bit, I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the expectation was different you think when, when you, when you got to Wilberforce, and that may have--
Speaker 2: It, it was.  I think they sort of laid down the law and said enough of this, for heaven's sake.
Story_ID: 317369
Speaker 1: What were your aspirations as a youth?  What did you think you wanted to be?  Your father's [John H. Lewis] a theologian.  Your mother's [Alice Bell Lewis] a teacher.  You're around academia.
Speaker 2: I think I wanted to design automobiles, and so I designed hundreds of them.
Speaker 1: So you could draw.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were a good, good artist.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, I, I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I was.  I should have mentioned that.  And so I had, you know, compiled this archive that friends would marvel at of old cars, the shapes of cars to come.  And so I thought maybe I'd like to do something like that, but that faded soon.  At--
Speaker 1: Why did that fade--
Speaker 2: Well, that's going off to what, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Cal-Tech [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California] or something like that, and I thought no, I'm, I'm not re--the science of it is not, is not me.  My uncle was adamant that I go to law, go to medical school, my father's brother [Smith Milton Lewis].  And my father thought well of that idea, and Uncle Doc and he'd said you know, I'll pick up the--he had, they had no children, my uncle and aunt, and I'll, I'll his tuition, the, the medical stuff.  But the idea was to go to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and, and decide then what one wanted to be.  And along came the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] early entrance program [Fund for the Advancement of Education Early Admission Program], this experiment, the likes of which had not happened before in this country.  Well, that's an overstatement.  It was patterned on the Chicago [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] program that, that the famous president of Chicago, Robert Maynard Hutchins devised.  And that was you come to Chicago, not bothering going to high school much, and you would matriculate at your own rate, three years, five years.  And you would be exposed to a very enriched curriculum, science, liberal arts and all that.  Well, the Ford Foundation took that off the shelf and funded a program centered at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee].  And it provided the money for a stand, stand-aside dormitory, two dormitories, and faculty, and scholarships, and an exam, which was the forerunner of the S- of the SAT exam.  And the exam was given nationally in 1951, I think it was the first time, and then again in '52 [1952].  And when my father learned about this, I was in--let's see, when we moved south, I skipped the first, I skipped tenth grade and went straight into the eleventh grade [at Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia].  And so there I am in the eleventh grade, one more year to go, and then college.  The Foundation, the Ford Foundation opportunity presented itself, and so I was--so I took the exam and was admitted to Fisk--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --with thirty other students from all points of the compass.
Story_ID: 317370
Speaker 1: Now let me pause a second--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --maybe rewind a little bit.  Now, what was the name of the grade school you attended?  This is all for the sake of history, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I went to the preparatory high at--
Speaker 1: I mean even back in Arkansas, I mean what was the name of your school.
Speaker 2: In, in Arkansas I, I, I never went to--there was Gibbs Elementary [Gibbs Elementary School; Gibbs Magnet Elementary School, Little Rock, Arkansas].  Gibbs Elementary was a public elementary school.
Speaker 1: But you went to Catholic school, right?
Speaker 2: Right, and then came the high school, Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas]--
Speaker 1: What was the, what was the name of the Catholic school?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  So, I went to the Catholic school, not to Gibbs Elementary.  And that's an odd thing.  Why didn't my parents [Alice Bell Lewis and John H. Lewis] put me in Gibbs Elementary?  In part, I, I, I'm not sure except that the, the, the principal of the elementary school was apparently so furious that he had been passed over when the high school was created and this outsider came in from Pasadena [California], which was where my father was then, that there was not only bad blood between my family and, and that family, but this guy mobilized his faculty.  I that, that, was it, so there's a--I'm, I'm just remembering now that we knew that there were Gibbs' faculty who were very unfriendly (laughter).  And so, anyway, I did not go to Gibbs.  I went to this Catholic school, whenever I went, whenever my knuckles weren't being rapped, I wasn't there.  So, so, so that's it.  So it's, it's the Catholic school, some homeschooling, and off to--
Speaker 1: Then the Wilberforce preparatory school [Wilberforce, Ohio], it was--
Speaker 2: Yes, the Wilberforce--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the Wilberforce preparatory school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you know, I think that it must be 19--if I said we met, we, we left in '47 [1947], that would accurate, not '48 [1948].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, in the preparatory school--yes.
Speaker 1: And you said you spent a year in Xenia High School [Xenia, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: A year in Xenia, that would have been--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Was that called Xenia High School at some point, or what was it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that I guess, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, how many high, there, was there only one high school in Xenia at that, I mean, I mean one public school?
Speaker 2: It's not a big place, you know.
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: I can only remember the high school now--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I think.  Now, could there have been a white school, a white high school and--
Speaker 1: So were you in a black high school in Xenia?
Speaker 2: Well, what I'm saying is I don't recall.  I don't--it seems to me everybody was there.  I, I just, I just introduced that as a possibility.  I have very little memory of--the only thing I remember about the high school in Xenia [Ohio] is that I fell in love with the teacher, my teacher, Miss Searcy [ph.].  And I (laughter), I took her to a movie with my parents' permission.  I asked if she, if I could take her to a movie in Dayton [Ohio] to see 'Joan of Arc' with the Swedish actress.
Speaker 1: I know who you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Ing- Ingrid.
Speaker 1: Ingrid Bergman?
Speaker 2: --Bergman.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: She played Joan of Arc.  So everybody wanted to see this movie, so I asked Miss Searcy if I could date her and take her to the movie.  And she was quite flattered, and so (laughter) my father sent the chauffeured car, and we went (laughter) to the movie in Dayton to see 'Joan of Arc.'
Speaker 1: So you all had a chauffeured car in, on the campus?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Was driven by a student or something or?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.  And that was a high point.  I mean and I--but unfortunately, she went on married somebody else (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now this is something.  I, I didn't think about that, but I know Benjamin Mays had a chauffeured car at Atlanta U [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], and that was pretty standard practice in those days, you know.
Speaker 2: It, it was, I was.
Speaker 1: It's unusual for these days to talk about chauffeured car--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely--
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: --yeah, right.  No, the, the thing about those jobs was that I think my father's salary was not much higher than a postal worker's, but you got a lot of perks.  You got the house, and you got, and, and you had a lot of student help.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  I know when you go to the Oaks [The Oaks] at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], that they, they said--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --there were like legions of students--
Speaker 2: Well, I think that--
Speaker 1: --serving on--
Speaker 2: --Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington] had a big salary.
Speaker 1: He had a bigger--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah--
Speaker 2: That's why we didn't like him.
Speaker 1: --students doing all kinds of things and stuff.  But a lot of the black colleges had a similar--these, these are students jobs that students could get, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Working in the president's home and grounds and all.
Speaker 2: Yeah, as a matter of fact, the driver's name was Anderson [ph.].  And as I recall, Miss Searcy found him really rather attractive (laughter).  So my, my gambit maybe was fated not to succeed.
Speaker 1: Yes, well, that kind of really interfered with your intentions then I guess.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, well, so that's, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Ah, but you were asking about that.  Yeah, so off to--
Speaker 1: High, so, Xenia High School.  And you were there a, a year you say?
Speaker 2: One year.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: So that's the ninth grade, I'm pretty sure.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So then I skipped the tenth and go straight to the eleventh down in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, so when did your family move to Atlanta?
Speaker 2: So it's '51 [1951], something like that I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Maybe '50 [1950].  In any case, it's the ninth grade--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --in Ohio and the eleventh grade in Booker T. Washington High [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in at, in Atlanta.  And then the Ford [Ford Foundation] experiment [Fund for the Advancement of Education Early Admission Program] comes along, take the exam, go to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Story_ID: 317371
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so there is no Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].  And while there was some talk about well, Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] as, as opposed to Yale, not really.  One, it, it represented an enormous savings, of course.  But incredibly enough, people thought of Fisk as being so exceptional that this was you weren't sacrificing an education so much as cache say, and you can always go to Yale for whatever you want to do later, at least that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the rationale.  But any case, that's--
Speaker 1: Now, nowadays it seems as Fisk has lost some of its--
Speaker 2: Oh, it's--
Speaker 1: --luster, but--
Speaker 2: --it's, imploded, yeah.
Speaker 1: But, but one, in those days, I mean when, when people thought of black colleges [HBUCs] they thought of, you know, Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and Fisk, and Atlanta U [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as being maybe--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I think--
Speaker 1: --or, or, or Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I think Fisk even, even more because Fisk was richer than all of them then, believe it or not.  It had a huge endowment, and, and the, and there was a special reason it, that they Harlem Renaissance had migrated to Fisk.  Charles Johnson [Charles S. Johnson], Arna Bontemps--
Speaker 1: Aaron Douglas was there.
Speaker 2: --Aaron Douglas, and under Charles Johnson's stewardship and the money that was poured into the place, and really talking eight hundred students in this small place with a huge endowment then.  And so the, at Fisk it was called the basic college.  And I think there are thirty girls and thirty boys admitted to this experiment [Fund for the Advancement of Education Early Admission Program], with its own faculty, which had been recruited from the Ivy Leagues.  Our headmaster was an African American from Minnesota or somewhere like that, William Thomas, who was 6'4" and had been an old blue at, at Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England].  He had been superb in every athletic pursuit.  And so he was our headmaster at, in the basic college dorm.  It was--
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: --quite, quite a, an affectation.  Blessings were in Latin.  The curriculum was sort of classic humanities curriculum and all that sort of stuff, and we all felt that we were exceedingly bright.  I was fifteen, so you get, you know, a lot of immaturity and a lot of, a lot of conceits at play.
Speaker 1: Now how did you handle going from being, thought of as a dummy to being thought of as a, now you're like--
Speaker 2: Well, by the time I--
Speaker 1: --one of the elite.
Speaker 2: In preparatory school in Wilberforce [Ohio] I was not.  And the year at Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia] I aced everything; in fact, I was kind of bored by, by more things, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, but that is a transition from a person who couldn't read--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --on, then you go--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --then all of a sudden you're--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --like, you know.  And I, I would suspect you were always bright.  Whatever stopped you from--
Speaker 2: I hope so.  I think probably that--
Speaker 1: Whatever stopped you from reading--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was something psychological or--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I don't know; who knows?  As you said--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --we don't understand the brains of adolescent males (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --today.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 1: Nobody does.
Story_ID: 317372
Speaker 1: Tell us about Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  I mean, so this--your headmaster [William Thomas] is 6'4" with this--he's, he, he studied in, in, at Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He went to Oxford, yeah.  I guess he was in the [U.S.] Army, and he, when he finished the Army somehow he ends up at Oxford.  He had a wonderful British accent.  And he, he--but he was in such great shape that if he didn't keep exercising you knew that he was gonna have muscle pains.  He (laughter), he was really quite an impressive torso.  He was not that bright though, and so he had a hard time with his smart charges.  He taught economics, and he was really not so good at it.  That was very clear.  And that was underscored because one of America's finest economists joined the faculty, our special David Granick, who wrote the book 'The Red Executive' about Russian, the Russian economy, but he was a good soul.  The Fisk experience was terrific.  We kept those relationships.  We were closely bonded.  Our faculty was mercilessly good.  I mean Aaron Douglas was my art teacher, art history teacher.  The first, the, the poet laureate of the library of--Bob Hayden [Robert Hayden] was our literature teacher.  Bernard Spivack was our classics professor, who won the big prize at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] for his book.  Robert Park's [Robert E. Park] son himself taught us sociology.  So it was a very rich experience, just terrifically so.  August Meier, the man who invented black studies was my Western civ. [Western civilization] teacher.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he went on to Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] and was responsible for a lot of black history publications.
Speaker 2: Right, yep.  He was absolutely insane, totally bonkers, and so that was a delight.  He'd walk across the campus, and he would bounce off a tree and, and, and tell it to apologize, just had, you know, furious discussions.
Speaker 1: Was he really?  I mean he really was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was absolutely nuts.  He would, while he was lecturing world civ., he would begin to bite his shoe, take off his shoe and bite it (laughter).  But he was absolutely brilliant and (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Well, this is a man who, he's, he's an editor of I don't how many anthologies--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, right.
Speaker 1: --on African American history.
Speaker 2: That's really right.
Speaker 1: In fact, he's been described by some friends of mine as the white godfather of African American history--
Speaker 2: That's true; that's quite true.
Speaker 1: --he and Elliott Rudwick [Elliott M. Rudwick], who later--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, no, it's all true.
Speaker 1: And, but Kent--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, he, he, and when he would, doing the Western civ., he was so atheistic about explaining that Christianity was a great scam, that sort of thing.  And so the Catholic students, many of whom were from Louisiana in that program, they went off campus and they found their priests and they, they complained.  And the priest came to campus, and, and, and there was a protest that, you know, this was young minds being abused in this way.  And so, August found the priest and had this great debate with the priest.  I think they ended as (laughter), as just good friends, and people learned to live with August's prejudices in, in that regard.
Story_ID: 317373
Speaker 1: So all that is to say this was a, in this small universe, it was a, a rich one with the Charl, the Carl Van Vechten art gallery [Carl Van Vechten Gallery, Nashville, Tennessee] was then--the South didn't have any museums to speak of, and so you came to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  And if you went to Van--all Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee] had was, was a podunk on campus on the other side of the, of the town.  And so, the great art gallery, well, it was quite small, but the Kandinskys [Wassily Kandinsky], the Modiglianis [Amedeo Modigliani], the Picassos [Pablo Picasso] were all at Fisk and still are, we hope.  And then there was the International Student Center.  And the International Student Center was in the basement of Livingstone Hall.  And there all the foreign films, the Nouvelle Vague had just come on, the new French films, and they came to America to Fisk first.  And so, that was quite, quite an experience to see Jean-Luc Godard.  And I would have thought I'd never forget some of those titles, but for the moment, I, they don't come.  And in that International Student Center anything that was happening in America came to Fisk so that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], not quite discovered, comes to talk to us.  Ralph Ellison, just having finished his book ['Invisible Man,' Ralph Ellison], comes--a lot of southerners who, who wanted to defend segregation as sep- in a separate/equal, on the separate/equal basis.  Curious people would, would filter through as well.
Speaker 2: And speak to the students.
Speaker 1: And speak, and so you can imagine the kind of volatility of times that, that (laughter), that produced. So I, my Fisk educational experience was I think satisfactory.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that sounds like a deep and intense place with the, with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was that.
Speaker 2: --resources that, to tell the truth, I've never heard express like, like this.  I've never heard--
Speaker 1: Well, that's, that's true.
Speaker 2: --those resources expressed the way--
Speaker 1: It, it was a kind of moment--
Speaker 2: --expressing them.
Speaker 1: Yeah, kind of moment and all that in '56 [1956], which was the year I graduated with, when Charles Johnson [Charles S. Johnson] had a heart attack.  Decisions were made, and, each decision down through the years was more catastrophic.
Story_ID: 317374
Speaker 1: Charles Johnson's [Charles S. Johnson] quite a figure.  He's someone who was a sociologist by training.  I guess he trained at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, he's a man who put together the Harlem Renaissance, of course, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, Charles Johnson--the Schomburg Center [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] that we're right a, right down the street from where, where we are right now during this interview was--I mean Arthur Schomburg [Arturo Alfonso Schomburg] was a friend of Charles Johnson's--
Speaker 2: That's right, he was--
Speaker 1: --brought to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and trained as a librarian--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in the Fisk University library [Carnegie Library].
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: I mean he, he--
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: --was quite a, quite a man.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you have a chance to meet Charles Johnson and talk to him?
Speaker 2: Oh, why sure, yes, indeed, because I was thrown out of Fisk and--
Speaker 1: Wait a minute now, wait (laughter).  Let's get this story.  What, what happened?
Speaker 2: There just a moment when I failed--oh, that, yes, the headmaster [William Thomas], we, we had to get up and, and stand by our beds for inspection at an unseemly hour, 7:00 or something like that.  I've never been able to get up in my life early.  And so, but if you were sick, of course, then you, you weren't gonna do that.  So, you could put a (laughter), could put a thing on the door saying sick.  So, I didn't this a few times, and of course said well, you can't be sick that often.  But my roommate and I kept doing this.  And so (laughter) one morning there's a noise, and we look up and there are the spokes of a ladder at the, the third floor of, of, of the dormitory.  And there is the headmaster clambering up the ladder, saying ah-ha, you're not sick.  So--
Speaker 1: Now this is the 6'4"--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --head--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, he's pretty athletic, so, he running up.  So we open the door, so we, we aren't sick.  So this is serious business because we are being trained to be gentlemen as well.  And (laughter) have integrity, so I--the, the dean of the, the school was, was a man named St. John [George C. St. John, Jr.].  He was a direct descendant of George Washington.  And he left Fisk and, and became headmaster of Moses Brown [Moses Brown School] in Providence, Rhode Island, one of the premier prep schools.  And he, he said "Oh, Mr. Lewis [HistoryMaker David Levering Lewis], I'm sorry, but you're not, you're not meeting our high standards.  You must leave.  Maybe you can come back, but you have to, have to go."  And I thought that was it; that was the sentence.  And I was getting ready to go, and I got a, I was summoned to the president's office in that great old library, gothic library.  And there was Dr. Johnson, and he said, "This is very difficult, but we don't think that you should go home because your father [John H. Lewis] is just being inaugurated president of Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], and this would be terribly upsetting to him and unfortunate.  So, we're going to let you stay, but you're going to have to do certain things."  And I had then--so I stayed.  Unfortunately, my roommate was expelled, and again, this is one of these, you know, the unfairness of life.  And I should have said if he's going, I'm going, but I didn't (laughter), and it ruined his career.  He never recovered.  He went back home to Louisiana.  He tried to get into medical school or tried to take some--at any case, things didn't turn out well for him.  So I had to copy out two chapters of Machiavelli [Niccolo Machiavelli] or something (laughter) like that, which I guess was appropriate in--I had to print them.  And that was--
Speaker 1: Two copies of the whole thing?
Speaker 2: Two, two, two chapters.
Speaker 1: Oh, two chapter.
Speaker 2: Yeah, two chapters.  And then the print is very tiny.  That's what I was supposed to do.  So I rolled with that and that was that.
Story_ID: 317375
Speaker 1: So the Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] experiment, experience was, was a good one.  And a measure of, of what you were getting was the exchange program.  Fisk had an exchange program with Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] and Pomona [Pomona College, Claremont, California], Whittier [Whittier College, Whittier, California], and one or two other places.  And so, in my junior year, I, I went to Wooster in Ohio [College of Wooster, Wooster, Ohio].  And my best buddy went to Oberlin, and Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole], who was then known as Johnnetta Betsch, went to Oberlin, and Gloria Marshall [HistoryMaker Niara Sudarkasa] went to Oberlin.  And we all ended up on the dean's list in our respective places.  No, Richard [ph.] actually went to Pomona and did, and did very well.  So that was an indication that what one was getting at Fisk eminently prepared you for, comparable even, yeah, equally demanding academic challenges.  And it's interesting that the two women: Johnnetta becomes Johnnetta Cole and president of Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and, and, and doesn't come back.  She finishes Oberlin and the same thing with Gloria Marshall, who becomes Niara Sudarkasa and becomes president of Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] and finishes at Oberlin.  And we felt that they, the, the women were, were, were traitors.  I mean the whole point, why would you give up Fisk for, for an Oberlin degree, that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: So they, they got out, they never came back to Fisk?
Speaker 1: They never came back, no.  They transferred and finished there.  And Oberlin was so happy to have minority students who were stellar, that they twisted their regulations about transferred credits and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  But you came back, right?
Speaker 1: Oh, I did, I did, indeed.
Speaker 2: How, how did you like the College of Wooster?
Speaker 1: It, it was curious because I hadn't run up against presumptions, of, of being inferior in my life really, even when I couldn't read (laughter).  And so, I was kind of faintly amused that I was meeting people who I had outdistanced really, and so I had to be kind of patient and courtly with them.  And people would ask me quite like, "Is one of your parents white?"  Or that sort of thing.  And you know it was nothing (laughter), nothing new, but the, the presumptions that being white was (laughter) such a wonderful thing, came upon me fully.  I had excellent instructions.  I had two, two professors I remember quite fondly: one, a philosopher of some note and one a, a comparative religions guy, who was quite good.
Speaker 2: Who, who, what were their names (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Vergilius Ferm, who has a philosophy, philosophy textbook that used to be noted, Vergilius Ferm.  And the comparativist's name was French, but I can't--in fact that he wore a beret.  I can't remember.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they--there was a interesting African American at Wooster.  You, as a southerner, you know, you develop a very keen eye for people who (clearing throat) (unclear) are typically white, you know to be, to have some African ancestry.  And one of them I, I knew immediately, picked, picked up immediately, and his name was Charlie Moton [ph.], and he was Robert Russa Moton's grandson.
Speaker 2: Now he was the president of--
Speaker 1: Of Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], right.
Speaker 2: Tuskegee, who followed--
Speaker 1: Who followed--
Speaker 2: --Booker T. [Booker T. Washington].
Speaker 1: Right.  And he was passing (laughter), and he was very nervous about it all.  And so whenever we talked, it, it was as though there might be a tape recording somewhere.
Speaker 2: You had to look around and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right (laughter), yeah.  He was a nice enough fellow, but, but his whole game plan was, was to be white.
Speaker 2: Now there's a mo- there was a movie produced a couple of years ago starring Anthony Hopkins as a, as a, as a white professor on the cam--well, he's--
Speaker 1: Called 'The Stain' [sic. 'The Human Stain']--
Speaker 2: --really black, but--
Speaker 1: 'The Stain,' yes--
Speaker 2: Right, 'The Stain.'
Speaker 1: --yes, right.
Speaker 2: 'The Human Stain,' 'Human Stain'--
Speaker 1: 'The Human Stain,' right.
Speaker 2: --right, right.  Do, do you think that it was patterned after Moton?
Speaker 1: Oh no, no, that was, that was a rip-off on the life of, of a man [Anatole Broyard] who worked for The New York Times, whom everybody knew was, was African American except him, mean all the whites knew that.  And he, he was so tortured, he was exceedingly talented, but he could never, ever get his story finished because of his conflict.  And, and then Skip Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] wrote about him, or somebody wrote about him, signed by Skip in The New Yorker ['White Like Me,' Henry Louis Gates, Jr.].  And that's where the, the, the writer who lives up by my way.  What's his name?  Roth, Philip Roth got, got the idea, yeah.
Story_ID: 317376
Speaker 1: We had you, we left you at the College of Wooster [Wooster, Ohio] and--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, so, you were there for a year and--
Speaker 2: A semester.
Speaker 1: Semester, okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah, just a semester.  It was at the first or the second.  I'm not sure, I'm not sure about that, yeah.  And it was a, a worthwhile ex, experience, returned for the senior year at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  Fisk acquired a chapter Phi Beta Kappa.  Fisk claimed that it got it first; Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] claims that it got its first.  Actually, it was a simultaneous award I suppose, but Charles Johnson [Charles S. Johnson] got the jump on Howard in the announcement and the ceremony welcoming the chapter to Nashville [Tennessee], as a lot, lot of luminaries came to campus.  And several of us were inducted into Phi Beta Kappa.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My best friends, Preston King, Phi Beta Kappa, Richard Thornell, Phi Beta Kappa, me, Phi Beta Kappa, Enid Johns [Rachel Enid Johns], Phi Beta Kappa, who was the, the daughter of Vernon Johns, who preceded Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --as pastor of Dexter Avenue [Dexter Avenue Baptist Church; Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama]  and a number of other people who thought they were smart.
Speaker 1: Okay and I think they were probably were right, we think.
Speaker 2: My roommate in the last year was white because Fisk had an ex, the exchange program brought people from those places.  But we had a transfer student who just came to Fisk from some really quite small southern college in the mountains; his name was Herb Schafely [ph.].  And, and Herb just thought that it'd be a good education.  And for some reason, it was thought that it'd be a good idea--we were roommates.  And he's a very pleasant guy, very hard worker, very smart, and I think he made Phi Beta--yeah.  And I've seen him once in the years since.
Story_ID: 317377
Speaker 1: When you graduated [from Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], what, what were your career goals?
Speaker 2: Ah, so I had to decide what, what I was gonna try to do.  My--
Speaker 1: In what year was it that you graduated?
Speaker 2: This was '56 [1956]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-six [1956].  My uncle [Smith Milton Lewis] dropped dead.  After it was discovered--the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] asked him if he could justify years of nonpayment of his taxes, and, and so he expired from a coronary.  And any plans that, that his largess would have benefited my education came a cropper, as my dear aunt had other plans.  And, but even so, I was not disposed to go to medical school, and so I applied to three law schools, thinking when you can't decide what to do with your life, go to law school.  So I applied to Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University Law School, Nashville, Tennessee], and Michigan [University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan], and Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut], thinking very much I'd like to go to Yale.  Yale said no.  Michigan said yes, and I was the first African American admitted to Vanderbilt Law School.  And--
Speaker 1: So why didn't you go to Michigan?
Speaker 2: Well, I haven't finished.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  And I thought I would go to Vanderbilt.  And my undergraduate history teacher major, Theodore Currier [Theodore S. Currier], who was also [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin's teacher and the man for whom I had a great deal of affection--as I look back it was all a mistake, as he had a very--his influence on, on Fisk was per, was, was a mixed one, put it that way.  He prevented certain things from happening that, that I think one should have deplored.  And he also was a cold warrior who believed that you should, a good student ought talk to the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] if he knew anything was not going right, that sort of thing.  But other, but, but, but he was a brilliant teacher, absolutely brilliant, and of course the fact that he was, John Hope Franklin considered himself virtually his son, influenced one's thinking about Ted Courier.  You went over to his place and you drank beer, and you talked about history and all sorts of things.  So I'm, I'm straying here.  He said, "No, you don't, you don't want to go to Vanderbilt.  What's, what's the point you'd be making?"  And I said, "Well, I plan to live in the South; southern law school would, would be, would be, would recommend one to the business community and that sort of thing."  He said, "No, no, no, you don't wanna do that."  My parents [Alice Bell Lewis and John H. Lewis] agreed, and so I went to Michigan.
Story_ID: 317378
Speaker 1: And when I got to Michigan [University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan], I found that I was asked if I would not live on campus.  And I had sent in my room deposit and all that.  And the tradition was for students of color to live with a ministerial family in, in the town of Ann Arbor [Michigan].  And I had refused, and I said, "No, you'll give me a room, and you'll do so now."  They did.  They gave me a suite with two other students, both very nice guys, both Jewish.  And they felt that they had been selected because they were Jews.
Speaker 2: They, you think they were right?
Speaker 1: I think so, I think so.  He was, one of the, one, one guy was, was o, okay.  The other guy was probably the most brilliant fellow there.  His name was Abrams [ph.], and he was Order of the Coif.  And I don't, I am surprised he's not on the Supreme Court now.  He had a lot of romantic troubles, he, one woman after another.  He couldn't decide what to do about this, what to do about that.  And for some reason, he always wanted to share his anguish about these things with me.  I spent a semester, did moot court and decided no, I didn't want to stay at law school, that I did after all want to do history.  My parents [Alice Bell Lewis and John H. Lewis] were upset, but they weren't paying because we took advantage of the rule that if the South could not provide you with an equivalent education, it had to pay for your education elsewhere.  And so I remember my father and I going down to city hall and him saying--he was a very imperious man at times, "My son is ready for his stipend."  And they said, "What are you talking about, we don't have--." And he said, "Oh yes, you do."  And so they provided the documents, and we signed.  So, so the State of Georgia was, was paying.  But I, you know, that's neither here nor there.
Speaker 2: It's an incredible story though.  We've heard it a number of times--
Speaker 1: I'm not surprised.
Speaker 2: --that, that they would actually spend money to send you to school--
Speaker 1: Absolutely (laughter), absolutely.
Speaker 2: --at the University of Michigan--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --which is actually a better school than they--
Speaker 1: Oh, of course, yes.
Speaker 2: --they had in--
Speaker 1: Well, Michigan as opposed to where in Georgia, good Lord (laughter).
Story_ID: 317379
Speaker 1: But, and he [Lewis' father, John H. Lewis] said, "Well, you know, this is irresponsible of you, and, and we're not going to pay for graduate training in history."  So I boarded a bus and came to New York [New York] and went to see the dean of Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], who was then Jacques Barzun, famous historian.  And I told Dean Barzun that my parents would not support an education in history.  I was leaving law school [University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan].  I would have no trouble with the coursework, and, and I'd like a fellowship or a scholarship.  And Barzun said well, we do have one.  But it's a scholarship that requires that you get your degree within the minimum of time, and if you do, then it's forgiven; you don't have to repay.  So I accepted those conditions.  I took my master's [degree] at Columbia in short order.  And I lived here at 122nd Street, taking care of a, two paraplegics, husband and wife [Ethel Deikman Dunn].  He was the son of a man named Dunn [L.C. Dunn], who was head of the anthropology department [sic.] here at Columbia.  And Stephen [Stephen P. Dunn] was a brilliant man, not ambulatory.  His wife could move about on crutches.  And I would take care of them, take him to his classes at Columbia for room and board.  And so I finished Columbia, did a satisfactory master's, and then decided--my parents said, "Oh, well, after all, maybe we should support you."  So I came back.  I finished--
Speaker 2: Oh, go ahead.  I'm just, I'm trying to--
Speaker 1: --and decided that I would go to the London School of Economics [London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE), London, England].  And that seemed a good decision on, that I, that I liked that decision.
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: And at that, at about that time, Time magazine ran a piece on the London School of Economics, saying that it was a den of, of subversive, lefties; Communists went to the London School of Economics.  And my mother [Alice Bell Lewis] said, "Oh, my God, you can't go there.  You'll be ruined.  You'll come back to this country and you'll be stigmatized as a Communist."  Well, that just made it all the more necessary from my point of view to go to the London School of Economics, but my mother is close to hysterical about this.  I might have said something like Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] (laughter) would have wanted to go to LSE, but I didn't think of, think about that at all.  And my father was uncertain what to do because my mother's opinion was to be, to be counted.  Our next door neighbor was the, one of the richest men in America.  He was the president of Atlanta Life [Atlanta Life Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia], Norris Herndon [Norris Bumstead Herndon].  And Norris and my mother had been classmates at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  And I had never saw Norris because Norris was a homosexual and had the habit of, of finding himself in scandalous situations that would make the press.  And in those days, of course, you can imagine what a pariah status that, that placed him.  But on the hand, he was fabulously rich and lived in one of the grandest mansions in, in the South, so--
Speaker 2: When you say one of the richest men in, you mean he was actually one of the richest people in America period or just among black folks.
Speaker 1: I think in, in those days he was worth about a 100 million, which was a fair amount of--
Speaker 2: That's pretty--
Speaker 1: --money, right.  And he was seldom not there.  I mean he was often not there.  He would travel the world and buy stuff and I suppose, find places where he felt more at home.  And the stadium at Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] was named after him, of course, and so my father had to have contact with him quite frequently.  So, I just walked across the, the yard, and there he was on his grand porch.  And I said, "Well, we're finally meeting, Mr. Herndon."  And he said, "Well, what, what, what, have you finished your training?"  I said, "Well, I'm wanting to go to the London School of Economics, and I don't have the money, and I'd like to borrow the amount.  I'd like to borrow five thousand [dollars] from you.  (Laughter) So, he said, "Why do you, why'd you think I'd give you five thousand dollars?"  And I said something about that our families had been together for many years, that I was clearly someone who could make a contribution, and I would pay him back.  So what's the big deal?  So he said okay.  And so he wrote a check out for--he said oh, go to the bank, the black-owned bank, Citizens Trust [Citizens Trust Bank, Atlanta, Georgia] and--are you all right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I'm fine.
Speaker 1: --and pick up, get the money.  I did, then I went off to LSE.  And brings us--
Speaker 2: So what year is this?  Is this '58 [1958] or '59 [1959] or--
Speaker 1: This is '59 [1959]--
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959], okay.
Speaker 1: --fifty-nine [1959].
Story_ID: 317380
Speaker 1: And before going [to London School of Economics and Political Science, London, England], my father [John H. Lewis] and I went to--I'm blocking the county [Schley County, Georgia] where this new high school [John Lewis School, Ellaville, Georgia] had just been erected named for him.
Speaker 2: Named for Herndon [Norris Bumstead Herndon] or, or--
Speaker 1: Named for my father--
Speaker 2: --or your fa, your father, okay.
Speaker 1: --named for my father.  And that was an interesting (unclear).  And I guess that was my last goodbye to the South in any real emotional way.  We got there and there were two rolls of dignitaries, one black and one white.  And as we walked down the rolls, people, my father would shake hands here, and then he'd shake hands there.  There were old colonels there who, who went--and clear there was a story there that I should have asked more about.  One of the, one of the white, the names of one of the whites was one of the oldest names in Georgia, which doesn't come to me now.  Anyway, I just, it was all very interesting and gothic.  But for me it was rather special because I knew my father was dying.  He had a heart condition, and a few years later a pacemaker would have taken care of it, but he was just, that problem was just a little bit before then--came back, had a rather tumultuous romance with a, the wife of a faculty member, and so I--it was all a, a rather intense period.  And there was a photograph of my father and my uncle, and I'm, after that photo, I go to the station, go to New York, and take the ship to, to England, and that's it.  He died two months later.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Could you come back for the funeral, or did--
Speaker 1: I was going to come back for the funeral, and his dying words were no, do not come back because you'll never go back.  And again, I regret that I did not.  My brothers [John H. Lewis, Jr., James W. Lewis, and Milton D. Lewis] were there, but I should have been there, but I didn't.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, what was the London School of Economics like?  What was--was this, was this the first time you'd been abroad?
Speaker 1: It was the first time abroad, right.
Story_ID: 317381
Speaker 1: LSE [London School of Economics and Political Science, London, England] was great.  The, the British way of doing things is that you do whatever you need to do because there will be an exam at some point, and you're expected to pass it.  And you should be smart enough to do what you need to do to pass it.  That's pretty much it.  Some, some of my fellow Americans didn't do what they needed to do because the structure was much more fluid.  There's no such thing as, you know, required class attendance or anything like that.
Speaker 2: So this is like Antioch [Antioch College, Yellow Springs, Ohio] or something (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter), somewhat I guess--and tutorials and that sort of thing.  Now mine was a little special because I wanted to do a French degree.  I knew that that's what I wanted to do, and I had in, in mind a, even though my, my master's here was on, on a topic to do with intellectual history, but--
Speaker 2: What was your master's thesis--
Speaker 1: It was 'John Fiske,' F-I-S-K-E, 'The Avatar of Social Darwinism in America.'  Fiske was a two hundred pound public intellectual, probably the first in America, who was the librarian of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], who went about the country preaching social Darwinism with a soft touch, 'cause he tried to combine Christianity and Darwin [Charles Darwin].  That was his shtick.  He was an interesting fellow, and it was an interesting time in America in the turn of the century.
Speaker 2: Did he--I can just imagine that his activities would inform the founders of a lot of the black colleges and university [HBUCs] I would think are, are those who--
Speaker 1: No, not at all--
Speaker 2: It's like some sort of--
Speaker 1: No, no, this was strictly selling the business, business, the, the business of America's business.  And so it should be, but you should appreciate that it's good for you because that is the way evolution works.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, that's--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Andrew Carnegie is the, the, the top of the chain.  And if you resist, then you'll be eliminated.  And that's too bad, but you know, the market and progress moves on.
Speaker 2: Okay, so that was--
Speaker 1: So, yeah, it was a good American (laughter) point of view.  He, he dropped dead from overweight, overeating.  So I wanted to do a French degree, and so I lived in France; I lived in Paris [France] and then in Versailles [France] with a royalist family and would commute to my tutorials at the LSE once a month.  So I pretty lived in the Bibliotheque nationale [Bibliotheque nationale de France, Paris, France], and in the sort of student environment, and with this family, which was an ideal forum for my topic because they were profoundly conservative, deeply Catholic, and they wanted the monarchy brought back and all that sort of thing (laughter).  And so it, for an American, this is not a problem that (laughter), you know, the many things you would encounter in social situations, this would not be one.  So if you were doing a dissertation as I was on the liberal Catholicism in France in the interwar period when a lot of Catholics were trying to combine Marx [Karl Marx] and Catholicism, and a lot of Catholics were upset about that, in the Vatican most of all, their reactions and their lifestyle informed the, the environment in which these people were laboring and, and pressing in issue.  And they were one of whom the daughter was lovely Sophie, Sophie Provost-Bion was her name.  She--
Speaker 2: How do you spell that 'cause the trans- our, our transcriber's gonna have a fit with that.
Speaker 1: Sophie, S-O-P-H-I-E, Provost, P-R-O-V-O-S-T, hyphen, B-I-O-N.  She was a Russian specialist, a little younger than I.  And I think I, I was really very taken by her.  So, there we are.  To, to be in Europe, to be in Paris for your graduate training is really a very good deal.  My father's [John H. Lewis] death left me well off so that I didn't have pressing financial worries.  In fact, I sent Norris Herndon [Norris Bumstead Herndon] his check for a thousand, for five thousand dollars.  And then (laughter), I realized that I shouldn't have done so because it was probably, he probably would have said if, if I had said I'll send it, he would have said no, don't, but anyway.  I, I felt very conscien- I appreciated his doing that, and I felt it was a debt of honor, and I wanted to pay it back.  And Europe was great.  I bought a motorcycle.
Story_ID: 317382
Speaker 1: My best friend from Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] was at the London School of Economics [London School of Economics and Political Science, London, England] as well.  We--I motored all over the place and--
Speaker 2: Who--
Speaker 1: --got my degree.
Speaker 2: --who, who--was your friend that was there?
Speaker 1: Preston King.
Speaker 2: Preston King.
Speaker 1: Preston King, you may know the name because Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] clemencied him just as he was leaving.  Preston--
Speaker 2: Right, he was involved in student demonstrations in Atlanta [Georgia], right, is that, that the one?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No?  Okay.
Speaker 1: That is the King family in Albany, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But he refused when he was drafted, he refused to join, he refused to come back because his draft board addressed him as "Dear Preston."  And he said, "Until you find my title, I'm not about to put my life on the line without some dignity."  This was unheard of, unprecedented; nobody could understand why would you do this, you know?  He didn't, and so he spent his life in England, and Africa, and Australia as chairman of political science departments at various places.  He wrote four or five books.  And then finally, some of us went to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And the NAACP got Bill Clinton's attention.  And there were one or two NBC '60 Minutes' things on, and, and he, he was clemencied.  He's now joint professor, distinguished professor at Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] and at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], so he's back.  I was drafted too.  And, and even though they didn't use my title, I did come back and that I went into, I was sent right back to Europe.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you, you were sent to Germany--
Speaker 1: I was sent to--
Speaker 2: --I, I take it?
Speaker 1: --Germany, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: I didn't stay long.  I found a way out very quickly, and--
Speaker 2: Did they send you as an officer, as a second lieutenant, or--
Speaker 1: No, no to be an officer.  You know, the, the Schine [G. David Schine] and Cohn [Roy Cohn] had messed that up, the McCarthy-Army hearings [Army-McCarthy hearings].  And now, the [U.S.] Army really required that you give them some time and do some things.  I was not prepared to do that at all.  No, I went in as a PFC [private first class] with a Ph.D.  And (laughter) I was plucked out of the motor pool into a special unit in Landstuhl [Landstuhl Regional Medical Center, Landstuhl, Germany], where all these guys are being brought now to be patched up out of Iraq, the largest medical facility outside the United States, and I got out very quickly.
Speaker 2: Now, now what year did you go in?
Speaker 1: So this is '61 [1961], '61 [1961].  Maybe it's just '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: And is that the same year you got your degree from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, actually, I, my, I was drafted two weeks before I stood my defense for the Ph.D.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is the same year, though--
Speaker 1: So, '62 [1962]--
Speaker 2: --six, '62 [1962]--
Speaker 1: --sixty-two [1962], right--
Speaker 2: --okay.
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: And all right, so--
Speaker 1: And I was then twenty-six, and I think within a few more days they couldn't have drafted me.  I would have been too old unless there was some emergency, so the board--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --made a point of that.
Speaker 2: How, how is it to be a PFC with a Ph.D.?  I mean that's really a--
Speaker 1: Well, a lot of respect.
Speaker 2: We, we all know what happens to Gomer Pyle in 'Forest Gump.'  Now what, what happens to a Ph.D. (laughter)?
Speaker 1: You know, the, the Army is, is a wonderful experience because it's the only the example of democracy that I've ever experienced, and, and it's gone now.  And so, if you were, you could read and write there were a lot of people who wanted your services, and so, I mean, you know, it'd be the first reaction, I mean who does this guy think he is?  But generally, there was a, a, a respect really, I mean here is the professor, you know, that sort of thing.  I had great friendships in the Army.  And in Germany, there was a jazz club in Kaiserslautern [Germany], which was wonderful to go to, and so--but I, I didn't want to spend a lot of time, and I found a, I found an outlet in the fine print.  And that resulted in some conflict because my commanding officer refused to approve my application.  And so I then had to ask for some assistance from my mother [Alice Bell Lewis], and, and she was very effective.  And very shortly the commanding officer was in hot water, and, and I was released.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is 1963 I guess.
Speaker 1: This is '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I was only there--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --for about twelve months.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you went in in '62 [1962], and you--
Speaker 1: And I'm out--
Speaker 2: --were out again--
Speaker 1: Yeah, because I--
Speaker 2: --in the same year.
Speaker 1: --reached Ghana in, in, in October of '63 [1963], so I guess that's '62 [1962] and '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the reason I was able to get out is that there is a fine print that says that if you request release from the Army to do a special service, social service like teaching, you can get out.  And I applied to the University of Ghana [Accra, Ghana] and was admitted as one of its lecturers.  And then when the officer refused to approve it, I asked that it be kicked upstairs, and it was.
Story_ID: 317383
Speaker 1: Now how did you manage to choose the University of Ghana [Accra, Ghana] as a place to go to?
Speaker 2: Well, by having gone to school in England, you, you knew what was coming, that the British were pulling out of their empire.  And Ghana was the first place they were evacuating.
Speaker 1: I think Ghana was independent in--
Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956].
Speaker 1: --fifty-six [1956], right.
Speaker 2: --fifty-six [sic. 1957], right.  And so by this time, Ghana had been, had built a magnificent university, which really looks like Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California].  And it was spending more money per capita on education than any other country in the world, per capita, relative to its gross national product.  And so the British were leaving, and they wanted replacements.  And so, there was a clearing house at the LSE [London School of Economics and Political Science, London, England], and I put my hat in the ring for that.  And so I was taken on as a lecturer in medieval history in, in Ghana and arrived just after Du Bois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] death.
Speaker 1: That's, that's interesting.  In those days, now, now people were starting to wake up to African history on some level.  Did, I mean did, did you, did you have an interest in, in Africa, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --part of this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I hallucinated, and I've written about it in The American Scholar.  It's just, it's called 'Ghana' ['Ghana, 1963: A Memoir,' David Levering Lewis].  I thought that I was going to lead a tank into South Africa (laughter) to liberate the country.  I went to Ghana to be part of Pan-Africanism and the liberation of the continent (laughter).  Of course, the, the Africans were, they were very patient with these Americans who poured in.  A lot of us came, African Americans, with this--and [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou shows up, you know.
Speaker 1: Right, there's a, there's a, quite a group there--
Speaker 2: Quite a group, quite a group--
Speaker 1: --at, at one point--
Speaker 2: --quite a group, right.
Speaker 1: --in time.
Speaker 2: And Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] was very indulgent, and we were given nice, nice, nice houses and appointments and all that.  And we made probably a nuisance of ourselves because, you know, Ghana has one of the best educated populations going.  It is not the Congo.  And these Americans, with their presumptions (laughter) that they were going to have such an impact, were, it was arrogance that, that the Ghanaians were very, very patient with.
Story_ID: 317384
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Nick Burghelea [Neculai Burghelea].  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] David Levering Lewis, and it's spelled David, Levering, L-E-V-E-R-I-N-G, Lewis, L-E-W-I-S.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: It's a good question.  Today is June the 9th, yes.
Speaker 1: Two thousand and--
Speaker 2: Two thousand five [2005], to be sure.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're presently in New York City in the Teachers College complex at Columbia University.
Speaker 1: All right.  And we're--this is a follow up, a com- an attempt to complete an interview we started back in March I believe it was, right?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: In 2005.
Speaker 2: Yes, right, this continues--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --the March interview.
Story_ID: 317385
Speaker 1: Where we left off last time, when we left off last time, you were in, on your way to the University of Ghana [Accra, Ghana] from the [U.S. military] service I think.
Speaker 2: Yes, I believe I was talking about the period of time in which I spent in, in Ghana at, at the University of Ghana.  I'd like just to forward back, if I might, very quickly to my earliest days when we were talking about my relocation or my family's relocation from Little Rock, Arkansas, to Wilberforce, Ohio.  And as I thought about my answers, I thought, well, I'm gonna come across as someone who did very little as a kid in the way that kids do things.  And I just wanted to point out that, indeed, I did have a dog, Butch, (laughter) who we brought with us from, from Little Rock, Arkansas, a handsome mongrel.  And I was devoted to that dog.  And one of the early tragedies, I guess you might say, in my life was discovering Butch dead one morning.  He had attacked someone who was a marauder on the property, and he had paid a high price.  And that was a very bitter experience, but one of those rituals I guess we all go through, death came into my life, as it were.  Also, I think that I was a bit mysterious about my age when we moved from Little Rock to Ohio.  I was, in fact, about nine and a half when that happened and I'd been born in 1936.  We relocated probably at the end of '45 [1945].  I am now quite sure of the timeframe because I happened to come across the, the yearbook of the graduation, graduating class of Wilberforce University [Wilberforce, Ohio] in 1946.  And there I came upon a photograph of myself and my Sunday school class, Trinity Sunday school, in 1946.  And so, I had to be about nine at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that's, that's enough of the, the, the memoir about the ten-year-old David Lewis [HistoryMaker David Levering Lewis].
Story_ID: 317386
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So on to, to Ghana.
Speaker 2: It was 1962 I believe, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, it was.  And I'd got there, actually it had to be 1963 because I got there three months after Du Bois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] death.  Du Bois died, of course, in late August of 1963, and I came for the startup of the winter quarter at the University of Ghana at Legon, outside Accra [Ghana].  I had come from the, the United States Army.  I had been inducted into the Army.  Just as I was completing my Ph.D. in history at the London School of Economics [London School of Economics and Political Science, London, England], and I had managed after a brief period of service in Germany, in Landstuhl [Landstuhl Regional Medical Center, Landstuhl, Germany], which is now a place that many Americans know because it is a place where wounded Americans are now being brought from Iraq, a huge medical facility that used to be a former S.S. [Schutzstaffel] medical facility, I served there and was able to shrink my service, the usual two-year commitment, through a technicality, the fine print.  In the regulations I was able to, to get an early exit and to go off and teach at the University of Ghana.  And so I did, and that was a, an immensely rewarding experience for me.  There couldn't have been a better time to go to Ghana.  Now that I look back upon it, it's night and day of course.  It is true that contemporaneously, Ghana is perhaps one of the success stories in a picture that is not particularly inspiring in terms of what's going on in Africa.  But then it was like, regarded as sort of the, the lodestar, the, the, the hope of Pan-Africanism.  Not inappropriately, therefore, Du Bois had gone there as the founder of Pan-Africanism and, and expired there.  And that was sort of the in the back of my mind going there, that I, in a rather egocentrically as a twenty-six year-old, twenty-five year-old hoped to be part of the, the new Africa and no better place than to be positioned as a lecturer at the University of Ghana.  The students at the university were largely on scholarship.  Ghana committed more of its resources per capita, percentage wise, to higher education at that point than any other country in the, in the world, and it's quite incredible.  And so you had all these village kids coming on the basis of examination to the University of Ghana, very much a replica of Stanford University [Stanford, California] architecturally.  It's a magnificent campus the, the British did, as they exit, do that one thing quite right, transfer a large amount of a $300 million on, on, in the Ghana bank account, a large sum of money then to be sure to higher education efforts.  And of course, Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] was very much the, the, the engine of that implementation, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, I, I just wondered if, was education free for the--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --students?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It, it, it was, but those students still needed supplemental monies, and the government provided, provided it.
Speaker 2: So if they passed the examinations and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 2: --they could--
Speaker 1: The exams were, were--
Speaker 2: It's a merit, you know, yeah.
Speaker 1: --were, were quite rigorous.  They were modeled on the, the British system, 11-pluses and that sort of thing.  So there's no concession to, you might say, affirmative action in the sense of, of standards that were not quite as demanding as they had been under the British system.  It's just that they were now available to a much larger pool.  And those students were, were very, very good, highly motivated.
Story_ID: 317387
Speaker 1: I was fortunate in having in my political philosophy class [at University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana] a young man who has become Africa's most significant philosopher.  He left Ghana and went to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], and has returned to Africa, and has written more books than, than I can count.  And I believe his name was Wiredu [Kwasi Wiredu], but I can't give you his full handle.  And there were others.  My, the chair of my department was an old friend, Adu Boahen [Albert Adu Boahen], chair of the Department of History.
Speaker 2: Can you spell his name?  I, I, I think I--
Speaker 1: A-D-U, Adu Boahen, B-O-A-H-E-N, a name of, of some significance because he was related to the royal family of, of the Ashanti, and had, himself, a huge cocoa plantation, to which he retired when, when he left the academy and ran for the presidency of Ghana, was defeated.  We knew each other in England when we belonged to the same club, Goats Club [London, England], which was a club that was a, a sort of congenial space in London [England] for, for foreign students: American, African, Indian, what have you.  He, of course, is, I suppose, Ghana's leading historian.  He is the editor of the whole Cambridge series on Africa and has written books specifically in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'A Short History of West Africa' [sic.] I believe--
Speaker 1: Yes, for example.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, I say all that to say that this was a charged environment, academically demanding, intellectually rich, a wonderful physical plant.  Ghana went out of its way to make expatriates, as we were called, welcome.  We were given housing and housing allowance and automobile allowances really on the lavish side.  And, and of course some resentment could, could be detected on the part of the local talent.  Here, these Americans come, and you know, what's independence about?  It's, it's our chance, not a chance to, to throw robust salaries at outsiders.
Story_ID: 317388
Speaker 1: The political atmosphere was exciting as well.  I'd written about this better than I can, I perhaps in a nutshell acquit myself here of that experience in The American Scholar a few years ago called 'Ghana: A Memoir' ['Ghana, 1963: A Memoir,' David Levering Lewis].  And what I think is significant about that memoir is that as I look back at the Ghanaian sojourn, I saw that there was a lot of displacement, psychic displacement going on amongst my fellow Americans, especially Americans of color.  Many of us were expecting Ghana to do things for us that we weren't able to do for civil rights in the United States.  Now mind you, this is the very moment when civil rights is, is breaking out all over the place.  The student sit-ins and the freedom summer, and really this is the high-noon of civil rights activism.  But we were impatient with that.  We have to wait for a [U.S.] Supreme Court decision, have to wait for time to improve things.  We want action, and we want it now.  And Ghan, the Ghanaians were going to do that, in that the agenda of Nkrumah-ism was a united Africa, and the South Africans out of South Africa.  Well, of course the Ghanaians really were and are one of the most prudent and pragmatic and, and, and gentle people you could know.  They're not given to extremes, and they are spared the kind of tribal animosities that so much of Africa is riven by.  There are really about two groups, the coastal population and then the great, and proud, and dignified Ashanti, one of the great warrior tribes of Africa.  And they get on very well.  And there are--I think they understand each other in ways that are, are useful for national unity.  And so we were the--if, if not, I speaking collectively, we were the, the, the lunatics of change.  We ran around boring many (laughter) Ghanaians with, with our proposals for them.  And, but they indulged them.  But very quickly, there were some concerns that I, that I found disturbing, growing corruption, nepotism, and the attempt to assassinate Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] pretty regularly, and his response, understandably, was increasingly more and more draconian, martial law, and then summary arrests of people, and disappearance of others, and not too many assassinations, but it was a fairly gentle dictatorship but nonetheless arbitrary.  And I knew people who had, who were victimized by it.  I won't go into details, but one of my best friends was the, the son of a Ghana Supreme Court [Supreme Court of Ghana] justice who was cooling his heels in jail because he was suspected of being involved in the first assassination attempt at a place called Kulungugu [Ghana], where Nkrumah's speaking, had almost been taken out by a bomb exploding in a fla, flower pot.  It did kill a number of his, his aides, and that was the beginning of repression.  And it built, and it built, and it focused on--it, it scapegoated the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] and the Peace Corps.  Everywhere Americans were suspected of masquerading as Peace Corpsmen, but actually have, having been CIA agents.  And the university [University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana] became especially suspect for harboring dissidents and plotters.  And so the atmosphere quickly became fraught, and I knew that it was probably only a matter of time before Nkrumah was overthrown.  But more seriously, the, the generous subsidies to the university suddenly disappeared, because economically Ghana began to go into a bit of a freefall.  In part, it was inescapable as it invested in the construction of one of the world's largest dams, the, the Akosombo Dam [Ghana], but also, the attempt to have a, a world class air industry, some investment in nuclear facilities, the presence of an elite Chinese guard, all that, the training camps up in the mountains for, for people who were supposed to go back home and overthrow repressive regimes, especially South Africa.  It was just almost too much going on because is about the size of Switzerland, maybe a little smaller.  Nkrumah seemed to be trying to do everything simultaneous, to the increasing ire of, of the American state department [U.S. Department of State] and the CIA.  And so, when my mother [Alice Bell Lewis] became ill, I returned with the, leaving the door open to come back.  But I came back to, to, to the United States--
Speaker 2: Now, what year was that?
Speaker 1: This was '64 [1964]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and decided I would not renew my contract and, and did not.  And of course, the coup took place about a year and a half later.
Story_ID: 317389
Speaker 1: Is in your opinion, now when you look back at this, you said that the Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] regime was increasingly suspicious of Americans and suspected a lot of Peace Corps people of being the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] and that sort of thing.  Do you think that he, his suspicions were well founded or--
Speaker 2: They were to some extent, in that I now know much more about that, because in researching my Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] biography ['W.E.B. Du Bois: A Biography,' David Levering Lewis], I interviewed a CIA mission chief at, in Ghana, one, one easy morning and afternoon at his home outside Washington [D.C.].  After a number of, of pleasant drinks, he was quite freewheeling about his experiences.  He went on to a more significant post after Ghana.  They were convinced, the CIA, that, that a large airfield was being constructed up in the mountains which could serve as a, as a transit station for that huge bomber, transport plane the Russians built.  What's it called?  In any case, it has a generic name, and that it would, that that's what was going in, and that Nkrumah had to go.  It turns out that (laughter) that that seems to have been the fervent imagination of the CIA.  The actual runway never existed.  But the, there's no doubt that the CIA was unhappy with the non-aligned politics of the, of Nkrumah.  And there, there were some considerable irritation.  As a matter of fact, I read some cables between Washington and the, and the, the embassy in Accra [Ghana].  And it was just a matter of time before he went in the same way that it was just a matter of time if you read the cables around the Nkrumah situation and Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower].  Now, the [U.S.] Army, the Officer Corps didn't need a lot of encouraging.  Because what Nkrumah was doing was--the one mistake that dictators had to be very careful about, suspicious of these British-trained officers, from Santos and elsewhere--he thought he needed his own security forces, and so he built up a kind of popular army.  And it was growing in size and resources more being allocated to it, and that made the Officer Corps restive, of course.  But they would not have overthrown Nkrumah without I think its, a signal from Washington, that they would be no objection.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In those days, nobody did anything without a signal from Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in Ghana, so you said in the--was, was that--
Speaker 2: And mind you, the overthrow was pretty bloody.  The Chinese fought, the, the Chinese that Mao [Mao Zedong] had sent in fought hard.  And some units were loyal to Nkrumah, and fights went up, up country fighting continued.
Speaker 1: Nkrumah himself was in, in China I think--
Speaker 2: He was in China when--
Speaker 1: --at the time--
Speaker 2: --he was overthrown.
Speaker 1: --visiting--
Speaker 2: Right, state visit.
Speaker 1: Right.  Was the, was the American enclave in, still in Ghana pretty, pretty much intact when this was going on, I mean was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --[HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou and--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I, I--
Speaker 1: --some of the others?
Speaker 2: --I think so.  One of my best friends was there, and he wrote a, a vivid letter, blow by blow of what was happening, what happened, yeah.
Story_ID: 317390
Speaker 1: So when you, when you come back to the United States [from the University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana], this is like the--was this the summer of '64 [1964] or the--?
Speaker 2: It is that, yes.
Speaker 1: All right, and this is a Freedom Summer in Mississippi.  And this is also the summer of the, the, LBJ's [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] campaign is reaching, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.  I had been, of course, I had followed the activities in, in the United States but from afar.  And I'd have to be candid and say I was skeptical that this would lead to much.  I thought, great, so the signs have come down; so, schools are suppose--kids can go to school without the National Guard as its patrol officers.  But this was too late and too little, and the demands were too cosmetic, I thought.  Easy for me to armchair judge everything from, from a professorship in--far away.  But all that is to say that haven't been emotionally as invested in the student movement as, as one might have thought, given my later history.  I came back, and of course I needed a job.  And I had written to a number of schools, anticipating that I might not return and keep my four-year contract.
Story_ID: 317391
Speaker 1: Oh, I should mention by the way, that while I was in Ghana [at the University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana], I didn't spend the entire time in Ghana.  And during one of the, those long breaks that the British academic calendar permits, I went off to Liberia and the Ivory Coast [Cote d'Ivoire] and a little bit of Mali in a Volkswagen with a Dutch colleague.  And that was quite interesting, to see Liberia when it too was undergoing a great deal of superficial prosperity.  I've forgotten the exact consolation and causes, but the Liberians finally had money to kind of dust off their, their old capital in Monrovia [Liberia].  And I remember that Van Dantzig [Albert Van Dantzig], and I, as we approached Monrovia, there was this skyscraper, sort of Trump-like, rising out of the, out of the savannah.  What's this?  We pull up, and a Frenchman comes out.  And we break into French, and he says, "Would you like to see what we are doing?"  Chandeliers, gold gilt, satin, everything--what, what was this?  Well, this was to be the new presidential palace and also sort of parliament, everything would, would take place there, at no consideration for capital outlay well, so that was, that was kind of interesting, 'cause when you got into the town, the monies had not begun to seep down yet into the, the neighborhoods, the typical story, all too typical.  And the bishop of, the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] bishop of Liberia was a student of my father's [John H. Lewis], and so we were welcomed and got a lot of the, the local gossip.  And then we went on to Ivory Coast where we, we couldn't stay in the grand hotel, Ivoire [Hotel Ivoire; Sofitel Abidjan Hotel Ivoire, Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire], with its, with its ice skating rink and its five-star restaurant, and it's elegant French-speaking francophone staff.  We stayed in the, sort of the ghetto.  What was it called?  I don't remember now.  But it was an extraordinary experience because they had recreated Paris [France] in, in, in Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire.  And the back, the Africans were in the front offices, but in the back offices the French were (laughter), were still running things, and, and, and repatriating huge sums of money because the Ivory Coast was one of the richest little countries in the world because of its cocoa monopoly.  And so you thought well, you know, this won't, someday this will come to an end because what is happening is that a service class of very Europeanized people in a kind of artificial Golconda is being created.  But, you know, the whole business of upward mobility, as ambitions grow, as people see what they're not benefiting from, they would have been quite happy if they didn't know what the others were having and that that would be problematic, and then too, of course, there were tribal fishers in Abidjan that you didn't have in--I mean in, in the Ivory Coast you didn't have in Ghana.  We drove to the presidential palace compound outside Abidjan, Houphouet-Boigny [Felix Houphouet-Boigny], and he had just begun to lay the foundations for what would be, of course, the world's largest basilica [Basilica of Our Lady of Peace,  Yamoussoukro, Cote d'Ivoire], the Catholic basilica there that dwarfs St. Peter's [St. Peter's Basilica, Vatican City].  And that again, you wondered if, how, how Catholic do you have to be to think that this is the best way to, to manage your GNP or GDP?  So, and then in Guinea, where we were at, Sekou Toure [Ahmed Sekou Toure] was running things, and there you had a very different attitude.  But you didn't have any prosperity at all because, of course, the French had embargoed everything, and so, he was--and his regime dependent on, on the Soviet Union.  So all that was a, a quick impressionistic canvas of Africa in the mid-'60s [1960s].
Story_ID: 317392
Speaker 1: Now what about Mali?  You said you visited Mali, too (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we just drove through.  We really didn't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: By that time, we--
Speaker 1: So you didn't see Timbuktu [Mali] or any of the--
Speaker 2: No, no, that would have wonderful.
Speaker 1: --big sites.
Speaker 2: No, we looked at our calendars.  We had to get back, students back.  And, and we hurried back only to find that Ghana was closed.  There had been an assassination attempt, and all the borders were sealed tight.  And we had run out of gas and run out of money, and we found ourselves in no-man's land.  The Ghanaians said you can't come in.  And then we went back, the Ivory Coast [Cote d'Ivoire] people said sorry, but you've left (laughter).  So, there we were, something like two miles of, of opportunity (laughter) to, to survive.  We finally were able to convince a, one of the checkpoints as we tacked along the closed border to phone quan, Conor Cruise O'Brien, who was in the chancellor of the University at Ghana [Accra, Ghana], the man who, of course, led the campaign in, in the Congo.  And O'Brien--
Speaker 1: Is he, he, he was the, the officer that, that led that--
Speaker 2: Yes, that was--
Speaker 1: --the--
Speaker 2: --his reward.
Speaker 1: --the Ghanaian forces in--
Speaker 2: Yes, after he--
Speaker 1: --into Congo?
Speaker 2: --after he tried to overthrow the, the, the, the Belgians in the Congo and to suppress the Shangi [ph.] regime, he was dismissed from the United Nations [UN], and, and Ghana offered him the position of vice chancellor of the University of Ghana.  And so, and so Conor rang and said let these guys in.  We did, and finished, got there in time for the resumption of classes.
Story_ID: 317393
Speaker 1: So on to the United States, I returned.  I had written applications to various places.  And I think I was, I was a bit early then in that African Americans had not been hired in most major places.  And so I thought, I knew there was a position at Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio].  And since my degree was in French history, I thought well, I'm, you know, I, I might, might, might be a perspective, but no, there, there were no offers at all.  And then out of the blue came an offer, a telegram from Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And so I accepted that position and taught for a year at, at, at Howard University in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 2: Did you teach French history or--
Speaker 1: I did, yes.  I taught French history on the graduate level and undergraduate.  And that was fairly satisfactory, except that the culture of Howard was, was an odd culture I found.  And so, I decided that I probably wasn't going to last long there, even though the chairperson of the department had been taught by my mother [Alice Bell Lewis] as a kid in Little Rock, Arkansas, Elsie Lewis [Elsie M. Lewis], historian of some competence.  But, but Howard seemed to value things that were not academic as much as other aspects of what one might bring.
Story_ID: 317394
Speaker 1: Howard University [Washington, D.C.], sort of a problem of emphasis you said.
Speaker 2: Yes, so when I got an offer from, from Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] to be visiting professor there in French history, and I leapt at it.  Vincent DeSantis [Vincent P. DeSantis] was then the, the chair of the department.
Speaker 1: Now how did, before you go to Notre Dame, can I ask you, well, did you know Leo Hansberry?
Speaker 2: Not at all.
Speaker 1: William Leo Hansberry?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --not at all.  The only person I knew of much to say at Howard was the president then, James Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.], who was a good buddy of my uncle's [Smith Milton Lewis], and the chairperson of the history department, yes, and, and Rayford Logan [Rayford W. Logan].  I didn't know him, but of course, I knew of him.  So--
Speaker 1: There's Robert, was Robert Harris [Patricia Roberts Harris] there then?
Speaker 2: No.  Blassingame, John [John W. Blassingame] had just finished, and he, we taught side by side, of course, as I recall, not the same course but just in the classrooms.  They were, were adjacent, and I got to know him a little bit.  He went off to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] almost immediately.  The, the, but being in Washington [D.C.] was for me a great asset.  I got married that year as well, I think; I think I did, or did I?
Speaker 1: Did you meet your wife at--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I met--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --my wife in, in Ghana.  I guess I should go back to that.  While all these other things were going on, I met a woman who was married to a professor of mathematics, both Americans.  And they were part of the Peace Corps generation.  They had come to Africa to be of service.  And as I got to know her better, the emphasis seems to have, have shifted from a more generalized service in Africa to a rather specific one.  And so, when I left Ghana, she followed me and left her husband.  And she was from Michigan, rather wealthy.  And my mother [Alice Bell Lewis], who had been the reason for coming back at that point in time, in fact, was terminally ill with ovarian cancer.  This is in Atlanta [Georgia].  And so I spent that summer with her, and the Howard offer came at about that time or had come just before that point in time.  And I continued correspondence with Sharon [Sharon Siskind Lewis].  My mother was somewhat dubious about the relationship, in part, because it was interracial, in part, for other reasons.  But it continued, and then Sharon came to Washington and we found a house in the, the upper 16th Street corridor.  And my mother came to live with us for the time she had left, and that was a memory that of course I treasure.  My mother then went back to Atlanta to die.  She did soon thereafter.  And by that time, my tenure in, in, in Howard had become just not viable.
Story_ID: 317395
Speaker 1: I suppose I should say the main problem with Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was that I was given a, a commitment to an assistant professorship.  And when I arrived I was informed that Howard does not give assistant professorship, only after you've been there and proven yourself for many, many years.  And, and so I would have to cool my heels until the administration deemed me worthy of an assistant professorship so I was a lecturer, and I took umbrage there.  And at the end of the year, I thought I'd done a pretty good job, and well, you know, keep doing your pretty good job (laughter), I guess.  I said this is absurd, and my mother [Alice Bell Lewis] said you know, son, you, you can't because this is a slippery slope.  I would add that I come from an academic family.  My father [John H. Lewis] was a college president, and so we were very familiar with the way the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] perform.  There are lots of pluses and many more minuses in, in that universe.  So once you blink, they had you.   So I said nope, I'm resigning, even without a job, just won't do it.  And then one day at the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.], Vincent DeSantis [Vincent P. DeSantis] walked up and said you know, we have a professor who is terminally ill, our French historian.  Would you consider coming as a visiting professor, and we'll see if what's his name alas doesn't return?  Why, this would become a permanent position with all the, you know, caveats of committees and that sort of thing, tenure review.  I did, and I spent a year a Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] enjoyably teaching, teaching world civ [world civilizations] and teaching modern French history.  Racially it was not very pleasant.  I found that there was no place to live.  The university actually found that the rel, real estate dealers would not rent to a person of color in South Bend, Indiana.  I wasn't totally unprepared for this because historically South Bend has been the home of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK].  But I was surprised that the university was unable to be--since Father Hesburgh [Theodore Hesburgh] was its, its president and chairman of the Civil Rights Commission [United States Commission on Civil Rights] (laughter) I think at the time.  It didn't work out so well.  Well, to my shame, I filed a grievance, and then sort of forgot about it, and found a place almost quite conveniently off campus with, and allowed three students to move in.  And so living conditions were perfectly acceptable, but the demeaning circumstance there was intolerable.  Finally, there were, there was a committee of review, and I appeared before it.  And I supposed if I had stayed around for the--at some point, there would have been some sort of restitutional resolution.  But the French professor rallied and is still there (laughter) I believe.  He had a form of leukemia that perhaps should have, fortunately not, had been fatal.  It wasn't.  His name was Bernard [Bernard E. Doering], and he wrote a book on Louis XVI, and as I say, he's still there.
Story_ID: 317396
Speaker 1: So, then I received other offers, at Wayne State [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan], but I thought, no.  And so then where did I go?  Yes, an offer from Morgan State University [Morgan State College; Morgan State University] in Baltimore [Maryland] and the advantage of that was the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] and living in Washington [D.C.].  And that's exactly what I did, found a place in Washington.  Sharon [Sharon Siskind Lewis] at this point became my wife, and we set up shop on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.], and within a year we bought a townhouse just across from the Library of Congress.  And so when I wasn't commuting to Morgan to teach, I was using the Library of Congress to write a book called the 'The Clerk in Politics,' based on my dissertation.  In the interim I published a little bit of my dissertation in the Catholic Historical Review.  And then out of the blue, in 1968, my second year I guess at Morgan, I got a letter asking me to consider writing the biography of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in the Penguin [Penguin Books; Penguin Random House] series, Great Leaders of the 20th Century.  And my first response was I had a much more conservative professional view of history I those days.  You can't write a biography of, of a man who is thirty-seven years old (laughter).  By the time it came out, you'd have to rush back and revise.  So, no, this, well, this is not for me, and secondly, what do I know about Martin Luther King's life from the point of view of, of biographical density?  I'm still catching up with the Civil Rights Movement.  And so I decided not.  The man who made the proposal was a, the Washington correspondent for The Guardian at one point, the British newspaper, and then he had become sort of head of Penguin America [Penguin Books USA, Penguin Random House].  And he had been a good friend of my best friend from college days, who was then teaching in England and was--no, in Africa--and was a, a political scientist.
Speaker 2: Whose name is King too, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Preston King, right--
Speaker 2: Preston King, yeah.
Speaker 1: --who has achieved a great deal of fame as, later when Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] pardoned him, and he has returned to the United States.  And he's now joint professor of political theory at Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] and at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  The, the offer, as I say, I was about to decline.  And I was literally on my way to the post office with the, a, a thank you note, letter, when the news arrived that King had just been shot fatally in Memphis [Tennessee].  And I thought well, my first objection no longer obtains.  You can write this life; it's over.  And so I agreed to do so and did.  And somehow I did it.  I researched the book and wrote it in one year.  King died in April of '68 [1968].  In January of 1970 the book ['King: A Critical Biography,' David Lewis] was out.  I leapt in the car, canvassed the South, met (unclear) sheriffs, and NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] officials, and SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] officials, had a lot of opportunity to meet people, in part, because of family connections, in part, simply because of my own resourcefulness.  And it was quite interesting that I, I, I got to Ghana, to Ghana to Albany [Georgia].  The whites had shut the whole town down.  All the public facilities had been sold or closed, swimming pools, libraries.  They were not gonna give in to civil rights.  And well, I needed the newspaper collection for, for the local township.  And so I drove--I found out where the white library (laughter) is, the new white library was, some fellow behind the counter at the Holiday Inn, and then he realized he hadn't told, he shouldn't have told me.  So I drove over.  As I got out of my car, I was walking up the, the sidewalk to this glass modern structure.  It was rather like the description of George Wallace, as the Selma [Alabama], Montgomery [Alabama] people marched into--the venetian blinds were crinkling as people were looking at my approach, so "Good God, a black person is coming to--what--."  So, but they were all very court, curt, courtly.  "Oh, my goodness," they said, "How did you ever find us?"  There was sort of a triumph in Africa.  I've been able to find things (laughter) that I've actually succeeded in locating the public library.  And they were, as I say, forthcoming.  So, I had spools of the local newspaper and other regional papers, and, and assiduously rec- read them in about two or three days and talked to the King family, who had been so important in the Albany movement and Charles Sherrod then.
Story_ID: 317397
Speaker 1: And then I went onto Montgomery [Alabama] and onto, I didn't go to Selma [Alabama], got back and, and, and wrote, wrote it and at breakneck speed, and, and out it came with some success and some problems, in part, because it was part of a Penguin [Penguin Books; Penguin Random House] series.  And being British trained and French trained, I gave the title 'King: A Critical Biography' [David L. Lewis].  And what I mean by that was, an objective biography.  The reaction of the ministerial alliances throughout the black community were quite hostile.  He's dumping on Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] as it were--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you're gonna--
Speaker 1: --critical.
Speaker 2: Right, go criticize him--
Speaker 1: What's wrong with (laughter)--
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Why are you criticizing--
Speaker 1: And it just never occurred to me this, and to my naive publisher, who was Praeger [ph.], this was gonna be a problem.  So, I was banned in various towns like Baltimore [Maryland].  Don't read this book.  Of course that ensured the sale, that this, you know, a banned book is really a, a blessing.  But unfortunately, Mrs. King [Coretta Scott King] also took a distinct dislike to the book because of its cover.  And again, I should have been more sensitive.  I chose Ben Shahn's portrait of Martin Luther King that Time magazine used.  I thought it would be appropriate.  She didn't like it.  She never liked it, so she was furious.  Now mind you, I tried to meet Mrs. King to do discuss the project with her and got nowhere, even though her father-in-law, daddy King [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.], had said, "Why sure, boy.  I know your daddy [John H. Lewis].  You, you know my house is your house."  So, when I went to interview members of the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], suddenly, he phoned and said I'm so sorry, but my daughter-in-law has embargoed all contact with anybody.  She will write this story of, of her husband.  Well, you know, this is, this is a, her biogra- biography brings this, problems with widows always.  However, I had developed a relationship with Martin Luther King's private secretary, wonderful woman, and it was, in fact, probably an in, a romantic relationship.  And so that was exceedingly helpful, it was.  And so, the book came out, and it has remained useful.  It's still in the canon.  It really positioned the way in which you, you write about the civil rights history at the time.  And it has been kind of a template for, for doing it.  But there was a great deal of, of hostility to I think the book because I was an outsider, and in part of the movement, I'd called it critical.  Mrs. King didn't like it.  The SCLC inner guys found things they didn't like about it.  And so, I then was not part of the kind of ongoing scholarship of the King movement.  And actually I rather backed away because that was not, in fact, the way I thought of myself.  As being a civil rights historian.  This had been sort of serendipitous, the whole business of doing the biography. So I went back to what I thought was my strong suit and did.
Story_ID: 317398
Speaker 1: But did you, was there anything that you learned in writing this ['King: A Critical Biography,' David L. Lewis] that you, that was surprising or unexpected about, about your subject?
Speaker 2: There were lots of surprises in the research for the King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] biography, most of all, the role of the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] in, in this.  Again, I had the, the good luck that my brother was an agent of the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] and, and very strategically placed.  And so, I knew a great deal about the government's surveillance.  And in fact, one of my fondest memories of, of, of that brother, who's now deceased, is when the March on Washington, the Poor People's Campaign, arrived in Washington [D.C.] with all the nervousness that, that the phenomenon engendered, I found my brother at a sidewalk cafe in, in the overalls, the, the outfit of the Poor People's Campaign, having a cafe latte.  I said (laughter) "Bill, what the hell are you doing here?  Like--he says, he says "Well, you know, I've been living with mule trains (laughter), living in tents.  I just thought for, I just walk away and (laughter) and have decent lunch."  Then he went back to the, the Mall [National Mall, Washington, D.C.] where the encampment was and resumed his espionage, as it were.  He later became the director of, of the justice department's community relations service for Mid-Atlantic States.  So that, that was useful.  And then I had some contacts with the, the press corps, and I've--the hostility to King's presumed peccadilloes, his sexual capers, I found hilarious.  For example, I knew that two senators reading the transcripts of King's activities in various motels that J. Edgar Hoover it seems had really gotten his rocks off on.  And they were saying, "This man is immoral; he's just terrible."  And then they'd say, "That sure is some fine women he's got there."  And of course, at the same time, in the White House basement, the president of the United States, JFK [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], his capers were, were well known.  And I became aware of the, the, the famous one in which President Kennedy made the mistake of sleeping with a, an agent of, of the, of the German Democratic Republic [East Germany].  And that was strategic to leverage that Hoover had over Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], his attorney general.  He bribed Bobby Kennedy for total electronic surveillance of the Civil Rights Movement, reminding him that the FBI had saved president from what would have happened to the presidency, had it been known that a, a gorgeous agent of the Stasi [Ministry for State Security] had, had regular bedtime with the president of the United States.  Those things I couldn't write about.  In 1968, '69 [1969], talking about the Newsweek's problems with sources, it would have been--who would have believed it?  You know, so, also, I would have been concerned for my health.  So, and it is also true that I--that King was, indeed, a, his extracurricular activities were really ongoing and quite vigorous.  This presented no problem to me, except from the point of view of good biography.  When personal matters had public significance, then they have to be part of the story.  It isn't voyeurism, oh, you know, I found that this guy is up to tsk-tsk stuff, no.  And what reassured finally about King was that with all pressures upon him from the justice department and other sources, he never blinked.  There was never a time when the threat, if you don't change your ways we'll do this, impended on him.  He--so that increased my admiration, already high, for Martin Luther King.  He had great moral courage, and that's what (laughter) his leadership should have been about in, in any case.  But the degree to which the FBI was involved in things that were unworthy of democracy distressed me.  And so in one paragraph I allude to this.  It's very, very deft but unmistakable about King's sexual conduct and the interest of the FBI, and I went on with the story.
Story_ID: 317399
Speaker 1: Other things that--I came to admire King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in a way that I really was unprepared for, because of the quickness of the logic of his position.  He starts off really as a child of Booker T. Washington.  That's what his family stood for, courage, yes, but prudence, yes; and no adventuring in, in civil rights, and bootstrapped; and you work hard and all that sort of stuff, work ethic, it's wonderful.  And, and Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] was an elitist, and he even says this, does King, in his first book ['Stride Toward Freedom: The Montgomery Story,' Martin Luther King, Jr.].  And very soon, the parallelisms between King and Du Bois impress you, because Du Bois always makes it seems to me the right judgment about the limitations of democracy in a free market society where government is or is not doing what it should do.  And that's really what it's all about, and King soon saw that.  And so, and as he sees this, the pressures from the civil rights establishment are as great as the pressures from the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation].  I mean the political class of black America, its taboo is you never criticize the government beyond the United States.  Civil rights stops at the shores.  And King realized that it doesn't; it begins really where the shores begin or end.  I found that, as I say, impressive.
Story_ID: 317400
Speaker 1: You moved on from Morgan State [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]--now, now, when you're at Morgan, did you know Sandye Jean McIntyre [HistoryMaker Sandye Jean McIntyre, II] at Morgan State?  He was a--
Speaker 2: I didn't know him well.
Speaker 1: --French teacher.  Okay.
Speaker 2: He was there.  Martin Jenkins [Martin D. Jenkins] was the president, the famous president, and he was the president who had disinvited Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] from an honorary degree, once Paul Robeson made his famous statement about refusing to fight against the Soviet Union.  And Du Bois agreed that, of course, that made sense, and so Martin Jenkins said cancel that.  But Jenkins was otherwise an, an exceptional college president.  And I was offered immediate tenure, because I wrote the book at Mor- at Morgan.  And, but, again, there were complications, and I'm vague now what happened.  Yes, I had a disagreement with, with the chair of the history department.  When I came to Morgan, the chairman was Benjamin Quarles [Benjamin A. Quarles], the great Benjamin Quarles, who has been one of the men in my life who has as a professional model been really significant for me.  He, I think is one of the finest wordsmiths of, of the profession as well, Ben Quarles, but he stepped down.  And the chairman and I didn't see eye to eye.  As I look back, the fault was probably largely my impatience.  In any case, I was denied what I was supposed to get as a punishment, and of course, in the chain of command the president has to choose between the guy who's running it or this brand new faculty person.  And the decision is to, to keep the chain of command intact, and then next year things would have been--but I couldn't wait, so I resigned without a job.  And where did I go at that point?  Yes, I am still living in Washington [D.C.], still using the Library of Congress.  So, I, I took a position at Federal City College, as it was then called.  It, it is today the University of the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: About what year is this?  This is sev-'70 [1970]?
Speaker 2: This is '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Seventy [1970], okay.
Speaker 2: This is '70 [1970].  The, the salary was, was munificent.  The conditions were otherwise, less than is ideal.  There were problems there in that this is an institution that could either have followed the city college model of educating people whose first experience college this would have been, affordably, with high standards, or it could be a cash cow for the faculty and the administration.  And those tensions were taut, T-A-U-T, at the time, with more and more battles being won by the people for whom checks--the delivery of checks was more important than service to the students.  But I must say I made a cynical decision.  I'm living across from the Library of Congress.  I'm writing a new book.  It's Washington, two children in the household.  My first son was born in 1968, and the second--no, no (pause) was it, it was, yes, I think it was, was '68 [1968] for, for Eric [Eric Lewis], the first, and the daughter [Allison Lewis] in '71 [1971] I think, yes, right.  And so I wrote, after the King book ['King: A Critical Biography,' David L. Lewis] I wrote 'Prisoners of Honor: The Dreyfus Affair' [David Levering Lewis].  That had nothing to do with my dissertation, and the book that was to, had been derived in large part from my dissertation, Pris- 'The Clerk in Politics' stayed in a drawer.  The, the momentum of the King book had made that sort of something that I intended to come back to, but instead I went straight on to the Dreyfus book because I knew, without getting into too many details, that there was a cache of documents that had never been seen.  What, you know, could you say knew about the Dreyfus case?  He was, he was innocent; he was unjustly accused; he was finally exonerated; and France fell apart and came back together very much repositioned.
Story_ID: 317401
Speaker 1: I wanna go, go back maybe to, to Benjamin Quarles [Benjamin A. Quarles] and get some of your impressions of him.
Speaker 2: Okay.  As I was saying, Benjamin Quarles was the chair of the history department at, at Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  And I'm sure that the, an invitation to join the faculty from him, his department was really key to my ready acceptance of the position there.  He stepped down at the end of my first year.  We, our relationship continued.  I relied on him.  When I wrote book reviews, I always heard from him.  When I wrote, when something that had my name on it, he was a good counselor.  Moreover, the kind of history he did was just of the, of the very finest.  His biography of Douglass ['Frederick Douglass,' Benjamin Quarles], and his work on Lincoln ['Lincoln and the Negro,' Benjamin Quarles], and those many biographies of prototypical civil rights figures, the names of which I, I don't recall--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --the David Walkers and the Sojourner Truths--
Speaker 1: Black abolitionists ['Black Abolitionists,' Benjamin Quarles] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and the black abolitionists were just splendid.  And he was a quality that is particularly esteemed by me.  He was a great wordsmith; he wrote beautifully.  Quarles could not write a poor sentence.  I once asked him if, if he hadn't wanted to move on, since he was still a vigorous man.  He had then another fifteen years to go.  And I knew that offers had come, and indeed he said that offers from prestigious research universities, and he said, no.  When he would have wanted those of course it was impossible because of race.  And now he thought no, it's a bit late. And he'll, he'd continue to do his work, but thank you, but no thanks.  And that was vintage Quarles.  Quarles was not an egocentric man.  He was very easy in his skin; he knew who he was.  He delighted in being a good teacher and a better scholar.
Story_ID: 317402
Speaker 1: We were talking about the University of the District of Columbia [Federal City College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, and the--you were writing 'Prisoner of Honor'--'Prisoners of Honor: The Dreyfus Affair' [David Levering Lewis].
Speaker 2: Right, I, I wrote that and in order to do it, as soon as the King book ['King: A Critical Biography,' David L. Lewis] appeared, I, I got an offer for the--another publisher--I'm try--William Morrow, a famous editor at William Morrow named Hillel Black.  And so I shifted from Praeger [ph.] to, to William Morrow to do--he was a little surprised.  In all of his enthusiasm, he said, "Well, now what would you do?"  And I said, "Well, I'll do the Dreyfus affair."  One, he's Jewish and he thought, well, I think--haven't we told our story?  What, what is it you're going to say?  And second, it's not what I thought William Morrow was, was acquiring you for, but something about Whitney Young or something about Malcolm [Malcolm X] indeed.  I said no.  Well, it was a successful collaboration.  The advance was useful.  And so, did I resign from--no, I just took a leave from Federal City College.  And Sharon [Sharon Siskind Lewis] and I, and my son, Eric [Eric Lewis], and my new daughter, Allison [Allison Lewis], we packed them up in the Mercedes [Mercedes Benz] and drove to New York, stayed with my, another brother and, out of on Long Island [New York].  And then we, we put the Mercedes on board a Yugoslav freighter.  We had arranged to get to Europe on board something called Yugolenia [ph.].  Yugoslavia was pushing tourism, and they had this wonderful freighter that was both a freighter and a luxury ship.  So, the, the car went on board, and we went into our cabins.  Some friends came to see us off at the Brooklyn [New York] pier, good friends.  And we reached North Africa, and the car was dropped overboard in Tangier [Morocco].  And we waved goodbye to people.  And we explored Morocco with these kids yelping all the way, Moroc- Fes [Morocco] and Marrakesh [Morocco], high up in the Atlas Mountains, wonderful time there.  And then we crossed to Spain and spent a time in Barcelona and then arrived in the south of France, not quite the South, the Ardeche [France], where we had taken a, an old stone house up in the mountains where I was gonna write the, the Dreyfus book.
Story_ID: 317403
Speaker 1: This was the kind of dream that you have, to go abroad, do what you wanna do, and then sit in the sun and write.  (Laughter) Well, didn't work out quite that way.  My wonderful son [Eric Lewis], hemorrhaged on the floor of the kitchen soon after we arrived, and it seemed to be an epileptic seizure.  It was not.  We drove to Montpellier [France], to the University of Montpellier [Montpellier, France], which I think is the third oldest medical center in the world.  And they still (laughter) were practicing medicine that was more medieval than, than modern though it was a caring place, and he was diagnosed as severely schiz, severely autistic, and so he was.  And it was rather downhill from that point in.  He had another seizure and then a third seizure, and with each seizure, his personality altered.  So, we decided not to return to the United States, but instead we went to Paris [France] to the leading clinic for mental diseases and neurological diseases, the clinic Saint Jean [ph.] and to the American Hospital [American Hospital of Paris, Neuilly-sur-Seine, France].  The same diagnoses were arrived at.  There was really nothing that could be done.  And so they said, you know, there isn't much that could be done.  He may get better, but this is a condition that we, we have no really ready intervention for.  But he's healthy, and he isn't going to get worse, so we decided no.  We will then keep doing what we came to do.  So we went back to the Ardeche [France], in the sun and the cold because we were there for almost a year, and I wrote furiously, pretty well, finished the book ['Prisoners of Honor: The Dreyfus Affair,' David Levering Lewis].  And then we went to Italy and spent oh, I guess about, I guess about oh, a, a month.  And that was wonderful, up in the northern part of Italy, the Alto Adige [South Tyrol, Italy], checked into a wonderful hotel called the Palace [ph.], which is now off limits to almost anyone who is not a, a multimillionaire.  But then, it, it was just beginning to redefine itself, and so there were bargains.  And we had a great room, affordable, and a wonderful swimming pool in which my daughter [Allison Lewis] learned to swim and learned to walk on the grounds of the Palace.  And then we met the freighter in Genoa [Italy] and returned to, to the United States.
Story_ID: 317404
Speaker 1: The book ['Prisoners of Honor: The Dreyfus Affair,' David Levering Lewis] came out, well reviewed.  But again, the, the business of race is always a factor in any enterprise.  The New York Times reviewer [Nicholas Wahl] seemed unable quite to get his hands around what the motive for writing the book was.  It was as though, you know, what is he up to?  And The Washington Post reviewer was by the one person I would not have wanted to review the book, who had a different point of view, a British historian, who has always argued that anti-Semitism had very little to do with the Dreyfus affair.  So you can imagine what kind of reception the book got.  "Lewis [HistoryMaker David Levering Lewis] has written well, he's written conscientious, but he's just wrong."  The, the reason I, I wrote the book was that I knew that there's this cache of evidence.  The military had fabricated evidence against Dreyfus [Alfred Dreyfus] for the final trial, the, the grand revision.  And they were gonna use that; that was their insurance policy that would keep Dreyfus on Devil's Island [French Guiana] or keep the sentence confirmed.  Well, it was so transparently fraudulous--fraudulent that when the, they didn't use it, and of course, Dreyfus was exonerated.  But bureaucracies don't destroy their documents.  And so they were filed away in the military archive outside Paris [France] at the Chateau de Vincennes [Vincennes, France], and I was determined to have access.  To make a long story short, I did; I was able to persuade the curator of special collections at the Bibliotheque nationale [Bibliotheque nationale de France, Paris, France] to endorse access.  He did, and I went to Chateau Vincennes.  In those days, there were military personnel standing there with machine guns at the ready because the FLN [National Liberation Front] was still trying to--it was not long after the FLN had, had, had won, and Algeria was safe.  But Paris was still a place where things happened.  And so I remember these, guy--this is, here is a research opportunity, and you're walking into this military compound.  They pretended that, that there were no such documents.  So I just sat, and I refused to leave.  And as the day passed, conversation was started up.  "Well, now really why are you here?  Who told you these documents exist?"  And for the umpteenth time I would respond.  And so finally, out of exasperation, someone said "Voila, les cles, monsieur. Ces sont a vous." So I went into this, this room, musty room, and there was this old filing cabinet, armoire is the word.  And I didn't insert the keys, as matter--and the key is inserted, the great lock is taken off, and there are these shoeboxes of documents.  Some claimed that Alfred Dreyfus was homosexual; others claimed that he had enormous gay--enormous gambling debts; others, other things.  And so, as I say this, they were an embarrassment  But the sig, the significance was, of course, from his historical judgment here, the degree to which the Army [French Land Army], the institution was prepared to violate due process in order to prevail.  And I told the story in a, I think really a vivid way because I interviewed people nobody had bothered to interview, certainly not the French.  I interviewed the daughters of Alfred Dreyfus and of Matthew Dreyfus, who lived in wonderful townhouses on the Seine, one of which was outfitted in wood that Napoleon [Napoleon Bonaparte] had brought back from Egypt.  And the furniture (laughter) was constructed from it.  I drove to Mulhouse [France], where Dreyfus was born, and interviewed descendants of the family in the house where he had watched the Germans as they occupied that part of France in 1870, when he was just a baby.  So, it had a, it had a vigor that I think few books on the, on the topic have.  It was well-received in Britain.  It became a military book club selection.  Of course, the French have now translated it.  The French (laughter) take their time about these things.  So, it was an enjoyable book to do, except for the family considerations of the, of the, of my son [Eric Lewis].
Story_ID: 317405
Speaker 1: So, there I am for the next few years at, at what becomes the University of the District of Columbia [Federal City College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], enjoying Washington [D.C.] as a great research laboratory.  And where did I go from there?  Yes, having done the Dreyfus book ['Prisoners of Honor: The Dreyfus Affair,' David Levering Lewis]--
Speaker 2: Now that was published in '74 [1974]?
Speaker 1: Seventy-four [sic. 1973].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then, having once gotten into African American historiography, even though obviously the King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] subject was, was, was chronologically focused, I knew about all these rich collections at places like Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and, and Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], and as not to mention the New York Public [New York Public Library, New York, New York]--, and the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.], and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], and James Weldon Johnson collection, but particularly at Howard, where an entire, one of the largest American letters collections by Alain Locke lay unaccessed by anyone.  Nobody had ever been able to read a single page of anything in the Alain Locke collection.  And it is one of the largest collections ever, the same thing was true of smaller collections.  And I thought ah, if I could write about the '20s [1920s] and the Harlem Renaissance, not as a Cotton Club phenomenon, but as a moment when Afric- a certain group of African Americans try to use the arts for civil rights purposes.  It'll be quite an argument, and it could be justified by the documents.  Well, I got a pretty good contract out of Alfred Knopf [Alfred A. Knopf] to do this.  Once again though, I think the anticipation was quite different, that I was going to write a book ['When Harlem Was in Vogue,' David Levering Lewis] about the Cotton Club--
Speaker 2: About the Cotton Club, right.
Speaker 1: --and all of that sort of thing.  Well, it's there, but that's not what the book's about.  And, and maybe I let them thing, well, if, (laughter) if that's the way I get my contract--
Speaker 2: I thought the book was about the Cotton Club when I saw the cover.  I said well, here's somebody writing about the Cotton Club again.  But then--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I got into it, and I--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I noticed it had some information the Cotton Club would not, you know, I mean a Cotton Club book wouldn't have--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --for instance, the, the address of the Blyden Book Store [New York, New York] on 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] and other things, like you know, some interesting--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: No, it's an argument, it's an argument about the way in which art is used for political purposes, and that a small group of African Americans, James Johnson [James Weldon Johnson], and, and Jessie Fauset [Jessie Redmon Fauset], and Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], and Walter White, and a few others decided that this was the moment with, as America is discovering Freud [Sigmund Freud], as whites are streaming uptown as the Negroes in vogue, it's a moment to use that, to position culture in such a way that African Americans become a very special group against whom, therefore, the stereotypes fall apart.  The great, they will be poets, and they will be, they will reinvent as it were Broadway.  This was the ambition.  And these contacts would, between the, the Algonquin Roundtable, the publishing houses, and the, and Tin Pan Alley, will produce a marvelous synergy of, of racial events.  And indeed, they recruited talent from all sorts of places.  Aaron Douglas is, is commissioned to, to leave Kansas and come to New York [New York] and, and do a kind of art, and the same thing is true of Paul Robeson.  He's taken out of his law firm and, and put into Eugene O'Neill's dramas.  This is all done by design.  Jean Toomer writes the first novel ['Cane,' Jean Toomer] of the Harlem Renaissance, although Jessie Fauset actually did, and Walter White, the third.  So here's the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] writing a, a novel, which has become a kind of schematic novel about an African American who succeeds in the North and returns South to be of service and is immediately lynched.  So, I got this, well, this is a terrific story after getting the documents.  But--
Speaker 2: And what's the Walter White story?  I mean what, what's the book called?
Speaker 1: It's called 'The Fire in the Flint' [Walter White]
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  There were twenty-seven great novels out of the Harlem Renaissance, and each one was to serve a purpose.  We can talk later about to what degree that purpose was accomplished.
Story_ID: 317406
Speaker 1: But to get into the documents one needed Dorothy Porter's [Dorothy B. Porter] permission, laissez-passe.  She was the great archivist of, of these materials.  And she wouldn't.  "No, no, no," she said.  And the reason was, of course that Alain Locke was a notorious homosexual, and this would demean the race.  This is kind of--rather amusing, as this is probably the best unkept secret (laughter) in the community.  Students, every Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] student had a story about Professor Locke.  So what was--what were we keeping ourselves from?  As indeed, others were going to speculate.  So why not get the story right?  That was, that's always been my argument.  I mean knowledge just can't (laughter) be hidden.  And the worst thing is to leave it to others to speculate.  Let's know what happened.  So, I did; I succeeded in getting in, as did Faith Berry.  She was writing Langston Hughes' biography ['Langston Hughes: Before and Beyond Harlem,' Faith Berry], and the same reservations about, about Langston Hughes.  We spent in the en- every day for an entire summer going through these, these collections, and indeed, they validated absolutely the thesis that I had intuitively put together.  And then I went off and, and did a canvas of every archive in the United States.  The Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] archive in particular was, particular was, was useful.  So that's the book ['When Harlem Was in Vogue,' David Levering Lewis], and I think it's a major contribution because the argument now has become sort of standard, that with the usual objections.  Well, Lewis [HistoryMaker David Levering Lewis] has written elitist history.  This is not about the people.  It's about the people who went to Jessie Fauset's [Jessie Redmon Fauset] salon.  It's about the talented tenth.  Well, yes, it is, but (laughter) that is part of the story.  And the point is not a dyad of either/or; it's to look at the whole bloody thing.  So, there it is, and it's you, it's value.  And then, of course, I put together the 'Harlem Renaissance Reader' ['The Portable Harlem Renaissance Reader,' ed. David Levering Lewis] in which I wrote a very large essay making the point clearer that I was trying to make.
Story_ID: 317407
Speaker 1: What do you think it is that--I know people tend to, the general public often resents the truth or, or, or, about certain historical events, like the Harlem Renaissance, here, here, you have a book that shows that a lot of it was consciously created and, by bringing people in and you know, consciously and, and you know, almost assigning them a task in--but, you know, people don't like to think about that.  I mean there's a, there's a group of people that are uncomfortable with Rosa Parks being an organizer and planning her action on the bus.  They'd rather have her just be an old woman, which she wasn't--
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: --at the time, with sore feet--
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know.  And there's, and there's so many examples of that in history.  People want Harriet Tubman to have been all over the United States, bringing every fugitive slave out, even though she was in, just going into one county in Maryland, even though--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it was remarkable to go in there six times, but, what do you think that's about (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, partly, you want the active participation of, of the group.  You, you don't want people to benefit from a kind of top down agenda, and that's understandable, and indeed, it's also true that without the participation, the top down agenda doesn't go anywhere.  The interesting thing about the Harlem Renaissance was, for example, Sterling Brown, famous Sterling Brown, who I rubbed him the wrong way at one point by not properly deferring to him, and so he got quite ticked off, and so I never interviewed him.  But he said there was no such thing as the Harlem Renaissance.  That's a famous remark.  He said nobody knew what these people were doing.  A guy in the barbershop didn't know.  This was, you know, highfalutin stuff at the, at Madam Walker's [Madam C.J. Walker] and so on.  Well, one of the things I found, among the things I found was in the old Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York], which was then a tatterdemalion place where nobody knew what anybody had.  And the woman I, who has become my wife [Ruth Ann Stewart], was the, then the assistant director, the associate director, doing her best to bring some order to that institution.  Up on the fourth floor was a run of newspapers nobody had ever looked at called the Interstate Tattler.  It came out every week, published in California and here in New York.  And that's what it was, it was the gossip of black America, everything, everybody was sleeping with whom, everybody was doing what, beautifully written, ma, Rabelaisian; that's the description of the prose.  Well, so what's my point?  Gossip, that isn't--it was that you found that when Zora Neale Hurston got a Guggenheim [fellowship], it was up on the, the barbershop walls.  When Walter White got his Guggenheim, they were cheering on, on, on Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard], that it was as though our team is winning, and everybody was applauding.  They didn't know what a Guggenheim was or a Rosenwald fellowship, but they knew that this was something that had, was coming our way for those of us who were really jumping over the bar.  So, there was great participation in this.  So it's simply not true that there wasn't awareness.  Now, one can say well, there are other shortcomings to this whole enterprise, and then I point those out.  But there is an anti-elitism in, in American culture, which we see now, with a kind of vengeance which is reflected in all of its cultures, black no less.  And so that's part of the the--and the other is the need to romanticize what we do.  If there were more things that we could credit in a positive way as a group, and there are many, but if there were many more, then there'd be less of the romanticism.  It would be less necessary to have, have Sojourner Truth ubiquitous, and less necessary to have Rosa Parks as a kind of doddering old woman who feets are tired, and she stands up, instead of the secretary of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], a very crisp woman, well-educated and so on, and so all the more reason to get the story right.  Because it really is true that if you don't understand your past, then you become a patsy to other people's manipulations.
Story_ID: 317408
Speaker 1: The Interstate Tablet [sic. Interstate Tattler] came out of California?
Speaker 2: No, it came out of, out of New York, but it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Out of New York, okay.
Speaker 2: --but it had an, a, a Calif- West Coast edition.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a wonderful run, and now it's been microfilmed, thanks to my retrieval of it.  And then there was another newspaper.  There is, uptown in Harlem [New York, New York], you know, something called the, the, the Dunbar Apartments [New York, New York], that complex that, that John D. Rockefeller financed.  And it was a state-of-the-art complex.  It was the dun, it is Dunbar, isn't it, the Dunbar Apartments?  And the, the manager of the complex is none other than the son the second African American senator from Mississippi, Roscoe Conkling Bruce, Senator Bruce's [Senator Blance Bruce] son, so very toney [ph.] place.  Now the Rockefellers gave the money to service hardworking black people; that was their notion, cheap rents, first-rate accommodations.  What happens was that Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] moved in, and James Weldon Johnson, and Roscoe Bruce, so it became the preserve of the, of the, the, the hoity-toities very quickly.  Well, it's still there.  And it published every week something called the Dunbar News, and so that everybody who stayed there was recorded, the time, and who.  Well, since in those in those, even in New York [New York], segregation obtained.  You didn't run in and stay at the Waldorf Astoria [Waldorf Astoria New York, New York, New York].  People bunked with, stayed with their friends up here.  So if you wanted to know who's meeting whom and for what purposes, there was the Dunbar News running for some five years, every week the activity.  The, it's the next best thing to being, say, in the lobby of the Hotel Theresa [New York, New York], taking notes about everybody who, who comes and goes.  And so that was another contribution of 'When Harlem Was in Vogue' [David Levering Lewis] that instead of this business of, of high kicking, high yellow women at the Cotton Club [New York, New York] (laughter), we had, indeed, a documentation of a group of people in the urban crucible doing things and not doing things.
Speaker 1: Okay, did, did you ever cover any information at all about the Harlem History Club when you were--that's a formation that doesn't get a lot of--
Speaker 2: I'm afraid I didn't, and that may have been one I missed, to my regret.
Speaker 1: Now Willis Huggins [Willis Nathaniel Huggins], you mentioned him in the book as--I know he had the Blyden Book Store [New York, New York], and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he was the, the, he presided over the Harlem History Club, which, which was host to Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] and, Nambe [ph.], Izukiawe [ph.]--
Speaker 2: Now you're not--
Speaker 1: --and other people.
Speaker 2: --you're not conflating, are you, Jervis Anderson's 'This Was Harlem' ['This Was Harlem: A Cultural Portrait, 1900-1950,' Jervis Anderson] with 'When Harlem Was in Vogue'?
Speaker 1: I don't think I am.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 317409
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about 'When Harlem Was in Vogue' [David Levering Lewis] and--
Speaker 2: So that book appeared in nineteen--1980 [sic. 1981].  And it took me a little longer to do.  I signed the contract in '75 [1975] I guess.  And that is because I wrote another book in between, which probably I should not have done, but the--we were moving towards the two hundredth anniversary of the republic.  And there, the States and Nation [States and the Nation, W.W. Norton & Company, Inc.] series was to produce a book about every state in the Union and the District of Columbia.  And the director of that group was funded through NEH [National Endowment for the Humanities], invited me to write the history of Washington, D.C.  And once again, I was intimidated.  I said, why me?  What about Constance Green [Constance McLaughlin Green].  She should be writing this.  She'd written a two volume ['Washington: A History of the Capital,' Constance McLaughlin Green]--well, Constance Green was terminally ill with cancer.  But they didn't know it at the time, but it was clear she wasn't going to be, be able to bring this to a conclusion.  And I guess I had the reputation of being a very quick writer, and so I was invited to take the task on.  And it, I'll just say, quite frankly, it paid very well.  It paid an $11,000 dollar advance in 1974, which was a fair piece of change for what was not to be a huge book.  And these were not to be definitive.  They were to be impressionistic sort books that would catch the flavor of time and place.  I did, very quickly wrote it, and satisfactorily.  But it engendered a lot of animosity on the part of state historians, local historians.  I had never dealt with local historians much.  I've since gotten to know them, and they're a special breed.  They are paranoid about their turf, about knowing more than anybody else about a neighborhood or a time in the history of something.  And so the--so, there's a lot of, well, I mean if he'd known more, sort of, but it, it was well, well enough received.  And it's useful because it catches Washington at the moment of black power and black control, with all that, that was, was, it was anticipated it would result in.  I interviewed all the members of the city council [Council of the District of Columbia], the, the, the names now are, are fading.  But any ca, ra--oh, yes, Walter Fauntroy [HistoryMaker Reverend Walter Fauntroy], for example, and a mad radical guy who insisted that African Americans should have as their dog the, the Congolese dog.  There's a special dog in the, peculiar to the Congo (laughter).
Speaker 1: He's advocating that we have a national dog--
Speaker 2: That we would have (laughter), that's right.  There were a lot of, lot of nuts and a lot of brilliant people.  There was Julius [Julius Hobson], what was his name, a marvelous militant man who ended the tracking system in public education in Washington.  He died of cancer.  He might, indeed, have become mayor of the town, Julius, yeah.
Speaker 1: I think I know who you're talking about, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And there was Marion Barry [HistoryMaker Marion Barry], of course.  And so, it's a, it's, and it's a canvas of Washington in the past and, and in the present.
Story_ID: 317410
Speaker 1: So then I resumed the Harlem book ['When Harlem Was in Vogue,' David Levering Lewis] and finished it.  And it appears it got an underwhelming review in The New York Times, which I thought was quite unfair, by the man who was the advisor to the film, 'The Cotton Club,' Jim Haskins [James Haskins].  And Jim Haskins has written maybe twenty non-books instantaneously.  And he reviewed it and reviewed it in such a way that it would never come to anybody's attention in terms of the, his role--so the book was used on this set.  My book was used on the set as they worked out the script.  But Haskins was the, the official advisor, and he reviewed the book.  And I was, I was quite annoyed by that.  And I got back at the, the man who assigned the review, was [HistoryMaker] Mel Watkins of The Times, and so I wrote some strategic letters.  And what usually happens in that situation is that people who don't like you love to get a letter like that, and so he was gone.  But it was a great mistake on his part to pass that to his buddy.  The Washington Post review was a very good one by Darwin Turner, well-known literary specialist.  But he was quite nervous because of the, my frank dealings with the sexual preferences of some of the characters in the Harlem Renaissance.  He was just aghast, and so (laughter) it was a kind of nervousness there, but, but he thought it was a useful book.  John O--
Speaker 2: Well, everybody kinds of, everybody sort of knows these things now about the--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Langston Hughes and--
Speaker 1: Well, I, I take cred, that famous when, when, when Countee Cullen sails off on his honeymoon with his best man [Harold Jackman] and leaves his wife [Yolande Du Bois] behind, and she joins him.  That story, which I think I was the first to tell, now is, you know, people dine out on it.  But at that time, my goodness, it's--we have to remember that, that groups that are fighting their way into the mainstream are, of course, protective, understandably, to the point of paranoia of, of, of their performance and their behavior.  And so, if it's perceived that the prevalence of homosexuality is a downer, why then, of course, people want to deny this.  But it seems to me that you have to be fair to what's going on, and certainly if you're talking about this men and these women, if, if they have the, the integrity to say I am what I am, then it seems to me we have to take them at, at their word.  It would be inconceivable that Langston Hughes would be embarrassed by the suggestion that Faith Berry makes about his, his, his life.  So there, so, so there, and I think now we've got, we have a professor who's just joined me at NYU [New York University, New York, New York], George Chauncey, who has written a history of gay New York ['Gay New York: Gender, Urban Culture, and the Making of the Gay Male World, 1890-1940,' George Chauncey], with a chapter on, on Harlem [New York, New York].  And Ann Douglas, who's gotten it all wrong because she assigns sexual preferences to people who are quite heterosexual.  She's quite wrong there.  But that's by the by.  So, this is all part of the evolution of coming to grips with history I suppose.  I enjoyed the book enormously 'cause I got to know, I interviewed seventy odd people and got to know people who were pleased to be discovered, who had lived rich lives.
Story_ID: 317411
Speaker 1: That book ['When Harlem Was in Vogue,' David Levering Lewis] done, I--was also, it came in a crisis in my life personally.  My first marriage [to Sharon Siskind Lewis] fell apart.  My dis, learning disabled son [Eric Lewis] had been placed in a, a special school in Pennsylvania.  That didn't work out well because he's a very robust guy, and one of his problems was that when he became upset, he would pick people up and throw them.  (Laughter) So, I don't know where he got these genes because, looking at his father, (laughter) I'm not a, not a wimp, but I'm, I'm not the truck driver he was, as it were.  And, and so they sedated him.  They brought in a psychiatrist, and so that wouldn't work.  So, all those tensions disrupted the marriage.  And the end of the story is that my son has been in a wonderful institution in Massachusetts, and so he is well cared for.  I also got into trouble at UDC [Federal City College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.].  My success I think was problematic to some of my colleagues, as Federal City College redefined itself as a university and moved physically to its new campus.  But it had to be downsized.  Too many people were on the payroll.  And so, I was charged with unprofessional conduct of not meeting my classes and not meeting my responsibilities, and my salary was seized.  I was simply not paid.  And I said, "Well, if I'm charged with something, I have to be proven guilty first, don't I?"  (Laughter) No, it's not gonna work that way.  What they wanted me was to really just sort of collapse, beg forgiveness of the particular people involved, and get out of the way.  I sued.  It is quite messy.  And I did not get a financial settlement but simply restitution of what I had not been paid.  Because there was a letter that could be used to say that I had not made, met a particular class.  Now at UDC, not meeting a particular class was a hoot.  I was quite conscientious, but I would have to say that classes were not regularly met.  It was a pretty bad situation.  Well, I received an offer to the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] and a fellowship to the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences at [Stanford University] Palo Alto, California.  And I took that even though that was only a year's fellowship.  I did not wish to take the chairmanship of African American studies at the University of Virginia.  I didn't ever want to be involved with administration, and so, I didn't.  And I went--my then wife said that she would not follow me to California, which surprised me.  But she was aware of the relationship I was having with the woman who ran the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York].  So, so I went to California solo, thinking that we would negotiate our way around this.  My then wife founded real estate business with, with a very prominent African American friend, female, and thought that, indeed, she would make her own way that way.  Unfortunately, that year the market collapsed, and the American economy went south, so I had to support the family in Washington [D.C.] while she told my children that I had deserted them (laughter).  It was a very bitter relationship.
Story_ID: 317412
Speaker 1: I went on to the University of California at San Diego [University of California, San Diego (UCSD), San Diego, California] as a full professor and except that I don't care for California, not even for La Jolla [California], it was a good, a good fix.
Speaker 2: It's a beautiful place.
Speaker 1: Beautiful place, indeed.  The chancellor, who was then the chancellor of the California system, Richard Atkins [sic. Richard C. Atkinson], who was then the president of, of--and I may have it wrong.  He may be the president of the system now and was chancellor of the, of UCSD.  He had caught a lot of flak from students, African American students over an issue, so he's very happy to have me.  And I arranged for a civil rights conference on campus that brought everybody who ever participated in civil rights, black and white there, and it was filled.  It was a three-day conference.  And the only problem was that there was no place to hold it on campus because all the venues were taken.  So we had to sort of be gypsy-like and move here and there.  But it was quite successful, but it, it took a lot of out of me, just these invitations.  I had to find money for it and all that.  So I said, you know, Richard, you owe me.  And I had gone to U, to the Center for Advanced Study in Palo Alto at Stanford [Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences at Stanford University, Stanford, California] to write a book on South Africa, on South African coloureds, and felt that I had a pretty good chance of, of being able to do that, with the support of the Ford Foundation [New York, New York].  As it developed, the Ford Foundation did not support it, because the South Africans counter proposed that I examine the Bantu stance.  I said but I'm not interested in the Bantu stance.  The idea was I guess that I would find that they were (laughter) (unclear) or something.  And the Ford Foundation said well, that's what they want, and so, you know, you should shift your, your proposal.  And I, I certainly wasn't gonna do that.  And I went to see the ambassador, who had been the guy who had been the ambassador of Ghana right after Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] was overthrown, who was then running the Phelps Stokes Fund, and whose name for a moment is going to block African American.  And he said this is outrageous.  And he picked up a phone to phone the head of the Ford, who was then, who?  Also African American--
Speaker 2: Phelps Stokes Fund?
Speaker 1: No, the, the--
Speaker 2: The--
Speaker 1: --Af, the Ford was head by, by--
Speaker 2: --Ford Foundation.
Speaker 1: --Tom, by Tom, by Franklin Thomas [Franklin A. Thomas].  And, and he couldn't through (laughter).  And he, he was, he nearly had a, a cardiac.  It was just an interesting moment in here's the Phelps Stokes guy not able to get to Franklin Thomas.  He did later in the day I suppose, but he wanted instant contact.  And, but it didn't help out.  And so, there I was with a project that I realized I'd even begun to take, take Afrikaans at Stanford.  I wasn't gonna be able to, to do that, and I reached back for a project that I had long ago developed and researched deeply, which became the book, 'The Race to Fashoda: European Colonialism in the Horn of Africa' and then 'African Resistance' ['The Race to Fashoda: Colonialism and African Resistance,' David Levering Lewis].  And so I quickly revised it, and I, I did, and then I took it with me.  But it wasn't, I, I needed, I needed a, more, more research there.  So, here I am at UCSD, and I say to Richard Atkins, I'd like a year off or a semester off to get to Africa.  He said yes.
Story_ID: 317413
Speaker 1: So, I left [University of California, San Diego, San Diego, California], went to Washington [D.C.], made some arrangements with the Ethiopian consul general, because at that point we did not have relations with Ethiopia because Haile Selassie had been overthrown, killed, and a bloody guy named General Mengistu [Mengistu Haile Mariam] was running the place.
Speaker 2: Mariam, yeah, Mengistu, right.
Speaker 1: Indeed.  And so, but I, so they got me into Ethiopia.  And so I spent, by way of, I went to Europe, finished up at the, at the Section d'Outre-- the Section d'Outre-Mer [Archives Nationales d'Outre-Mer, Aix-en-Provence, France], which is France's great archive for its colonial documents.  And then I went on to Djibouti, fascinating place, and then into the Ethiopian highlands.  I arrived soon after the bloodlettings.  Things were very spooky, but it was a wonderful month there.  And at the university of the, of Addis Ababa [Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia], there were two gentlemen who main, managed the archives, and they sat on either side of me translating Tigrinya and Amharic documents, for two days straight.  And what I wanted was a document, a treaty that was signed between the emperor of Ethiopia, Menelik II, and the mahdi, the, the Khalifa [Abdullahi al-Khalifa] of the Sudan--
Speaker 2: Are you talking about Muhammad Ahmad the mahdi or--
Speaker 1: Or the mahdi's successor.
Speaker 2: The khalifa, yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: The two powers signed a document to prevent the Europeans from taking over East Africa.  And of course, the, my argument was to recover African resistance in this book.  So this was, this was a moment.  And these gentlemen knew that they would soon be dead, who were certainly removed, and they later did disappear.  So that was--
Speaker 2: They knew--
Speaker 1: --that was quite a day.
Speaker 2: This, this all this actually takes places in eighteen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eighty-three [1883].
Speaker 2: Eighteen eighty-three [1883]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause it's--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --nineteen, 1983, right.
Speaker 2: Oh, 1983 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I am, in mine this--
Speaker 2: Okay, and the book, the activity--
Speaker 1: The book take place.
Speaker 2: --is 1888--
Speaker 1: Eighteen eighty--
Speaker 2: --probably 1889, something like that.
Speaker 1: --the 1880s to, to, to 1907 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --like that, right.
Speaker 2: I know that khalifa was wiped out by Kitchener [Horatio Kitchener] in the--
Speaker 1: In, in--
Speaker 2: In the--
Speaker 1: --in 1898.
Speaker 2: And Abdullah and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I have the photo of him lying there dead in the book, yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: So, so that, that was just indispensable.  And then I went to the Sudan, to Khartoum, and had the same access at the University of Khartoum [Khartoum, Sudan] to the British secret service [Secret Intelligence Service (MI6)] documents that are moldering there because the British, in typical Lawrence of Arabia fashion, would darken their skins and put on turbans and go off, you know, and, and speak Arabic, and they'd send these reports back.  So, those were wonderful.  And then I had contact with the men who ran the Ethi, the Su- Sudanese research institute, Rob, Robert Collins [Robert O. Collins] was the great Sudanese historian, British, and he had left and gone to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] or UCS, or, or, or University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California].  I'm not, I can't remember which.  And Collins had given me all kinds of dos and don'ts when, when I got to Sudan.  And one of them was to be very careful if I wanted to go to Fashoda [Kodok, South Sudan], that he had gone there, and they hadn't come back for him.  And (laughter) so he had spent something like three months surviving, quite competently, another British story.  So, when I met the, the director of the Sudan research, he said I'll fix it so that you can go to Fashoda; just sign these papers, and then they'll fly you in, and I didn't do it.  And then I got so involved in the documents that time passed, and then it was really too late.  And I don't regret it.  I would have liked to have gone, but that could have been pretty dicey (laughter), so--
Speaker 2: So, so you never got a chance to go to Fashoda?
Speaker 1: I never got a chance to go to, to that armpit place, no.  But I did go to Omdurman [Sudan], to the mahdi's house, the khalifa's boat.
Story_ID: 317414
Speaker 1: The story is about Marchand [Jean-Baptiste Marchand], of course, the French colonel who marched from the West Coast of Africa to the East, straight across the middle belt for a year and a half, twelve French officers and two hundred Senegalese tirailleurs, or infantrymen.  And it's never been done before or since.  So that's the story.  And when they get there, they are to team up with a hundred thousand Ethiopian troops to prevent the British from coming north/south.  And so, the British want the railroad from, from the Cape to Cairo [Cape to Cairo Railway], a railroad for British interests.  The French want to cut them off in the middle.  And the whole point is to force the British to agree to give the French all of Morocco.  And since the British are gonna keep Egypt, which the French thought was theirs, they are adamant about--so (laughter) it's really, it sounds like a, one of these video games today (laughter).  That's the way imperialism worked.  So, so there, Marchand had an aluminum boat that was dismantlable, state-of-the-art thing.  And so there it was, and I stood in it and had myself photographed as I had myself photographed on camel at, at the, at the Pyrenees, the camera didn't work, so none of those photos came out, too bad.  And then I went on to Turkey to Ankara, to Ankara, to Istanbul [Turkey] for Turkish intelligence reports, because Turkey had once owned that part of Africa, and people forget.
Speaker 2: Right, right--
Speaker 1: And though--
Speaker 2: --Muhammad Ali and the--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --Ottomans--
Speaker 1: And he--
Speaker 2: --had, had Egypt.
Speaker 1: And, yeah, and so when they were, when they lost out to the Egyptians, who then lose out to the Brits, they kept their intelligence network.  But I was thrown out of the, of the archive.  The Turkish republic had just been overthrown by its military.  And, and they were really not very forthcoming.  In fact, the archive--the, the foreign affairs archive is being run by sergeants and people who, who shouldn't have been there.  So I didn't get into those documents.  And I came back and wrote the book, and it had--the British reception to it was that I was wrong, that there had been no resistance, indeed, that the, that by the time the 1890s, it was all over, which is ridiculous.  The Washington Post review was by the queen's [Queen Elizabeth II] cousin, Pakenham [Thomas Pakenham], who wrote the competing book ['The Scramble for Africa: White Man's Conquest of the Dark Continent from 1876-1912,' Thomas Pakenham], a big book on, on empire in which the British are doing good work, for the most part.  The New York Times book review was quite good.  So, you know, you get good ones, bad ones.  It's a favorite book of mine.  It came out in 1980--'89 [1989], just between the, the research I was doing for Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois].  So the Du Bois book ['W.E.B. Du Bois: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919,' David Levering Lewis] came out in '90--'94 [1994], Volume, Volume I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--I'll tell you, I was amazed when I saw 'Race to Fashoda' ['The Race to Fashoda: Colonialism and African Resistance,' David Levering Lewis].  And when I saw the book, said well, this is the same man who wrote 'When Harlem Was in Vogue' [David Levering Lewis].  I said how, how is he able to--and he's got a book ['King: A Critical Biography,' David L. Lewis] on Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  You know, this is a lot of informa--you know, you don't see--you know, I say well, he's not specializing in any one thing.  It's--
Speaker 1: No--
Speaker 2: I, I couldn't see the link.
Speaker 1: Slightly disgraceful, that I call myself--
Speaker 2: But I--
Speaker 1: --a compara, a comparative history, comparatist.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I, I can see there's a thread through all of it.  I mean you, you have enough--
Speaker 1: Well, thank you.  I think there is, yeah.
Speaker 2: --background to, to, you know, make a, you know, since we've done this interview, is a thread through all of this, the French history informing the Fashoda story and all that in--but it's, it was something I, you know, it, but it--this is all good stuff though, you know.  I mean it wasn't like, you know, it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, I think--
Speaker 2: --it wasn't--
Speaker 1: --I think it's fairly, fairly--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's very--
Speaker 1: --solid.
Speaker 2: --it's good--
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.
Speaker 2: --material, so, you know.  And somebody said who is he?  You know, and, and I'm asking my limited number of friends.  They didn't know (laughter).  But we, but it's impressive, you now, so.
Speaker 1: But it does mean that many people think of me doing one thing and not doing another thing, and vice versa.  And of course, once again, race is a factor because we will say that I'll, that isn't what we, what, what we're, we want to talk about civil rights.  We wanna talk about the black condition, which has to be addressed indeed, but it, I think it's not a good idea that we have some people doing it only one way, and (laughter) some people are not doing things the other way.  So that book is, is added.  And then, where are we?  I had signed, of course, the contract to do Du Bois in '85 [1985].
Speaker 2: All right, so we're, we're around 1985 now.
Speaker 1: Yes, I returned to, to UCSD [University of California, San Diego, San Diego California], and then I got a, a fellowship to the National Humanities Center in Research Triangle Park [Durham, North Carolina].  I went off to finish reading--writing 'The Race to Fashoda' and finished it, pretty much finished it there, pretty much finished it there.
Story_ID: 317415
Speaker 1: And then, instead of going back to California, I, because of my marital situation, I thought I should be in Washington [D.C.].  My, my, I--by that time had a third son [sic. third child, Jason Lewis], and he was not getting the kind of training he should.  And I thought his mother [Sharon Siskind Lewis] was falling down on the job.  So I thought I needed to be in Washington.  And so I--Michael Winston [Michael R. Winston], who was then the vice president for academic theorist at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], assured me that Howard would welcome my talents and services.  Well, it turned out that not really.  But I said look, I need to be here, so you find something.  So, I got a professorship there in the history department and found that Howard had not changed much at all.  But the important thing was the domestic situation to be attended to.  And it was then in '85 [1985] that I signed the Howard contract and--I mean the, the Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] contract, as, as well as signing on at Howard.  And then, out of the blue came a, information that Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] was looking a candidate to fill an endowed chair bear, bearing the, in honor of Martin Luther King, endowed by the people of the State of New Jersey as a line item I guess in the budget.  And I was the winning candidate.  So, I left Howard and, and installed myself there at Rutgers, where I remained until nineteen--until 2001, yes, eighteen years.  And it was there that I wrote both the Du Bois volumes.  And the Rutgers was an excellent experience.  It had one of the best history departments in the country, excellent, huge, sixty people.  It had more people of color than any other department in a major research university, ten, I think, on its history faculty.  It was a leading department for women's studies, of course.  So, it was a, a wonderful experience.
Story_ID: 317416
Speaker 1: How did the Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] project come to you?
Speaker 2: When I finished 'When Harlem Was in Vogue' [David Levering Lewis] I knew that I--well, let's put it this way, I thought I wanted to write a biography of Walter White.  But a man named Robert Zangrando, who had retired to Cleveland [Ohio], had done much of the research and had staked out that terrain.  And I thought at some point, Robert's biography will appear.  And many of the people I would have wanted to interview, I knew would have said, "No, we had kind of pledged to Mr. Zangrando."  But then I thought, as a matter of fact--and then I got a letter from the second Mrs. Alfred Knopf [Helen Norcross Hedrick] after 'When Harlem Was in Vogue' appeared.  And she very much liked the book, and she said, "I would have urge you to write about Du Bois."  And I thought that is a good idea.  My--is it a good idea, wonderful idea and what a challenging proposal.  But once again, that's with Alain Locke's collection that had been off limits and prevented anybody doing much until I was able to.  And the Du Bois papers were, for various reasons, inaccessible.  I contacted the archivist at the University of Massachusetts [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts].  She said, "Well, it's going to be several years before we've collated, because we have to combine all the stuff in various other places.  And it'll be two or three years before, but I'll keep you posted," she said.  She did, and I kept abreast of the developments there.  And then I, I began to talk about wanting to do this.  And my agent proposed the project to Harvard.  In fact, the editor of Harvard University Press [Cambridge, Massachusetts], Aida Donald, said, "If you ever want to do Du Bois think of Harvard first," and I did, but Harvard didn't think of the money (laughter).  It--the advance was less than I wanted, because I knew this would be an expensive project.  My agent at, at Howell Loeber [ph.] then shopped it, and I found that a number of publishers said, "Do you have permission from the right people, from Aptheker to, to do this?"  Of course not, I never have met Herbert Aptheker.  But there was a great desire for me not to do it on the part of people who were very far left, and so there was some criticality.  And then there were other people who said who, who, we couldn't care less about Du Bois, and this is a Communist, an expatriate; no, we're not interested.
Speaker 1: And the left was the most concerned constituency.
Speaker 2: It was.
Story_ID: 317417
Speaker 1: Then came Henry Holt [Henry Holt and Company].  And the senior editor there was the grandson of the man who published Du Bois's [W.E.B. Du Bois] third book.  His name is John Macrae, III.  John Macrae I published 'The Negro' [W.E.B. Du Bois].  And Holt had been Du Bois' publisher for a number of books.  And Du--and Macrae's father had turned down one of Du Bois' last books as something you've done before (laughter).  So, there was that peculiar interest.  And so, when Macrae got the proposal, he was at the Century Club [Century Association, New York, New York], and he ran into Al Murray, Albert Murray.
Speaker 2: Albert Murray, the writer?
Speaker 1: And--a member of the club.  And he said something like, "What do you think about Lewis [HistoryMaker David Levering Lewis] doing a biography of Du Bois?"  And as Jack Macrae tells the story, Murray said "Du Bois?  He got everything wrong.  My God, the guy, he's an elitist.  He didn't understand Booker T. Washington.  He had the wrong recipe for everything.  Du Bois, ah, now double everything's seen through the veil."  And so Macrae said to himself, this has got to be one good story (laughter).  So we signed on at a, a very hefty advance which was soon doubled, and so that puts me going.  And at that point, as I kind of timed it, the University of Massachusetts [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts] archives were opened.  And I was the first there and pretty well lived in them for the next few years.  It's an extraordinary collection, probably the second greatest American collection.  And what's more to be said?  It was to be a one-volume biography, of course, and somewhere along the line, soon I realized you couldn't tell the story in one volume for two reasons: one, because of its sheer enormity, but secondly, because it would be better to wait until what was about to happen, happened, and that was the collapse of the Soviet Union.  Let that run its course.  Just as I was finishing what was to become Volume I ['W.E.B. Du Bois: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919,' David Levering Lewis], glasnost came along.  And one could see what was going to happen, so I, I said let's have a two-volume.  And my publisher at first resisted and then said no, that's an inspired idea.
Story_ID: 317418
Speaker 1: We renegotiated the contract [with Henry Holt and Company], and I went off to the Soviet Union.  That was a moment in my life that (laughter) I'll never forget.  I had to go twice.  And Volume I ['W.E.B. Du Bois: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919,' David Levering Lewis] came out with the success it had.  Now, Volume II ['W.E.B. Du Bois: The Fight for Equality and the American Century, 1919-1963,' David Levering Lewis] the first time I went, I went just as a tourist through Entouriste, but I had, through Paul Robeson, Jr., some names.  And one of them was the woman who was a major translator of American fiction into Russian, Frida Lourie [ph.].  And I made contact with her since I got to Moscow [Soviet Union; Moscow, Russia].  And I--was a hot day like today.  And I walked over and expecting just to spend time with her, letting her know why I was there and what help she could be--she had been very close to Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois]--and I walked into her room, there was a conference room with every table, every chair, occupied by gentlemen in dark Apparatchik suits.  (Laughter) And I sat at the head, and I explained my mission.  As I'm talking, I see that the head fellow there is not looking in my eyes but looking sort of down about my chest.  And I'm wondering, what's that about?  And suddenly he interrupts me and he says, "Where you get your blazer?"  (Laughter) And I said, "Ah, Brooks Brothers."  Just, the question seemed so basic, I said (laughter), he said, he said, "Brooks Brothers?  Where is Brooks Brothers?  Is it near your university?"  And I said, "Yes, yes, I, my university is just outside New York [New York].  There's a Brooks Brothers near the university and of course Brooks Brothers in New York."  "Ah," he said.  "Any interest in a relationship between Soviet writers union [Union of Soviet Writers] and Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey]?  We would like to have relationship with Rutgers."  I thought well, I said, "Sir, I am a professor and unauthorized to speak for my university, but I can't imagine that there wouldn't be immediate interest in this unique opportunity.  But if I return to America and tell the president [Edward J. Bloustein] of Rutgers (laughter) that, what you've just told me, he would say well, where is the evidence?  If you could provide me with some documents that'd be help--." He clicks his fingers, in walks a magnificent woman, just, if I may say so, just a real terrific looker, tall, blond, shapely.  And he says in Russian that the professor needs a document to take to his institution.  She goes, there's a lot of clacking, the document is presented, both in Russian and in English.  And it proposes a relationship of faculty exchange and Soviet writers.  Now, no other American university had this possibility, so I flew back to New Brunswick [New Jersey] and told the then president.  And he said, "This is terrific, David [HistoryMaker David Levering Lewis]."  Now there are a lot of faculties that, "My God, you know, the, Soviet, no.  I mean the writers of the Soviet Union, why these are their great hacks, you know; these are people who feed at the teat of the party; we don't want this relationship."  And then others said, "Are you kidding?  This is an opportunity for our faculty to get to Russia and get into things in detail."  The document was signed.  The president of Russian--the president of Rutgers flew with his deans to Moscow.  They got drunk on vodka.  There were photo ops, and the documents were signed.  And my part, then they came to New Brunswick and I had to play a part there.  And then I was invited as a guest of the Soviet Union and of the writers union to do anything I liked with the research for this volume.  And the KGB then stood forward as my assistant, and every person I wanted to see anywhere in the Soviet Union was made available.
Story_ID: 317419
Speaker 1: So that I flew to Uzbekistan, and I flew to the Ukraine and, and met people throughout Moscow [Soviet Union; Moscow, Russia].  And the extraordinary experience was that I had never been more privileged in my life, in that whatever I needed I was at the front of the line.  And I learned that the treatment of high ranking party [Communist Party of the Soviet Union] members is far better than anything that Wall Street (laughter) can offer you.  Just the privileged position is just--I got ill, for example.  It was indigestion, but they were afraid it might be more serious.  And I, I'm taken by limousine to a special hospital that has all the latest Japanese equipment, and the doctors were fluent in English and all that, so.  I thought it was the most immoral system I had ever seen, my God.  But my, my job was the life of Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], and the man who was mostly responsible for making sure that I found what I needed was the Soviet Union's greatest spy, decorated, Og, Ovid Gorchakov, who wrote novels and they sold--
Speaker 2: Can, can you spell his name?  I know that--
Speaker 1: O-V-I-D--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Ovid, Gorchakov, G-O-R-C-H-A-K-O-V.  His wife [Alla Bobricheva] was, his wife was an, inordinately beautiful.  And she ran the Canadian-American Institute, which is their key institute for keeping abreast of what's going on here, not an, not an espionage institute, but academically and from a policy perspective.  And she had been a classmate of Paul Junior's [Paul Robeson, Jr.] in the special academy that Stalin [Joseph Stalin] had created when for a moment he thought that English should be mastered by everybody.  And she had sung some of the greatest songs, blues songs too, (laughter) in, in her early career.  And Ovid was a great guy.  He had parachuted behind the Nazi lines and all that.  And so, I drank an enormous amount of vodka.  I spent a lot of time in the Soviet writers union [Union of Soviet Writers] palace [Yasnaya Polyana, Oblast, Soviet Union; Oblast, Russia], where the tsar had fallen down the steps when it had been a, had belonged to the, the, the great Russian family, writing family who, who, 'War and Peace' [Leo Tolstoy]--
Speaker 2: Chekhov [sic.]--no, no, not--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: I mean what's his--Tolstoy.
Speaker 1: Tolstoy, thank you--then, the Tolstoy family mansion.  So this was a pretty special moment.  And out of it I found a document that nobody knew that Du Bois had done.  I got the original manuscript of his autobiography, which was first published in Russian and then translated into English, and talked to people who you might say, well, were these people intimidated?  No, Du Bois was a sort of a hero, and so there's no--they were, of course, there're parts; they were as people do, magnifying and all that.  But I got a--but some are very critical of Du Bois, including Ovid, who walked through a cemetery near a place called Barvikha [Soviet Union; Barvikha, Russia], which is the great PX for the Communist Party [Communist Party of the Soviet Union] when it was in power.  All the dachas are wonderful, and all the facilities are topflight.  And when they were walking through that cemetery that abuts Barvikha, Ovid turned to Du Bois and said, "Dr. Du Bois, here some of the heroes of the Soviet Union are buried, and do you know that there widows and their families cannot come and see them without--that this is off limits, and isn't that terrible?"  And Du Bois said, "I suppose there's a reason for that."  And Ovid said he, like Sir Stafford Cripps, was never going to say anything about the Soviet Union that adverse, even though he must have known that this was a, an obscene experiment by this time.  And of course, that was true, and that was, that was regulatory.  So, the meanwhile, the Soviet writers began pouring into New Brunswick [New Jersey] uninvited (laughter), and Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] was less than pleased.  And that, that soon petered out as Gorchakov went his way and things changed.
Speaker 2: That's, that's something.  Now--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --why, why did--well, well, we know that--
Speaker 1: And I'm, and Brooks Brothers is, is my favorite store, and I haven't yet told them what they owe me (laughter).  One day I will.
Speaker 2: So you think they poured into Brooks Brothers, too, the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm sure they made their way to Brooks Brothers--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in New Brunswick, sure.
Story_ID: 317420
Speaker 1: Well, you've taken this a place where I would never have guessed that you would have gone, gone, gone to the Soviet Union first to, you know, pull together information.  But that's, that's probably the toughest place to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes--
Speaker 1: --go to of all places--
Speaker 2: --yes, it would have.  In China--
Speaker 1: --and all the sources.
Speaker 2: --I was going to, but Tiananmen [Tiananmen Square protest of 1989] occurred.  And, and then the two people I wanted to see most, one of them came back and has written recently his biography.  And I interviewed him here on the East Side [New York, New York].  And what about the other man?  I'm, I'm vague now.  So I, I regret that I couldn't do the Chinese side of the story from the ground, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have the cooperation of Shirley Graham Du Bois or, or--
Speaker 2: She was dead.
Speaker 1: She was dead by then?  And--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: --what about her son, David Du Bois?
Speaker 2: Yes, David was not particularly useful because he didn't know very much.  What I had was the discovery of Du Bois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] granddaughter, the, the last of the line.  She had signed off on any connection to her grandfather, the bitterness was so great.  Bit of a story there.  But I flew to Houston, Texas, where she was a teacher of psychology.  And she met me at the hotel, and I gave her, we had lunch.  And she so much enjoyed the exchange--I can be a very good interviewer after all these experi- you know, a gent.  And so she said well, I wanna come back, so I said well, I'll stay another day.  And then I wanna come back, and so for three days she gave me her whole life story.  She had had an illegitimate child.  Du Bois, of course found that disgraceful.  She had wanted to marry a Czechoslovakian film producer.  Du Bois had to ask Khrushchev [Nikita Khrushchev] to investigate the young man's background.  So imagine trying to live your life.  You find somebody you'd like to marry, and the politburo (laughter) gets involved in--so she just fled.  And so, so, I got her back into her life and gave her some advice, and she's now professor of psychology at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana] in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And now she wants to write her own story, and shows up for interviews and so on.  But David, David really knew very little.  He came late, but he was useful.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: All right, well--
Speaker 2: I might add that Du Bois' granddaughter is named Du Bois Williams.  And she said to me, imagine being a little girl and having to carry around that name, Du Bois (laughter).
Speaker 1: Du Bois Williams?
Speaker 2: Du Bois Williams.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How old is she at this--
Speaker 2: Oh, she's about seventy-five, yeah, maybe almost eighty, a vibrant, total recall, chip off the old block, just like her grandfather.  The gene skipped because her mother [Yolande Du Bois] was not very bright, you recall.  She is, has, has a, an ecumenical mind, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 317421
Speaker 1: Now in terms of the--in Volume I ['W.E.B. Du Bois: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919,' David Levering Lewis], you, you start with Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] from his birth in 1867--
Speaker 2: Eight [1868]--
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1867], is it?
Speaker 2: Eight [1868].
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1868], okay, to 1919, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you had to, you know, we, we start with him and you know, Great Barrington, Massachusetts.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now you won a Pulitzer Prize [Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography] for that, that book, right?  And it's, it's quite a piece of work.  What did you discover about Du Bois that you didn't know?  Well, probably a lot of things I would guess--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes--
Speaker 1: --if you're writing a--
Speaker 2: --yeah, a number.
Speaker 1: But there'd been other things written about him though, so, so I guess you knew things--
Speaker 2: Yes and no--
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: --in, indeed--
Speaker 1: --so many things.
Speaker 2: --I was a better, I was a--
Speaker 1: He wrote about himself (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, so I was the beneficiary of all those versions.  I had the, the choice of as, as I got to see that Du Bois, like Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], was a man whose romantic life was, was very full, very, very full.  And so once again, here we have Dr. Du Bois, the, the ed, ex, exponent, the espouser of proper behavior and of the Talented Tenth virtues and all that.  And here is a guy who is irresistible to women, absolutely irresistible.  What women would tell me as they began to think misty-eyed about their time (laughter) with Du Bois, was quite wonderful I must say.  And one would say, boy, he was rather enviable after all.  I remember one woman said, "And you know, he was so well hung."  Now this, this woman was an ambassador to a country at one point, so we're not talking--you know, I don't mean to demean anyone--but a woman of great accomplishment and, and culture.  So that story had to be told, and, and it was important because Du Bois is the first feminist amongst black males.  He is the first one to say that women must have rights, not just voting rights, but the control of their own bodies.  This is pretty radical stuff.  So if that guy is the inventor of sort of feminism, which women have parlayed into all the things they should, then if, indeed, his treatment of his wife [Nina Gomer Du Bois] is pretty awful, then it's a story.  And, and, and so I've, I've told that story because I think it's a curious combination of, of enlightenment and patriarchy on his part.  The poor woman had a terrible time, and Du Bois treated her in a correct way that is formerly so, but it was a--she never had a chance to be developed.  And of course, the death of the son [Burghardt Du Bois] came between them, was an emotional scar on the relationship.
Story_ID: 317422
Speaker 1: What I found else about Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] was simply that to be a genius, you really do have to work hard.  And his, the organization of his life is quite fabulous.  He got up at a certain time, and he went to bed at 10:00 without exception, the rest of his life, 10:00.  If he found himself on a dais here in New York [New York] at town hall, and somebody is blabbering on when he's supposed to speak at 9:15, at 10 to 10, he would look at his pocket watch, and ostentatiously stand up, and walk off the platform.  So people knew that if you have Du Bois here, all the bills comes later; let him, let him speak.  And he was always a marvelous speaker, not emotional at all, but quite crisp and, and cogent.  So he gets up.  And I can't remember the order of the things now, but some much, so many hours are devoted to correspondence, so many hours to reading fiction, and the rest to research and, and writing.  And he--I found rolls of an outline in blocks of everything he would do that month, and he did.  So that--and yet there was a time for women, (laughter) a time for other things.  The, this, the schematization of the life was a tour de force.  So, on the other hand, the economy, he never wrote long letters, almost never, unless the letter was a policy letter, and so, and so that presents an imbalance in the correspondence.  If he's writing to a woman he deeply loves, it's "Madam, as you know, I think well of you and, and plan to see you at this restaurant at 10:00 on Tuesday, November 10th.  I hope you will present yourself there" (laughter), something like that.  I'm caricaturing somewhat, but not by a lot.  And the letter from the woman would be far more human, to be sure, so that if you looked at only Du Bois writing to people with whom he was emotionally engaged, you might miss that unless you paid attention to those letters and response, which are not always in the same box of course.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that, that's, that's interesting that we are known by not just what we do but how others respond to us.
Speaker 1: Right, yep.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 317423
Speaker 1: I wanna go back and did you, you did meet Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] at one point when you were young, a youngster, right?
Speaker 2: It must have been when I was--'cause we now know that we, we came to Wilberforce [Ohio] when I was nine going on ten, and we left when I was thirteen and moved to Atlanta [Georgia]. So it would have been in 1948, the Boule meeting there in Wilberforce.  It's there that I think I get patted on the head by Du Bois when my father [John H. Lewis] introduces me to him, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's hardly, hardly friendship (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, right, but it's something, it's interesting that you at least had some, you know, contact with him and those who he, who knew him, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --from, from that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm told that he had been a guest in, in the house, but I don't remember that at all.  And the last letter in the Aptheker three-volume letters ['The Correspondence of W.E.B. Du Bois,' Herbert Aptheker] is a letter of my father to Du Bois, which was rather courageous to do, because it's 1959, and Du Bois is still a nonperson.
Speaker 1: Okay, right, right, to be associated with him is to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --risk being a victim of the Cold War, Cold, Cold War politics and so forth.
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah.
Story_ID: 317424
Speaker 1: Now, the early development of Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], was there anything--how does that develop his character?  Can you maybe speak to that in the, I mean his early days?
Speaker 2: It's, it's a lonely life up there in the Berkshire Hills [Massachusetts].  And it's not--how shall I put?  It, it, it, it's not miserable, but it's very solitary.  There weren't many African Americans in those hills, although those who were there had been for, for many, many generations.  But he would naturally have been solitary because he's, you know, smarter than most of the people around him.  And as you reach your teens, race comes along, as he memorably points out in that business of the visiting cards and what have you.  Now I say in, in, in Volume I ['W.E.B. Du Bois: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919,' David Levering Lewis] that the story changes. At one point, it happens early; another point, that incident happens later.  And that is to say, I think it wasn't as scaring as Du Bois makes it, but he knew how to take an, an event, an incident that had some poignancy, to be sure, and make it the definition of a world.  I mean the, the, the veil falls at that moment when the, when the, the, the card is not extended to him.  And from that point on, my life is defined, you know.  Well, it's just terrific, and he suggests that he then, "Now I know that I must be a Negro."  Well, you'd say, really, aren't you an African?  Do you have a choice in the matter?  But Du Bois would say oh no, it's very important that, that I become the champion of a group out of intellectual commitment (laughter), rather than pigment.
Story_ID: 317425
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Sir, could you please state your name for us?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] David Levering Lewis.
Speaker 1: And we are completing an interview that we started I think about a year and a half ago, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think so, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 317426
Speaker 1: We were talking about Dr. Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], the Pulitzer Prize-winning Du Bois biographies that you wrote.  And we were talking about his early years I think before, and you made some reflections on those early years.  What--I don't know--I don't think we, do we talk about Du Bois at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge Massachusetts]?  No, I think we talked about him growing up, but--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, but certainly that is a, a major chapter in his life, formative.  He said famously in his autobiography ['The Autobiography of W.E.B. Du Bois: A Soliloquy on Viewing My Life from the Last Decade of Its First Century,' W.E.B. Du Bois] that he was at Harvard but not of Harvard, suggesting an outsider predicament or standing in those three years as an undergraduate and then his graduate training that went on for another year to take the master's [degree] there before he went off to Germany for what he hoped would be the German doctorate, which in the end of the quest he, he did not achieve because of the scholarship shortfalls.  And so he returned to Harvard to take the, the doctorate in history as the first African American Ph.D.  In fact, factually it seems that isn't correct.  The first African American to receive the doctorate from Harvard was Martin Delaney [Martin Robison Delany] as a medical doctor, just to make that point, in the, in the 1860s I suppose it was.
Speaker 1: Well, he was there in 1850s, but I don't think--I think they, they, the students rebelled before he actually got a degree.  I mean he was working on the M.D.
Speaker 2: Yes, right, yes.  I, I think he did receive the degree though.  But in any case, it's certainly significant that, that Du Bois in 1895 achieves that distinction.  And of course, his dissertation, his, his thesis was the first volume in the prestigious Harvard historical series [Harvard Historical Studies], and it was 'The Suppression of the African Slave Trade to the United States' ['The Suppression of the African Slave Trade to the United States of America, 1638-1870,' W.E.B. Du Bois]  He did very well at Harvard, of course.  His grades were high.
Speaker 1: Now he, he had a, I think it was one personality that he got along with fairly well on campus, was William James.  He sort of mentored him.
Speaker 2: Well, yes.
Speaker 1: I've, I've read that, but--
Speaker 2: Yes, well, that is true.  William James, he wanted to, to major in philosophy as a matter of fact.  He did well.  But a combination of advisories came along.  James said, in effect, you know you're talent is quite impressive, but an African American philosopher will have a hard road to hoe, professionally.  And Du Bois thought hard about that and shifted to history under Albert Bushnell Hart, one of the, the great deans, early deans of the field.  But James loomed large in his emotional and intellectual life.  His blue books were fascinating when I came upon them at, at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] of all places.  His examination booklets under James were, are interesting to read, James's marginal comments saying you know, this is not clear (laughter).  This is clear but not right (laughter), that sort of thing.  That is to say, he, he could have been a first-rate philosopher.  He was involved in an extracurricular way with the famous Metaphysical Club that William James and others founded, and Du Bois was present more than once.  And that is, that speaks well for the esteem in which the faculty held him and his own ability to, to move competently and confidently amongst first-rate minds.
Story_ID: 317427
Speaker 1: He doesn't speak of many friendships while at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Curiously, William Monroe Trotter was there, a year behind Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] in the undergraduate college.  They don't seem to have interacted much at that, that time.  There, there was a, a kind of policy or rule of behavior amongst African Americans in those days, that they or we would not seek each other out, that we were able to move about in an integrated and assimilated way, and so why clump together?  And Du Bois may have had that point of view, but certainly Monroe Trotter did, as he expressed himself in, in, in such a way.  And the Trotter was, unlike Du Bois, to the matter born; he was from a very affluent background; his ancestors were notable figures in the Reconstruction and the Civil War before it.  In fact, as he swept through the Harvard yard with his scarf blowing in the wind, he looked every bit the, the, the Harvard man, the, the WASP [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant] of the day.  He gave the valedictory address in Sanders Theatre [Memorial Hall, Cambridge, Massachusetts] when he graduated.  And that was a national event.  It's hard to imagine that this young man received a kind of attention that today you would (background noise)--
Story_ID: 317428
Speaker 1: This is delivering the valedictory address.  This is Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], right?
Speaker 2: This is, yes, at, at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And, and it was, as I say, it received national attention sort of on the order of appearing on 'Oprah' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] say (laughter).  It was a, an interesting address.  It was a comment on, on Jefferson Davis.  And for an African American to pass judgment on the leader of the Confederacy was both dicey and of course, attention getting.  And it was a fine speech in which Du Bois honored the, the devotion to a warped cause of Jefferson Davis, but deplored that so much talent, and resources, and, and life had been committed to an obscene cause.  And there unanimous exultation at the conclusion of that address, and it was covered in The Nation, and The Times [The New York Times], and the Boston [Massachusetts] papers and so on.  So, he was, he should have been off and running.  But his ambition was always just at the point that many would have said well, I, I'll take my, my winnings and, and, and keep them.  I won't press my, press my luck, press my ambition.  Du Bois did, of course.  And he applied for a scholarship to study abroad, to study in Germany, Ger- a German degree was, of course, the acme of, of accomplishment in those days.  And there was a foundation, the Slater Fund [John F. Slater Fund for the Education of Freedmen].  And the Slater Fund bore the, yes, was named after a very successful merchant.  The, the president of the fund was the former president of the United States, Rutherford B. Hayes [President Rutherford Birchard Hayes], who, of course, famously presided over the dismantlement of Reconstruction.  And the, of, the Slater Fund had announced that it was going to fund the higher education of a small number of highly qualified African men--no women I think--men of color.  But when Du Bois applied the policy was in revision, and the fund, in fact, announced that it had not been able to find any qualified African American applicants.  Well, Du Bois was furious, and he wrote a barrage of letters, a blitz of letters to his Harvard professors and to distinguished men in higher education and forced the fund to reconsider, and, and indeed, it did appropriate a scholarship.  And off he went in nineteen--in 1893, what was then the Kaiser-Friedrich-Wilhelm Universitat or the University of Berlin [Humboldt University of Berlin, Berlin, Germany].  He, again, excelled, but the Slater Fund, at a critical point, refused to extend his stipend one more time, and he needed just a term in order to defend the dissertation.  He was unable to do so, and so, rather bitterly, he returned and said I had to take a Harvard degree.  And he always said that with a bit of irony in his, in his meaning.
Story_ID: 317429
Speaker 1: As I've said, that degree [from Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] eventually did in a major work of scholarship, published and his degree.  But if James [William James] had warned him that making a career as a philosopher would be challenging, it was equally (laughter) challenging to be a sociologist or historian.  And the term--
Speaker 2: How was his work received, I mean 'The Suppression of the African Slave Trade' ['The Suppression of the African Slave Trade to the United States of America, 1638-1870,' W.E.B. Du Bois]?  How was that work received by academia?
Speaker 1: It, it wa, it was, I think, generally well received.  There were some critical asides, because Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] passed judgments, indeed, moral judgments on the men who presided over the legislation that embedded slavery in the American experience.  And, and one reviewer said you know, the scholarship is sufficient, but we, we, we don't, we don't pass judgments; we, we don't have sort of obiter dicta.  But Du Bois famously said something like, "It behooves men to do the right thing at the right moment always, lest the problem become insuperable, insolvable, challenging far beyond what it would have been."  And they founders of the republic come in for hard thumps in that dissertation.  And objective scholarship of the day would have said we don't pass those judgments.
Speaker 2: Now, now--
Speaker 1: We simply--
Speaker 2: --you, do you think his critics were using a double standard based on the, you know, the, I guess the popular scholarly opinion of the slave trade, and black slavery, and the, and the, even the, the, the southern states and their split I think?  Do you think they were, they were issuing sort, sort of a double standard there, I mean?  This is a--
Speaker 1: I'm not--
Speaker 2: It's a---
Speaker 1: --sure.  I--
Speaker 2: They're calling for him to be objective and yet, and not to put any emotion in, yet and still--
Speaker 1: Right, there was a, a pretense that scholarship must be objective, quote unquote, and the name of Leopold von Ranke was usually invoked as the, the bar, the standard for that sort of thing, that you impoverished your cause, indeed, by reflecting that kind of emotional involvement in it.  You must stand back and, and speak universally about the pros and cons involved.  Now, as you canvas that literature, or the literature about slavery, or about the Civil War, or about Reconstruction, or indeed about race relations, you don't find objectivity that is certainly so.  And so in that sense, there was a double standard.  But they, they weren't being unfair in, in criticizing Du Bois for passages that really were passionate and, and stirring.  Now whether or not they would have been happier with, with those elements removed, yes I think they would have been, certainly.
Story_ID: 317430
Speaker 1: When you look at Du Bois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] early life compared to others, like Trotter [William Monroe Trotter] and I think, I think William Ferris [William Henry Ferris] went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] I think a short time--
Speaker 2: Yale.
Speaker 1: --later.  Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], okay, all right.  How does, how does he, well, how does he fare compared to the other two?  I know both of those two ended their own lives, you know, at a certain point.  But I don't, you know, Du Bois, you know, lived to ninety-three, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I'd forgot, I'd forgotten that.  Well, I, it's a good question.  I, I think what Du Bois had going for him was a centeredness that those other men you've just mentioned and many men and women lacked.  I mean it's remarkable, his equanimity and his equipoise in situations that might have de-centered him, might have flustered him, might have made him become, indeed, emotional to the point that he wasn't able to be effective.  But with rare occasion, Du Bois is always to the task psychically in situations that are objectively and subjectively stressful.  He has a confidence in himself that is remarkable indeed, if not unique.  I think of only maybe one instance when Du Bois is rattled or reveals that he's rattled to the depth of distress, and that was when he took a trip during his first year at the University of Berlin [Kaiser-Friedrich-Wilhelm Universitat; Humboldt University of Berlin, Berlin, Germany] to, to the Hanseatic cities, to Lubeck [Germany], on the Baltic Sea.  And Lubeck, of course, is an historic center.  It was the leading city of the Hanseatic League, those cities that were big on commerce and trade.  He, as he was walking through, as he walked through the town, he found himself surrounded by almost a Hitchcockian way of urchins who were gesturing at him, and jabbering, and commenting on his, his complexion, and, and he couldn't shake them.  And he writes in his diary, rather frenetically, the cruelty and the, the, the disruption of his enjoyment of, of Lubeck by, by these, these young people and says why can't they leave me alone?  That's, that expression was very, very rare.  I didn't find anything else that showed Du Bois really emotionally off, off, off key.  Now mind you, he's angry many times, as in his disappointments about funding of his enterprises, about the way in which the philanthropoids withdraw support of, of enterprises that would have served the race, as he would put it, in a, a finer, and better, higher way.  He is a stern moralist when it comes to his family and, and daughters, who disappoint him, either in the grades they bring home or their conduct.  And then in a more general sense, he passes judgment on African Americans of accomplishment who yet and still are not sufficiently invested in the enterprise of moving the race forward or who are, who fail in an appropriate generosity to the social causes.  But his, his armor is, is thick, intact, and, and so it, it, it carries him through.
Story_ID: 317431
Speaker 1: As a social scientist, I know early on maybe, somewhere around the turn of the century he wrote 'The Philadelphia Negro' [W.E.B. Du Bois]  And this is the first, I guess major sociological study or social science study by, by an African American, and though it's, it's hardly ever cited in courses on the history of social science, you know, which is I think kind of--I mean do you have a--how do you assess the importance of this work, and, and what does it mean for us now (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, 'The Philadelphia Negro,' Du Bois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] second, second book, and, and it appears, let's see, his first book is published in 1896 and the next book in 1899, so that's a good clip of product, productivity.  And 'The Philadelphia Negro' is, as you say, a foundational book study, and it is, yes, the first work of, of sociology by an African American, certainly one, one of the, that, that pretends to be social scientific.  But, and indeed, it is really, bar none, one of the first empirical studies written in this country.  There was a great deal of talk when Du Bois' book appeared, and there had been about one, again, objectivity and empiricism.  But sociology was markedly armchair stuff, still.  You think of, of course, Herbert Spencer as the great theorist spinner of, of the turn of the century, and he typified sociological scholarship.  Du Bois, of course, remarkably interviewed a thousand or more people in the 7th Ward in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in great detail to, to get the real warp and weave of their lives.  And so it's a, it's, it's a, it's really a magnificent enterprise, and it, he did it by himself.  He didn't have a committee, didn't have students, student assistant, the, the lone scholar there at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], barely recognized by and received by the faculty, and rather odd description of his, of his title.  He, but he did this solo, and it is a remarkable book.  And it's, it has been criticized in two ways of course.  One, that it is time bound for sure, but secondly, that it was elitist, that it somewhat was guilty of victim blaming as it looked at the poor.  Du Bois would enjoin them to pull themselves up by their bootstraps and do what they could do to make their lives better.  There's a bit of that, but this is written in the, in high, the high, the apogee of the Edwardian age.  He's a man of his times, even though he's a man ahead of his times.  But if you read the book carefully, it balances those, those exhort, those exhortations to middle-class values, with a clear linkage between poverty, and race, and racism.  And that, of course, is evident to us today, but in 1899, to look behind the way in which people lived, their deprived and limited lives, to hiring policies and the demographics that, of the immigrant immigration displacement of people of color who had performed well in various crafts, who now are being forced out, simple crafts like barbering, and catering, and drayman, and that sort of thing.  There was in other words a socio and economic shift going on that resulted, of course, in people's life chances being foreclosed rather, rather sharply and, and tightly, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, okay, so, Du Bois, if I understand you, he had to actually conduct all, you know, he, he had to compile his own statistics and, and information and sort through it himself?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: By himself?
Speaker 2: He did, he did.  He made these tabulations.  And it's, it, it's a work of, of, of high social science, even today; it's, it's quite admirable.
Story_ID: 317432
Speaker 1: And it's now being appreciated.  Of course, the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] has held conferences.  There is a, an impressive collection of papers devoted to 'The Philadelphia Negro' [W.E.B. Du Bois] appearing oh, maybe eight years ago, ten years ago.  And now this will interest you and, and those listening to this: I just received an email last week that Aldon Morris, a sociologist of some significance, led the fight to name the most prestigious prize of the American Sociological Association after W.E.B. Du Bois.  And so this year, that prize will be awarded for service to the, distinguished service to the, to the field of, of sociology that I gather was a hard-fought battle, Aldon Morris tells me, but they prevailed.
Speaker 2: Now that, that is significant because the, I don't, I don't if, you know, if, is it, do you know if, if Du Bois is taught in social science courses as, I mean as a, when they look at the history of the development of social science, if he's ever--
Speaker 1: Yes, indeed, because, of course, his next moment of, of significant contribution is the Atlanta, the Atlanta Studies, the thing this Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] studies.  And nothing like that had been done before, and that is, from 1899, when Du Bois moved to Atlanta University, until 1910, when he left to join the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], each year there was a conference, the Atlanta Studies Conference.  And the Atlanta Studies Conference would take an aspect of American life and African American life, a crime, morality, labor, child rearing, the professions, the church, and those books appeared steady drumbeat of those extraordinary Atlanta University studies, so that for the African American Du Bois provided a, more than a snapshot, a good biopsy of, of all the things that go to make up a, a people, those were remarkable, they were rec, they were recognized in mainstream publications.  Du Bois was applauded as a pioneering field, but he didn't get the money that these achievements should have, should have earned.  The reasons for that were, in part, that scholarship always has difficulty funding, funding itself, but there were competitors.  Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] ran also a similar enterprise, but with a very different perspective from, from those at Atlanta University.
Speaker 2: Is that, were those connected by Monroe Work [Monroe Nathan Work]?  I mean was, was--
Speaker 1: Well, Monroe Work comes later--
Speaker 2: Late, okay, all right.
Speaker 1: --but yes, indeed.  And Monroe Work would have been, we now know from his biographer, very much a Du Boisian, except that his check was soon paid by, by Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington].
Story_ID: 317433
Speaker 1: I guess we recently passed the, the anniversary of the publication of 'Souls of Black Folk' ['The Souls of Black Folk,' W.E.B. Du Bois].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The last cup, couple of years, what's your impression of souls of black, 'The Souls of Black Folk' and its place?
Speaker 2: Well, the centenary 'The Souls of Black Folk' what, what was appropriate in, in, in its--and the lavish craze accorded that, that collection of sixteen essays.  It's unique because it's the first of its kind, and so being the first, it is unique.  And it's the insight of Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] on race, American race relations, is incommensurable, it's just wonderful.  And that's a book that moves from the, the genre of sociology thinking of, of the essay on Albany, Georgia, and sharecropping to literature to do with the coming of John, say, the young man who returns from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to the South and tries to be an effective member of the community.  And his fate is to be lynched at the end.  And so there's everything in, in that little book; all the chords of the experience are, are sounded.  And of course, any great work needs two or three phrases that people regurgitate, and you're given at least two or three such phrases from that book: the, the problem of the 20th century; the problem with the color line, that is still, trips off the tongues of anyone who knows, those people who know anything about Du Bois or the famous analysis of the bifurcation, bifurcated experiences of African Americans, two souls, one an American and one a Negro trying to join those things together.
Story_ID: 317434
Speaker 1: We were talking about 'Souls of Black Folk' ['The Souls of Black Folk,' W.E.B. Du Bois] before we closed the last end.  But when you look at an early life of Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], is there any particular point that you, you know, well, you know, that you draw from looking at his early life?
Speaker 2: You know, I certainly do, but it's actually the, the, the, the later chapters that speak to me.  And, and I think that maybe as significant if not more than the, the years around the founding of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the writing of 'Souls of Black Folk.'  For a, a biographer, seeing how his protagonist handles himself as the world changes, is a major exercise.  And the world does change, and what makes people great at one moment, of course, resonates oft' times less, less well, less vibrantly as the years pass.  And so there's a dilemma, and a person can change himself or herself to keep up with the times or try to keep ahead of the times, or he or she can stick with her principles.  The world is going in the wrong direction; I'm not.  And between those extremes lies the successful negotiation of, of life, and most people fall somewhere in, in the middle, I suppose.  But great people tend either to stick with their initial successes and, and emotional, and intellectual alliances, or they transcend them.  And with Du Bois, we have a bit of both.  That is what's so fascinating about him, that every decade we have a new iteration.  There's a new Du Bois.  Now, the substratum is, is there.  Du Bois, the principled activist, the scholar, the, the man always ready to run against the grain, subsist.  But what he's running against the grain about will change.  And so we have Du Bois at the beginning of his career, parodied as an elitist, the Talented Tenth concepts say.  We have Du Bois judging in his writings on the family, that African Americans must be more resolute in overcoming the obstacles in their way.  And so, some accusations of victim blaming again adhere to Du Bois.  But then we have the Du Bois after World War II [WWII], who becomes the pariah, almost of his own people.  Nobody wants to associate with Du Bois.  Joe McCarthy [Senator Joseph McCarthy] is looking over the work of the NAACP.  Various congressional committees are summoning and subpoenaing people, and people are making great apologies for their pasts.  Think of, think of Langston Hughes who abjures much of his previous writings, so on; you would think of Paul Robeson, hounded out of his celebrity; or you think of Jackie Robinson, explaining why Robeson is wrong to say the things he says.  So in these times, Du Bois, the Communist, Du Bois, the, the Marxist, Du Bois, who opposes publicly the Marshall Plan [European Recovery Program], the, and the Cold War, civil rights of the day, scares the bejeebies out of the African American establishment, the political class--
Story_ID: 317435
Speaker 1: And yet, and he is wrongheaded in many aspects of his contrariety, but he stands as someone who is always saying, if you think we've won, if you think we've achieved things, if you think the American dream is coming to pass, then you're setting your sights too low and too, too, too parochially.  The civil rights decision of 1954 [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] is only the beginning.  It's not a charter.  It is an opportunity.  And in order to fulfill it, says he, you have to look at economics.  Well, nobody's looking much at economics, except in the American way of saying we should work hard and everybody's going to become wealthy, and you know, be patient, and that sort of thing.  Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] says no.  The very moment when the richest country in the world is saying that, that racial separate, separatism is unacceptable, at that very moment is the opportunity, indeed, to obliterate the conditions and made racial separatism a, the, the, the detriment of, of our convictions for such a long time.  So, as a biographer, you think well, this is a fascinating life to, to follow.  And then at the end of the day, it isn't clear that Du Bois' imbrications and his severe judgments on his own country were not of a far greater service than had he been on a bully pulpit saying, you know, things are moving and will keep moving and, and let's all cheer our accomplishments.  He knew that class and economics were American factors, even though we Americans have assiduously denied that we have a class consideration.  I'm after all, most recently the Democrat Party has been put on, off balance by a very clever argument on the part of Republicans that class war has been what the Democrats have done and brought to American, the American political arena, and that is to be deplored.  At the very moment when, of course, the mal-distribution of wealth in the United States now excels, exceeds that of any developed nation or, and, and is, of course, proceeding at, at a startling rate in, in, in the direction of, of inequality.  And the consequences of that are that government deprived of its tax revenues and deprived of a policy of enforcement of certain social policies has to stand aside as the rich get richer, and we say the market will take care of our social problems.  For some, that is an effective and sufficient solution to social tensions.  But for the Du Boisians, that is, indeed, not and that it could produce, in the same way that he, he condemned in his book, 'The Suppression of the African Slave Trade' ['The Suppression of the African Slave Trade to the United States of America, 1638-1870,' W.E.B. Du Bois] the failure of men to do right when they should, he would say, once again, these remarkable opportunities that this country has to handle its social and political problems have been squandered to the, to the advantage of plutocracy.
Story_ID: 317436
Speaker 1: There are couple of junctures in Du Bois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] life when he's really, like when he splits when--I can think of several, but I won't get into all of them, but, but can you tell us about his split with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] when he finally, you know, leaves NAACP?
Speaker 2: Yes, that--Du Bois at the NAACP was, there was the organization, and then there's Du Bois, and there wasn't room for both, I guess you would put it that way.  And as time passed, of course, other issues had to be privileged and prioritized.  For Du Bois, the court cases which were coming along were very important.  But he was already going beyond, or at least he, in his mind, was going beyond the, the litigation to talk about structural problems again because, of course, the Depression [Great Depression] changes the ability of the NAACP to accommodate Du Bois and, and his magazine [The Crisis].  The, and the NAACP, by 1933, is almost at Chapter 11 [Title 11, United States Bankruptcy Code].  And Du Bois is, the circulation of the magazine has, has dropped precipitously.  The cost of his staff is a burden perceived on the association.  And the role of the NAACP, at this point, is one of, of resting on its oars, as it were, and plugging the holes until the storm of economic distress passes.  Not Du Bois; for Du Bois, this is the moment when the country itself, searching for a new model, the African American must be part of that, that search and go beyond liberal economics into a strange mixture, it seemed to many people, of socialism and separatism.  And so, he proposes a kind of separate African American economy based on co- cooperatism, all of it really far too theoretical for people who are selling apples under bridges and hoping that the WPA [Works Progress Administration] and the Civilian Conservation Corps will hire them.  And Du Bois is talking about a new paradigm, and so the tensions, of course, grow.  And when, indeed, he begins to speak of the advantages of racial separation, having of course given his life, until that point, for the, the cause of integration, and they found--
Speaker 1: And in fact is a major por- opponent of Marcus Garvey, if not the, the major--
Speaker 2: Indeed, indeed.
Speaker 1: --opponent.
Speaker 2: Not to mention Booker T. Washington.  And there, we have this advocacy which strikes people as perverse and indeed, deadly dangerous, because in the United States Congress and in various state legislatures Du Bois is being quoted as an advocate of racial separation and therefore benefits under the New Deal for, based on, based on color.
Speaker 1: So where the, the demagogic pol- politicians like Theodore Bilbo [Theodore G. Bilbo] and Vardaman [James K. Vardaman] and--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: --people like that--
Speaker 2: --exactly, yes, and into the congressional record Dr. Du Bois supports our position that the New Deal should have separate, a separate tiered, tiered federal subsidies based on race and professions.  So, they--Du Bois refuses to, to change his, his rhetoric and his policies, he leaves.
Story_ID: 317437
Speaker 1: But the benefit, again, is that in returning to the academy, he produces his, his chef-d'oeuvre, his, his masterpiece, his master work, which is 'Black Reconstruction in America' ['Black Reconstruction in America: An Essay Toward a History of the Part Which Black Folk Played in the Attempt to Reconstruct Democracy in America, 1860-1880,' W.E.B. Du Bois].  And while 'The Souls of Black Folk' [W.E.B. Du Bois] is terribly important and evocative of, of the experience of people of color, it is 'Black Reconstruction' that has an impact that few books ever have.  It offers the way in which we have come to look at the Civil War and the Reconstruction period.  And so it's an extraordinary accomplishment.  And once again, the, the reception was brilliant but extreme, brilliant but overstated, or he's misunderstood Marx [Karl Marx], or this book has no place in the, in, in, in the canon.  That was a standard reaction of the, of the historical association.  And so as you will remember, it was not reviewed even in the American Historical Review.  Curiously enough, it was reviewed in the American Sociological Review, just as 'The Philadelphia Negro' [W.E.B. Du Bois] was never reviewed in the American Sociological Review, but it received (laughter) some attention in the American Historical Review, a bit of irony there that was done quite by design.  But within four or five years, C. Vann Woodward and Kenneth Stampp [Kenneth M. Stampp], and leading practitioners of, of, of the field begin to pay tribute to Du Bois for that work.
Story_ID: 317438
Speaker 1: Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] is, just to kind of wrap him up here as a per- personality, I mean I've heard many stories in these interviews of people that met Du Bois one time or another and were absolutely baffled by the behavior (laughter), where they would--one gentleman said that he, well, the former president of the Storer College [Harpers Ferry, West Virginia] and, and--
Speaker 2: That's in--
Speaker 1: --Harpers Ferry [West Virginia], yeah--
Speaker 2: --Harpers Ferry, right, yes.
Speaker 1: --yeah, now defunct.  He invited Dr. Du Bois to speak for the, it was the last commencement address.  And he thought he would talk about, you know, since he wrote a book about John Brown, he'd talk about John Brown, maybe in the founding of the Niagara Movement or something--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --or, you know.  And, and you know, he--they said Dr. Du Bois talked about Japanese economics for an hour and (laughter).  He was completely baffled.  People didn't know what he was doing.  It seems to be a strain of him being able to just close himself into himself and not really seem to be aware of what's going on around him.  Is this--did you--
Speaker 2: Yes, I, that, and that's a trait I think that comes with, with genius and, and often does not serve the cause of the genius and certainly the setting of, of an intended occasion.  But yes, the, the stories of Du Bois' perversity in, in small ways are, are abundant.  His being asked to pray at, at, at a meal and mumbling to himself.  And, and the hostess saying "Dr. Du Bois, we can't hear you."  And he said, "Madam, I am not speaking to you."  Or, the, he was, his first chapel when he, attendance when he was hired at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  And the president of Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], Florence Read [Florence M. Read], appointed by the Rockefeller Foundation to head that school, since the Rockefellers were paying for the school, asked Dr. Du Bois to lead the assembly in prayer.  And Du Bois I do not do those things, madam.  That's just quite shocking.  So, yes, he had those traits.  But you know, people rather prized them, because there's always something to talk, to dine out on with Du Bois.  You know, and he came and he was supposed to do this, and what on earth did he do?  He did something quite, quite different.  Imagine when he was the speaker for the annual meeting of the Boule, Sigma Pi Phi [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], the distinguished African American professional society in Wilberforce, Ohio, in 1948.  And I later remembered that I was there as a, as a nine-year-old with my father [John H. Lewis], and had been introduced to Du Bois at that point, and I'd forgotten.  But as I got into the research, I found myself there.  And he spoke to this assemblage of doctors, lawyers, surgeons, architects, the cream of the African American social order, the four hundred, if you will, in Galloway Chapel [Galloway Hall] on the campus of Wilberforce University [Wilberforce, Ohio].  And he told them that they had failed.  They had, they had disserved the concept of the Talented Tenth by their selfishness, by their conspicuous consumption, by their lack of charity, and that what they should do is go home and read Marx [Karl Marx], and that he now abandoned that concept of the Talented Tenth for the Guiding Hundredth.  Well, when it was over there was applause (laughter).  And as people filed out of the auditorium, Du Bois left and he sat on a bench, and people just sort of awkwardly filed away.  And they couldn't make what on earth, he, he founded us; he created the Boule, as it were; and he's really spoiled our conclave (laughter).
Story_ID: 317439
Speaker 1: So in--now Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] died in 1963 in--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in Ghana.  What, why did he--well, do, do you think that his repatriation in Ghana was a, was a natural kind of a, I guess outcome of, of his life's work?
Speaker 2: There's a logic to it, and certainly whether natural or not, I'm, I'm hesitant to say.  I, I think Du Bois' sense of himself was, was, was quite large.  And I think after his positions in the Cold War were, became so controversial, and he lost his voice in the sense that his purchase on his own group and, and the larger society was, was loosened, indeed, reduced virtually to nothing, I think he decided, I'm not going to go out in ignominy or in, invisibly; I'm going to go out with, and make statements as I do; and he thought that the Civil Rights Movement in this country would only lead to things that he thought were no big deal, really.  That is to say it would lead to a great divide amongst people of color, with those who succeeded, a small number, becoming more and more successful and believing that race was increasingly unimportant in life's chances and the great majority of people of color would remain pretty much where they were, although some outward forms of apartheid would, of course, be gone.  And that was a great pity, but that that was exactly what would happen because African Americans were buying into what James Baldwin would later call a burning house.  Well, this rhetoric is on the cusp of, of irresponsible, probably, because most people simply need to have an assurance that their lives are, are possible, and, and certainly things are better, quote unquote.  But if you think large about, and globally about issues than you can see that Du Bois might well have put the accomplishments of the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] in a context that was, that, that spoke less of, of a kind of opportunities than the, than the participants, because he thought: until the world of color begins to have a degree of solidarity and economic purchase, that is the world, the brown and black world, what happens to people in this country and to people of color will be deeply affected and limited.  And so by going to the future, as it were, Ghana, to the promise of African, Pan-Africanism and of Socialism, Du Bois thought that he would force his own people, and people in the United States, and in that controversy to think hard about options, and about possibilities, and about the insufficiencies of things that otherwise were to be applauded.  And, and indeed, he did have that impact.  And of course, to, to leave American citizenship behind, and there's controversy about, about whether or not he actually renounced his citizenship--that is the ultimate act for an American, since America exists only as a place where people deny the past and affirm the future.  And, and therefore it is a unique position to be an American.  It's--to give it up is the, the ultimate, the ultimate be, betrayal.  And Du Bois was quite prepared to say my city, my citizenship belongs to a larger, a larger polity than the United States.  And now, as the, the, the Cold War is, is over, and we can look back at Du Bois and see the American empire at the end of its rope, Du Bois' cautions, and caveats, and critiques, together with the overstatements and the absurdities, to be sure, are, are worth, are worth entertaining.
Story_ID: 317440
Speaker 1: So you would, I, I, I would guess that you would think that Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] needed to be studied probably more than he is today, do you think?
Speaker 2: Well, I think anyone who says that it's the economy, stupid, is to be studied.  The most remarkable thing about the United States, Du Bois would have said, and I think he would have been right, is that a country that is based on, on money is the very country that is least smart about understanding what it does, socially and politically.  And this is because, of course, of a commitment that Americans have to a future of individual, the individ- the possibility of individual wealth.  Every American thinks still that to the extent that he or she is not wealthy, it is because of him and her.  We still have the, the, the misappreciation of a increasingly rigged society.  And so long as that paradigm holds, yeah, it was a great chatter now about the maldistribution of wealth and about level playing fields and all that, but at the end of the day, Americans do not follow that, they don't internalize that.  And so therefore labor unions die; the role of money in medical health is allowed to loom larger and larger; higher education prices itself beyond the means of everybody, hence, this scandal about the way in which student loans are being shopped.  But all of these things, it isn't as though these were things that one could hardly do anything about.  They are things that citizens and voting could, could ameliorate, but it doesn't, it doesn't happen.  And so a Du Bois and even a little bit of Marx [Karl Marx] coming back into the curriculum is not a bad idea.  Because without the political economy, a component of citizenship, we're all doomed to bread and circuses.
Story_ID: 317441
Speaker 1: Now, your latest book is, well, yeah, yeah, 'God's Crucible: Islam and the Making of Europe' ['God's Crucible: Islam and the Making of Modern Europe, 570-1215,' David Levering Lewis] is, it's just on the cusp of publication here, and so--
Speaker 2: It is, yes.
Speaker 1: And tell, tell, tell us about that and its--
Speaker 2: Yes, it, it, I've, I explain in my, my preface why I wrote this book because many people will say well, the last time we heard the name [HistoryMaker] David Levering Lewis it had something to do with Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], or civil rights, or Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  Many people do not remember, nor should they I guess, that I've written books about other, other topics, the Dreyfus affair in France, or the scramble for Africa in the 1890s, or other things.  But when I finished Du Bois, a man who thought in terms of global implications, I had a clear anticipation that the tensions that were building in the Middle East and the rise of radical Islam were going to have an impact, a devastating impact upon American policy.  I could see, it seems obvious now, but I think I was in a small group of people who regarded the exercises in the East, in East Africa, the bombing of the two embassies and the, the large hole punched in the destroyer, the, the coal and indeed, 1991.  That was the first time the, the towers [World Trade Center, New York, New York] were shaken, that our policies in the Middle East were fueling a confrontationism that was gonna become really pretty, pretty serious.  Well, I had no desire to write about the contemporary problem, but I thought it'd be interesting to write about the impact and interaction of Islam and what becomes Europe early on in--in human history.
Story_ID: 317442
Speaker 1: So we were talking about your book, 'God's Crucible' ['God's Crucible: Islam and the Making of Europe, 570-1215,' David Levering Lewis].
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --and I thought that something like 9/11 [September 11, 2001] was impending, and so I persuaded my then publisher to draft a contract for an advance to do a book about the 8th century, when Islam moves across the Straits of Gibraltar to the Iberian Peninsula.  And on the, on the 9th of September, 2001, after appearing at what was then Laura Bush's annual book fair [National Book Festival], my wife [Ruth Ann Stewart] and flew to Morocco for the first leg of what I always do.  I not only do the, do the boxes in the libraries, but I also visit the places about which I--that are pertinent and, and the people.  And so I have reconstructed the invasion route of the, of the, of the Arabs and the Berbers from Morocco through Ceuta to--(unclear)--and up the spine.  And on the morning of, of 9/11, we were in the kasbah in Rabat [Morocco] when a young man came up speaking very bad French.  And I thought he wanted to be our guide, and I brushed him aside, but he persisted, who kept saying that buildings had been knocked down.  Not a big deal coming from New York [New York] (laughter), buildings had been knocked down, but it, it was clear that something, something catastrophic had, had transpired.  And he said come out, carry you to some Americans in the kasbah.  And we went to a house occupied by two embassy employers, employees and watched the BBC and watched the horror.  And of course, the country shut down so we couldn't have returned.  My wife wanted to get on the first plane back, said but we can't do that.  So we kept to my agenda, and we went from Fes--from Rabat to Fes [Morocco] and then up the coast.  And at some point, Ruth flew back.  She left me in Madrid [Spain], but I stayed and recreated that, that, that route, and returned, and then began the serious business of finishing the research.
Story_ID: 317443
Speaker 1: And at that point, my publisher and I, my agent, my editor and I went in different directions.  The, the book that I was writing was not the book that, that he thought he wanted.  And also, he seemed to have an attention span problem because, for medical reasons.  He was, was a progressive--multiple sclerosis was impacting his powers of concentration.  And so I lost time, thinking well, what do I do here?  I'm waiting for him to sort of pay attention.  He didn't.  To cut to the chase, my agent took the, the proposal and the book because I had begun to change it and write more to W. W. Norton [W. W. Norton & Company].  And there the publish, president of W. Drake McFeeley took the manuscript, thought it was worth acquiring, and the editor that I very much hoped to have, I think the best in the game, raved about it.  And so, the book ['God's Crucible: Islam and the Making of Europe, 570-1215,' David Levering Lewis] is done now, and it's now, as I say, a much more ambitious book.  It's no longer a book about the 8th century alone, but it ends at the, in the first decade of the 13th [century].  So the, the compass is from 570, the putative birthday of Muhammad, to the Fourth Lateran Council, presided over by Innocent III in 1215.  And it's a sweeping manuscript.  Nothing like it I think has been done because there, a number of thesis there that I work out in a kind of prose that I hope will detain people.  And it, and it's indicated by the opening chapter, which is called "The Superpowers."  And you know, people--where did Islam come from?  How did it explode like that?  And, and explanations have generally focused on something remarkable about Islam, or about Muhammad, or about the Arabs and so on.  And I don't gainsay any of that.  Muhammad is remarkable; Arabs are remarkable; and, and the, the, the, the scripture, the, the Koran [Qur'an] is, is, is an extraordinary document.  But it was only possible, Islam, because of the seven hundred year war between Rome and Persia.  And I opened the thing with the man who got it going, and there is always somebody who gets something going.  And he was the biggest real estate developer in, in the Roman Empire, Marcus Licinius Crassus.  And because he had backed Julius Caesar and Pompey, he was given the third highest rank of a trivium, and they, they gave him, they gave him Syria and Iran.  And so he marched off with seven legions.  But there had been an understanding that the Euphrates River, Persia had that side of things, and Rome stopped, you know.  So Rome had North Africa, but it would stop there.  He violated that understanding, marched over it with seven legions, and at the end of the day, none of them survived.  So that was forty thousand men and, and Marcus Licinius Crassus killed.  And the wars between the two along, fought along the Tigris [Tigris River] and Euphrates go on for seven hundred years.  They will end in six--629.  At one point it's the Roman Empire versus the Sasanian Empire, and then it becomes the Eastern Roman Empire after the split between the two empires.  And the west, of course, goes down.  And by the end of the 5th century, the Western Roman Empire is, is dead.  But the Eastern Empire, Byzantium, that you were mentioning earlier, carries on vigorously.  And the struggle between exhausts both empires.  And during the time after Justinian [Justinian I] and a remarkable shah of the Sasanian Empire, they fight a no-holds barred, unconditional war for forty years.  And at the end of the day, the Eastern Roman Empire wins, and the, and the Persian Empire is defeated.  And in that exhaustion, is created the vacuum, out of which comes the, the, those people that organized around this remarkable document by this remarkable figure.  And so the, the implosion of both the two empires is a result of self-inflicted serial war and, and explains the remarkable military successes.  And I just follow that sweep across the Negev to 711 when the seven thousand Berbers and Arabs invade.  And once again, you have an, an implosion.  You have the Visigothic Kingdom, powerful, and one battle, the, the thing collapses.  And within three years, the Iberian Peninsula is Islamized, and they don't leave for seven hundred years of course.
Story_ID: 317444
Speaker 1: So then you have an experiment in collaboration between Jews and Christians and, and Muslims, which allows for the most remarkable commercial and cultural effervescence ever to, to the visit the European continent.  Then there's European mythology that, in 732, as the Silesians came over the Pyrenees they were stopped at the foot of the Pyrenees by the leading Frank, Charles, Charles the Hammer, Charles Martel, the Battle at Poitiers [Battle of Poitiers].  But, of course, if you look at the, from the Muslim point of perspective, this was an inconsequential sidebar.  They were defeat but had every intention of coming, in larger numbers.  Not that, that the, that the caliphate in, then, Damascus [Syria], anticipated the conquest of all of Northern Europe.  What they wanted to do was to have the entire Mediterranean on both sides as part of the Muslim ecumene so that Istanbul or Constantinople [Istanbul, Turkey] would find itself completely cut off, both north and south.  And so you would then have had this, this, this Muslim empire that would have cut through the south of France and the south of Italy and the Balkans.  It's isolating.  The one thing that stood in its way of overwhelming everything that, that impregnable city-state of Constantinople.  Out of the, the victory though of Charles Martel comes the word.  A priest writing about it says the Europences [ph.] stood tall and given word then for these people.  They become the Europences, the Europeans, and increasingly they define themselves in opposition to what's over the Pyrenees.  Well, in all of this is the one guy who has to, as Stalin [Joseph Stalin] said, the bishop of Rome has not many divisions.  And there are great problems in terms of how Christianity is sorting itself out on this Euro, European continent.  And there were two versions of it, of, of what becomes Catholicism.  And one imperils the survival of the bishopric of Rome, Arianism, which has a lot to say about the divinity of Christ and the other, which becomes Orthodox Catholicism favors it.  And the only group that can support the bishop of Rome is that family that stood tall at, at the Pyrenees. And the collaboration between the two of them grows until, indeed, the papacy invests them with the power that becomes almost mystical and invents at a wonderful moment the greatest forgery in history, the donation of Constantine, which is that as Constantine left and built his city, he gave to Peter's successor, the bishop of Rome, the custodianship of the West.  Now this was invented by the Pope as he came across the, the Alps, the first time he'd ever done that, and comes to a place that no longer exists in France, and tells Pepin I: you are now going to be the successor to everybody, and then you're going to serve our interests because here's the donation of Constantine.  Well, this is powerful stuff for forming the sense of the European sense of self.
Story_ID: 317445
Speaker 1: And the next drama will be the invasion of, the attempted invasion of Al-Andalus by Charlemagne, Charles the Great, which fails miserably in the Pyrenees.  And out of that comes something that every, every schoolboy used to learn in Europe and, and even in the United States, 'The Song of Roland,' when Roland is bushwhacked at the top of the Pyrenees, supposedly by the Saracens.  Well, there are no Saracens there.  They were Basque.  But, as it was litera- as it was put, put into literature, it became the mighty standoff between a Christian knight and the Saracens.  And so then we get the ideology of us versus them really being deeply embedded.  But meanwhile, what has happened to the Jihad beyond the Pyrenees?  It would have continued, as I said, except that the, in 740, the Wyad [ph.] Empire or the Arab Empire, the, the Umay [Umayyad Caliphate] was shaken from the Negev to Northeastern Iran by a revolution, which overthrew everything.  In other words, Shia, a Shia movement was responsible for the disestablishment of the three--250-year-old Umayyad Caliphate and the center of Islam then moves from Damascus to a new city created overnight, Baghdad, and a Abbasid Caliphate, not Shia, but Shia is involved in this. And so the shift in the focus of the, the empire, much farther south, leaves the Arabs and the Berbers on the Iberian Peninsula with the, the necessity of being moderate.  And so you get Islam, a curious kind of modernizing Islam there, and that modernizing Islam, though they no longer will have the force to go over the Pyrenees in numbers; they go over in knowledge.  And, and so that's, that's the story I developed.
Story_ID: 317446
Speaker 1: Now, how did you become interested in the, this?  Was it the contemporary politics (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I became really through the, the book I wrote called 'The Race to Fashoda: European Colonialism and African Resistance in the Scramble for Africa' [David Levering Lewis].  And to do that book I went one summer to Djibouti, Ethiopia, Egypt, and the Sudan, and Turkey.  And I lived in the Sudan for a month at the university and at the archives there.  The British had left a wonderful archive from the 19th century because their equivalent of special forces were, they were all like T.E. Lawrence.  They would color their skin dark, put on burnoose, speak Arabic, and infiltrate.  And all these documents were gathering dusk, dust at the University of Khartoum [Khartoum, Sudan], and so it was wonderful to read them.  And so I did that, and got to know a lot of the people at the university, and left and went on to Egypt and then to Turkey, had a bad experience in Turkey.  Well, a year later, that regime, the government of the Sudan, which is secular with lovely women wearing blue jeans, tight-fitting blue jeans at the university, and the professors knocking back beers and whiskey, the, the Islamist who had stopped--what, what was the book I was writing about?  I was writing about, of course, the radical Islam under the Mahdi that had stopped the British Empire's design--
Speaker 1: Right, right--
Speaker 2: --of the--
Speaker 1: --that's right.
Speaker 2: --Great Cape to Cairo rail connection [Cape to Cairo Railway]--
Speaker 1: And it--
Speaker 2: --and it really stopped the Brits for ten years, General Gordon [Charles George Gordon] and all that sort of stuff.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then we have Kitchener [Herbert Kitchener] and what have you, stories pretty well known because Charlton Heston had a good part.  But, but it stopped the greatest empire in the world for more than ten years in its tracks.  And so, when I left, it occurred to me that next year, when the descendants of that movement took over the Sudan, that here we were with a radical Islam that was going to present the same challenge to the, the great empire of the 21st century and the 20th century, the United States.  And it was that experience in one short moment that interesting, very civilized country, has Sharia the women are in bed sheets now.  They poured all the booze into the Blue Nile ceremonially and all that sort of stuff, and so I thought that sensitized me to, to think about Islam and modernity.  So that's, that, that's it.
Story_ID: 317447
Speaker 1: The book ['God's Crucible: Islam and the Making of Europe, 570-1215,' David Levering Lewis] ends with the, the call by Pope Innocent [Innocent III] for the Crusades.
Speaker 2: Right, what, there's a remarkable--the presence of Islam in, in Spain might have gone on indefinitely.  It's an interesting story.  Internal divisions sabotaged them.  The caliphate, they created a new caliphate, and for, until 1031 each, each heir succeeded the other in the same family.  But willy-nilly, we get a caliph [Al-Hakam II] who spends all of his time in the library.  They created the greatest library in Europe.  It had 400,000 volumes.  The largest library in Europe in, in the, in the 9th century had 800 volumes in vellum.  The Arabs also bought paper to, to Europe and, and mass produced paper and sativa.  So, this caliph spent his time in intellectual pursuits.  And his son [Hisham II] was really one quite young when he died and had grown up in the harem inexperienced, had led nothing, no military campaigns.  And so he was handled by powerful people, and one of them became a general [sic.] and led the, the, the caliphate, caliph armies north into Leon, Castile, Galicia, and Navarra, and they just wiped out the Christians in the far north because all of the Arabs conquered almost all of Liberia.  Up at the top, of the north, was just the flames of, of little statelets that survived.  And so they kept wiping them out; they kept disestablishing them.  They played one against the other and all that sort of stuff.  But this guy, in order to maintain his power, had to have one military victory after another, after all, he was illegitimate.  The caliph was there, and they just let him in the, in the harem, and then they fed him stuff, and you know.  And he symbolized stuff, but he was really impotent.  But this man, Al-Mansur, had to have one, and he continued year after year after year after year.  But what happened was, it forced the small statelets of the north to begin to coalesce.  And, and so, and when he died, his successor [Abd al-Malik Al-Muzaffar] was soon poisoned by his own brother [Abd al-Rahman Sanchuelo], and so the military initiative flipped and with it, the caliphate was destroyed because the am, the ambition of the usurping family was to claim that it should inherit the caliphate.  Well, I mean this caliphate descended unbroken from Muhammad, and so this guy is saying now my family is gonna take over, well, so, up for grabs.  And so Al-Andalus imploded into twenty-six city states, Seville [Seville, Spain], Cordoba [Cordoba, Spain], Granada [Granada, Spain], Murcia [Murcia, Spain], so on and so forth.  And so, as the united, Catholics, Leon Castile [Castile and Leon], under Ferdinand [Ferdinand I] and then Alfonso VI, as they begin moving south, they, they, they, they defeat these people.  But in 1085 Toledo falls.  It's occupied by Alfonso VI, and the, the, the, the flow of, of history is clear.  But the guy who's running Seville, Al Mu'tamid, who is a very able guy who writes wonderful poetry, he crosses this Gibraltar Straits [Strait of Gibraltar] and appeals to the Berbers to save the situation.  And it so happens that that the Berbers have undergone one of their Shiite effulgences [ph.], couragism [ph.], and something called the maraboutism or the al-Marabouts come, and they come over in huge numbers, slapped the Spanish back, and reverse the whole thing.  But you think the Arabs of Al-Andalus are happy?  No, these guys are fanatics.  You know, by this time, this is the most sophisticated culture perhaps in the world.  It's urban, it's, it's commercially vibrant but socially decadent in many ways.  They don't fight, and (laughter) come these guys, and they're so unhappy that they begin to say, to collaborate with the Christians again.  They said we know you guys (laughter).  We don't know these, these, these rubes from, from Marrakesh, at--
Speaker 1: Are they the more fundamental--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah, for fundamental and more--
Speaker 2: They, they would be Al-Qaeda, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Story_ID: 317448
Speaker 1: Well, but there's an even more fundamental, this group coming behind them.  So behind the al-Marabouts come the--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear), and they destroyed the al-Marabouts, and they cross over and stop everything.  But, by this time, Christian Europe has begun to help out the people in the north.  The papacy has begun to direct the operation rather smartly.  Funds have begun to flow.  And after 1096, of course, the First Crusade has happened.  And so now that becomes part of the crusadings fear.  And once Innocent III comes along, this genius of, of a pope who dominates secular rulers the ideology becomes quite potent, and it is matched with steel and leather and, and cavalry.  And so, in, in 1213 comes the first really great battle between Christians and Muslims.  All the others had been mixed battles.  Sometimes the Christians were with the Moors.  Sometimes the Moors were with the Christians.  You'll think of El Cid.  You know, he, he fought with whoever paid his way, he'd fight.  But his battle is one in which with the papal banner, with a hundred thousand Christians they face the black banner of the Almohads at a place called Los Navas de Tolosa, and there the Christians win, and that's it.  And so from that point on, in 1232 Cordoba is occupied.  By 1280 Seville is occupied, and so then we move onto the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that's really the point of decline, rather than--I know a lot, lot of people talk about the 1490--
Speaker 1: Yes, but it's really that--
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 1: --it's, it's 1215, when Innocent says that henceforth, Jews must dress in a certain way.  Islam is the devil, and we must purify our, our, our realm.
Speaker 2: So religion in, in the West becomes more polarized at that point I guess with the--
Speaker 1: Indeed, indeed.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, the, the relationship is that the, the Muslim world is to Islam, in my story, as today Islam is to the, the West, that is the sophistication, the commercial aptitudes, the science, the culture is so far ahead, I say boldly that it cost Europe 350 extra years of development to get to the point it reached then that it could have had 350 years earlier, had, had the Battle of Poitiers gone the other way.  And that'll be quite controversial I suppose.
Story_ID: 317449
Speaker 1: I have to ask you about this.  I have to ask you about the Moors, you know, they're, in our community, in the black community, the Moors have been identified as an African group that conquered Europe at a certain in time.  And people often ask who were the Moors and you know, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, they were really Semitic.  They, they were not Negro.  They were Negroid; they were Semitic; they were Arabs; and they were Berbers.  And the Berbers don't get the play they deserve, but the Berbers were the, were the fighting arm after a point of, of the expansion of Islam.  And Berbers, of course, are ethnically quite puzzling.  They may, they may be related to the Finns.  They are blond and blue-eyed, you know, and so, so they're not, they're not African, except in terms of, of being located there.  So it's not a, a, it's not an African in the sense of sub-Saharan phenomenon, although to be sure, many, many of the participants in this grand enterprise are from Chad and from Sudan and what have you.  But no, the essence of it is it's a, the Arabs are Semites, and, and that's, that's, that's the source of it, or they're Persians, and the Persians, of course, are, they are Aryans.
Story_ID: 317450
Speaker 1: You are a part of several historical associations.  You've been the president of the, is, is that the American Historical Society?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I served one year.  You can only serve a year. We have term limits for the society, the American Historians [Organization of American Historians], and several years ago I was president.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So nobody can establish a dynasty there (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you, you teach--you were telling me earlier you taught like one class per semester at, at--
Speaker 2: Right, I do a freshman--
Speaker 1: --NYU [New York University, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: --honors seminar, and I very much like that in the first semester.  And then second semester I do a graduate something.  I did a graduate colloquium last semester, or rather semester before last, called African American Intellectual History from the Victorians to the Present, which I think went, went well.  But I will not, I only teach next year the freshman honors seminar, and then I will be, my wife [Ruth Ann Stewart] and I will be in Berlin [Germany].  For the spring semester, I have a residential fellowship at the American Academy in Berlin [Berlin, Germany].  And we're really looking forward to that because we were in Berlin three years ago.  And to my way of thinking, Berlin is the most exciting city on, on the continent.  What's happening there is just startling in terms of the way the city is reinventing itself socially and of course architecturally, so.  And then it's central in terms of travel, and we intend to do a fair amount of traveling on the continent, and then I will retire.
Story_ID: 317451
Speaker 1: We always ask this question: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, the standard answer I suppose is the glass is partly filled and largely empty and which way is the fluid going?  I'm really not, not very hopeful for the group as a whole because of the things I was talking about rather murkily earlier probably, and that is, we've embedded poverty so deeply now amongst people of color that I can't see any way in which it would change percentages largely.  And increasingly more and more people, irrespective of race, seem contended to say, to point to the extraordinary successes, therefore, Senator Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] becomes in many ways a solution to lots, as Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] most certainly--(unclear)--has Condoleezza Rice, or as the great successes in, in the corporate sector and, and all that, or in the entertainment industry, to be sure.  And all that, who, who would begrudge this?  But statistically, it is miniscule, and it seems really not to have much synergy for the rest of the, for, for the great majority.  And I see nothing on the table or nothing that is being thought to be placed on the table that will alter this situation, especially because of our integration policy.  I am not one of the African Americans who thinks that one should simply open the gates to the flow from Mexico and, and Latin America.  And, and this seems to me to make, it makes no sense to do this if people of ordinary means and ordinary talents expect to have a living.  They're not gonna get it if they can always be undercut by people who don't speak the language (laughter) or are here illegally who can be victimized if they, you know, say anything.  It's just absurd.  And of course, the business community welcomes this, but it's puzzling that not only are the Democrats myopic about this, but the institutions in black America that should think about this apparently don't at all.  So, I, that, that gives me pause.  But it goes deeper than that.  We, we have gender issue that, once again, everybody acknowledges and then closes the situation.  And no group that loses its male population by 60 percent is really gonna be around in any significant way.  And we know that most black males now are in prison.  And that, it has all sorts of consequences.  AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] is indirectly related to that, this whole phenomenon on the, of homosexuality in the black community, the black male community, is in large part drive by (laughter) having to stay in prison for long periods of time; none, no black males are graduating from college, getting there.  I mean the figures are really, when one bandies around terms like genocide, I think it's almost appropriate to apply them to what, what is happening.  And my issue here is not to a lot blame to organizations or to the business community, as such.  It is simply it seems to me to say that the, the raw numbers tell you something that you can't step back from.  You hear African American women who are somewhat more successful can't find partners, you know.  Well, well, we can cross over the line perhaps, yes.  Well, the same thing is happening, of course, in the (laughter) larger community as well.  So it's a society that really when it turns off its television sets, you know, and you say now really what's the shape of things?  It looks appalling, it really does.
Story_ID: 317452
Speaker 1: And the larger issue is, of course, that the, the way in which the major issues have been outsourced of health, and housing, and education, and, and, and the rest of it.  So I'm not really very optimistic at all.  I, I wish, I wish I could be.  On the other hand, I'm somehow not, not, not depressed, because I'd only be depressed if I thought we could do something about it, and we weren't.  I think we can't do anything about it, and therefore why should I be depressed?  I think, I think that people like to say, you know, well, what happened to people like Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], and James Weldon Johnson, and Walter White, and Lester Granger [Lester Blackwell Granger], and Mary Bethune [Mary McLeod Bethune], and so on?  And of course, they, they then idealize and romanticize these people understandably.  But it, it is true that at one point there was a custodianship of the group, at least rhetorically, that is absence.  I suppose you could say there is, there is--the, the man who's done the contract, black America.
Speaker 2: Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley.
Speaker 1: Kevin--Tavis Smiley, he articulates these things. But as, as I've watched those, those seminar symposia, it seems that people come really to have their moment before the camera.  And each person gets more articulate and rhetorical than the next, and then we all, we all wait for a Cornel West.  And we know that he's going to trump everybody, unless it's, it's dear Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton].  And so there's something, there's something entertain, entertain, performance about it.  It doesn't, doesn't advance the, the situation.  So, I think, as I say, the future is not encouraging, that along class lines, there are some wonderful successes though.
Story_ID: 317453
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could do it?
Speaker 2: I'm sure I, I should say yes, because it would suggest that I learned nothing if I said no.  Does anything readily come to mind?  I, I don't think so professionally.  I've made a number of choices that would have taken me to different places.  I might have, I might have taken the offer from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or taken the offer from Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], but I have no regrets.  In fact, if I had then I would have taken the offer.  So, I suppose when it comes to my family, I have cost them.  I had a previous wife [Sharon Siskind Lewis] and a family by that wife, and some of my children have--one of my children has not done well, and I, I live in great concern about his welfare.  He lives in California, and I suspect that if I had written one less book or that I would have been more attentive to the needs of, of the family, I, to some extent, I made a choice.  They haven't done so badly, and indeed, my daughter [Allison Lewis] has just made me a granddaughter, and that really rejoices me.  But there are wounds and things that, that, that they will remember, as kids do.  So, I might maybe have written one less book and have been closer to my kids at a time when they really--and also, of course, that marriage ended in divorce, which was, I don't think attributable to writing books so much, but in any case, that's part of the story.
Story_ID: 317454
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope I'm still writing my legacy.  I would hope that I will be appreciated as someone who wrote some critical books or critically commented on, on issues that, that matter.  One of the reasons for writing this book ['God's Crucible: Islam and the Making of Europe, 570-1215,' David Levering Lewis], it goes beyond the other explanations given.  I might have done something else for sure, and I might have--but I thought of--it's time also for those of us who are so well-credentialed.  I mean you think of my degrees, they just go on and on and on.  I've had a splendid education, but I can think of lots of people who have had as splendid a passage through the academy.  But I don't think that we have broken out of the box we need to get out of.  We need to begin to write about things that of course are relevant to a specific experience, but make that specific experience really relevant by looking at it in a larger context.  And so a book by an African American scholar on Islam at this time from a perspective of someone who is very well advantaged in this society, but never for one moment thinks that he should take it, take for granted his position in the society, and therefore will always have an insider/outsider sensitivity.  Such a person it seems to me can, can make a contribution.  And I'd like to see more of, of young scholars of color resisting the business of being public intellectuals and darting about explaining the significance of nigger or writing a book about hip hop, say.  People can write the books, but if, if we would really become a little more serious, and rewards are being serious, can be really quite considerable if, if one does it well.  I'm not suggesting that one go into a hole and labor and then one's, one's product is of value perhaps in a seminar once.  No, no, if one writes well, and thinks well, and, and takes the risk of wanting to comment, people want to hear, and that serves us all quite well.
Story_ID: 317455
Speaker 1: Now you told us a little bit about your family, but you're, you're married now, right, and you, you have children by a previous, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Yes, that, that's it.  I have a stepdaughter [Allegra Stewart] by this marriage--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who (laughter) keeps us very busy.  Yep, the, I just lost my one surviving half-brother.  He died two days ago, and I'm going to his funeral Friday.  I much and loved the guy.  He was much older than I, but my father [John H. Lewis] had two families.  His first wife [Eva Walker Lewis] died, and so there were, and there were four brothers, three brothers and sister.  They're all gone now.  So, the family in Atlanta [Georgia] has extinguished; there's nobody left.  And that will be the next thing I do after the next thing I do.  And the next thing after the next thing I do is to do some family history.  I, if, if, if I still have my marbles, I think I, I need to do that and before every trace is gone.  As I suspected it pretty well, the well has dried up there, but there are a few clues about, about the family.
Story_ID: 317456
Speaker 1: Is there another book idea that's itching to come out that--
Speaker 2: Well, I have to have a project, to keep myself honest in Berlin [Germany].  And what I propose to do, and I may do it, I think probably I will, is to write a smallish book which combines the Harlem Renaissance, about which I've written, with the Weimar Republic because they occupy the same time span.  They come on at the same time, 1919, and they're gone in the early 1930s.  And both are really the attempts of outsiders to change history through culture and politics, Jews and, and homosexuals in Weimar, African Americans and writers in this country.  And I think it would be an interesting twinning of that.
Story_ID: 317457
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't mentioned or asked we think, you think you need, we need to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: You asked me I think on our first meeting about pets or something.  And I remembered later that I had had a, a dog named Butch (laughter).  And I don't know why I thought about it, and I said that dog meant so much to me, why didn't I mention Butch?  But I, I grew up in, started growing up in Little Rock, Arkansas, and we had to leave over a civil rights issue.  And I'm going back to Little Rock in September to give the keynote at the Clinton Library [William J. Clinton Presidential Library and Museum, Little Rock, Arkansas] to do with the fiftieth anniversary of Central High [Central High School, Little Rock, Arkansas].  And so I've been thinking a little bit about Little Rock.  But when we left Little Rock, we drove, as you did in those days, to Ohio.  And we brought Butch, and Butch got out of the car.  And of course, I was hysterical, and we had to find Butch.  And my father [John H. Lewis] said I've got to going; we've got to go; we can't stop for the goddamn dog.  But we did, and we (laughter) searched for the dog in the Ozarks, and we found the dog, and we carried on, and so (unclear)--
Speaker 1: That's quite a story.
Speaker 2: So I would have felt I couldn't make the great trip from North--from South to North without my dog (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, the, the last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, I leave that to the re- rememberers, yep (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, well, the hist- the rememberers are the historians, and you're certainly a significant one of them.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: No, thank you.  It's been (laughter), been good.
