Story_ID: 534577
Speaker 1: This morning we're going to be interviewing our HistoryMaker, Mr. Harry Lennix [HistoryMaker Harry J. Lennix].  The videographer is Scott Stearns, and the interviewer, I'm [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock. Let me begin, first of all, thank you very much for agreeing to do this, and let me begin by asking you to give us your full name and to spell your name for us.
Speaker 2: My full name is Harry Joseph Lennix, III.  H-A-R-R-Y, J-O-S-E-P-H, L-E-N-N-I-X.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Good enough.  And today's date?  First of all, where are we?
Speaker 2: We are currently in Los Angeles [California] in my home, and today's date is April 1, 2006.
Story_ID: 534578
Speaker 1: I'm going to begin by asking you five People magazine questions that are supposed to relax you.  Of course, you're a seasoned veteran at this, so--
Speaker 2: It's like a polygraph test, you're getting, getting prepped for a polygraph test (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Exactly.  Let me ask, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color these days is burgundy, and you can tell by the, my walls here--but yeah, burgundy.  And second, a close second, is gold, a golden sort of orange thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That doesn't have anything to do with that being USC's [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] colors?
Speaker 2: No, no, it's just coincidental.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well, my favorite type of food is probably Italian food, followed very closely by sushi, and Japanese cuisine.  Of the Italian food, my favorite is probably lamb, a roast lamb cooked in the oven, in a brick oven, (speaking Italian) forno a legno, montone, I'm sorry, and they cook it, it's a (speaking Italian) abbacchio cacciatore.  So, that's my favorite dish.  It's very simple, just a little bit of pepper and olive oil, and put it in a brick oven, (speaking Italian) forno montone, and then you let it cook up. It's pretty great.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Autumn.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Without question.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: Well, it depends.  For what purpose--I think just to relax, my favorite vacation spot is probably a place like Cancun, Mexico.  For a bit of culture and a bit of adventure, I prefer a place like Sydney, Australia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or anyplace in Australia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And finally, your favorite phrase, or your favorite saying?
Speaker 2: I heard one the other day which I'm quite fond of.  It's in Spanish, it's actually, (speaking Spanish) "Vale mas, poco con ganas que mucho, sin ser querido."  That is, "It is worth more to have a little bit of something that you love--that is worth something, than a lot of something that means nothing to you."
Speaker 1: That's an excellent saying.  Okay, let's get down to, I wanted to get your date of birth and your place of birth.
Speaker 2: My date of birth is November 16, 1964.  I was born in Chicago, Illinois, I believe at Mercy Hospital [Mercy Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 534579
Speaker 1: I'm going to try to take you back to before you were born, some of the stories that you may have heard from your mother or your father [Harry Lennix II], to see how far back we can go to, in a generation, or two generations, with your mother's family and then back on your father's side.  First, we'll begin by, lets, give me your mother's full name and spell that for me, too.
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Lillian [Lillian Vines Lennix], L-I-L-L-I-A-N, Cleo, C-L-E-O, Lennix, L-E-N-N-I-X.  She was, her maiden name is Vines.
Speaker 1: V-I-N-E-S?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And her date of birth?
Speaker 2: It's January 1, 1924.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she is a New Year's baby (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A New Year's baby.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And, her place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Halifax County, North Carolina, in a place called Palmyra [North Carolina], I believe.
Speaker 1: Good.  And, let's deal with your mother.  How far back can you take us in her family from stories that she may have shared with you?
Speaker 2: She can remember quite a bit.  I asked her a number of questions in the past, and recently, yesterday, she can remember that she had a grandfather [sic. great-grandfather] who had been a slave.  And he was African, actually, so he was probably bought from Africa when he was a younger boy.  And he was quite proficient, she said, with roots and with medicinal purposes of plants and so forth, and could fix just about anything, burns, bites, scabs, illnesses of many different kinds.  That was on her mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it was her innate, innate grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: My, it would have been my great-great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Great-great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: Right. Yeah, her grandfather, on my mom's side.  And then she also remembers her grandfather from her father's side having owned a grocery store.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And him being a rather stingy, ill-tempered fellow, but who from time to time would give his son, her father [James Vines], candies and treats to bring back to the children.  So, that was obviously a pretty remarkable thing for a black man in that part of the country during that time, to be a proprietor of something. So, she remembers that.  She also remembers that her grandmother had a maiden name and she was a very fair-skinned, white looking woman.  Her maiden name, I believe was Jordan [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember what her first name was?
Speaker 2: No.  But my grandmother's maiden name was Owens, so she must have married an Owens at some point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she married my grandfather, she became a Vines.  So, she remembers quite a bit back there.  My mother is one of thirteen children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two of her brothers died during the Second World War [World War II, WWII].  Her father had fought in the First World War [World War I, WWI].
Speaker 1: Well, let's go back and try to put some timelines for your great-great-grandfather, I'm sure, the African.   And we assume that we are probably talking in the 1850s or maybe the 1840s?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't have a whole lot of information about him.  She has sketchy memories about him, but I would imagine that since her mother was born in 1904, her father was born in, I believe 1895 or 1896.  And that the mother before that would probably have been, my mother's mother, that is to say, her earliest date of birth probably--even though my mother's mother got married when she was thirteen and had her first child when she was thirteen or fourteen--let's say we go back a generation, and that woman would have been, oh say born, I would say, in about 1884 or so.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: It is conceivable that she married a much older man, or somebody that was born into slavery, depending on when she got married, of course, and if that is indeed the date of her birth.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It's conceivable that she was born in the 1870s or so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, slavery having ended in essentially in 1868 or 1869 [sic. 1865], he must have been born sometime like in the late 1850s or something.
Speaker 1: Eighteen fifties [1850s], yeah, yeah--brought to this country.  Okay.  Any names that your mother may have shared with you?
Speaker 2: No, just the Jordans, the Owens.  I know my grandmother's name was Addie Owens [Addie Owens Vines], her maiden name.  I don't know her mother's name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But your grandmother on your mother's side was Addie Owens?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 534580
Speaker 1: Let's take a look at your father's side.  Let's get his name first, his full name.
Speaker 2: His full name is Harry Joseph Lennix, Jr. [Harry Lennix II], same spelling, just--
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay, and how far back are you aware on your father's side, does the family memories go, or history?
Speaker 2: It goes back a fairly long time.  There were two different branches.  He was born in LaPlace, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that, please?
Speaker 2: Yeah, L-A-capital P-L-A-C-E, the place, it's French for the place (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, LaPlace, Louisiana?
Speaker 2: LaPlace, Louisiana. And--
Speaker 1: Date of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth is January 25, 1925.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother [Lillian Vines Lennix] robbed the cradle, it turns out. (Laughter) By about a year.  So, he was born there as the oldest of five children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was his brother Louieroy [Louieroy Lennix], and his sister Marjorie [Marjorie Lennix], and a sister [Evelyn Lennix]--I can't remember now.
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: I can't--and another brother, Roland [Roland Lennix].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was the youngest.  Uncle Babe, they called him, we called him.  And most of them are still down in Louisiana. In any event--
Speaker 1: Oh okay. They're still alive? Okay.
Speaker 2: Many of them, yeah.  He was born, his father was a cooper.  He used to make barrels, you know, so all along the ocean front.  He was born in 1892, my father's father, Harry I [Harry Lennix].
Speaker 1: Eighteen ninety-two [1892].
Speaker 2: And his father before him--
Speaker 1: Now you say his father was a cooper?
Speaker 2: A cooper (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) His first name was cooper?
Speaker 2: No, his father, that was his occupation.
Speaker 1: Oh, oh. A cooper.
Speaker 2: He was a cooper, and he was also an amateur jazz trombonist from the Louisiana area, and was in a band, I know.  And he was given to the drink from what I understand.  And his wife, my father's mother's name was Florence Victor [Florence Victor Lennix], V-I-C-T-O-R.  There are a number of Victors still in that region of Louisiana, that's St. John the Baptist Parish in Louisiana.  And the legacy of my name, for example, we believe, is from the Lenni Lenape tribe of Delaware Indians [Native Americans], which had moved down to Louisiana at a certain point, and mixed with the Creoles and the African slaves or descendants of Africans who were slaves at the time on the sugar cane plantation.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: They still eat a form of weed that grows up around the sugarcane called pepper grass.  My Aunt Nita [ph.] who my Uncle Louieroy was married to until he died, she's now re-married.  She still cooks pepper grass.  But so, the Victors are all down there still.  And the Lennix, there are still a lot of Lennix's there.
Speaker 1: How do you consume the pepper grass?  I mean, you just boil it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You cook it like a green.
Speaker 1: Like a green?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's like a green.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You put it in a pot, you boil it and it's supposedly a pretty flavorful grass.  It has a strong but pleasant flavor.  I've never had it, but my grandmother--you can go and pick it right now, for example.  It's all over all the time because it grows up around the sugarcane.  So, you know, my father's father, cooper, jazz trombonist and his father before him, was named Isaac Lennix. And he was--
Speaker 1: Isaac Lennix, okay.
Speaker 2: And he was a teacher.  Some legends says that he was a professor.  And I would imagine that his date of birth must have been around, probably right around Reconstruction, or just before, like 1862 or 1865.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Something along those lines.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of his wife [Mary Lennix], I don't know very much, but of my grandfather's wife, we know a little bit more--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Florence Victor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, on Isaac Lennix's wife we don't have any information?
Speaker 2: Not a whole lot, no.
Speaker 1: The best guess, let's say when you say Reconstruction, I guess you're really getting into the 19- 1870s?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Story_ID: 534581
Speaker 1: Any other stories that your family may have shared with you about what life was like?  Any eventful things that took place that impacted them in some sort of way?  And then, I want to visit, by the way, the Indian tribe [Lenni Lenape] migrating to Louisiana too. Visit that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Yes, I think there was, there are a number of stories.  But, on my father's [Harry Lennix II] side, for example, I know that the town of LaPlace [Louisiana], or at least that county, St. John the Baptist county [St. John the Baptist Parish, Louisiana], was at a given time, it was very difficult to find the history on this, but my cousin is a librarian.  Her name is Crystal Lennix Henry [ph.].  She found out that it was actually the site of the largest and most violent slave rebellion [German Coast Uprising of 1811] in the United States history.  It was unsuccessful.  The people who were caught were beheaded, as an, I guess as an example for those were presumed to try to fight for their freedom.  But, as you may be well aware, the sugarcane plantations were the most abhorrent, difficult, stressful, back-breaking of all the plantations.  My mother [Lillian Vines Lennix], who grew up in and around North Carolina and Virginia, picked cotton.  She was at one point capable of picking two hundred barrels of cotton--two hundred pounds of cotton, a day.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And she told me yesterday, "If you could pick two hundred pounds of cotton, you could pick cotton anywhere."  And my mother's not a large woman, you know.  Now, she's somewhat stout, she's eighty-two.  But, you know, I just imagined that her father [James Vines] who was a farmer and raised tobacco and cotton and corn and grew all these things and also was the custodian of the school, I can imagine this little girl, you know, out there picking all that cotton.  But even that was less troublesome than the sugarcane plantations.  People were given to amputating parts of their bodies.  Those plantations down there were lavish, in the French tradition, obviously, to some extent, and in the Spanish tradition, where labor--cheap labor and indentured servitude was not uncommon in Spain, and certainly in Portugal. Some of those slave colonies that had existed there were, you know, blights on the history of all of those countries, not just ours, which is obvious enough. But so, I know that there was a large waterway in that part of the country.  They had the St. Johns River, that my family still does a lot of fishing.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: They're quite adept at crabbing and things like that.  My cousins tell a story about my uncle making him go out and catch crabs, you know.  And there's a way that you hold them and there's--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, they're really good with their hands.  And they're actually geniuses with their hands.  They could build any building from the ground up, without having studied any form of architecture or contracting.  They just know.  I don't have that proficiency, but that's what the Lennix's were able to do, and I would imagine that it stems from--
Speaker 1: They had to, because you know, they had to make a living (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. They had to make a living.
Speaker 1: In a very, very hard land.
Story_ID: 534582
Speaker 1: Let me just try to put a date, when the Delaware Indians [Lenni Lenape tribe] moved to Louisiana.
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do we have any sense of a date, or around what date we're talking about?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't know that that can be known.  I would imagine, though, something feels right about the year 1820 or so.  And why that feels right, I don't know.  But you know, the Delaware Indians [Native Americans] were all in association with William Penn.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Delaware, Pennsylvania, all those people.  There are a lot--even the Mardi Gras now--a large part of that whole celebration is Indian, or Native American in nature.  You know, you see pitch-black people in full Indian regalia, because they have ties to the Native American community down there.  My guess is that that has always been the case.  My grandfather, Harry I [Harry Lennix], who as I said, was known to be something of a roustabout and a drinker, probably had the same sort of allergic reaction that Native Americans have to alcohol--distilled spirits.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Many of them have, I think it was--it changed his, it altered his behavior, and that was probably due to the large percentage of Native American blood.  I would imagine also that that's maybe true of Africans, but it's something of a cliche that it's considered fire water, and that it has a negative impact on people.  I don't think he drank a lot, or all that frequently, but when he did--
Speaker 1: It affected his--
Speaker 2: The story is, the stories are that it affected his behavior.  So, I would say that he probably had a goodly percentage of Native American blood.  And Florence Victor [Florence Victor Lennix] probably did as well.  What percentage, I don't know.  I would imagine also that the descendants of African slaves is also a huge percentage of that, and then there's probably not a little bit of miscegenation that went on, certainly on my mother's [Lillian Vines Lennix] side.  So, God knows.  I would say sometime late, early 1800s is my guess that the Indians and the Natives of the Lenni Lenape tribe, which means men among men, by the way, came down and mixed in with the, with the Africans.
Story_ID: 534583
Speaker 1: Now, any sense, and again, I know this would be a good guestimate, but any sense of where this slave rebellion [German Coast Uprising of 1811]--what time of, when the slave rebellion took place?
Speaker 2: There must have been, well it's still on the records, but nobody ever reports it.  So, I'm not sure.  My guess would be the 1830s or 1840s.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Any time before that, you know, you'd be dealing with other wars that were going on, and I don't think that that is very likely that it happened in the 1700s.  I think it must have been early 1800s.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  The, you had said it was not successful, and there were several other slave rebellions that took place around that period.  But, none of them were successful, but they did put people on notice that there was dissatisfaction in several of the slave colonies.
Speaker 2: Well, I would argue that Nat Turner's was fairly successful, in that it certainly got the attention of people and that there was certainly collateral damage on both sides.  I would also argue that John Brown, who was not black, but you know, who was certainly, enlisted the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Shook things up--
Speaker 2: You know, was successful, and even though he was killed with his sons.  But so, I would say that some were more successful than others.
Speaker 1: Than others.
Speaker 2: And then Denmark Vesey, of course, we know. You know, but that wasn't on this soil.  And of course, the great Haitian revolutionaries. So on the North American contiguous United States, no, there was never one that we could say, hey look what these people did.  They got their own land, but certainly in the American hemisphere, there were from to time successful ones and most notably Haiti.
Speaker 1: Of course, the rumor was going out that the slaves were very happy being under their masters and so forth, and these rebellions sort of put people on notice, that no, they're not all happy.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, they were, they were not all happy.  I think, you know, you have the same sort of mentality with Barbara Bush, saying that the people who are victims of Hurricane Katrina were happy and that they were content (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. They were lucky (laughter).
Speaker 2: Those were the lucky ones. This is a sick kind of mentality that I think is manifest very clearly by the man [President George Walker Bush] who holds office right now, who is a criminal and really should be impeached and drummed out of the country.  He should be sent adrift, as far as I'm concerned, someplace and never given safe harbor anywhere, for the murder and the debt and the wanton wasteful criminality and plundering that he's done to the American people and it's resources.  It's never going to be enough to make up for it, there's not enough time.
Speaker 1: And I want to, I want to visit that with you a little bit later.
Speaker 2: Certainly.
Speaker 1: That, how you came to many of your political opinions, and so forth.  Which I think we'll find that interesting.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Story_ID: 534584
Speaker 1: We will now come up to where your mother's [Lillian Vines Lennix], first of all, growing up.  Are there any stories that she may have shared with you among her brothers and sisters or siblings, and her family and so forth.  Let's talk about her growing up there in North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Yes, she grew up largely though, in Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: What part of Virginia?
Speaker 2: The Newport News [Virginia] era--area.  So, usually in that area.  And I know that she, (laughter) I know that she didn't wear shoes.  She still to this date has the toughest feet of any human (laughter).  She likes to tell the story of, you know, she was born in 1924.  So the Depression [Great Depression] would have happened, the stock market crash would have happened five years or so after her birth, so she grew up as a Depression era kid.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And but she said that they were never hungry.  There was food all around.  They grew some and that were peaches and things, and they would just pick food from the trees.
Speaker 1: So she was born up on a farm owned by her parents [Addie Owens Vines and James Vines] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On a farm, by her father, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: So, she said they were never hungry for food.  She remembers doing things like spring cleaning where they would just air out the house.  I would imagine it was a very small little place, but they had some form of plumbing, because I remember she talked about a sewer- probably, I don't know what the plumbing was.  She tells the story of them having a car, which was unusual for a black family at the time. You know again there--
Speaker 1: Especially during the Depression.
Speaker 2: During the Depression, yeah.  But there again, there were thirteen kids, and she's the second oldest of all the, the kids.   Two of them--I know one brother was named Howard [Howard Vines].  I can't remember the other brother's name, but they died in the war [World War II, WWII].  And then she had another brother named Charles [ph.], who was killed I believe by his girlfriend.  He was something of a (laughter) dilettante, I think.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But that happened much later, when she was in her forties and fifties.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.  So, the Depression, as you had noted, really crashed in 1929, but there were indications of people losing their wealth in many cities up north and in the South.  And I'm trying to see your mother growing up there as the third child.
Speaker 2: Second.
Speaker 1: Oh second child (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 534585
Speaker 1: Let's try to set, draw a picture for what it was like.  Has your mother [Lillian Vines Lennix] ever discussed what it was like for her growing up on this farm near Newport News, Virginia?  What, what her father [James Vines]--he was a gentleman farmer, and so forth?  Her education, did she go to school or did she stay home and learn to become a homemaker?  Has she shared any stories with you?
Speaker 2: She has.  My mother is a fairly remarkable woman, she, I think.  And as was necessary at the time, could do many, many things well, just as a function of having picked cotton and raised tobacco.  She probably has the keenest sense of smell of any human being that I've ever met.  She can tell you when something is off, when it's still edible, when it's, you know, what the ingredients are.  I know that there were several of them in one bed.  She had a lot of sisters--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and there wasn't a whole lot of room in those houses, as I'm sure you can imagine. She walked to school four miles and back every day, in the wintertime, through a frozen stream that was a shortcut that they would take, that they were cautioned away from.  She was something of a songstress, and at a given point, somebody tried to get her into Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York], but she wound up going to essentially a community college.  She always wanted to go to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], but did two years of college, and shortly after that moved to Chicago [Illinois] where she met my father [Harry Lennix II].  She was working at the time at Spiegel [Spiegel Inc.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think in the gift wrapping department and then someplace else.  And my father was a machinist.
Speaker 1: We're going to visit that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Let's--so she went through, she got through two years of community college.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, and about her, the rest of her sisters and brothers--their college heights, where did--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't think that--many of them were in the [U.S.] military.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Some were [U.S.] Navy, some were [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: Now did they join the military during World War--
Speaker 2: World War II [WWII].
Speaker 1: World War II.
Speaker 2: Many, many of them, at least, at least three, probably more like four, two of whom did not make it back.  And then the girls, I guess they must have just gotten jobs.  But I know that one of my sisters, one of my mom's sisters, Claudine--or Claudette, it's Claudette [Claudette Vines], did well in school and has a daughter, Pat [ph.] who is, you know, extremely well-educated.  I know there were a lot of children that were very, very well-educated.
Speaker 1: Your grandfather, what occupied his time?  Was it work on the farm, or did he hold another job outside of the farm (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He worked on the farm and he was also the school custodian.  He was responsible for you know, chopping the wood for the fire and cleaning and raking up around the thing, and basically an engineer for the school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he, he, could keep his eyes on his sons and daughters (laughter)? At the same time, and be at work.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right. That's right.
Speaker 1: And your mother's mother [Addie Owens Vines], who probably stayed home as a homemaker.  Was that her principal occupation?
Speaker 2: Principal occupation, I'm sure that she helped, you know, work the field.  And I'm sure that she raised the children.  It's conceivable that she took in laundry from around--I think I have a vague memory of my mother saying something about that.  But, you know, they did whatever it took to make ends meet (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ends meet.
Speaker 2: --with thirteen children.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: But I don't believe that food was ever a problem.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Clothes probably were.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 534586
Speaker 1: Your mother [Lillian Vines Lennix] has gone on to two years of community college.  And then something prompts her to move to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Has she ever shared what that motivation was?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think, I don't think it was all that deep.  I just think that, you know, for somebody with an active mind like hers--she's always been very curious, she's always been a reader.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She just wanted to see a bigger place.  She wanted to get out of the restrictive environs of what was the South at that time.   However near south it was, it was still southern.
Speaker 1: Right.  Being the second oldest, she was leaving a lot of younger siblings behind there in Virginia?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Was she the first to go to Chicago or?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Everybody else stayed in and around the area, and still are in and around the area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She had a brother, a half-brother.  My father [Harry Lennix II], evidently, my grandfather [James Vines], her father, had it would seem to be another family.  And there's at least one boy that my mother was in touch with, I think for the first time somewhat later in her life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably when she was in her fifties or sixties.  And his name I believe was Howard [ph.], I'm not sure about that, but anyway he just passed away.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I believe that he was a little bit older than she.  So, it's conceivable that, you know, around the same time that my grandparents had their first child, Aunt Peaches [ph.], that there must have been another family.  So, anyway--
Speaker 1: Right.  Right. And that was not unusual in those days (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.  It's not unusual now (laughter).
Speaker 1: I had Howard down here as the first child, but Peaches was actually first?
Speaker 2: Peaches was the first child.  And Howard--I think that was his name, I may be wrong about that.  My mom could certainly tell you, but he just passed away.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we now have your mother moving to Chicago and what was life like for her there prior to meeting your dad?
Speaker 2: Well, she was a very pretty woman as a young woman, in a sort of classic kind of '40s [1940s] way, you know.  Large round face, beautiful set of almond shaped eyes, thick lips, but you know, very well defined.
Speaker 1: Okay, and are we into the '40s [1940s] war?  World War II [WWII] is still going on?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Because she tells the story of, you know--stockings were being rationed, for whatever reason.  She tells the story of having drawn a line down her leg as if there were stockings there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I know that she wouldn't have done that in Virginia.  That would have been here, or in Chicago.  So, I would imagine probably shortly after she left college, she must have been twenty-one or twenty-two that she moved to Chicago.  She stayed for some time as a single woman, and met my father about eight years before my brother [Larry Lennix] was born--so around 1950 she met my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I would imagine that sometime around 1944, she came to Chicago, I'm not exactly sure of those dates, when she was about twenty or so.
Speaker 1: That's matching what I'm thinking also.  Where did she work when she came to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Spiegel [Spiegel Inc.].
Speaker 1: Okay, that's when she, her first job was at the Spiegel company working in the catalog department?
Speaker 2: That's right.  And in gift wrapping and all that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, gift wrapping.  Okay, any particular incidents or events that are noteworthy that we should know about during the first years prior to your mother meeting your dad?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She was once going into the store to work, and a gentleman, a white gentleman was opening the door and she thanked him.  And a white woman had come out shortly right after she did, and my mother thanked the guy, and he said, "I wasn't holding the door for you, nigger."
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 2: And that was in Chicago.  And she never forgot that.  And I would imagine that that wasn't that uncommon.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Particularly for Chicago (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But it's important that it helped shape us as individuals.
Speaker 2: That incident--right.  That incident stood out in her mind, still does.  And just because she was really appreciative of somebody, you know, being a gentleman to her, and that wasn't what was happening. So, I remember that.  I remember her telling me that.  I remember watching her wrap gifts at Christmastime, such as they were, and how proficient she was at it, how proficient she was at ironing clothes and how proficient--you know, she had to do all these things for her siblings and for the family, and so she never lost those skills.  She still has them.  She's the best ironer I've ever seen in my entire life.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The best laundress I've ever met.
Story_ID: 534587
Speaker 1: So sometime during this period, she [Lennix's mother, Lillian Vines Lennix] meets your father [Harry Lennix II].  How much of that can you relate to us?
Speaker 2: I don't really know the circumstances, but I believe they met out. He was, my father wanted to be a singer, in the Billy Eckstine style. And (laughter) there are varying stories about whether or not he was good.  Most people say he was okay and they said he sounded like Billy Eckstine.  I think it was like a hobby for him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there is a picture somewhere with him by a piano with some sheet music (laughter) and--but I've never heard him sing, and there are no existing recordings anywhere, so, although somebody claims that there is one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my cousins claims that there's a record (laughter).
Speaker 1: But your father hasn't let it be released yet (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, my father, you know, I don't know if he would have, if he would have wanted it released.  He probably did.  His brother, my Uncle Roland [Roland Lennix], is a musician and can play a couple of different instruments pretty well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It probably comes from their father [Harry Lennix].  But anyway, they met, I believe, out at a place.  I don't know much about--that's, that's sketchy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's sketchy.
Speaker 1: But they did meet during that period (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, during the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: How long was it before they, they got married?
Speaker 2: I think it was about eight years.
Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, eight years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think maybe more like six or seven. But I know at least five, because they were dating each other for five years before my grandmother [Addie Owens Vines], her mother came to visit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's what prompted them to get married.  And then shortly thereafter, my brother [Larry Lennix] was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I know that there was a five year period where they were exclusively dating, and based on some tangential, tangential threads of conversations, that they had been seeing each other for at least a year before (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --they were all that serious about, you know, making a life together.
Story_ID: 534588
Speaker 1: Let's now go through your father's [Harry Lennix II] early life.  In talking with your dad or him relating stories, how far back does he go in talking about what it was like growing up with his family?
Speaker 2: I never, I don't remember my father.  I never, you know, he died when I was not quite two.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I have no recollection of him outside of a very strong belief that the reason he died is because of me.  And that is to say that I was a very sick boy.  I was two months premature, and at the time, you know, forty-one years ago, that was a pretty significant situation.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I was not even, I think I was three pounds when I was born.  And I was in an incubator.   My mother [Lillian Vines Lennix] wouldn't even see me, but my father came by every day to visit in the hospital.  My mother didn't think I would make it, nobody did, except (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. She was trying to protect herself.
Speaker 2: She was trying to protect herself.  She, you know, at the time she had probably had a couple of miscarriages before.  I believed that she did.  And I was extremely sick and had a hole in the valve of my heart that wouldn't heal.  So she wouldn't see me, but my father would come by.  And I have a feeling that he made a bargain with God.  And it was like, you know, "If you save this kid, you can take me instead."  My memory starts somewhere shortly after that, but I have no recollection at all--
Speaker 1: What hospital were you in?
Speaker 2: Mercy [Mercy Hospital; Mercy Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Mercy Hospital there in Chicago [Illinois]. Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I don't have any stories directly from him, but only through my uncle, his youngest brother who lived in the apartment building where I grew up, on the first floor with his family, my cousins.
Speaker 1: That uncle's name was?
Speaker 2: Roland [Roland Lennix], Uncle Roland.  Uncle Babe, we called him because he was the baby brother.  And he worked at the Continental Can Company as a, as a machinist as well, or some sort of--very good with mechanics, just excellent with mechanics, my uncle.  Really good with his hands, too.  The Lennix, it's a Lennix trait, they're very good with their hands.  And I don't know much about my old man except that he wanted to sing, was a machinist, and was in the Second World War [World War II, WWII].  He fought in Africa, North Africa, where he contracted some sort of a condition that he called jungle rot which was a result of some sort of chemical agent that they used, that they sprayed around.  My mother believes that it is for this reason that he contracted the Hodgkin's disease [Hodgkin's lymphoma] that killed him at the age of forty-one.  I'm forty-one now. So--
Speaker 1: So, is it fair to say that Uncle Roland, or Uncle Babe was sort of a surrogate dad?
Speaker 2: No, no. That wouldn't be fair to say. He's a good man who has watched a lot of siblings, you know, die, many prematurely.  My Aunt Marjorie died very young and her daughter just died about two years ago.  And it's been a relentless parade of death for him, and it had always been that.  And, some people handle it better than others, but he was not particularly paternal.  It wasn't like he was the paterfamilias or anything.  That role had been served by my mother and my brothers [Larry Lennix and Michael Lennix] and the priests that I'd studied with in seminary [Quigley Preparatory Seminary South, Chicago, Illinois] and in school [St. Bride Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay. Although he lived in the same building?
Speaker 2: For a time. For a time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A time, okay.  All right. So we, we don't have a lot of information on your father growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, a little.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know the school that he went to, I know the house that he was born in.  I saw all of that when I went down to visit about ten years ago (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: I know that he, too you know, was very good with his hands.  I know that he drove a cab from time to time.  I know that he was a very handsome fellow. There's a photograph of him--
Speaker 1: Now, he drove a cab in--
Speaker 2: In Chicago?
Speaker 1: Oh Chicago, okay.
Speaker 2: And that he wanted to be a singer, and that, that--
Speaker 1: Did he work at Continental Can [Continental Can Company] also as a machinist?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, I don't think it was at Continental Can.  My mom would know, but I don't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, right. Good enough.  Okay. Ah, anyway, they dated for five years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at least (laughter). At least, five years.
Speaker 1: At least five years.  I know there's a point where they were not seriously dating, then dating for five years.
Story_ID: 534589
Speaker 1: But there came a time when your mom [Lillian Vines Lennix] and your dad [Harry Lennix II] got married, and your oldest sibling, Larry [Larry Lennix]--
Speaker 2: Larry.
Speaker 1: --was, was born.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And has Larry related anything about what it was like at that time in the household?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) He remembers one incident where he was given these Buster Brown shoes, and they were supposed to be scuff-proof.  And (background noise) he remembers these Buster Brown shoes were meant to be scuff-proof.  And that, he must have been six or something, and he went out and deliberately scuffed them up.
Speaker 1: To test (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) To test.  And my father was livid, and he turned red, and beat him so hard that he had to take a break (laughter) and come back and whip him some more.  Then he just it wasn't that he was mischievous at that time, although he was, he was an extremely precocious and mischievous young man--
Speaker 1: But he was also curious.
Speaker 2: He was very curious.  My brother's IQ was something in the genius range.  Like they did a test, and he was off the charts.  And I don't think he, you know, ever really pursued that kind of academic endeavor, but he had the capacity and still does.  He's a genius, particularly with music. I think that's where I get my appreciation of music from.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He should have been a producer or a composer.  He was, is amazing at that.  Anyway, he remembers that, and he remembers being taken to get haircuts and things like that with my father and stuff like that, you know, just father and son type stuff.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: My brother Mike [Michael Lennix] remembers that as well.
Speaker 1: I may have gotten a little ahead of us.  Why don't we go through your siblings?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Right now Larry is the first.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And who's next?
Speaker 2: Michael.
Speaker 1: Michael.  And then your sister?
Speaker 2: Lori Ann [Lori Lennix], yeah.
Speaker 1: And then you?
Speaker 2: Then me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is there any reason why you became Harry, Jr. [HistoryMaker Harry J. Lennix] as opposed to Larry (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Harry III, I'm the third.
Speaker 1: The third, I mean, yes.
Speaker 2: My mother didn't like the name Harry (laughter).  She didn't like the name at all, and you know, she didn't think the name, Louieroy, which is my uncle's [Louieroy Lennix], my brother's--second oldest brother, my father, his brother, Louieroy, then Roland [Roland Lennix], is the youngest kid--she didn't like the name Harry.  And so she, the closest she could compromise was Larry, because she didn't like the name Louieroy for a guy either, although I have a cousin named Louie Roy [ph.] that's a guy, you know, different spelling.  And so finally she capitulated and after three kids, three boys, she said, "All right, this is going to be the third" and my father supposedly lit up like a Christmas tree (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right. All right.
Story_ID: 534590
Speaker 1: We've got an idea of what Larry [Larry Lennix] is like, and now your brother Michael [Michael Lennix] comes along.  What is, what is Michael like?
Speaker 2: He's like the archangel, Michael.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's, he's the one who can cast Satan out of heaven.  He's a state trooper, he's a lieutenant with the state troopers.  He's rigidly, rigorously just and, and about the law, and about the letter of the law.  He can bend with the spirit of the law.  I guess he's a, he's a fair man, but he suffers no fools.  And one of the strongest, toughest men, I think, in the world, and a particular idol of mine.  My brother Larry, too.  Larry is one of my heroes.  He's a guy who was my father, basically, as a really young man.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he assumed that responsibility.  He always had a job, always was up on fashion, he always knew, you know, I had the law and I had the arts, and those are what my brothers represented to me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  And Larry's life lead him to what career?
Speaker 2: Larry is a librarian in a hospital, Rush Presbyterian St. Luke [Rush Presbyterian St. Luke's Medical Center; Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: In Chicago.  He's been there for twenty-seven years now.  Larry likes things, you know he's so evolved intellectually that he likes things to be simple, and so he keeps his life pretty basic, and I have great admiration for that.  He's got it down to pretty much a science, it's reduction, life is a reduction, life is, is deconstructed.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  And Lori, Lori Ann [Lori Lennix]?
Speaker 2: Highly complex, highly involved spirit.  Wanted to be a singer, still sings.  Loves music, never studied it diligently, so never really quite got to the esoterics of it.  But loves it, feels it, you know.  She's a principal at an elementary school and she has a tremendous amount of empathy for children, and it's sometimes almost too much.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Loves these children and will do anything for the children.  Begs, borrows, for these children.  She keeps her school open, keeps it running.  She serves a very really quite impoverished area near the Ida B. Wells Homes [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: What is the name of that school?
Speaker 2: Doolittle East [Doolittle East Elementary School; James R. Doolittle Jr. Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], is the school.
Speaker 1: Doolittle East, okay.
Speaker 2: They come from surrounding schools, and so she'll have even more children to look after, but she--
Speaker 1: Many of her students come from the Ida B. Wells Homes?
Speaker 2: Yes they do.
Story_ID: 534591
Speaker 1: And of course the fourth child, you, came along.  And you've told us a little bit about that.  There came a time when you were able to go home.  You had survived, and I'm sure your dad [Harry Lennix II] and your mom [Lillian Vines Lennix] were very satisfied.  Were your brothers [Larry Lennix and Michael Lennix] and sisters [sic. sister, Lori Lennix] aware of the crisis there, of your being in the hospital [Mercy Hospital; Mercy Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  They would have been very young, in any case.  My brother would have been six.  My other brother would have been four, and my sister would have been two.  So, I don't know how aware they were.  I'm sure that they were aware that there was a baby someplace.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And the story, legend has it that my mother's mother [Addie Owens Vines], after my being in the hospital for so long, said you know, "Get that baby home."  But she said, "He can't hold anything on his stomach, he'll dehydrate, he'll die."  She said, "Feed him beer, give him beer."  And so it was because of beer that I was able to develop a tolerance for food and an ability to digest it, which is probably why I like beer (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right. (Laughter) I was going to ask that question.
Speaker 2: So, I was very, very sickly.  And I know that my mother was quite irritated.  My father was the one who would stay with me.  I would wake him up, evidently.  It was, when it was time for him to go to work, nobody else would be able to get him to wake up, and my mother would send me.  You know, I was probably like one and a half year old, and I would just, you know, wake him up and he'd get up and go to work (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, so it would not be anything loud or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Something very gentle, but he was aware of that touch? Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he would wake up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your grandmother come up from Newport News [Virginia] to give your mother that advice, or was she just giving it--
Speaker 2: I think that she gave it via the telephone, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: My mother never said.  It's possible, and I think I have a vague recollection that maybe she did come up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember my grandmother really well.  I remember going down to visit, when we were, when I was about two.  And I remember a mule, and being afraid of it.  And I remember people up in a tree.  I didn't like the country, I didn't like that kind of rustic--it didn't translate to me.  I didn't fancy it at all.  And I remember my grandmother sort of making me buck up, as it were.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then I remember when she was dying.  I remember a couple of times, I remember when she was getting older, when I was about thirteen and went down for a visit.  And then I remember when she was dying, and looking at the ingredients of the makeup of what it was that was in her drip, and her thinking that I was going to be a doctor, just because I knew what glucose was, and so forth.
Story_ID: 534592
Speaker 1: Now, let's go back to your earliest memories as a, as a child.  You're home from the hospital [Mercy Hospital; Mercy Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] now.  And what are your earliest memories of smells and images there in Chicago [Illinois]?  First of all, let's ask, where did you live there in Chicago?
Speaker 2: I lived two places.  I just, I don't remember the exact address, but I remember one place was on Peoria [Street], which would have been in Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois] or somewhere around there.  I don't remember being there.  And then we moved to the place where I grew up, which is on Phillips in Chicago, Phillips Avenue, in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois].  And I remember, my very first memory, is being down in Virginia with that mule.  And then my second memory--
Speaker 1: And, and elaborate a little more, down in Virginia with that mule.
Speaker 2: With my [maternal] grandma [Addie Owens Vines], and my mom's [Lillian Vines Lennix] sisters.  I don't remember if any of the guys were there.  I remember Uncle Charles [ph.], I remember the guy who got shot.  I remember him, and I remember looking through a peephole and he was with a woman and was kissing her, or something.  And it was fascinating to me. And I didn't see what the big deal was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it the scene that was fascinating, or the--
Speaker 2: The scene, you know, the keyhole.  You know it was like the old doors that had the keyhole that you could look through.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The key.  And everybody was like fascinated that my uncle was kissing this woman.  I remember that, and I remember, like I said, the dole eyes of the mule that scared me.  I don't why.  I didn't think that something should be able to be that strong and that stupid, and be able to move like that, and that people were dependent on it to get from one place to the other.  It seemed to me an enormously unpredictable beast, and it didn't seem as if it were something with which one could reason.  Nor did it seem reasonable that people like my cousins, who were not very old, must have been nine or ten, were sitting on tree branches spitting tobacco juice.  I remember thinking, why would they (laughter)--that's not civilized.  I just remember thinking that the whole thing was completely uncivilized.  But, it smelled of mud and of rain and of grass and of things that--chickens and things that didn't belong in anybody's home.  That's my--
Speaker 1: These were foreign odors to you?
Speaker 2: They were.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And not particularly pleasant.  Not particularly unpleasant, but just something didn't seem--that they didn't belong in the day to day lives of people.  I remember thinking that.
Story_ID: 534593
Speaker 1: Then I remember being back in Chicago [Illinois] on my way to my first day of nursery school.  My mother [Lillian Vines Lennix] tells the story that, and I believe this is where my memory begins.  But, I would come back in the kitchen after spending several minutes, sometimes an hour or so in what we called the living room, the great room, but served as a family room, it wasn't very big.  And we were alone, and I would ask her where my father [Harry Lennix II] was, and when he was coming back.  And she said, "Well, he's with the Lord."  And that's pretty abstract for, you know, for a two-year old.  So, I don't remember any of that, but she said one day I came back and I said, "I know where my father is, he's dead."  And then I never visited that room again.
Speaker 2: Oh. Okay.
Speaker 1: So, it's her belief, you know, that he said something to me, or communicated something somehow to me.  And I have no cause to disbelieve it, but I know that I don't remember anything like that.  But the concept of the permanency of death to a child must have been pretty traumatic for me.  I carry a certain fear of it, even now.  I remember going to nursery school the first day and I remember crying when my mother--she was holding me--I was a small boy, very small for my age, not four yet.  When she was leaving--and I remember that the teachers would always try to get me to draw in different colors than brown or black.  I preferred brown or black or dark purple.  I would get a crayon set--and they thought that there may have been something morbid about my color schemes (laughter).  And also I remember watching my friend outline what he was going to color in, with a black crayon, and thinking, that's remarkable, because it's already outlined, but he's reinforcing the outline.  I remember thinking that that was wild, and I started to do that, and then my drawing became more neat, and I started to draw things, like sketches and things.  But there was something about it that seemed apocryphal still at the same time, to reinforce something that was already there that didn't need to reinforced, but I did it, because it seemed an effective and neat way of going about things.  I remember a girl named Karen Mason [ph.] who used to help me.  She lived across the street and about four houses down, four apartments down.  Her family owned the building, and she would come and help me get dressed, and then she would hold my hand as we were going to school, although she wasn't my girlfriend or anything, she was just a friend.  And I remember holding my sleeve like that, as I put my hand through the outer coat in the wintertime, and my mother and Karen telling me that I had done it well.  And I remember turning four.  I remember the sesame seed, 'Sesame Street' song was in my head, you know, as I turned four.
Speaker 2: Did you have a television set there at home?
Speaker 1: We had one television set.  It was a thirteen inch black and white thing that we had for years and years.  I remember when it went out.  I was about seven or eight and we listened to radio for, had to be eight or nine months.  My mother took it to the Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] and the tube had to be replaced, and they had a backorder of months and months.  And I remember fighting for, to see whatever shows might be on, and all that was ever left me were things that nobody wanted to see when people were in bed, like 'Masterpiece Theatre,' and 'Nova' and 'Sesame Street,' all those things on PBS [Public Broadcasting Service].  I remember watching National Geographic and watching the wild, 'Wide World of Sports,' which my brothers [Larry Lennix and Michael Lennix] enjoyed.  I remember the Disney [The Walt Disney Company] movies you know like--and then for a time, I would go to the movies.  My mother had a guy that was interested in her, named Bob Holman [ph.], and he was a strange little man.  But he worked as a security guard at a theater, at the Cheltenham Theatre in Chicago, and we would go, my brothers and my sister [Lori Lennix] and I.  And he would give us a box, literally, like a cardboard, like a box where you would put food in, popcorn.  And we would sit there and eat popcorn and watch movies.  None of them were very good really.  It was during the black exploitation era, and that was what was on tap, and then the kung fu era.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And we would watch all that stuff, but I remember being fascinated by, traumatized by some of it.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Some of it was horrifying.
Story_ID: 534594
Speaker 1: This elementary school here, just going to school [Myra Bradwell Elementary School; Myra Bradwell Communications Arts and Sciences Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Are there any other things that you may remember?  The teachers, whether they were particularly nice or indifferent to you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember all of them. I remember all of my teachers.  I remember Ms. Laplant [ph.] and Ms. Barricalo [ph.], when I was in kindergarten.  I had a good friend, my best friend there was white.  His name was Peter [ph.].  Everybody else would call me White Boy, you know, because I was a fair-skinned black kid, and I was quiet and sort of heady and sickly.  And I remember elementary school, first grade, meeting my buddy who remained my lifelong friend, Brian Payne [ph.].  And then my other friend, Walter Taylor [ph.], in second grade.  He lived right across the street, and we were like brothers.  And my brothers [Larry Lennix and Michael Lennix] would babysit for them.  His brother just got killed recently, unfortunately, last year.  And yeah, I remember that there would be things called block parties.  And the city would throw these block parties.  And I remember one, and it was on the street right next to us.  I was in second or third grade maybe.  And I remember we were on this bouncing thing, like you put up a tent and you can bounce on the thing.  I remember it was some kid that was going around tackling people, throwing other kids down on the bouncy floor thing.  And I remember watching him do all of this.  And I remember them coming over to me and throwing me down and then I got up and I threw him down.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And that we became friends.  I never saw him again, but he and I were like buddies that day.
Speaker 1: Right. Right.
Speaker 2: He liked the fact that I threw him back down (laughter).  I remember always getting up again.  And my brothers, you know, sort of beat me up and toughened me up and so forth, and making me fight other kids and stuff.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I was not enjoying that, but understanding the necessity of it.  I wasn't good when there were multiple kids picking on me, but I was pretty tough when it was one on one.  And I didn't, I never ducked a fight, as a kid.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were the teachers like at the school?
Speaker 2: They were nice.  Elementary school, well, kindergarten--I remember them being concerned, there were like three of them, late '60s [1960s].  I remember in the '70s [1970s], Ms. Laplant, when I was in second grade, she was, I thought (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You said that the teachers were concerned over--?
Speaker 2: About my health.  I was always out of school, I was sick all the time.  I had all sorts of asthma and allergies and I could barely walk, you know, to the school.  I wasn't, I wasn't well.
Story_ID: 534595
Speaker 1: And your mother [Lillian Vines Lennix], during this period, was she still at Spiegel [Spiegel Inc.]?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Other department store?
Speaker 2: No.  By that point, you know, she was, my father [Harry Lennix II] would get a veteran's check from the Veterans Administration [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] from having fought in the World War [World War II, WWII], and then she got social security and stuff, because he died, and she babysat other children to make ends meet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And ultimately got a job at the church rectory as a laundress.  And they would, the priest would give us food and things from time to time.
Speaker 1: What church was that?
Speaker 2: Saint Bride [Church of Saint Bride], Southeast Side [Chicago, Illinois], 77th [Street] and Coles [Avenue], 78th [Street] and Coles.  And I remember the teachers were all white, until there was a guy by the name of Mr. DeJesus [ph.], who was a black man, who was like a fourth grade teacher.  And I remember wanting to get into his class but it didn't work out that way.  But I was very fond of my teachers.  They were all nuns, once I left the public school.  I went to Myra Bradwell [Myra Bradwell Elementary School; Myra Bradwell Communications Arts and Sciences Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] for kindergarten and then I went to St. Bride [St. Bride Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], and they were all nuns.  And I think they were of the IBVM order, Immaculate Blessed Virgin Mary order [Sisters of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary], and were strict.  They wore habits, most of them.  And they were good educators, diligent about us learning civics and American history.  I remember once, was it cheating--sort of cheating.  (Laughter) I was taking my test and I asked my friend what his answer to number seven was and the teacher caught us both and we got Fs, so I remember that.  So that was a signal event in my life, thinking, you know, you have to be rigorously honest.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I remember chewing gum in class and sort of being the cut-up, and Sister Biotta [ph.] making me stick the gum on my forehead.  I remember that they made my brother, who is left-handed, right-handed.  They wouldn't allow him to write with his left hand.  This must have been Pre-Vatican II [Second Vatican Council].  And they would beat his hand with a ruler, and to this day his penmanship is appalling.  But he does a lot of things left-handed.  He plays sports left-handed, but he writes right-handed.  He's ambidextrous, but he's also crazy that way.  And then I remember having to learn to do things right-handed, just because that's what was left us, you know.  We got a lot of hand-me-downs and stuff that people couldn't use anymore, and people worrying about this widow and her kids and so forth.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: She never went on public assistance at all.
Speaker 1: So, she was a very proud woman?
Speaker 2: A very proud woman.
Story_ID: 534596
Speaker 1: Now there came a period there in Catholic school [St. Bride Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] when you determined what your future was going to be.  What grade were you in when that happened?
Speaker 2: Um--
Speaker 1: Or when you thought you had determined what you were going to be?
Speaker 2: I remember being nine or ten, or maybe I was eleven or twelve--maybe I was eleven.  It was before I was confirmed Catholic.  That happened in seventh grade, at which point I would have been eleven or twelve.  And I wanted to be the pope.  And I recognized that in order to do that, I would first have to be prie- a priest.  You can, however, be made archbishop or cardinal without being a priest.  It's an honorific, it doesn't require certain things to have to do.  But, you have to be a priest to be the pope (laughter), so I decided at that point I was going to go to seminary, and did.  So, that would have been about sixth or seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Before that, you know, I wanted to be various things; a professional musician, a trombonist, a professor of literature.  I always thought of myself as the professor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember my mother [Lillian Vines Lennix] scraping together some money to get a trombone for me when I was in about fifth grade.  There was a guy by the name of Fabish [Thomas Fabish], Dr. Fabish, he's a famous music educator.  And he owned a shop, Quinn Fabish [sic. Quinlan and Fabish Music Company], and he put me on the trombone, and my brother had suggested it, because he liked Fred Wesley of the J.B.'s.  And I remember getting this trombone, but thinking, no, I'll be a priest, I'll be the pope.  And then after that I wanted to be a baseball player, but I didn't have the eyesight for it, really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you did play some sports, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I ran cross country, ran track and field, played baseball.  And I loved it, I loved sports.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wasn't very good at basketball, but I had a really good arm for football and baseball and loved running, I was very fast for a long time.
Speaker 1: Right.  And how about your brothers?  Were they athletically inclined?
Speaker 2: My brother Michael [Michael Lennix] was, was a boxer.  And also a baseball player.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  There came a time when you decided you did not want to be a, the pope, if you had to be a priest.  Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Her name was Anita Blanchard (laughter).  And I met her when I was about thirteen.  And I thought that she was the most exquisite thing in the world and I decided at that point that I was going to marry her (laughter).  I met her briefly, and then I met her briefly again when I was about fifteen.  And boy, if you could get even more in love, I was just head over hills.  I read every romantic novel I could find, I watched ever movie, I watched things like 'Rebecca.'
Speaker 1: And Anita was in all of them (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was in all of them.  'The Great Gatsby' [F. Scott Fitzgerald], she was Daisy Buchanan, she was everything. 'Catcher in the Rye' ['The Catcher in the Rye,' J.D. Salinger] she was Sally [Sally Hayes] and Jane [Jane Gallagher] both, and then she was everything to me.  And she was going to become a doctor, and she is a doctor.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And she's got four wonderful children and a wonderful husband.  And you know, there was never anything except for my abiding love for her, but she treats me now like I'm her fifth child.  (Laughter) You know, she makes sure that I have enough to eat and a place to stay (laughter).  She's just great, I just adore her.  But I left the seminary to go to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] so that I could be with her.  We never even dated, I never even kissed her, but I just was nuts about her.  And I don't regret one minute of it.  She was the purest, most beautiful love of my entire life, even if it wasn't reciprocated.  She was just great.  So, she almost single-handedly spared the world my papal edicts (laughter).
Story_ID: 534597
Speaker 1: There also came a period, and you have not reached Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], I don't believe, where you started to take an interest in being on the stage.  Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, actually when I was in elementary school we would do sort of a spring musical, or usually silly little trifling things that told a story about something, like American inventors or something, or the American journey from the West, you know, opening up the West Coast, and all that stuff.  And I did one of them.  I still remember the song.  I performed it with my buddy Walter Taylor [ph.], the guy that's like my best and oldest friend.  I still remember the words to it.  And, it must have been in sixth grade [at St. Bride Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  And then they did something else and then I did, I played Thomas Edison, in 'The Electric Sunshine Man' [John F. Wilson and Grace Hawthorne].  And it was my friend Gregory McBride [ph.] and then me, we split the role.  And I'm sure I was awful, but some kids came, some kids from another Catholic school, a bunch of white kids came to our school to watch us do it.  And we had an occasion to (background noise)--should I turn that off--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right, we were talking about your youth.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember that these kids came up from another school, and we had occasion to talk afterwards.  Somebody gave me what I thought was an enormously flattering compliment.  They said that I reminded them of Clifton Davis.  And I loved Clifton Davis, I used to watch 'That's My Mama,' and all that stuff.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I thought that he was just great--you know, nice kids, they were nice kids.  And that was my first foray into acting, but I had no interest in it at all.  Freshman year, they did a play, but I was on the baseball team and wasn't, couldn't have been less interested in it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: When I was a freshman in high school [Quigley Preparatory Seminary South, Chicago, Illinois]], that is.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 534598
Speaker 1: Sophomore year [at Quigley Preparatory Seminary South, Chicago, Illinois], some friends of mine were auditioning for the play, and I saw a bunch of girls that were auditioning for the play, too.  These girls were from surrounding sister schools, like Elizabeth Seton [Elizabeth Seton High School, South Holland, Illinois], Mother McAuley [Mother McAuley Liberal Arts High School, Chicago, Illinois] and you know, Our Lady of Peace [Our Lady of Peace Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois], and things.  And I auditioned, and I got a small part in it.  It was 'Guys and Dolls,' and the priest, his name was Father Robert Bridge [Robert Emmett Bridge].  He was a librarian, but was a lover of the theater.  He put me in it and I sang a song and met some wonderful people, and just fell in love with this life, with this thing.  I saw, on some snowy day when everybody couldn't get there, I saw 'Guys and Dolls,' the movie, and I remember at that same time I had read a book by Mario Puzo, called 'The Godfather.' And I had seen that at the Cheltenham Theatre [Chicago, Illinois], you know, where we would go watch movies with that big box of popcorn.  And I couldn't believe, I couldn't wrap my head around the fact that that was the same guy from 'The Godfather' that was in this 'Guys and Dolls' thing.  Not Sinatra [Frank Sinatra], but Marlon Brando.  And I became fascinated with Brando, and I just started watching everything I could.  I would get the movie--the TV Guide every week.  This was before, you know, VCRs and all that stuff.  And I would find Brando movies, and then I would read about him, from books in the library.  I would even find out about the people he liked, you know, and watch those movies.  I would watch Olivier [Laurence Olivier] and Alec Guinness, and then from Guinness I would watch people like Charlie Laughton [Charles Laughton], and from Laughton, I would watch people like Robert Donat, and Peter O'Toole, and Richard Burton.  You know, like there were all these tangential lines, these connecting threads of amazing performers.  And then, you know, we were reading in high school, 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry], and I saw this guy, this Sidney Poitier guy, and I thought that he was amazing, just amazing.  And Paul Newman, and Ivan Dixon, and you know there were these amazing actors, wonderful actors, and wonderful actresses, like Bette Davis and Piper Laurie, and Eva Marie Saint, and Kim Hunter and Vivien Leigh, the Hepburns [Katharine Hepburn and Audrey Hepburn], you know, just like amazing actors.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And Cicely Tyson, I remember seeing the 'Autobiography of Jane Pittman' ['The Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman'], and I remember her in this tour de force performance.  But there was also a guy who played a small role in it, and they were trying to get people to move off the plantation and settle in other places.  And some people were trying to get them to stay, and this young black man, this actor, said, "There's lots of places we can go, there's gold in California."  And I remember him saying that and thinking, "He's a wonderful actor."
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And that's the only line that he had.  He was a wonderful actor, and authentic, and just real.  And this thing, this 'Roots' thing came on man.  And I was shocked at that story.  I had never heard that story in the Catholic schools.  I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: So they were making a tremendous impact.
Speaker 1: Yeah, actors were opening up the world for me, through theater and movies and books.  We were opening up--my mother [Lillian Vines Lennix], like I said, always read books.  And she read things like you know Reader's Digest.  I remember I would thumb through Reader's Digest or National Geographic or the encyclopedias that she would buy.  When I was a kid like in the fifth, sixth, seventh grade, I would read the encyclopedia.  I was fascinated, it was like, Nicolaus Copernicus and people like that, and Isaac Newton, the fundamentals laws of physics and, you know, it was watching things like 'Nova' with Carl Sagan.  It was just a wonderful, open, insane, limitless world out there.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And actors were like, they were like cowboys.  You know, they were like, they could rope the thing together and they could put a lasso around it and could yield and yank it back.  They were able to do--the actors in the theaters and movies can, can for a little while reign in the radical wild universe that we live in.  And they can tell a story.
Story_ID: 534599
Speaker 1: As I was discovering literature, great American literature, and to some extent, great world literature.  And I had very good classes at the seminary [Quigley Preparatory Seminary South, Chicago, Illinois], and had wonderful teachers in elementary school.  But I would give my mother [Lillian Vines Lennix] books that spoke to me, and she would read them, and we would discuss them.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, and she enjoyed many of the same kinds of books that I did, it turned out.   And she was always, she had a gift for puzzles, she always liked crossword puzzles.  And she was fond of telling me to look up a word if I didn't understand it.  And I got a great appreciation for etymology at that point and so forth, and for language, and endeavored to learn as much about language as I could.  First, the English language, and then Latin and Spanish, and now I speak Italian and some French (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: But I got all of that from her.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did you learn to be fluent in several languages in Catholic school?
Speaker 1: No, no.  I wouldn't ascribe that to anything except for a sort of idiot savant quality that I have someplace.  Like, for example, if you ask me to find my way to the nearest post office, I would be lost in about five seconds.
Speaker 2: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 1: If you ask me to remember the dates of a lot of things, I would be completely at sea.  If you asked me to do very basic equations with, you know, unknown quantities and so forth, I wouldn't be able to help you at all.  But, I can immediately do conversions from Fahrenheit to Celsius, or vice versa.  I can immediately do monetary exchanges and I can immediately learn languages. I just, I don't know how, but I just can (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have never been able to really learn a language, outside of Russian.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: And working for the National Security Agency [NSA], they wanted me to learn, and I learned.
Speaker 1: That's pretty deep.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: I wanted to go into--you have an aptitude for languages?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Give us the story on that.
Speaker 2: I really don't, I don't know if there's a story to it.  I, I have a memory for words, and words at their most basic construction.  And so, you know, if there's a word like, you know, oven, then I'll know that (speaking Italian) forno is oven in Italian, cause it comes from (speaking Latin) fornum [sic. fornus] and in Latin, and it's also the same in Welsh, and so I have this way of cross referencing words at their most basic level of construction, and then the rest of that is a rhythm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I, once I have a sort of oral rhythm for it, I can approximate at least the sense of what somebody's trying to convey.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know why.  There really is no--I just have a memory for words.  Like I say, I can remember almost exactly what anybody ever said at any given moment, if I told myself to remember.
Speaker 1: That's amazing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, I would have to say, "Okay, remember that," and then I can remember it.
Speaker 1: Right. That's amazing though.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How many, if I were to ask the question of how many languages you can speak fair to fluent, would we, how many more languages would we include in there?
Speaker 2: Well, one is no longer a living language.  I would say Latin. But, you know--
Speaker 1: That's not unusual, having gone to Catholic school.
Speaker 2: Right, seminary in particular.  But four.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Four, not including Latin, which nobody speaks (laughter).
Speaker 1: And those four would be?
Speaker 2: Ah, they're all Romance languages, except for English, you know, which has a lot of romantic qualities.  But it's French and Thai and Spanish and English.
Story_ID: 534600
Speaker 1: Now this time, you are fascinated by actors and you are in high school [Quigley Preparatory Seminary South, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you are not sure, but it just comports with your appetite for reading, to just learn everything that you can, and to see all of these different actors perform in the way that they do.  Where does that take you?  I mean, where, how does that start to grab you so that you so that you increase that appetite for trying to further yourself in this area?
Speaker 2: Well, it took me to the place of learning what the requirements for actors are.  And in order to do that, you know, if you go to the source of somebody that you admire--and in this case, let's say Marlon Brando.  Then you have to understand Stanislavski [Konstantin Stanislavski], and, you know, the Actors Theater [sic. The Actors Studio, New York, New York] and all those places where he studied, and where they were teaching Stanislavski, Stanislavski.  And so, I started reading those books, 'The Actor Prepares' [sic. 'An Actor Prepares,' Konstantin Stanislavski]. 'Notes to the Actor' [ph.], some Boleslawski [Richard Boleslawski], some Michael Chekhov, and you know, some Uta Hagen, but not a lot.  And just learning what the source material for those actors were, and actually seeing where those extrapolations that were made by people like Marlon Brando, where they happened, because he really doesn't do Stanislavski, that's a completely different kind of thing.
Speaker 1: You're still in high school at this time?
Speaker 2: I'm still in high school at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so by the time I got--interestingly, when I got to college, where we were supposedly studying Stanislavski, I knew probably quite a bit more than most other students, not all of them, but I had done my sort of groundwork.  And I just kept watching and I kept imitating and I had no inventiveness of my own at the time.  I was just really an adept copycat, and stayed that way, you know, pretty much until you know, ten years ago (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's go back for just a short moment.  You're in high school and at some point you selected the college you wanted to go to, and what you wanted to pursue.  Just relate that to us.
Speaker 2: Yes, well, I had every intention of going to the seminary, Niles Seminary College of Loyola [Niles College Seminary at Loyola University; Saint Joseph College Seminary, Chicago, Illinois].  I applied, was then accepted, and visited and spent a good deal, actually a good deal of time there, but Anita [Anita Blanchard] was going to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], and Northwestern started later in the school year than did Niles.  So, I decided to go to Northwestern.  I'd been accepted and I remember, I think I got accepted not because of my outstanding grades, they weren't all that outstanding, they were good, very good, but not amazing.  But I did well on the standardized tests. I did, you know, pretty good on those, and I got into the school.  I wrote an essay, and the essay was all about, you know, getting knocked down and getting up, and I had a pretty fair experience, a pretty fair amount of expertise in that area (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Because, because, you know, I was always losing at sports.  I was always--the asthma and things, and you know, just not having enough time or money or, you know, things to really concentrate on, having to work and stuff.  So, I was always getting knocked down, always coming in last--on the cross country team, but I finished, I always finished.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, and that taught me a lot, so I wrote an essay about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was like, well you know, if you let me in this place, I may not be you know the swiftest guy, but I'm going to finish. And--
Speaker 1: And that impressed them?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Story_ID: 534601
Speaker 1: What school did you prepare for--wanted to pursue there at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: What was I gonna do--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: What field of study?
Speaker 1: Field, field of study.
Speaker 2: Originally I wanted to major in English, in English literature or American literature.  I was more interested in English literature than American literature,  I don't know why, and except for, except for in African American literature, which seemed very mysterious to me, and seemed to sort of reflect a kind of Gothic perception that I had of my neighborhood [South Shore, Chicago, Illinois] and my growing up, in my environment.  It was always very overwhelming, it was always sort of Gothic and sort of Southern Gothic, and eerie, and sort of riddled with ghosts and things, and I was, like I said, a moody, temperamental, sickly boy.  And I think I was almost like Poe, really (laughter), like an urban you know Edgar Allan Poe.  And so I really wanted to get out of that, because it was depressing, and it was dark in there.  And the seminary sort of fed into that, because you know, it was churches and the thing and the ceremony and the ritual and all of that.  And while it captivated me and fascinated me and really was the basic constitution of my spiritual self, acting was a way out of that. It, you could fly when you were acting, you could be someplace else.  You could be another person, you could escape.  And, it was just lighter, and it was more immediate and more human, and less sort of severe and less dogmatic, but there were still rules, there was still structure, there was still an ethic to it.  And it's ethicism, I thought, and still do, is somehow more natural.  It seems to me the religion tries to put a lid or a control or some sort of stop gap on what is our basic nature and that the theater and the creative arts attempted to direct it in a way that is more functional.  Both have enormous influence and import, but one to me is more liberating than the other one.  I could go down as a real rabbit hole.  It might be a useful rabbit hole, maybe like Augustine [Saint Augustine of Hippo], or something, or Paul [Paul the Apostle] or somebody.  But I don't think that I would last very long in there.
Story_ID: 534602
Speaker 1: So, you were admitted to Northwestern's school of communications [Northwestern University School of Speech; Northwestern University School of Communication, Evanston, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Right. School of Speech at the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) School of Speech, okay.
Speaker 2: At the time.
Speaker 1: And what was life like that first year as a freshman?
Speaker 2: It was mind bending.  I remember getting there and there was a thing called the Summer Academic Workshop [SAW], which was engineered specifically for first generation college students.  It was supposed to be, anyway.   And I fit the bill, essentially.  And I remember seeing a lot of black kids that had completely different upbringing.  They had two parent households, and their parents had gone to colleges or had money, and whose parents saw them off to school that day, or whatever.  You know, I hitched a ride with somebody, you know, like Anita's [Anita Blanchard] people or something.  And we didn't have a car, you know.  We never had a car growing up.  And I remember thinking, I'm in over my head (laughter).  This is getting (unclear). There was brilliant and beautiful young men, brilliant.   And there were just women that were gorgeous and brilliant.  You know, I was terrified of women.  I was a virgin, you know, like I didn't know anything about girls.  I'd been at a boys school [Quigley Preparatory Seminary South, Chicago, Illinois], you know like, and there was never any hanky-panky there or anything like that.  You know, there was never any of that, I never saw any of it.  But, that didn't decrease my intimidation of women, or the intimidation caused by women.  And I remember just thinking, I'm out of my depths.  And then we started school, and there are all these smart kids, and all of them were white, you know, except for like two people.
Speaker 1: There's a point that we may have skipped over, and that--
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: You know, my mom [Lillian Vines Lennix] had to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, now you were at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] and receiving some financial aid, am I correct?
Speaker 1: Yes, financial aid because of my mom's economic status, financial aid because of an increasingly promising academic record.  Financial aid because of work study, and working, and with the help of some friends--people who helped to feed me, or who would help me, let me use their name on the other side of the cafeteria, you know, when I didn't have enough to eat.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, you know, people like Grady Hall and Dwayne Perry [ph.] and my friends Tim Jones [ph.] and Anita Blanchard, and people who helped bridge the gaps.
Speaker 2: Now Anita and Tim Hall [sic.] and the rest of them, were they traveling back and forth between Chicago [Illinois] and Evanston [Illinois], or were you living on campus?
Speaker 1: I was living on campus and they were living on campus.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Their, you know, their parents probably came up more than my mom was able to.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Just because of the transportation situation.
Story_ID: 534603
Speaker 1: There you are a freshman [at Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], surrounded by all of these white kids who you felt may or may not have been academically more prepared than you.
Speaker 2: My initial instinct was that they would be more, just because they came from more affluent neighborhoods and that they probably had much more exposure to travel and things than I did.  But, it became almost immediately clear to me that I'd prepared myself very well, and that I really was right where I belonged and that I had more life experience and had a more varied background than theirs, just by virtue of where I grew up, and you know, it was close. They couldn't have imagined the circumstances under which I grew up: watching people shot, watching people gamble, watching streetwalkers, watching pimps, watching drunks and winos, living with my uncle [sic.], who was a Vietnam veteran [Vietnam War], who was a severe alcoholic.  He lived with me in my room for five or six years.  And, watching the machinations of that, of his psychosis, and his illness with alcoholism (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was Uncle Babe [Roland Lennix]?
Speaker 2: No, this is--actually this is not my uncle, this is my Cousin Cecil [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My Cousin Cecil.  He was significantly older than I, but he'd seen a lot in Nam [Vietnam], and related a lot of those stories to me, and you know, his friends.   You know, I grew up in a pretty tough neighborhood [South Shore, Chicago, Illinois], and the gangs were rampant.  I also grew up right next to the Black Muslims, they were on the next street.  So, I had a confluence of influence, lumpenproletariat, you know, people taking me off my bike, or having to fight for this, that or the other thing--my brother, you know, in scraps with people, having guns pulled.  No, nobody else, black or white in the theater department at that time--there were kids on campus that had seen that, but in the theater department, that was a unique experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I also realized that in terms of my academic rigor, that I was very hard on myself and that I was at least as capable, and frequently often more capable academically and technically than my contemporaries.
Speaker 1: Okay.   So, there was some uncertainty as to what it was going to be like.  You had complete confidence in yourself that you could achieve (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I came to be completely confident.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did not immediately have it, but as the time went on, and as discussions went on, I realized that I have as much to contribute here, and probably more, than everybody else.
Story_ID: 534604
Speaker 1: In talking with your brothers [Larry Lennix and Michael Lennix], they had gone on to college, of course.  What schools did they go to?
Speaker 2: Illinois State University [Normal, Illinois], both of them (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Both of them.
Speaker 2: And then my second oldest, Mike, wound end up going and graduating from Greenville College in Greenville, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your sister [Lori Lennix]?
Speaker 2: Went to Illinois State University.
Speaker 1: She went to Illinois University.
Speaker 2: And graduated from there.  My brother Larry never graduated.  He wound up going to Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois].  He'd had some you know academic issues.  He didn't apply himself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was more than capable, he's smarter than all of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  They, did, because brothers and sisters always compare notes, did they ever tell you that they may have had some of the same doubts that you may have had when they, where they went to school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, they didn't.  My sister is only two years older than I, and I distinctly recall she was in certain classes and pledging a sorority and so forth.  And I wound up doing most of her academic work one year (laughter) even though I was still in high school [Quigley Preparatory Seminary South, Chicago, Illinois].  So, I knew that she could do it, because I knew that she was smarter than I was, but that she was not doing it, or you know, didn't have the time or didn't choose to take the time to do it.  So, I knew that I could very easily go to Illinois State and probably start teaching classes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right. Right.
Speaker 2: You know, because I really did study very, very diligently.   And specifically literature, it was, has always been my most neglected skill--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --is writing, and the ability to interpret the (background noise) written word.
Story_ID: 534605
Speaker 1: We are still in our freshman year there at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] and what was that freshman year like?
Speaker 2: Freshman year was, it too was, was you know, I call my childhood Gothic.  This was pure Russian Romanticism.  This was (laughter) this was Rachmaninoff [Sergei Rachmaninoff], my freshman year.  It was Tchaikovsky [Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky], it was insane, it was a whirlwind of information, of academic excellence, of challenge, of sometimes physical duress.  Because of the requirements of being a theater major, you had to do a certain amount of crew.  Those hours could be grueling.  And, you had to get your coursework done and you had to do the work study, and you had social life, such as it was.  And I was a shy boy, and wanted desperately to have a girlfriend, and I managed from time to time to get a smooch in from here and there.  So, you know, you just, as I look back at that boy, I have tremendous affection for him and for his innocence, and how humble and a little over his head he was.  But that the kid had some moxie (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He had guts.
Speaker 2: He had some guts.  And, and I like him, I like that kid.
Story_ID: 534606
Speaker 1: As we prepare for that second year [at Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], I wanted to go back and revisit your mom [Lillian Vines Lennix] and the gentleman [Bob Holman (ph.)] that she was seeing.  Was that relationship still going?  Was it still going on in that first year?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't.  No, it wasn't. It--
Speaker 1: So no more free popcorn.
Speaker 2: No more free popcorn.  It wasn't much of a relationship at any point, as far as I knew.  I don't think it ever became physical for example, or anything.  She you know, remained a widow.  And I don't know, I don't know what she did.  I hope that she had some fun in some way (laughter), but I'm not aware of it having happened.  But I certainly don't think it was with that gentleman.  But, yes, she remained working in the rectory, she remained active in our academic lives, she did what she could. There wasn't a whole lot, just because of the physical limitations of no, of not driving and so forth.  But she, you know, she would do my laundry when I could get it there.  And she would send an occasional bag of food up or something to my brother.  My brother Larry [Larry Lennix] would bring money and he helped me through some pretty tough spots.  He didn't have any, but he gave me what he had.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, that was pretty cool.
Speaker 1: Was he out of college by the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then at your mother's parents' home, was your grandmother [Addie Owens Vines] still living at that time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not at the time I was in college, no.  She died when I was a sophomore in high school [Quigley Preparatory Seminary South, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And I think we--
Speaker 2: So, at that point, all of my grandparents were dead.  She was the last surviving grandparent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 534607
Speaker 1: Now we're in that summer between your freshman year and your sophomore year.  You worked that summer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked in the library, following in my oldest brother's [Larry Lennix] footsteps, (background noise) doing the Dewey Decimal [Dewey Decimal System] thing and met a lot of people.  This guy by the name of Dysvyadia Subral [ph.] who was from India, who taught me a lot.  He knew a lot about everything.   This brother from Africa whose name was Boula [ph.] who also knew a tremendous amount, just a lot of interesting people.  A kid that was teaching me Thai a little bit.  So, I met a lot of people and worked real hard and put a lot of hours (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was at the Chicago Library?
Speaker 2: This was at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Oh, Northwestern University's library [University Library, Evanston, Illinois], okay.
Speaker 2: And I was getting minimum wage, or whatever.  And then I could work in the cafeteria for my meals, so that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now we're beginning the sophomore year and you're back at school.  What was it like then, the second year?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's sort of a blur.  I didn't do much my second year.  I decided to focus on the academic aspect of it, and actually the course study, because that's when we actually began acting classes.  So, I didn't--freshman year was more just like general theoretical studies of theater history and so forth, and this started the actual study of acting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the various techniques and exercises that that entailed.  So, I primarily did that and worked on my work-study thing and lived with my freshman year roommate, a guy by the name of Scott Sanders [ph.].  And, and did my work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, there are no interesting events or anything that took place during that sophomore year that we should share?
Speaker 2: A few heartbreaks, a couple girls you know, that I was interested in, that weren't that particularly interested in me.  It wasn't unusual.  I did for a time have a girlfriend that I'll never forget.  She was the prettiest thing.
Speaker 1: But not prettier than Anita [Anita Blanchard]?
Speaker 2: No, but different.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Different. And it was Allison [ph.].  And as it turns out, I ran into her husband about a year ago on an elevator in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], actually Richmond, Virginia.  I didn't get a chance to see her, and I desperately wanted to.   But she was a beautiful girl, tall and alive and, you know, nothing ever really happened seriously.  I was still a virgin and everything, but she--I kissed her and we hung out for a little while and then the issue of religion came up.  And being a Catholic, and something of a staunch one, she couldn't make that fit with, with her religious beliefs.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, so we split up.  I wound up doing a play.  That year I did 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] and I played Bobo, the smallest part in the play (laughter) really.  But it was fascinating, and I remember watching other actors.  I would go to sit in on other acting classes, and we had some brilliant actors there.  A guy by the name of Steve Marble [ph.], and a guy by the name of Denis O'Hare, and Tom Swift, and Mandy Daniloff, Dunn Grad [ph.], Patty Acha [Patricia Acha].  I mean, these were tremendous talents, really.  And I would go and sit in on their classes and watch them perform Pinter [Harold Pinter] and Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], and things like that, and see their performances.  They did a thing called 'The Future' [ph.] which included '1984' [George Orwell] and 'Invasion of the Body Snatchers' and I just watched, I just studied, and did that small little play and, and that was about it.
Story_ID: 534608
Speaker 1: I have a hunch you want to name some of the people who were in 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry] there just a few moments ago?
Speaker 2: Yes, another brilliant, brilliant actor--I didn't have occasion to see him in class because I don't believe that he was in class at that time, but his name was John Marshall Jones.  Just, we call him J.J.  Ami Brabson, who is married to Andre Braugher now.  She was Ruth [Ruth Younger], she was terrific.  Deneen Wade was terrific.  Dwayne Perry [ph.], who was my best friend and was in class with me, played George Murchison, he was tremendous.  And just a bunch of guys you know.  We just hung out, and I didn't have but one scene in the whole play, so you know, I got a chance to just hang out with the jocks and the guys who were sort of filling out the other roles, and we would talk about girls, and try to find ways that we could get drunk for free at some campus party someplace (laughter).  So, you know, but I was pretty tame and I didn't fancy, you know drink very much at the time, but I did like to talk, and I liked to listen.  I liked to watch and I liked to study and learn.
Speaker 1: I'm thinking, and she may not have been there [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] at the same time as you were there, but she's down there in Richmond [Virginia], her and husband [HistoryMaker Tim Reid], with the film company [New Millennium Studios, Petersburg, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  [HistoryMaker] Daphne Maxwell Reid (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Daphne Maxwell Reid.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was she there before?
Speaker 2: She was there sometime before I was, yeah.  She was the homecoming queen, and is a woman that I have enormous love and respect for, just a lovely, gracious--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --go-getter, entrepreneurial, beautiful, proud, and I think a shining example to everybody.
Speaker 1: Right. [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett and I would go down there sometime, and they would talk about all of the things that she didn't do right in his class (laughter), because he was teaching there for a while. Okay, then anything I'm missing or skipping in sophomore year there at school?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 534609
Speaker 1: Now, we're at the summer between the sophomore year and the junior year [at Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, did the summer festival [SummerStage], which is basically a wrap of three plays.  I was in two of the three or something.  Maybe I was in all three.  It was 'Equus' [Peter Shaffer], 'Little Mary's Sunshine' [sic. 'Little Mary Sunshine,' Rick Besoyan] and 'Twelfth Night' [William Shakespeare].  I was in all three.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And not very big roles or anything in any of them.  But I learned a lot, reluctantly, because I should have had bigger roles in them.  But that was sort of my first taste of the difficulties of being a black actor in a white environment, and not being able to do the roles that I was capable of and deserved, and had earned, partly because of seniority, but also partly just because of the fact that--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --people's brains were not open in that way at that time in that environment.  I wound up booking a national commercial that summer, as I was working in this cafeteria for McDonald's.  It starred James Brown and the person who was in charge of the academic workshop at that, the summer fest wouldn't let me do it because of the performance schedule of the thing.  I would have missed the performance of two, there were no understudies.  And I also learned a lesson there.  And that is that, if you give your word to a project, then that word is binding.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And you have to stick to your word.  And however unfair or however much it would have eased my financial load at the time, it taught me a lesson.  That you know, ethics and rightness is not always convenient, and it always isn't, it isn't always lucrative.  And so I learned that lesson well, and also learned to sit back, you know, as I have done, and just wait.  Wait for my turn.  And I said to myself, because I was taking over the black student theater at the time in my upcoming junior year, you know it's time to do my own thing, nobody's going to give it to me, I have to give it to myself.   I have to make opportunities, and make opportunities for other people.  So, I started to direct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I was going to ask you a question, and you've answered part of it, I believe.  I was wondering whether your not getting larger roles was due in small part to your being reticent to step forward and speak out for yourself, or whether it was something else?  And I think you sort of answered that.
Speaker 2: I was never reticent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I never, ever have been reticent.  In my sophomore year someone mentioned Stepin Fetchit in class as an off-handed remark.  And I wrote a letter that I read to the entire class, and it became something of a theater legend in the school.  I never, I never backed down from a racial confrontation, ever.  Never have, never did when I was in seminary [Quigley Preparatory Seminary South, Chicago, Illinois].  When I was a freshman in seminary there was this white senior who was throwing berries at me one day in gym class, and I went over to him and confronted him, and he asked for me to meet him after school, and I showed up.  But he didn't.
Speaker 1: He didn't.  He was smart.
Speaker 2: No, he was a bigger, stronger guy, but I didn't give a damn.  I don't care now.  I don't back down from that, and so I was never reticent about it.  But, you know the fact that I would speak to it, and still do, did not necessarily change the equation.  The only thing that changes the equation is actual action.  And so that's what I determined to do after that summer festival (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --which was the first and last that I ever did.
Story_ID: 534610
Speaker 1: That summer between your sophomore year and junior year [at Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], what did you do, and where did you work?
Speaker 2: I worked in the cafeteria, and was doing the summer fest [SummerStage].  So, the cafeteria fed me.  I'd crash on the couch of a buddy, and you know, I did those performances.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now we are starting for the junior year.  And how do you approach it, and what are you doing in class?
Speaker 2: Junior year, I booked my first professional play.  It was at the Goodman [Goodman Theatre, Chicago, Illinois], and I was living off campus, and the play was, was 'The Government Inspector' [Nikolai Gogol].  I think by Bogotkov [sic.], I can't remember, maybe it's not Bogotkov, but one of those guys.  And so I did that, and was elected at the time, in the year to come that is, but we had the elections during the year, the chairman of the black student union.  And I was actively involved in running the black--the African American theater ensemble, and doing my course work, and doing plays for university theater for the first time.  The university theater is like, you know, the bigger theaters on campus.  And I had done, was doing a play with a white South African, called 'The Island' by Athol Fugard.  And again, you know, consistent with my desire to confront directly the issues of race, we were involved with the anti-apartheid movement as, For Members Only, which was the black student union.  And I found out that this guy was an Africana, and went up to him and said, "I want to talk to you about your country."  And we took the better part of an afternoon and got to know each other a little bit, and wound up doing this play, 'The Island.' which was an instant hit, and which you couldn't get a ticket for.  It was mad.  And so I wound up doing that.  I was dating a girl--
Speaker 1: How long did that run on campus?
Speaker 2: Two or three weekends.  Two weekends.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But like we had to add a show or so.  It was crazy.  People were literally hanging from the rafters to see this thing and I'd also done a play with my friend David Schwimmer, called 'Pvt. Wars' [James McLure].  And--
Speaker 1: For people who don't know, he made him, I guess became famous on the show--
Speaker 2: On the television show, 'Friends.'
Speaker 1: 'Friends.'
Speaker 2: But he's a much more varied and complex actor than could be manifest on a half an hour sitcom.  He's a very talented man, very talented. And a dear friend. So, I did those two plays, and again, you know, I stayed largely away from the university theater.  I did a big thing--this may have been at the end of my sophomore year, I'm not sure, maybe not.  But I did 'Huckleberry Finn' ['The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,' Mark Twain], I think that was my junior year.  That was a big university theater production directed by Frank Dilotti [ph.], and I played, you know, Nigger Jim.   Or Big Jim, sometimes referred to it.  But it was a hit, you know.  I was in these hits.  And so an agent came down from this place called Geddes [Geddes Agency, Chicago, Illinois] and she signed me, and so I started going out on professional auditions and so forth, in Chicago [Illinois] and so my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In your junior year?
Speaker 2: In my junior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In my univer- in my, or was that at the end of my sophomore year?  I can't remember now.  It was either the end of the sophomore year or somewhere in my junior year.
Speaker 1: You signed?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went down and my horizons started to open up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And horizons such as?
Speaker 2: Professional theatrical productions in Chicago, commercials.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, yeah, theater and commercials.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any memorable ones during that junior year that we should know about?
Speaker 2: Auditions?
Speaker 1: Yes, no, the ones that you got.
Speaker 2: The only thing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The roles that you may have gotten.
Speaker 2: No.  No (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't get anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't get anything.  I tried out a lot, and I remember people playing a lot of head games with me at auditions, but you know, I saw what they could do, and I saw what I could do--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and I let them do what they did, and I did what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, I relentlessly pursued my own inner sense of truth.
Story_ID: 534611
Speaker 1: So, it would not be fair to say that you began to realize your talents, because you had complete confidence in your talents before this?  It was, would be fair to say that you are now showing your talents?
Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't say that I had complete confidence in my talents.  I had complete confidence in my position.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I knew that what I was trying to do, or what I hoped that I would be capable of doing, was the right thing to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that I had the inherent equipment, once developed, once honed, once I got out of the heads of Marlon Brando and Sidney Poitier that I was copying shamelessly, that I might find a voice of my own.  But I knew that that was some time away and I had the sinking feeling that somebody was going to find me out before it could happen.  So, I wasn't so confident in my ability, but I was confident in my potential.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was confident that, in my position on the, on the issues.
Story_ID: 534612
Speaker 1: So now you are going out auditioning professionally for some of the roles that supposedly are becoming available.  And you're really there at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] working very hard as a student, also.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you find a conflict?  Did you find anything that may have been suffering as a result?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Sure.  Sure, I did.  Nothing in any of the fields of endeavor that I was actually interested in, but there were other requirements, things like, you know, physical sciences.  I guess I had to study geology or something, and I couldn't have been less interested.  You know, it had to be something.  It wasn't going to be nuclear physics, because I had no aptitude for that (laughter).  But I would take, you could take courses, they were called a PN, you could either pass or you know no grade.  And you know, the best you could do was if you get a P--and I didn't take my geology class as a PN, I took it as a straight academic thing, and I wound up getting like a C or C minus.  It was the lowest grade I've ever got in my life and I--well, not in my life, but you know, in my high school [Quigley Preparatory Seminary South, Chicago, Illinois] and college years.  And then everything else, I had to take after that, like political science and crap.  I, the politics that I was interested in, weren't really being taught (laughter).  Nobody was teaching how to overthrow P.W. Botha in South Africa.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Or how to successfully shoot Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] (laughter).  I remember when he got shot.  I was in high school and I remember going to the chapel and praying that he would die, because I thought that he was an anathema to anything just or fair.  I think he was a pig, and I think he's largely responsible for this terrible state of relationships that we're in with the world, with each other in this country, with the immigrant situation.  He's just a pig, and I was interested in those politics, and Northwestern wasn't teaching that. So, the stuff that they were talking about, you know, revolution in 20th century Latin America, which was as close to an interesting subject as I could find in politics. I would take that, but I'd take that PN and I would frequently skip the class.  It was academic, it wasn't--the guy had no passion for it.  It was an ivory tower interpretation of something that was real to people who couldn't eat.  And so when you're talking about things like you know the Noriega [Manuel Noriega], or you're talking about Cortizone Akeno [ph.], and people like this who--most of the government that had been in place before, you know, he talked about that, but it didn't have any real importance to him, it was academic.
Speaker 1: He was very dispassionate.
Speaker 2: Right.  And that is, that's not interesting to me.  So, I would sit in the cafeteria and have more coffee, or whatever.
Story_ID: 534613
Speaker 1: Now things were going on in your hometown [Chicago, Illinois], of course.  The black mayor, you know, the politics of that, and so forth.  Did you get involved in any of that?
Speaker 2: Indeed, indeed we did.  You know, as part of the black student union [For Members Only], we had Mayor Harold Washington come up and speak to the students while he was still campaigning.  We invited members of the Nation of Islam up, we invited Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] up.  We invited everybody who was anybody up.  We went to school with Ed Gardner [HistoryMaker Edward Gardner] who was one of the largest contributors for Mayor Washington's campaign.  Al Raby [Albert Raby], who was his campaign manager, who was a friend of mine.  We shot pool in the same pool hall that I shot pool in.  So, I was tremendously engaged as a young person, just at least in following the story and in getting the words of those people from their mouths.  So, we had everybody up there that we could get a hold of.  Dennis Brutus was on campus.  We were all involved in the anti-apartheid movement.  We joined forces with the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] students.  So, there was a lot going on.  Mayor Washington, we were thrilled about.  There was a story about a writer [Leanita McClain] who was married to [HistoryMaker] Clarence Page at the time.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Or not, I don't know if at the time, but she had been married to him, and she killed herself because of the reaction and the response of her colleagues at a paper to the mayor's election.  And this was a great mayor, a great man who opened up the city for everybody.  But the vitriol that--and the consternation that that caused in the minds of our white co-citizens, was measurable, and was toxic, ultimately.  And I don't believe that that's a riff that has since been healed.  And I believe that they would be loathed in Chicago [Illinois] to see that happen again, no matter how beneficial it would be for the community at large.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting.  So, campus life, you felt there was a separation around that, between what black students were advocating and what white students may have been advocating.
Speaker 2: Certainly with regard specifically to that, but also in general.   There was a relentless suspicion on both sides, of each other, of the other side, and Northwestern's [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] history had not been particularly kind you know, to black students.  Black students had taken over the bursar's office in the '60s [1960s] and demanded housing changes and academic changes and so forth, and a field of study for African American studies and what have you, and was successful. Clovis Semmes [Clovis E. Semmes], Jabulani Makalani is his name now, and people like that were very active, and I was part of the group that picked the successor of the dean for academic student life.  And so, you know, we had that house.  We called it the black house, it's still there.  And you know, so there was a natural, or at least pre-existent hostility from black students to white students, and vice versa, and outrageous things would happen every year and we would address them when they came up. And so this was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now you were very actively, active politically?
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes.
Story_ID: 534614
Speaker 1: We're now, the summer between your junior year and your senior year [at Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  And how did you spend that summer?  Anything that we should note?
Speaker 2: You know, working, again, in the cafeteria.  And I may have done a play.  I think I did do a play called 'Larger than Life' [ph.] or something, in Chicago [Illinois] on the Near North Side.  And, (laughter) yeah, I did. And then--
Speaker 1: Let me break in with this question, and that is, how did your, how did your mom [Lillian Vines Lennix] respond to your wanting, to acting being your major there?   Did she think it was a good idea, or how did she feel?
Speaker 2: My mother is inalterably pragmatic.  And I think that she would rather have I become a priest than an actor.  It's not a stable life.  Even with the relative success that I've had in pursuing it, it still isn't stable.  I don't have a family, for example.  It makes people wonder you know what I'm up to, if I'm some sort of womanizer or gay or something you know.  But the fact is, I tried and it's been difficult to sort of hammer out any kind of stability in my life.  And that plays havoc from time to time.  But again, I've never lost confidence in my position.  And my position is that as much as I can do to make the world a little bit better, then I'm going to try to do that.  And as much as I can do to provide resources for students and for children that don't necessarily have them or can't get them, then I'm going to do that too.  And that's more important to me.  And so, my mom has never questioned me about that, but I know that she worries about me, and whether or not I'm eating well or whether or not somebody's looking after me.  So, she needn't worry.  There's always somebody to look after you, but I know that she's concerned about it, so I look after her.
Speaker 1: Right.  And your brothers [Larry Lennix and Michael Lennix] and your sister [Lori Lennix], do they have an opinion? (Laughter) (Unclear) opinion?
Speaker 2: No, they don't care.  I think that they're mildly annoyed when people ask them what it's like to be my brother (laughter).  I don't know what their answers are either. I don't think it's always that flowery or anything (laughter).
Story_ID: 534615
Speaker 1: The end of the summer and you're entering your senior year there at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  And what is that senior year like?  How much work are you getting?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm now the head of the black students organization, For Members Only, and I book a job, again, I have to abdicate my position so that my second in charge can do the job.  It was an offer I couldn't refuse.  It was at a theater that would--essentially, we had everything in place.  I was highly involved with For Members Only, and so I took off to do the play.  And I also managed at that time to have something of a personal scandal.  I was in love with a girl who for religious reasons, a different girl, couldn't see her way to be with me in a relationship, even though we'd been together for a couple years.   And meanwhile, another beautiful girl, a stunning girl, that I would later become engaged to, showed up on campus.  And we began to spend some time together, and she had a boyfriend.  But you know it was all perfectly innocent, it was just romantic.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Now I was out of Rachmaninoff [Sergei Rachmaninoff] and into like Debussy [Claude Debussy], you know.  I was the French impressionist (laughter).  And it was all terribly romantic, and just lovely.  So, she was the major event of my senior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she changed my life, essentially.  She was that important to me.  We were together for like ten years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh. Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. So, and I just, just nuts about her.
Story_ID: 672945
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, my full name is Harry Joseph Lennix III [HistoryMaker Harry J. Lennix], H-A-R-R-Y, J-O-S-E-P-H, L-E-N-N-I-X, followed by three Roman numerals.
Speaker 1: All right, and, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois, November 16, 1964.  I was born in Mercy Hospital [Mercy Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: And because this is oral history, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation, primarily, right now is actor, but I'm also a producer and director, writer and public speaker.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is May 3rd, 2018, Thursday.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're presently at the offices of The HistoryMakers, and that's at 1900 South--
Speaker 1: Michigan.
Speaker 2: --Michigan (laughter) Avenue [Chicago, Illinois], yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, and we're here today to finish a interview that we started, I think in Los Angeles [California], and--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --about twelve years ago.
Speaker 2: Correct, April 1st, 2006 was the first part.  That's twelve years ago, and a little bit.
Story_ID: 672946
Speaker 1: We left off, we had you in college, finishing your college career--I mean days.  And, but we, we wanna go back a little bit and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --get some dates on that--now, when did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: I graduated from high school in 1982 from Quigley Seminary South, Preparatory Seminary South [Quigley Preparatory Seminary South, Chicago, Illinois].  There was also at that time, Quigley Preparatory Seminary North [Chicago, Illinois].  It must have been May of two thousand and--I'm sorry, 1982.
Speaker 1: All right.  And you entered Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --right afterwards, right?
Speaker 2: --went to Northwestern--I was first accepted into a program called SAW, Summer Academic Workshop.  So I think I must have gone in mid-August.  SAW was for students who were first generation college kids, and most of us were black.  There were a couple of Latin kids, Latino kids, but mostly black.
Speaker 1: All right, sort of like an Upward Bound program in a way, I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was similar to Upward Bound, but it was really specifically for Northwestern, and, and it was contained therein, sort of an extension of their cherub program [Medill Cherubs], but acclimating students to college life, which was very beneficial.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so you had a, sort of a transitional period to get involved in college life at Northwestern?
Speaker 2: Exactly, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 672947
Speaker 1: At Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], did you decide to become--now, you were an education major in the beginning, right?  Is that true? No, were you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, I was--at Northwestern I was always in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: In theater?
Speaker 2: --a speech major.
Speaker 1: Speech, okay.
Speaker 2: They didn't have a--at Northwestern at the time--and they still don't--I don't think that they had a dedicated degree for theater majors, but we got a, what is now a communications degree.  So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And I don't know if we talked about this--I don't think we talked about who maybe some of your mentors were at Northwestern?
Speaker 2: Well, at Northwestern, I had, I had--probably, my biggest mentor was Dr. Ulysses Jenkins.  We referred to him as Duke.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He had fought in the Second World War [World War II, WWII], married a German woman, spoke fluent German, and a very interesting man, later went on to become an educator and historian, knew a lot about Africa and, and these kinds of things.  And then, of course, we had Sterling Stuckey.  He was there.  Leon Forrest who was a tremendous novelist, of course, and Stuckey, a great historian and writer.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Sterling Stuckey, yeah, he's one of the great ones, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, he is, he is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Leon Forrest, the author of 'The Bloodworth Orphans,' you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: --one of the great Chicago [Illinois] writers, yeah.
Speaker 2: Great, great writer, and then, of course, there was Dr. Alice Palmer [HistoryMaker Alice Palmer] who's--was the--who is the daughter [sic.] of Buzz Palmer, who had been a ward committeeman and, and a big Chicago politician.  I actually had occasion to talk to President Clinton about him at some length.  Somehow, President Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] knows more about Chicago (laughter) than even I know, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: About--about Buzz Palmer?
Speaker 2: He knew all about him.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: He knew all about him (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Edward "Buzz" Palmer, we interviewed him, and he's a, he's a remarkable figure in Chicago, lived in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] and--
Speaker 2: (Coughs) That's right, a few--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --in your neighborhood, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --a few blocks away from where I grew up.  So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, right, right.
Speaker 2: --I didn't know them, of course.  I was just a kid, you know, at the time, and, but we would walk along that trail from Phillips [Avenue] where I grew up, up to Saint Bride [Church of Saint Bride, Chicago, Illinois], which was on Coles [Avenue].  And so I probably passed their house many times.  They were on Saginaw [Avenue], which is a few blocks east of, of Phillips.
Speaker 1: Right, and he would walk the neighborhood too.  I, I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Is that right (laughter)?
Speaker 1: --I lived in the same neighborhood.  And I would--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh wow--
Speaker 1: --see Buzz a lot, walking, you know, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I probably saw him and didn't know it, know who he was, you know, 'cause, young, I guess, and--although I should have known, but I didn't.
Speaker 1: So you're talking about his wife, Alice, right?
Speaker 2: No, Dr. Alice Palmer, I think it was his daughter, his daughter.
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no?
Speaker 1: Alice Palmer who was state rep [state representative]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's his wife (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah.  That's his wife, yeah, Alice Palmer.  And that's the--she was one of the mentors of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], and, in fact, he ended up being elected to the seat that she vacated, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, and she tried to get that seat back--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah, there's a story about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and it became a kerfuffle. Yeah, I mean it's, it's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --history that she asked him to stand down because she was gonna run for the Congressional seat, and [HistoryMaker] Jesse Jackson, Jr., I think decided to run.  And she decided to--that she was gonna keep her seat and let him come in or grandfather him in, as it were.  And he got her dismissed on a technicality.  So he ran unopposed.  That's history.
Story_ID: 672948
Speaker 1: The South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] is a interesting neighborhood, and I don't know if we had a lot of discussion about that 'cause, but--in the last interview.  But what are some of your--these are some of the people that lived--so you knew about some of the politicians from your area there in South Shore and what they were doing, and what was going on over there?
Speaker 2: I, I knew a little bit about the Chicago [Illinois] political scene.  Of course, it's a very political city, but my awareness of politics didn't really kick in until probably high school [Quigley Preparatory Seminary South, Chicago, Illinois], you know, Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley] was big for many, many years.  He died, I guess, in the mid-'70s [1970s].  And then, of course, Bilandic [Michael Bilandic] and then Jane, Jane Byrne and then, of course, the great Harold Washington who remains my favorite political figure ever, local or national or international.
Speaker 1: Right, I think when you were in high school, William Beavers was the alderman over there, I believe, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah, yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: --yeah, on 79th.  And South Shore, the character of South Shore is interesting because there're a lot of musicians that lived in South Shore, a lot of the brothers and sisters that were in AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians, Chicago, Illinois], and, you know, they've--in those apartments in the South Shore--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They would go to Europe and come back and, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I used to hear the--there was a place called the Village Compound [Chicago, Illinois] on 79th Street.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I would go and listen to (laughter), to some of those guys.  I can't remember all of their names now, but, of course, we would see people like Malachi Favors there and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --there was a guy, Dixon, I remember his name, the great Ernie Dixon [ph.].  I can't remember his--but great sax player, and he actually taught me how to listen to abstract jazz, avant-garde jazz.  I, I--'cause I'm an amateur musician myself, in the true sense of amateur.  I, I, I played proficiently, but, you know, I'm always trying to learn and glean things, and that--and there were a lot of places where you could go in the, in the neighborhood.  The Village Compound closed down, and so I would then venture to places like the Apartment Lounge [New Apartment Lounge, Chicago, Illinois] or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and The Other Place [The Other Place Lounge, Chicago, Illinois], which was on (laughter) 75th [Street] and King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], get a good bowl of spaghetti there and some chicken wings or fried fish, and listen to an amazing array of jazz musicians.  Chico Freeman, Von Freeman--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Freeman, right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, all of these guys were, were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's the Apartment Lounge crew, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: The Freeman brothers, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they would, they would play--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: George Freeman, Chico--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Von Freeman.
Speaker 2: You could hear a lot of people, and then I remember the brother who wrote 'The Spook Who Sat By the Door,' you would see him there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Yeah, Sam Greenlee [HistoryMaker Samuel Greenlee].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Sam Greenlee, Jimmy Spinks would show up and do a, you know, spoken word type thing with the guys in the back playing.  You'd see tremendously talented females that could play.  So it, it--you know, it was, it was a rich cultural fabric at that time that was still around.  It's no longer there, unfortunately, or it's a different--morphed into something else, a different kind of culture, I guess.
Speaker 1: Now, there's still a arts presence--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's still stuff there, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --in South Shore.  I mean it, yeah, you're the first time, I think anybody's mentioned the Village Compound, and that was--the proprietor of that was Tyehimba Mtu, one of the Larry O. Hardware brothers' [ph.] sons.  And he was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he was--he later became my landlord--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Is that right?
Speaker 1: He made drums, probably--the place is probably filled with drums he made, I would think.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I know, yeah, it's--I remember there being drums there, but I don't, I don't know if it was filled with--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: The Village Compound, yeah, Tyehimba, yeah.
Story_ID: 672949
Speaker 1: This is--so what, what was going on?  Carole Adams [HistoryMaker Carole L. Adams], I know, Abena Joan Brown [HistoryMaker Abena Joan P. Brown] and others at the time were pitching South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] as the cultural arts center of the black community (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: In those days, so--
Speaker 2: In those days, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And Chuck lived in South Shore--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --Chuck Smith [HistoryMaker Charles "Chuck" Smith], Abena, and Carole Adams--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --a lot of the people that were--[HistoryMaker] Geraldine de Haas, remember Geraldine?  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Of course, I know her kids, of course, as you know, well.  Of course, Aisha [Aisha de Haas] and, and Darius and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 2: --yeah, so, yeah.  We all came up together, you know, in a lot of ways.  Aisha and I came up together.  Darius had sort of gone on to New York [New York] by that point by the time I was aware of Aisha and so forth, at least I think.  I didn't see him a lot because of, maybe the musical theater aspect of it.  But I did a play at Wisdom Bridge [Wisdom Bridge Theatre, Chicago, Illinois] when I graduate--shortly after graduation called 'Ten November,' [Steven Dietz and Eric Peltoniemi] and Aisha was one of the people in that, and loved her, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, they were in a program at eta [eta Creative Arts Foundation, Chicago, Illinois], the summer program.  Darius de Haas was one of the stars of the youth program over at eta.
Speaker 2: I'm not surprised.
Speaker 1: But Chicago [Illinois], I mean, just--I guess I'm just trying to go over some of the territory.  You know, Robert Townsend, who's older than you, but he was at--on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] at Lamontezino Theater [ph.].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Although he wound up going to X--what was X Bag [Experimental Black Actors Guild, Chicago, Illinois], and then turned into the Chicago Theater Company.  I know he trained with them and Okoro and Harold--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okoro, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okoro, yeah.
Speaker 1: Harold Johnson [HistoryMaker Okoro Harold Johnson], yeah.
Speaker 2: --Johnson.  And, and I, I remember Robert telling me, he said, you know, that, that Harold Johnson would always say, "This is your Broadway," that the stages of the Chicago Theater Company which was in Hull House [Hull House Theater, Chicago, Illinois] basically.  So, yeah, he, he has very fond remem- remembrances of that.  I talk to Robert from time to time, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --he brings it up all the time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so this is--there're a lot of--in fact, there were a lot of actors doing work in Chicago, I mean at--who would go on to be in the movies.  And at the time, in that, early '80s [1980s] is when Hollywood discovered Chicago as a site for movies.  I think beginning--maybe I'm off, but I think around the time 'The Blues Brothers' was made, and this was like '79 [1979] or '80 [1980].
Speaker 2: Sounds about right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seemed like Hollywood started making a lot of--the State of Illinois gave tax breaks to filmmakers.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And there was a Illinois Foundation for--I mean a film--
Speaker 2: Film commission [Illinois Film Commission]--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, commission or something to start really trying to attract Hollywood movies to Chicago.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so local actors got roles.
Speaker 2: That's true, yeah.  And a lot of us did, Steven Williams was in 'The Blues Brothers.'  He's a Chicagoan.  All of, a lot of Chicagoans were in that.  You turned on that movie, and you, you see guys--Paul Butler, you know, was in that film, who went on--the, the late Paul Butler, great actor.  And so, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember--
Speaker 2: --a bunch of Chicagoans.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember Alyo Tolbert in the dance sequence in, in--you know, in a--you know, he was the founder of Muntu Dance Theatre [Muntu Dance Theatre of Chicago].
Speaker 2: Is that right (laughter)?
Speaker 1: But he had a checkered shirt on and jeans.  We didn't even recognize him, you know, when we saw him.  We said, "Oh, that's Alyo," you know.
Speaker 2: Right, it was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But it was a thrilling time to be from Chicago, and if you were on the arts scene, you saw a lot of Chicago people in movies.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, I wasn't on the arts scene though until, you know, during and after college [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  But my--the arts scene that I was exposed to in college was North Side [Chicago, Illinois], primarily, or downtown.  I think my first professional job was way up north on, in--
Speaker 1: So when you were growing up, did you see--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Edgewater [Chicago, Illinois] or something.
Story_ID: 672950
Speaker 1: Did you see many plays in the, at, in the local black theaters at all--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't see any plays when I was growing up.  I--the first play I ever saw professionally was 'Fiorello!' [Jerome Weidman and George Abbott], which was at, in Lake Forest [Illinois].  There was a theater out there.  I can't remember the name of it, but I thought it was a wonder.  I was fifteen or sixteen years old, and my--one of the directors, the director of our high school theater program [at Quigley Preparatory Seminary South, Chicago, Illinois], Father Robert Bridge, who's still a priest and still lives in Chicago [Illinois], took me to see it.  And I was entranced by the color and the--they had these turntables on the stage.  They had the turntable thing where it rotates, and it's a new set.  And this one rotates.  I was shocked.  I was like, look at--this in ingenious.  But I didn't see anything on the South Side.  That didn't happen really until well after I graduated, and I came, (clears throat) came back south to live for a little while.  And then I would go or have an audition or these things, and so I became aware of eta [eta Creative Arts Foundation, Chicago, Illinois], Black Ensemble Theater [Chicago, Illinois].  I remember trying out for a [HistoryMaker] Jackie Taylor (laughter) show, and I was way too young for the part.  But that's how I got familiarized with black theater.  And then I got cast--in 1987, I was cast and didn't do the show 'til '88 [1988], early '88 [1988], 'Ma Rainey's Black Bottom' [August Wilson] with, with Jonathan, Jonathan Wilson directing it, at the Pegasus Players [Pegasus Players Theater Company; Pegasus Theatre Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], Arlene Crewdson's company.  And that put me on the map.  And so once I did that play, since it was black, as it were, a lot of the black directors, artistic directors, other actors, became aware of me and--but I never worked a whole lot on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] or, if at all, except for I did 'The Meeting' [Jeff Stetson]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --at the Chicago Theater Company [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: Which was '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: That's [HistoryMaker] Douglas Alan-Mann was director, I think, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's, that's right, yeah.
Story_ID: 672951
Speaker 1: So you're at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] from '82 [1982] to, what, '86 [1986] or '87 [1987]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986], right.
Speaker 1: Okay, '86 [1986].  All right, and so, now, when you--well, okay, when you graduate, you do, you stay in Chicago [Illinois].  You taught school, I think?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, so my day job was a school teacher, but while--when I first graduated, I got into a show at the Remains theater company [Remains Theater Ensemble, Chicago, Illinois] called the, the lar- the 'Highest Standard of Living' by fellow Northwestern grad, Keith Reddin.  And then I went from there to the Goodman [Goodman Theatre, Chicago, Illinois] where I did 'A Christmas Carol' (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And so--and then after 'A Christmas Carol,' work dried up, and so I was a school teacher--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now, what--what part did you play in the 'Christmas Carol'?
Speaker 2: A character called Topper which is like a--he makes a joke about Scrooge at Fred's Christmas party.  Fred is the nephew of Ebenezer Scrooge and I make an elaborate joke or something.  And then I played several smaller, little roles, but after that I, I didn't get any acting work for a while.  So I, I was a school teacher and, and enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 672952
Speaker 1: Now, the black actors in Chicago [Illinois] were pushing the theater community, the larger, white theater community for more roles in those days.  I remember there, there was a, an effort to--I mean I first heard the phrase nontraditional casting, I think, in the early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Colorblind casting, they used to call it, and then it became--I think it later morphed into nontraditional as a euphemism--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --but it was--they called it colorblind, and I think it started from a gentleman who was in the union, one of the unions, either Actors Equity [Actors' Equity Association] or Screen Actors Guild [Screen Actors Guild (SAG); Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)], a brother here in Chicago, who pushed for it.  And it was controversial, you know, for a while there, this push for inclusion, what we now call inclusion.  And I remember my friend, Robyn Peterman, from Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] got cast as Dorothy in 'The Wiz,' at like Marriott Lincolnshire [The Marriott Theatre, Lincolnshire, Illinois] or something, and it was colorblind in the reverse.  So it was used to kind of bite people, you know, on the tail end after, after being forced, as it were, to look at the issue of including more people of color and to the landscape of, of Chicago actors.  So it works a little bit both ways.  My feelings on it were always ambivalent.  I thought that the--like August Wilson, who articulated it very well in 'The Ground on Which I Stand,' the thing is not to join white theaters, companies or what have you, but to start theaters, new theater of your own, which black people have been good at doing in Chicago for a long time.  And so that, that's one of the great prides that I have, is that unlike other major cities, we have our own.  Memphis [Tennessee] has one, by the way, at the Hattiloo Theatre.  New York [New York] has a couple, kind of things--they used to have the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC], but now they have the Classical Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] which isn't really dedicated to doing theater about, for and by black people, as it were.  But, but we do.  Houston [Texas] has, has the, their theater company [The Ensemble Theatre].  I think it's--I'm gonna get back to it.  I can't remember the name of it right now, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, but they're, they're around the country--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I think every major city has some sort of black theater company now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, not everyone.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No.  Los Angeles [California], for example, does not.  They have--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Not now?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Really?  Nothing today?
Speaker 2: Nothing of note, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know [HistoryMaker] Marla Gibbs had the theater--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, the Vision Theatre [Los Angeles, California]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: There were--there's several others at one time.  And New York still, you know, Woodie King [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.], would--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Woodie is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --they were doing stuff down at Henry Street Settlement House [Henry Street Settlement, New York, New York]] and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --the National Black Theatre [New York, New York] with [HistoryMaker] Barbara Ann Teer.  She's passed away now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --but there's a generation in theater that has passed, has passed away or is passing away as we speak, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, it's true.  It's very true, but [HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward, I think is still kicking around, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes, right, right.
Speaker 2: --and I see him from time to time, always great to see him.  And I see Woodie from time to time.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: There was just a movie about Woodie done ['King of Stage: The Woodie King, Jr. Story'], a documentary that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --Juney Smith, a friend of mine put together.  So, these are the old lions, but there, there's some young ones coming up.  Ekcandoo--Ekundayo Bandele in, in Memphis, for example, and a bunch of others, [HistoryMaker] Kenny Leon with True Colors [True Colors Theatre Company] down in Atlanta, Georgia.  So there are--most of the major cities do have some form, but not all of them.
Speaker 1: Now, it's interesting to hear you say what you said about the importance of black theater 'cause there's so many--I, I think in those days, as I remember, we had actors that never were in the black theater.  They were always in, in one of the ninety something or 100 something white theater companies on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois], primarily doing, doing plays, and you never really--you didn't see too many of 'em, you know, performing with Jackie [HistoryMaker Jackie Taylor] or with Val [HistoryMaker Val Gray Ward] or Abena [HistoryMaker Abena Joan P. Brown] or, or Okoro [HistoryMaker Okoro Harold Johnson] where these are people on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].  But, but South, theater on the South Side and on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] was still a hard--it was a promotional problem and a cultural education problem, you know, to get people used to coming to the theater.  Once they got used to it, you know, they seemed to really enjoy it.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: But it was--'cause we tried different things.  A season, I remember that, that was a big idea.  Let's have a season, and then you--people can anticipate what's coming--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --'cause sometimes, the theaters, being on a small budget wouldn't be able to project beyond the show they were doing (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: This way, it depends on how it did as to how they--if they'd be able to launch another one right afterwards, so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, so that was, I think Abena's model was to do, sell to clubs, you know, and I know one--in churches, you know.  She had--churches would buy a night out or the Jaguar Social Club [ph.], I remember the name of that club (laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that bought a night, you know, bought a--and it was a struggle, you know, yeah, struggle, and it still is, I think--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --right now, to try to--get theater ensconced in, yeah, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, theater, theater in general.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: White theater too is having a tough time.
Story_ID: 672953
Speaker 1: So, you, you get more involved after you graduate [from Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] with, with the black theaters on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] on some level and--
Speaker 2: Right, never, I mean never of any great note or any official capacity.  I, I, I would go and see things with my friends and them--but, but no, I didn't become very involved, per se, but I got to know some people, got to know [HistoryMaker] Jackie Taylor.  I directed a play there [Black Ensemble Theater, Chicago, Illinois].  I did a production of 'Julius Caesar' [William Shakespeare] that, you know, got a lot of notice.  I can't remember.  This must be '92 [1992] or something, '93 [1993] maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're working in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: From--I mean--now, you--and you're doing some--what was your first movie role?
Speaker 2: Well, the first movie that I did, that ever saw the light of day was called 'The Package.'  It was with Gene Hackman--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, right.
Speaker 2: --and Tommy Lee Jones and Joanna Cassidy and, and a bunch of Chicagoans.  It was directed by my friend, Andy Davis [Andrew Davis], who grew up in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois].  His father, Nate Davis [Nathan Davis], was an actor who I've worked with on stage and plays at the Goodman [Goodman Theatre, Chicago, Illinois], 'The Government Inspector' [Nikolai Gogol], for example, directed by my old college mentor, directing mentor, Frank Galati, great, great director.
Speaker 1: Right, he's one of the legends in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Great legend, now living in Florida, Academy Award [Academy Awards] nomination for penning the script for 'The Accidental Tourist,' that stars my friend Geena Davis.  She was fantastic, played Muriel [Muriel Pritchett] in that movie.  But that was my first movie, is, with Gene Hackman, 'The Package,' and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I know they used--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --he was really cool.
Speaker 1: --they used Pullman [Chicago, Illinois] as Germany or something.  I mean I--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, we were kind of all over.  We were--and the German woods I think was like Willow Springs, Illinois where we shot.  It was snowing.  We had to wait for it to snow for several weeks, and while we were waiting, we were being paid.  So I was like, please don't snow, don't snow (laughter).  And so it was, it was great.  We shot for several weeks.  Andy was great about putting Chicagoans to work and making sure that they, you know, earned a living.  So that was the first thing that I did.  That was '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: All right, now, you did--in '89 [1989], you also did 'A Mother's Courage: The Mary Thomas Story.'
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That's Isiah Thomas' mother [Mary Thomas].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And was that, was that shot locally too?
Speaker 2: Yes, that was, that was shot in Chicago, but that, you know, I distinguish that because that was television, a television movie, a Disney movie--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --of the week.  But I did that before I did 'The Package' actually.
Story_ID: 672954
Speaker 1: 'The Five Heartbeats' was the--this is your--well, tell us about what, what it was for you?  This is your first big role, right, in a movie?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think--I guess so.  I think we actually shot though--I'm just going back to 'A Mother's Courage' ['A Mother's Courage: The Mary Thomas Story'] briefly.  I think that was shot in '88 [1988] and maybe came out in '89 [1989] because that's the way it works.  We shot 'The Package' early '89 [1989], shortly thereafter.  And I remember that because Gregory Alan Williams played Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  We were shooting 'The Package' when I found out that we--I had been cast as Malcolm X in 'The Meeting' [Jeff Stetson] which I wound up doing at the Chicago Theater Company [Chicago, Illinois] to some acclaim.  But in any event, 'The Five Heartbeats' came after both of those.  I was teaching school, and I got this audition to go down--I remember Chemin Bernard [Chemin Sylvia Bernard] was the casting director, I think originally from Chicago [Illinois].  And I met Robert [Robert Townsend].  He was just in an office.  I don't think I auditioned--I know I didn't.  We just had a conversation, sitting down like you and I are talking.  And I told him that I had to get back to school (laughter) because, you know, I had people, kids waiting, and he was a little fascinated that I was a school teacher for my day job.  And that was, that was a great conversation.  And later that year, very early 1990, I decided to try as, what we call pilot season, and to go out to Los Angeles [California], and see if I can get cast in a television pilot because I was like striking gold.  It was like being a '49er and mining for gold.  If you got cast in one of those, you would be, you know, sort of set financially, if the show went, although it's not--it's not, not easy as all that.  But while I was at pilot season, I got this call from my agent that I had been cast as one of 'The Five Heartbeats.'  And I, I was shocked and delighted and we got to work almost right away.  At that time, however, there was a strike from IATSE [International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees], the international trade union of artists, scenic artists and so forth, grips and electricians and all of these things.  They were striking for better pay, and all that, and so we had to delay a bit, maybe several weeks.  And so we rehearsed these routines.  We, we had--Michael Peters was the choreographer, the great Michael Peters, had done all those Michael Jackson videos--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --and has this amazing talent--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: 'Beat It'--
Speaker 2: 'Beat It' and all this.  He was in it, you know, he was in these videos frequently, but he was really a choreographer, of--par excellence.  And I got to work with the great Harold Nicholas of the Nicholas brothers and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --and he was very cool, just a regular guy.  He was like, I think eighty--seventy-eight or seventy-nine, and he was still doing (laughter) these dance routines.  I was amazed that he could do this stuff and, and it was great, you know, getting to meet the guys.  Michael Wright is still one of my very dearest friends on, on the planet.  He's in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] right now.  I see Leon [Leon Robinson] for, on Sundays at our buddy's house to watch football games and basketball games.  Robert and I just did an interview--'cause he's doing 'The Making of The Five Heartbeats' [ph.].  I see Tico [Tico Wells] from time to time, showing up on projects.  So it was really an important time in my life.  It was, as you say, perhaps the most high profile thing that I'd, I had done on film up to that point, and I'm forever fond of it.
Story_ID: 672955
Speaker 1: Okay, so you have a role in 'The Five Heartpe- -beats.'  You're learning choreography from Michael Peters--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --and you're--but you don't really have to sing, right, because The Dells are (laughter) singing the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, The Dells, The Dells did the cover of, of the song, but they weren't--they didn't sing in the movie.  That was--those were some other guys, Billy Valentine--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --for example, did, did Michael Wright's voice.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a guy named Kevin Dorsey who did my voice, but then The Dells did the radio cover--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --as it were for the soundtrack of the movie.  But, yes, we, we didn't have to sing.  I know Leon [Leon Robinson] sings a little in a reggae band.  Tico [Tico Wells] was the best singer of all of us.  Michael and I could barely (laughter) hold a tune.  And Robert [Robert Townsend] loved music, but, but, you know, he wasn't much of a crooner or what have you.  But we got some great guys that--Robert did a great job voice casting the people who would be--who we were lip-syncing to.
Story_ID: 672956
Speaker 1: Now, I was asking this question off camera, but I, I think it, I think it's true, and you were saying, well, it may be not as true as I, I thought it was.  But the actors, a lot of actors I know have had to, you know, study--whether they could sing or not, they had to study voice.  They had to study dance, you know, and they're--a lot of actors, they are--regardless of what the public sees in play, are versatile enough to do a musical or to do, you know--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] or do, you know, there's--it's a lot, that they have a wide range of skills they can bring to a role.
Speaker 2: Yes, and we all, generally speaking, have a, have a pretty, pretty sizable bag of tricks, not all of 'em know all the same trick.  I'm not much of a singer as I've demonstrated capably many times.  I tried out for just about every musical while I was at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], by the way, and didn't get in any of them (laughter) until my senior year when I was cast as Pontius Pilate in 'Jesus Christ Superstar' [Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice].  That was a great moment, and then I later did do 'Pacific Overtures' [Stephen Sondheim and John Weidman].  I had under--I filled in for a guy.  I replaced an actor and had to sing a song.  But most--but many of us don't, many of us do.  Some people can dance, some people can't really, but, you know, your ability to move gracefully is important.  So you will have to take some sort of movement class or fencing or dance, something in--that, that, that loosens up the body.  But the vocal training really is not, it's not compulsive to do or compulsory to do singing classes.  I didn't take any singing classes, but we did have to take speech, elocution, diction.  We learned what--through what was called the Lessac method, Arthur Lessac method, but at that time--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What is that method--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Placing the voice, learning how to place your voice in the nasal cavity, as it were, the--this part of the brain or, or face, facial mask.  You can actually hear a buzz when you are doing it properly.  But now, there are many other methods, Alexander [Alexander Technique] and other such things.  I'm not terribly familiar with these, but the old fashioned way works for me.  You know, I don't do a whole lot of declaiming anymore on stage, nor do any actors 'cause it's not necessary.  The technology has advanced so much now that you can whisper on a Broadway stage and be perfectly audible.  So I think that that's taken a little bit of the, of the old techniques away.  I sort of regret the fact that, that anybody almost can do it now.  You don't have to have been trained in those same methodologies to be able to come across to an audience.  So anyway, that's me being old fashioned.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and, yeah, you make a good point because even the theaters were designed acoustically--I know we had a tour of the Auditorium Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] once, and somebody stood on the stage and just made the slightest sound, and you could hear it all over because the speakers in--when the Auditorium was built, I think the, in the 1880s or something, had to be able to project through the audience without a mic [microphone].
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --and theater, traditional theater was done without a mic.
Speaker 2: Right.  And now they have these floor mics, or hanging and, you know, from the thing.  You can't even see them, and it picks up everything.  But I, I, I think it loses some of the, the mystery because of, of that.  Those plays were written, theatrical literature is, was designed to be heard in a certain way with certain kinds--you know, there're purist in music who think if you're gonna play Mozart [Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart], for example, then it should be played on the clavichord or harpsichord and not on a piano.  It wasn't designed for that.  I like to listen it just on whatever instrument just because it's such great music, but I, I think the same can be said of, of, of acting Shakespeare and August Wilson.  You should be able to use the entirety of your instrument to deliver this message, and when you're not having to do that, I think it takes something away from the power and, and intent of, of it.
Story_ID: 672957
Speaker 1: Technically, and I never thought about this before, but in the age of the microphone, how does the microphone change--does the microphone and the, the, I guess the--access to nuance, because of the mic, in your voice--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --does that change your expressions on stage because I know stage expression is usually bigger than expressions, stage expressions that a actor makes in a film because you can't do the same thing in a film that you do on stage--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Sometimes, it's too much, it's too hot.  You, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, I mean I've heard that theory that, you know, that you can be too big for film.  I don't that that's necessarily true.  I think it depends on what the scene calls for.  I think it depends on how the scene is being shot, but, yes, the more intimate stuff is, is reserved for the camera, and so the more, as it were, public or demonstrative stuff--not always, of course, is reserved for the stage.  It's the whole person and, and things.  But great actors don't really modulate for it.  I don't think that Al Pacino or, or Jack Nicholson, whoever, are, are playing it small.  You know, they, they go for it (laughter).  They're screaming, they're, they're doing all the stuff that you would do on a stage.  They just are aware of how the technology is used.  So, I mean if it's a extreme close up, they're not doing all that.  They know how to modulate for the cameras, and actors who are theater actors should know how to provide the illusion of the same kind of intimacy, the same kind of closeness or private-ness as you do in the, as you do on film, but you have to do it in a different way.  This is where, you know, mastery comes in, like people like Julie Taymor who is able to, on stage, to create the illusion of the close up, just by the use of lights or the use of other scenic elements, the mise en scene can reduce or expand or draw the audience's focus, but she does that, you know, on this wide landscape, this, this huge, panoramic stage.  She could also do it in film, and then great directors, you know, have that kind of fluidity.  Great actors should, as well, although most actors, back until recently, most film actors wouldn't have dared to go on a stage and many stage actors were ambivalent to say the very--to be kind, about doing film.  The great Paul Scofield, the great Paul Scofield, didn't like doing movies.  He did them, you know, a few, won the Academy Award [Academy Award for Best Actor] for doing 'The Man for All Seasons' [sic. 'A Man for All Seasons'] (laughter) and all of this.  But he didn't like, he didn't like it.  He preferred the stage.
Speaker 1: Now-
Speaker 2: Olivier [Laurence Olivier] preferred the stage.
Story_ID: 672958
Speaker 1: Now, an actor with a gift like yours, and you have a, a voice that is a gift, you know--
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: --a lot of people would like--I mean, but it, it's part of a legacy of black actors that had this kind of gift, going all the way back to probably beyond the Rex Ingram.  I don't know what kind of voice Ira Aldridge had, but I would imagine he probably had a pretty strong voice.
Speaker 2: I would imagine, yeah.
Speaker 1: But Rex Ingram, Paul Robeson, as we're talking about, William Marshall, Avery Brooks--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones' voice--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Percy Rodrigues always had--it was the strong voices, you know.  Does, does that voice--does the power of your voice require you to do something special with--when you act, I mean to try to--'cause there was a criticism of Avery Brooks once.  They said, he plays big scenes bigger than anybody--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: --but if it's a small--if he's saying, hello, it's just too, hello, you know, it's just too--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right, it's intense.
Speaker 1: So do you have to kinda hold, hold the reins on it a little bit or what?
Speaker 2: I don't know, you know.  I don't--maybe.  I think, I think that there's a kind of style that actors have, and, and I don't know if it's that they can't make those adjustments.  I think that they choose not to.  I mean there are people who, when you meet them in real life (laughter), and you say, "Good morning," they say, "Hey, good morning," and they overwhelm you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --with their, with their presence.  That's just the nature of it.  There's a, a scholar of opera.  His name, I think is Dr. Wallace Cherry [ph.].  But anyway, we were discussing Shirley Verrett, the great operatic soprano.  And he was saying--and I asked him, was there something physi- physically, the physiognomy or physiology of the black body that gives it a kind of tonal quality when the voice is produced.  And he started--he said that there had been some research about it, and there was a different quality, in some cases, that black people have, their ability to produce vocal resonance and these things.  Now, I don't know how, you know, politically correct that might be (laughter), but I, I wondered about that myself because it does seem that, when you hear these basso profundo, you know, this kind of great voice (laughter).
Speaker 1: Of course, not, not everybody has it, you know.
Speaker 2: Not everybody has it.
Speaker 1: But, not--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --not everybody's a James Earl Jones, but--
Speaker 2: Not everybody, but you're of a certain size, it seems to me if you're--we had an actor here in Chicago [Illinois].  His name was Paul Mabon, wonderful--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, I know Paul (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --wonderful actor, had that, who had that even way more than I did.  I think Bruce Young [Bruce A. Young] had it, had that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Paul was a singer too, yeah.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: Paul Mabon, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause he played, he played the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was in several--
Speaker 2: --Robeson.
Speaker 1: Yeah, several pieces at eta [eta Creative Arts Foundation, Chicago, Illinois], where he was--
Speaker 2: Wonderful actor.
Speaker 1: --featured as a singer, yeah.
Speaker 2: Wonderful singer, wonderful actor.  But I saw him in 'The Great White Hope' [Howard Sackler] at, and he blew me away.  He was so wonderful.  They did that--Jonathan Wilson directed it at the Pegasus Players [Pegasus Players Theater Company; Pegasus Theatre Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Did you know Ed Douglas [ph.]?
Speaker 2: Of course, yeah, the great Ed (laughter).
Speaker 1: He played God in [HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown, Jr.'s play ['In De Beginnin']--what's the one about the snake in the Garden of Eden and all that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know, just--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: 'Cause I used to always refer him to as God.  I could never think of his name.  I said, "You're, you're God, right?"
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: And he said, "That's right," you know, (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I can't remember the name of the play either, but I'm, I'm familiar with the play and--but, yes, a wonderful guy--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Ed Douglas, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Wonderful guy, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So we have a history of this, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, so you're part of that tradition, and, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'll take it (laughter).
Story_ID: 672959
Speaker 1: 'Five Heartbeats,' now, 'The Five Heartbeats' was an excel- well, it, it didn't do as well in the box, at the box office as--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --as, as was hoped.
Speaker 2: Right, right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But I don't know if it did as well as it was expected, but as, as, as you would--as, it hasn't done--it didn't do as well at the box office then as it subsequently did.  People watch it all the time now in a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, do you--does that--well, I know they recog- people probably recognize you from 'The Five Heartbeats' as much as they do from 'Blacklist' ['The Blacklist'] or something, probably.
Speaker 2: It depends on the kind of people, like, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for black people, many of a certain generation know me from that, and who grew up with the movie.  But I've been in, you know, some tent pole things like 'The Matrix' or cult favorites like 'Dollhouse' or whatever.  So I would say if you're a white teenage girl, you probably know me from 'Dollhouse' (laughter).  If you're a fifty year old black person, or over thirty-five, you probably know me from 'The Five Heartbeats' or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) that's a Joss Whedon--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right, yes, Joss Whedon--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --piece, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, you know, the--but, the, 'The Five Heartbeats' didn't burn up the sky at the box office, but that's typical for a lot of movies that become favorites after the box office.  'It's a Wonderful Life' didn't do well at the box office--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes, right, right.
Speaker 2: But it did, you know, obviously, we--you see it twenty times during the Christmas season.  'The Wizard of Oz' didn't exactly do gangbusters, even though it was revolutionary at the time and an amazing film and a classic.  And so in its afterlife, post-box office, it, it did quite well.  And that's more important, I mean the enduring quality of film does not rely on box office success in order to get into the hearts and the minds of the people.  And I think that's proven over and, over and again, particularly, for me with 'The Five Heartbeats'.
Speaker 1: Now, economically, does it--do you, I mean has it--does 'Five Heartbeats' continue to pay you anything significant over the--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No.
Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter) 'cause I thought I'd ask.  I just wondered, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  No, the--you know, the, just the way it works now, and this isn't any fault of the movie.  I think if, if there was fairness in corporate minded studio systems, we'd probably get our, our fair share of it.  But the way that the residual thing works now, it doesn't really benefit actors, even huge things like 'Man of Steel,' which did well, 'Batman, Superman' ['Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice'], all these things which did well.  You get nothing essentially--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the residuals are not--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: 'The Matrix'--
Speaker 1: --worth--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Not juicy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that changed with, you know, the, the unions negotiate these contracts with the studios and the producers, and when it was on VHS, we did way better.  And even on network television, we did, we did better.  The residual payments were, were good because there was a very limited market.  Now, with all of these media platforms, these distribution platforms, all of that money has evaporated largely.  We don't get a lot of--we don't get anything for Internet plays.  We don't get anything--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You don't get anything for that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So if I watch 'Five Heartbeats' on Amazon [Amazon.com, Inc.] or Hulu or other (unclear)--something, now, you don't get anything from that?
Speaker 2: A fraction of a penny for every million views or whatever, you know, noth- nothing.  It was a big bone of contention in one of our recent negotiations with the Screen Actors Guild [Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)] that, you know, DVDs, we, we, we got very little money, if, if anything, sales, rentals, and then on the Internet, nothing, nothing at all.  So it's not fair.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: It's not fair.  And it's not show fairness, it's show business (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, 'Five Heartbeats', did you ever see 'Sparkle?'
Speaker 2: Of course, I saw 'Sparkle.'
Speaker 1: Now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I saw both versions, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the first version was Abena Joan Brown's [HistoryMaker Abena Joan P. Brown] favorite movie.
Speaker 2: Is that right, yeah.
Speaker 1: She watched it at least once a week.  And she would talk about it all the time, and, but the--one of the problems with it, as I remember seeing it, was that it was shot too dark or something and just didn't--the, I don't know, the production values of it were--I think they had the equipment but somebody decided to turn the lights down or something and it just--do you remember that, kind of feeling like that?
Speaker 2: I, I, you know, I was never enamored of it, per se.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I remember liking the performances of Lonette McKee and Dorian Harewood was in that, I believe, and, and Philip Michael Thomas.  I just remember that.  I don't really recall being hip to things like production value at the time--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --so I didn't--I haven't seen it in decades, but--
Speaker 1: And it's probably not relevant to this discussion, but it was--it did kind of proceed--it was like, I guess--we have an interview with Robert Townsend about it, but I, I imagine he was influenced somewhat about it, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure.  I know he was, I know he loved 'Sparkle.'
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: He talks about it.
Story_ID: 672960
Speaker 1: Any rate, 'Five Heartbeats,' and that was filmed out in Los Angeles [California]?
Speaker 2: We filmed it in Los Angeles entirely, yes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So this is your first--was this your first film, actually, outside of Chicago [Illinois], where you actually went to L.A.?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Yes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah, that was the first movie I did outside of Illinois or, yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1991, 'The Five Heartbeats.'  It is now a classic.  So you're still teaching?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right, so--and I forgot my question now.  Oh, this is (laughter)--all right, so, now, you're teaching.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, now, this is interesting.  They--it, it shows some initiative and organization that you actually have a job that pays you a salary--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 1: And so many actors, as you know, are waiting tables in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in Chicago at any--somebody wrote in a paper that at any given time, 90 percent of the actors are waiting tables in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the old joke, I think was, (laughter) was, "Oh, you're an actor."  Said, "Yeah, I'm an actor."  And they say, "What restaurant?"  (Laughter) So, yeah, that's--it's, you know, it's a cash business.  You can make a pretty good buck if you're at the right restaurant at the right time of day and, and all of those things.  And it has some flexibility.  People can cover shifts, and they say, that's the benefit of waiting tables in pursuing a career in acting.  With teaching school, it was a little more difficult to do that just because you would have to get a substitute to cover you for the day, which is how I started out.  When I first was teaching school, I was a substitute teacher.  So on those days that I had an audition or a rehearsal, I just didn't call in because I was working.  And then when, you know, it's--in some sense almost like being a teamster.  If you wanna work, and you have a certain amount of hours, wou made your book and all of these things.  You work when you want or when it's convenient.  And it became very convenient for a couple of years, and then I was assigned as a permanent substitute, what was called FTB, full time basis.  And then I became a cadre which is like you are assigned to that school.  And I did that for the last few years of my teaching career under the auspices of one Mrs. Marcella Gilley [ph.], who was like my second mom and who I met through her son, who was at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] with me, one of my very best friends, Nick Gilley [ph.].  But she gave me a job, and I also did a couple of days working for my sister, Lori [Lori Lennix], 'cause she was a principal (laughter) at Doolittle High School [sic.]--Doolittle East--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, elementary, yeah, Doolittle, yeah.
Speaker 2: --elementary school [Doolittle East Elementary School; James R Doolittle Jr Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], middle school or what have you.  And, yeah, so I had people who were in the, you know, the board of ed [Chicago Board of Education] or, or in the Chicago public school system [Chicago Public Schools] who would look out for me and make sure that if I needed to, for those long stretches of time when I wasn't doing a movie or, or play (laughter) that paid a buck or two, then I had a way to keep the lights on and pay the rent.  But it was difficult.  You know, I was doing plays.  Even still, I was doing 'The Five Heartbeats.'  We shot that in '90 [1990].  It came out in '91 [1991].  I was doing a play at the Wisdom Bridge [Wisdom Bridge Theatre, Chicago, Illinois] where I played the Great Gatsby [sic. Jay Gatsby] in, in the stage ada- in the stage adaptation of the, of the novel ['The Great Gatsby,' F. Scott Fitzgerald].  My friend, John Carlile directed that, but I was doing the tour, the publicity tour of 'The Five Heartbeats' while I was on stage having to do that.  So I missed a fair amount of what we call the press junket, doing all of those interviews and going to cities to promote the film, still being done at that time, a little bit different now.  We had a private jet that was carrying us around--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: --this is an entirely different world for me where we had, you know, Peter Roth's private jet or something that took us from city to city when we were doing that.  But--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So you do the daytime shows and the talk shows in the evenings, and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Evening news, interviews, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that, that's exactly right.  But I was, you know, like I said, I was doing a play, and I was also teaching school.  And, in fact, 'The Five Heartbeats' came up to Bass Elementary School [Perkins Bass Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and made an appearance.  And all five of, of us, we bussed the students, the kids to a theater.  They saw the movie one day, and then the next day, we went and visited the school.  And it was a beautiful event.  I'll never forget it.  Robert [Robert Townsend] arranged for it, that to happen, and it meant the world to them and because of that, it meant the world to me.
Story_ID: 672961
Speaker 1: But I was doing, wearing many hats at that time, teaching, acting in theater, developing what would, you know, become, you know, a film and television career, pursuing civic responsibilities, getting the vote out, these kinds of things.  You know, this was--I was an activist at that time.  And I was, in the '90s [1990s], '89 [1989], '90 [1990], '91 [1991], I was studying or processing a bit at the Nation of Islam.  I was still struggling to figure out exactly what my religion would be--
Speaker 2: Okay, tell us about--now, how did you get involved with the Nation of Islam?  What happened?
Speaker 1: I would go to the, to the mosque and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, around 73rd [Street] here in Chicago [Illinois]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's, that's correct.
Speaker 2: --the Mosque Maryam?
Speaker 1: The Mosque Maryam.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Now, you're a Catholic, you were a Catholic--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I was, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --young man.  Were you still a Catholic in those days or were you searching for--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I was searching.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was searching.  So I, I was what we now refer to as interfaith, (laughter) I guess.  But at a certain point, I abandoned all of it and became, not an atheist, but I became an agnostic.  But this was a deeply meaningful period of time for me, just because I was learning a lot about the, the theologies of various religions, what God was in the Nation of Islam, that he's a black man and that all humans on earth descend from that man, which turned out to be true, that aspect of it.  And I was also struggling with, you know, being this ex-seminarian, you never really are an ex-Catholic (laughter).  I think once you're a Catholic, you're a Catholic, whether or not you call yourself that, is one thing--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They even say that about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --but it stays.
Speaker 2: --atheists, a Catholic atheist is different from a Protestant one, that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's probably true.
Speaker 2: Right, that ath- that's what they say, really.  They say that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I believe that.
Speaker 2: That--yeah.
Speaker 1: I believe that, but, you know, I was juggling these different ideologies.  I believed all of them fully at the same time, you know, in some way.  I believe that, that Jesus did get up out of that tomb.  I believe that, that the black man was divine and, and was God and that when he was not acting in concert with that, he was doing that by circumstance and not necessarily by nature.  And so these, these were big ideas.
Story_ID: 672962
Speaker 1: I had grown up really very close to a lot of members of the Nation of Islam, the entire block almost on the--we had an alley in common on Phillips [Avenue] and Yates [Boulevard].  All the people on Yates were, were Muslim.  And so we--in the day, they were at school.  They were at school all year.  They would be in school in the summer.  But when they got out of school, they would play in the alley with us.  And we would play baseball, basketball.  We would rig up these garbage cans to create a hoop or we would put a milk crate on a, on a telephone pole and, and, and play softball, Frisbee, tennis, against the back wall.
Speaker 2: Now, this is--I don't think this was brought out in the first interview, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, probably not.
Speaker 2: --Phillips is one of the most--where you lived in South Shore is one of the densely populated places in the City of Chicago [Illinois], lots of apartment dwellings, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --at one time they were, it was a Jewish neighborhood, I think.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: But high income, though densely populated area--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --South Shore was the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You bet.
Speaker 2: --yeah, South Shore High School [South Shore International College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois] was a Jewish high school basically, and what's his name, the great actor, singer that played--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Mandy Patinkin.
Speaker 2: Mandy Patinkin, yeah.  I used to live across the street from where he grew up--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, and, on Essex [Avenue]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --yeah.  That's a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --South Shore is a, was that, and, and that dense population as time, as--by the time that you start, you came out of school, and you were growing up there, I mean the, things were getting tenser and tenser over there because of the lack of jobs and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: At one time, I think [HistoryMaker] Ernie Banks owned an apartment building on Kingston [Avenue], you know.  But that time had passed, kind of passed away.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And so, there were always people in the neighborhood that had a job, usually, but there were a lot of relatives that stayed with them and didn't (laughter) so they were out in the street.
Speaker 1: Right, that, that's right, and that's, that was my experience there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In fact, you know, there, there were still some white families that couldn't afford to move out yet, but eventually would.  My mother [Lillian Vines Lennix] would visit as part of her obligation for Catholic Charities and so forth.  There was an older Jewish lady named Mrs. Wolfe [ph.] who she would visit every week.  And we would go by there and, and look out for her, you know.  If she needed some things, you know, she would give us a quarter to do this, that or the other, take out her trash or bring some groceries to her.  But I remember Mrs. Wolfe greatly, and I remember, you know, there were still some Jewish merchants there, the Barron's Shoe Store [ph.] was there--that's where we got our shoes.  They were very kind to us.  The doctor, Dr. Lawrence Feldman [ph.], was, was my dentist.  He was between Essex and Phillips on 79th [Street] for a long time.  And then, of course, this, this influx of--as the times were changing, and the sensibilities and the, you know, got tenser with the same kind of economic struggles and demands and, and protests and all that, you know, as it were, were coming into being.  And the people were dying out.  You know, entire new groups of people came in.
Story_ID: 672963
Speaker 1: So you're growing up--you say you--there were a lot of Muslims around you in the Nation of Islam--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --which is different from being a Orthodox Muslim, even though it's getting closer and closer to it.
Speaker 2: There would be no Orthodox Islam in America--at least it would have taken a lot longer time without the efforts of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad and the Nation of Islam.  It really did put the footprint of Islam in the United States of America and Orthodox Muslims will tell you that.
Speaker 1: Well, the--they had the Ahmadiyyah movement too which was in Detroit [Michigan].  I think he was associated with that when he lived in Detroit, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was now--nowhere near the efficacy of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad and before him, Noble Drew Ali, so--who were both in Chicago [Illinois], so in my, in my, you know, I, I don't think that there's any comparison in terms of influence or, or, yeah, yeah, sphere of influence as it were.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you, your neighbors basically drew you into interest in the Nation, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yes, I was fascinated with them, you know.  They were extraordinarily polite.  They were always clean and well dressed.  They were very, very intelligent.  They were studying trigonometry when I was still--when they were in like eighth grade.  So, you know, it was, it was, it recommended itself as, as an area to look into.  And I don't know why people aren't more interested in the contributions of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad.  It think that, without question, you could say he is the most important, most accomplished black person who created--self-created man, essentially, wasn't in a group that was integrated, no white leadership, no white membership.  And the organization is still doing well.  It's been around eighty some years.  They talk very basic things, food, clothing, shelter.  It's a religious organization so it's not really political.  They weren't supposed to even vote, so I think that, that it is an important organization to study, and an institution that, that we can glean a lot from as a people.
Speaker 1: Okay, so is it the self help aspect of black people doing for themselves that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --really attracted you to them?
Speaker 2: What's more American than that?  That's, that's the very bedrock of American can-do-ism, not relying on the state or, or, or charity to do for yourself, and to, and to create for yourself opportunities that can then contribute.  Then you can contribute to others.  So I think if you looked at it carefully, the--all of the rhetoric and of this, the negative things that people have about it are misplaced.  And it only comes out of lack of knowledge as to what's being taught, so I--are really being taught there.  So I'm, I'm--to this day, I, I defend the Nation of Islam and, and I think that, that people (laughter) could learn a lot from it.
Story_ID: 672964
Speaker 1: Did you have any particular mentors in the Nation that--were you close to Minister Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan]?  I mean he's the, he's the, you know, the, the head.  But--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --now, that would be--well, I wouldn't imagine you'd be close to him at that point, but, but is there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --anybody in the Nation that you were close to?
Speaker 2: Not at that time, and I was a little boy, really, and then, you know, as--getting into the '90s [1990s] and so forth, there were people who I had met at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] where I had been the head of the black student union, For Members Only.  I was the head of the black student organization there, and so we invited people up from the Nation of Islam.  We invited Harold Washington up.  We invited Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] up.  We invited Stokely Carmichael, Kwame Ture.  So, you know, that was my obligation, is to expose as many people to the varies--the various thoughts and ideologies that were available to them, rather than this, you know, the same old thing over and over again, the American dream aspect of it where everybody gets to participate in it except for black people who had been here as long as anybody, but who had benefitted very little, if at all.  And that's--remains true.  And so I, I, again, I think it's, it is a duty that we can expose our people to the ideologies that can help them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, yes, I mean now I'm very good friends with [HistoryMaker] Munir Muhammad, who is no longer affiliated with the Nation of Islam, but is a, is the head of his own organization called the Coalition for the Remembrance of Elijah Muhammad, C.R.O.E. [Coalition for the Remembrance of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, Chicago, Illinois]; and you'll be interviewing him, I think on Saturday.
Story_ID: 672965
Speaker 1: So this is the early '90s [1990s] is a time when the Nation of Islam was making a lot of headlines.  Minister Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] was in the news a lot.  And the early '90s [1990s] were also a period of time when gun violence in Chicago [Illinois] had reached epidemic proportions and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in the years leading up to the Million Man March, I remember it really, really--1994 was, I think it's still the record for the number of gun homicides on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] and the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].  But so, but you're a person, you have like roots on the far South Side and you've got, you've got connections on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois] in the theater community.  So you've got--you're spanning like two different worlds--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --sort of, you know, which is--now, it didn't tear you apart.  You've still sitting here (laughter) like Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] said, it didn't split you completely down the middle.  How did you maintain yourself, your perspective?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I've always been curious.  I've always been intellectually curious and, and drawn to many different ways of thinking without ever becoming completely all one way.  And so I put on a different hat.  You know, what my--probably my second favorite politician of all time is Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], of the ones that I met and the ones that I know.  I met Harold Washington, of course, and Clinton and many of them, but he had this ability to compartmentalize things.  Like he could put that in a box and go back to it and open it up and, and, and talk at some length and in some detail with some expertise on that, and then there would be something completely different, maybe, you know, like water sports or something (laughter) or the dessert that he had in Arizona, you know, in 1984.  So I, I've always tried to be that kind of person where there are many Harry Lennixes [HistoryMaker Harry J. Lennix] and, and I, I didn't really have a hard time juggling those.
Story_ID: 672966
Speaker 1: But, again, I was--I left Chicago [Illinois] really in '94 [1994], right around that time.  I moved actually even before that.  I'd--I still maintained tentacles in Chicago, and would come back and do the occasional stint of teaching, would come back and do other, other things.  But I was in New York [New York] by that time, and was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay, when did you actually take up residence in New York?
Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991], late '91 [1991], and I got the opportunity to work with the great director, Julie Taymor at Theatre for a New Audience [New York, New York].  We did 'Titus Andronicus' [William Shakespeare] on stage there in '92 [sic. 1994], I believe, and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, New York City, now, so, so this is, you know, basically a theater town.  Did you--so you're involved with a lot of stage productions in, in New York City in those days?
Speaker 1: No, not a lot.  I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I didn't do a lot of stage there.  I was really, at that point, starting to break into film and television.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I did, I think in '92 [1992]--(laughter) I can't remember the years exactly, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, some of the--I know you were in 'Mo' Money' in '92 [1992]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Was that a Hollywood film--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --or, or a New York?
Speaker 1: Hollywood film, but shot here in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: So, I came back to shoot that.
Speaker 2: And you were in 'Bob Roberts' in '92 [1992].
Speaker 1: Yes, that's right.  I did that.
Speaker 2: And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I was living in New York for that.
Speaker 2: Okay, and, now, do you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: We shot that in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] though.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Now, in these roles, I mean are you getting the kind of role that you really wanna have in these--I mean you're, you're not the lead in these movies, right, or, but you're--are you getting significant roles?
Speaker 1: Right, I considered them important roles.  Some of them were small roles, but, but, yes, I, I think they were significant.  As, as we say in the theater, you know, any time a character comes on the stage in a Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] play, enters the, the stage, it's life or death.  And so, for me, you know, when the camera is on me, I have to deliver.  Sometimes those are the harder parts, you know.  Really, you have to be--you have to fit within a framework, within a context that's already established, and you have to, you know, hold up like--it's like being a substitute in a basketball game in the fourth quarter.  You're expected to hit the three point shot when the ball gets to you.  That--when you haven't worked in to the rhythm yet, that might be a little more tricky.  So I--it, it's sort of parallel to that.  And, but, yes, I wasn't playing the lead in any of these things, so to speak, but so what?  I took it seriously, and, and delivered.
Story_ID: 672967
Speaker 1: Now, you had a pretty substantial role in 'Titus Andronicus' [William Shakespeare], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, which--
Speaker 2: Yes, 'Titus Andronicus,' we did that on stage first, and it might have been '94 [1994].  I can't--I think it was '94 [1994] that we did that at the Theatre for A New Audience [New York, New York].  I played Aaron the Moor who was, if you will, I guess the chief protag- antagonist in the play.  He does not like the Andronici, nor should he, you know.  He comes into Rome [Italy] in chains with the Queen of the Goths [Tamora] and her two sons [Chiron and Demetrius].  And they treat him like dirt and say nasty things about him, and he doesn't have much regard for them either (laughter).  So I really--I, I regard Aaron the Moor as rather heroic.  I think he's a very interesting creation by William Shakespeare, this white man, four hundred years ago or so, wrote this play, maybe a second or third play.  And he creates it along the lines of, you know, things by Thomas Kyd and, and, and, and so forth.  But it's an interesting Roman revenge play, tragedy.  And here's this Moor that shows up.  He's the only black man in the room, and as I say, they have marginalized him.  And so, he is therefore able to be subversive.  He's able to go underground, so to speak, and to influence those in his circle, and they wreak havoc on these people who have brought them in bondage to Rome as prisoners of war.  And the Emperor [Saturninus] decides to marry, you know, the Queen of Goths who is the secret lover of Aaron the Moor.  That's a very interesting, fraught with dramatic potential (laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: And so I, I loved that part.  And I remember the part had been offered to somebody else or, you know, the audition had gone out, and people either rejected it out of hand as racist and so forth or, or were intrigued by it.  But once it got put up, once it was mounted, once it was put into production in New York, it's a rare--it was rarely done at that time.  Deborah Warner had done a production in London [England] with, with--to some acclaim.  And, but it had been a while, a few years, and then Julie did her take on it and it became a hit.  And it got her to the attention of the Disney [The Walt Disney Company] people, and she went on to 'Lion King' ['The Lion King'], of course.  And then we did the film version of, of 'Titus Andronicus' that came out in '99 [1999], that we started in '98 [1998].  But I loved the part, and I was the only actor that went from the stage production of it to the film of it ['Titus'].  We shot that in Rome and a little bit in Croatia and, again, working with Anthony Hopkins, this amazingly great actor, my favorite actor at the time, you know, without question, still is one of my fav- favorite.  Jessica Lange, you know, this, this was great.  And I know that, actually, Brian Cox had been in the Deborah Warner production.  And I think he was up for the role, but, you know, he had performed --that is, Anthony Hopkins at that point is Academy Award-winning [Academy Awards] actor of, of unparalleled ability and so forth.  So we had quite a cast.  Alan Cumming, Jonathan Rhys Meyers, Mathew Rhys, who's now on 'The Americans.'  A lot of us have gone on to have sustainable careers, and, of course, my, my great take away from that was my abiding friendship with the actor Angus Macfadyen, a Scot who sort of grew up all over the world.  His father worked for the World Health Organization [WHO] and to this day, we, we remain, you know, very, very dear friends.  I cherish my time with him, and we became friends on that project.  He played Lucius Andronicus, the oldest son of Titus [Titus Andronicus].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And while we were this (gestures) on camera, (laughter) like we can't stand each other, he actually, you know, puts me to death, although you don't see the death on, on stage or in film, but off screen, we worked with each other every day on that material.  We went to the gym every day.  We had all of our meals together, and so anyway, I love Angus, and, and I love that project.  It (unclear)--it's probably my favorite project ever.
Speaker 1: Really?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 672968
Speaker 1: I mean the role [in 'Titus Andronicus,' William Shakespeare] is certainly an important one, and it--to this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to that point, I guess, this is your, this is your really, your, your meatiest role, I guess, in, you know, in terms of stage or film, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I mean I had played Othello--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: To ninety--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --in '92 [1992] here in Chicago [Illinois] at the Court Theatre [Chicago, Illinois]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, well, okay.
Speaker 2: That's a, you know, that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the second most Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] lines of any character, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 2: --in any single play after 'Hamlet' [William Shakespeare], I think, yep.
Speaker 1: Is there a--do you have--there was a movie made, I think in the early, early '90s [1990s] with, the last one, who was in 'The Matrix' with you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Laurence Fishburne.
Speaker 1: Laurence Fishburne.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Now, here--see, that's where my memory is going (laughter), going bad.  I should remember Laurence Fishburne.  But, yeah, is there a--so many black actors, great actors who played Othello, is there a key to playing Othello?  And what was your, what your take on Othello?
Speaker 2: I don't think it's possible to play it if you're black.  I don't.  I think it's written for a white person to play.  There's no way to walk out of it with your dignity intact, in my opinion.  Now, I did an interview with Fish about this in the Shakespeare Bulletin, a quarterly journal for Shakespearian academics of which I'm a kind of honorary (laughter) fellow, kind of.  But I did this interview with him.  We talked extensively about this very issue.  I don't think he had the, the same problems.  I don't know what [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones thought about it or thinks about it.  My good friend, Keith David, the wonderful actor--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Keith, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't think--he, he always said that Othello is the eye of the hurricane because that's what he had been told by Earl Holman [sic. Earle Hyman]--I think that's his name, the great actor who's on--played Bill Cosby's father on the 'The Cosby Show.'
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But a lot of great actors have played--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: There's a statute built to this man in Norway or something because of the great regard they had for his Othello.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Ira Aldridge, or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  This is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, not him.  Another one?  Okay.
Speaker 2: --a contemporary, you know.  He's probably not long gone.  But whoever played Bill Cosby's father--I think his name is Earl Holman, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think Holman, yeah, I think so.
Speaker 2: Something like that.  We'll figure that out.  But he--I didn't meet him, but Keith did, and had worked with him.  And so there's a great legacy, of course, and actors of ability with Shakespeare, a facility with Shakespeare, the play, 'Othello,' but I, I detested it.  And it was directed by my dear, dear friend and colleague, Eric Simonson, who if it had been directed by anybody else, it probably would have been intolerable.  But I could never find my way through it, and I don't know that it's--I don't believe it's soluble for a black person.  I think that he's such a gullible idiot, Othello.  There's nothing redeeming about him.  He kills this woman [Desdemona] at the--with the contrivances of this idiot who--I mean not even an idiot, but this Machiavellian figure--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Iago--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --who he doesn't even trust enough to become, to make him his lieutenant and yet he kills his wife.  And so, I, I--and then he regrets it and then kills himself.  This is a very difficult part.  I think it's perhaps the most difficult part in Shakespeare, and I'm not alone in that opinion.  Laurence Olivier said that he believed that Shakespeare and Richard Burbage got drunk one night, and Burbage said, "There's no part that you can write that I can't play."  And that Shakespeare wrote 'Othello' and said, "Try that" (laughter).  So, you know, unless you can kind of go there and make yourself into this fool--which is difficult to do, you know, because he's got all--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You know, this is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --the grandiloquent language, and he's, he was this heroic figure, then it's completely undermined in the fifth act.  So I, I don't know how it's done capably, although I, you know, I did my best, and, and some people, you know, felt it was, it was pretty good, I guess (laughter).  David Bevington, the great Shakespearian scholar at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], actually told me--and he had seen Olivier's and a bunch of other people.  It's been tried by every, almost every great actor who does Shakespeare.  He said that he liked my fifth act better than any fifth act he'd ever seen, which was my least favorite (laughter) act.  So it just goes to show you, I don't think that the actor or the artist is the best person to assess the work.  He didn't say that about the entirety of the performance, but he did like the fifth act, which I think was, was by far, the most difficult.  So, I was young.  I was twenty-seven or something when I tried the part, and it's really written for an older actor, I think.  He says, "For I am declined into the vale of years," I think is, is the line.  So it indicates that he might be a little older than I was when I assayed it, but I don't--it would take wild horses to have me try it again.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's interesting story.  A black superstar in a white world--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and what happens to him, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, very interesting.
Story_ID: 672969
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, in fact, I thought--I, I think that it contributes--I, I, I regard Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] as a progenitor, really, of, of structuralism in the English language, that is that language itself has an impact into the kind of thinking process of a people.  And the language used and the character, the figure of Othello himself, has been used as a wedge in the United States of America, and that it helps--it in some way informs race relations.  When, when what's his name, O.J. Simpson was accused of killing Nicole Brown Simpson, there were all these 'Othello' [William Shakespeare] comparisons.  You heard it almost every day.  And I, and, and that--it gave, it gives it a kind of mooring--pardon the play on words--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that, that it would not otherwise have, had not Shakespeare wrote that play--written that play.
Speaker 2: Right.  I mean, well, it says something about the, the time.  I mean a lot of these, these--Abena Joan Brown [HistoryMaker Abena Joan P. Brown] would call a lot of situations a script.  She used to say it in eta [eta Creative Arts Foundation, Chicago, Illinois] all the time, said, "That's a script," you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That we've seen this before, in other words.  This is a script.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: You know, O.J., 'Othello', you know, all--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's right.  It's a play--it is a script.  And that script that Shakespeare wrote, as I say, has informed the reality of, of people's lives in an unfortunate way.  And although I, I admire greatly Shakespeare, I think he's, you know--it's pretty clear (laughter) that he was not the most forward thinking, as it were, in a political way--genius in terms of human nature and all of that, but, but was a man of his time, and had limitations in knowl- about his knowledge of people of different ethnic groups.  So anyway, that's, that's another conversation (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, all right.
Story_ID: 672970
Speaker 1: So, this is 1994.  Now, now, you're in a film 'Guarding Tess' in '94 [1994].  You're in another movie, I think at the end, called 'The Client' and there are other films too, but did (background noise)--
Speaker 2: Oops, sorry.
Speaker 1: --I think the last time you referred to, or either, or either I saw it on the Internet (laughter), the last couple of days, you, comparing your career at the time with white actors, you'd gone to school with and, and what white people were doing.  I mean, you know, the, the--professionally, how much money they're making as opposed to what you have to do.  What was the--what were you seeing then, 'cause you, you went to school with David Schwimmer, right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: By this time, he's in 'Friends,' right, he's a big star in 'Friends.'
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: I think you went to Colbert, Stephen Colbert--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I did, yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't think he's like a big star at this point, but he--well, he's not, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but, but what were you seeing in terms of--were you comparing yourself to where you were to where they were?
Speaker 2: I don't believe I was.  You know, I was happy for, for my friend, David.  When he was a freshman, you know, I was in the first play he did at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], a thing called 'Pvt. Wars' with--by James McLure.  I was happy for him.  I didn't really compare myself to them in terms of salary.  I didn't--I don't know what they made.  But, you know, actors want opportunities, and I'm sure that, you know, I, I wanted the same kind of opportunities.  I, I knew that I could hold my own with anybody, so I don't--but I don't think--I didn't have any envy about them.  I wasn't resenting their success.
Speaker 1: Okay, but it was just the, the reality that you weren't getting the same opportunities that, you know, there weren't a lot of opportunities for black actors compared to white actors, and there still, still aren't today, I guess.
Speaker 2: No, I don't think that there are.  I mean the, the roles, opportunities, the quality of the work.  There's a very measurable difference in it.  And so my method now is to do my own, and so I've been producing films of my own and plays and directing them, and, and so I don't have any sense of lack at this point in my career.  I feel that the work speaks for itself.  I've built up a body of work that, that I could put up against anybody's.  You know, I've acted at the Royal Shakespeare Company.  I've, I've done a lot of, a lot of stuff, so I'm not depending--I don't feel that it's even fair for someone to want, for me what they're providing for themselves.  It's up to me--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to provide those things.  And, again, that's something that I gleaned from the Honorable Elijah Muhammad.  Why are you going over there?  They're, they're worried about feeding themselves, and, you know, you should do for yourself what other people have done for themselves.  And I think that applies, certainly in this industry.
Story_ID: 672971
Speaker 1: I've never not created work for myself.  After we did 'The Meeting' [Jeff Stetson] at the Chicago Theater Company [Chicago, Illinois], Gregory Alan Williams and I formed a company that took the show on the road.  We went to Atlanta [Georgia] and stayed there for a while.  We were all over the United States of America with it.  I got productions that have been in many states--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that I directed or have been in or produced, and I'm very proud of that, of that.  A lot of people--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's when I first saw you, it was with, when Jeff Stetson was actually in town--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and you all did a preview of the, 'The Meeting.'
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And Jeff Stetson being the author of it and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Of 'The Meeting,' yes, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, which was since made--it was made into a television production starring--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Who was it?  I know who, who he is.
Speaker 1: Dick Anthony Williams.
Speaker 2: Dick Anthony Williams, right.
Speaker 1: And Jason Bernard.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And I wound up doing a play by Jeff Stetson with Jason Bernard at the Jomandi theater company [Jomandi Productions] in Atlanta.  It's no longer there.  But that was run by Tom Jones [Thomas W. Jones II] and Marsha Jackson [Marsha Jackson-Randolph].  Marsha is now a resident director down at Disney World in Florida [Walt Disney World Resort, Orlando, Florida], has gone on.  And Tom's still active, living in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] or maybe California now, but he had been in Vegas doing plays that he wrote or produced.  So, yeah, Jason Bernard and, and Dick Anthony Williams.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the, 'The Meeting' was almost the ideal play for small, black theaters in a sense I mean not, not that it has to stay in, on that level, but, you know, budget.  You have two act--you got three actors really--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Three actors, right.
Speaker 2: --you know.  And you got a full length play, but you've got like two actors on a stage most of the time, having--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in an exciting dialogue about a subject that everybody's interested in.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And, which is, you know, I don't think a black theater company, you know, in, in the United States could resist staging (laughter) 'The Meeting' because of the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, yeah, probably (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was done many places.  It still gets, it still gets performed.  It's, you know, it's a interesting, you know, debate, as it were, dialectic between the two schools of thought, so to speak, integration versus, you know, self empowerment and separation by will.  So, yes.
Story_ID: 672972
Speaker 1: So you had a chance to play Malcolm X--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as well, which is something that, you know, Denzel Washington, basically--it's been argued that he built his career on the portrayal of Malcolm X in 'Chickens Coming Home to Roost' [sic. 'When Chickens Come Home To Roost,' Laurence Holder]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's, that's right.
Speaker 1: --in the first--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --play, he was--one of the--it wasn't the first play he was in, but it was one of the first notable plays he was involved in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --where he played Malcolm X for the first time.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I think alongside, who was it?
Speaker 2: Al Freeman, Jr.
Speaker 1: Al Freeman, Jr., right, right, right, as Elijah Muhammad--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Who went on to become, you know, a very successful actor, celebrated in, in his way, did some great movies, you know, back in the, you know--but this is early--of course, Al Freeman, Jr. was already Al Freeman, Jr. when he was doing 'Chickens Come Home to Roost'--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: So he, yeah, he'd already established his career, had been on soap operas and things, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He was--anyway, yeah, yeah, he's great.
Story_ID: 672973
Speaker 1: Okay, so 1995, this is a time of the, as we said, a lot of gun violence in the City of Chicago [Illinois].  You're not living in Chicago at this point, right?
Speaker 2: No, '95 [1995], I moved to Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you're in Los Angeles--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: January or February of '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: And you appeared in one of the, in 'Clockers,' right?  This is--you played Bill Walker, I think, in Spike Lee's film--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, I did that in '94 [1994].  I was still living in New York [New York].  Yeah, it was my first time--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --working with Spike, but they cut--the part got cut (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did it?
Speaker 2: The part didn't make it into the movie, no, no.
Speaker 1: 'Clockers' is one of the strangest Spike Lee films.  It stars white people.  And it's a--it doesn't--it's really not about black people at all--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: --as such, and there's some black people in it, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it actually--Mekhi Phifer's in it, and it sort of started his career.  Isaiah Washington is in it, but, yeah, it's kind of about the cops, so it's, it's John Turturro, Harvey Keitel and, and a bunch of, you know, Spike regulars, so.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm, yeah, I thought it was unusual and 'cause he didn't write the script either--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He didn't--yeah.  I think it was the first script that Spike Lee--I mean the first film Spike Lee did, based on somebody else's script.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think so.
Speaker 2: It probably is.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Clockers', yeah, probably is.
Speaker 1: They cut your part, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they (laughter)--I didn't make the cut (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what is your--tell us what did you play, and do you remember what you played?
Speaker 2: I was a cop.  I was like an investigator.  I think I was a, you know, worker for, as it were, subordinate to Harvey Keitel's character [Rocco Klein] or something, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: It was one day, it was one day of work.  I think I was there all day, and I had met Spike a couple times 'cause I had auditioned for the Malcolm X piece and was obviously, was sorely disappointed that (laughter) I didn't get to play the part of Malcolm X in the, in the film ['Malcolm X'].  But he remembered that, and put me in the movie.  And then later, we did the Million Man March movie, shortly after that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, right, yeah, 'cause the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --'Get on the Bus.'
Speaker 1: --the march takes place in '95 [1995], and then I guess the movie comes out in '96 [1996]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --'Get on the Bus,' right.
Speaker 2: Yep, exactly right.
Story_ID: 672974
Speaker 1: What's your approach to playing Malcolm X because I remember in 'The Meeting' [Jeff Stetson], I, I just remembered--I intended to ask about this.  Dick Anthony Williams as Malcolm, I thought, and I'm not a big critic or anything, but I was thinking it was too hot.  I think it's a tendency of people to wanna make Malcolm X a firebrand all the time, when he, seemed to me, when you hear him speak, he's very matter of fact.  He said, "And, and look at you.  Who made you hate yourself?"  That same, you know, I mean he--that's the way he talked.  He's not like screaming.  I mean I don't know.  I mean to me, he's--but Dick Anthony Williams had him really, you know, he was really fire, you know, it was fire and water on stage, you know, with him and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So did you--how did you play him, and how were you--were you directed to play him as a firebrand or did--or how did you do it?
Speaker 2: Well, again, I mean I, I don't--I didn't see me do it, so to speak, so I don't know how it came across or, or what I did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Well, what was in your mind about doing it when you--
Speaker 2: To learn as much as I could about Malcolm X and, and I, and I did that.  And, again, that, that fueled my curiosity about the Nation of Islam, you know, just, just doing the research on it.  But I, I established the underpinnings of who he was, his philosophy, how he got there.  And so I filled it with that.  So I, you know, Malcolm, in public was fiery.  And I don't--yeah, I saw him on--we've seen him on many different occasions, if you've looked at the materials.  But when he's--he was a great rhetorician and he knew how to gin up the crowd when he needed to and he need--and he knew how to speak very reasonably and cool when he needed to do that.  And so he could go either way, but it was that, almost the two cathodes on a, on a car battery, the negative and the positive that, that, that's the interchange of going back and forth that drives the motor, drives the energy, creates the current.  So I do think he was electric and, and kinetic and very passionate, not always screaming.  And I certainly didn't do that.
Story_ID: 672975
Speaker 1: But I think, you know, that Stetson [Jeff Stetson] did a great job with the script [for 'The Meeting'] in the sense that you see him holding this doll that belongs to his daughter.  It was one of the takeaways from the firebombing of his house, which I fully believe was, was the work, not of the Nation of Islam, but of governmental agencies, including the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] or the New York City Police Department.  The Nat- Nation of Islam is the most surveilled organization, probably more than the mafia, ever.  And if there was any indication that any its leaders, particularly the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, had anything to do with the assassination of Malcolm X, the Honorable Elijah Muhammad would have been in jail, as he had been for not fighting in the Second World War [World War II, WWII].  So I, you know, there is no evidence whatsoever--we now know that three of the four people who went to jail for it, had nothing at all to do with it.  And so I really--I knew this at the time.  I, I was aware of this as I'd done a mountain of research on it, on, on Malcolm and found an ambiguous figure, you know, somebody who himself was struggling, who himself wanted to rejoin the Nation of Islam.  You can go on YouTube or whatever on the internet and hear the tape that he made to the Honorable Elijah Muhammad and who reacted and, and took the bait, so to speak, of the red herring that the people in the Nation were, were--wanted him dead, some of whom probably did.  But--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause he, he says that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that order never, that order never came.  The Honorable Elijah Muhammad said, "I do not want one hair on his head touched."
Speaker 2: Yeah, he actually said that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --members of the Nation were trying to kill him, and he knew 'em--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's, that's, that's what he said, right.
Speaker 2: You know, they chased him down the street and other things.
Speaker 1: You know, I, I, I--with all due respects to his memory and all of that, he was under enormous amount of pressure and stress.  He probably believed all of the stuff.  One of his chief lieutenants, we now know, was an informant for the FBI--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Gene Roberts.  He was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, he was a New York City [New York, New York] policeman, right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --he worked for the New York police department--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, that, that's right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And John Ali was, was an informant--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: For the FBI, yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Right, for the FBI.  So we now know that there were people, both in his ear and the honorable Elijah Muhammad's ear, but he never took the bait.  And so while somebody in the Nation of Islam who appeared to be a member in good standing or rank and file were actually not doing the bidding of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad.  So I, I, again, I, I think that I'm sure I would of believed it too, you know, somebody throws a Molotov cocktail or whatever in your house, what are you gonna think--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there is that, that article in the, in Muhammad Speaks [Muslim Journal] with the cartoon by Gerald something--I forget what, what number X he was [Gerald 2X]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --the cartoon is of Malcolm X's head bouncing down the street with the article by Minister Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] at the time.  He was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Proving what?  What does that prove?
Speaker 2: He was saying that he deserves death.  And this is before--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: He believed, he believed that he did deserve death.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That was the teaching, that if you betrayed the leader, that that's, that's the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It doesn't prove they did it, but it, but it certainly proves that--I mean I would take that, if I saw my head bouncing down the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you, you would, you would be--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --street in a cartoon, I would, I would feel threatened.
Speaker 1: Right.  But, again, you know, there's no--I don't think there's any innocent people involved in it.  I'm not abdicating complete responsibility, but, again, Malcolm X started it by saying that the, the assassination of John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was a case of chickens coming home to roost, when he was told to say nothing and to express for the Nation the sympathy that it was duly accorded.  So I, you know, he started it, and, and, and, and a bunch of stuff fell into place that shouldn't have, with some regrettable things.  But I believe--and there's no evidence to, to dispute it, that the Honorable Elijah Muhammad and the Nation of Islam, those who were truly in its membership, did not kill Malcolm X--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --or have him killed.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And we now know, again, for certain, that three of the four people that were accused of it and spent time in prison for it, had absolutely nothing to do with it, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, that's true.
Speaker 1: --that, that's the preponderance of evidence.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think they've been since revealed--there's a fellow in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] now who actually pulled the trigger with a shotgun, who would, who had been in the Nation of Islam--I don't know if he was in it at the time, but he, he's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Rogue members and so forth--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think he's well known in the Philadelphia area.
Story_ID: 672976
Speaker 1: So did you go to the Million Man March?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, but I was in the movie.  I was working on something at the time.  I couldn't make it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).  All right, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to the second one.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Day of Atonement [World Day of Atonement], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there were a million people there.  I mean it was really something, and, but you were in the movie, 'Get on the Bus,' all right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so, what was your role in the movie?
Speaker 2: I played a certain Randall who was with his lover [Kyle], played by Isaiah Washington.  And we get discovered as, I think--I guess we kind of get discovered as being homosexual and a relationship, and Andre Braugher's character [Flip] (laughter) takes some exception to it and gets into a fight with Isaiah's character and gets his butt whipped.  And so I just play a guy that's--believes that he's a million--you know, wants to be one of the million, who's making a statement that we can come together peacefully to acknowledge that there's still work to be done and all of these things.  So, it was quite an accomplishment, that Million Man March.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  The role probably was groundbreaking in that it depicts a homosexual relationship as positive on some level--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --'cause black movies, that often is not.  I mean and in white movies, you know.  Usually, the villains are homosexuals and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Sometimes, yeah, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Some--in many--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --back in those, those days.  Not anymore, not anymore (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, but in those days, they certainly were.
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Story_ID: 672977
Speaker 1: Now, you, you--in '97 [1997], you're involved in 'ER.'  You play a character, a recurring character for six episodes, right?   And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, that's right, '96 [1996], '97 [1997], yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, and did you--was there hopes that this is gonna be a regular character at a certain point or--
Speaker 2: I didn't really care, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: I was happy to get the, get the (laughter) arch, what we called an arch, you know, a kind of span.  I don't know if I wanted to be--I, I tried out and it was between Eriq La Salle and me for the part that he played, Dr. Benton [Peter Benton], maybe.  I can't remember (background noise).  I wound up sort of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's not either one of us.  I don't know where that's coming from.  But we can wait.  It'll be over in a minute.
Speaker 2: I'm hoping it's not me.
Speaker 1: It happened yesterday too, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, it did?
Speaker 1: Yes, and the day before, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause it would be on my phone.  In any event, I didn't expect that I would become a regular 'cause I already knew that there was a regular.  But it was between Eriq La Salle and me to play the lead--or, or, you know, the, the--that part.  But I was doing 'Titus Andronicus' [William Shakespeare] on stage, and I couldn't make it to the screen test in Hollywood because they would have had to cancel the show that night.  And I didn't wanna be responsible for--there was no understudy for me.  So I couldn't make it there, and that was probably a big opportunity.  I believe that I probably would have gotten that role, but I was happy to be on it in some form.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you had a similar situation in 'Diagnosis Murder.'  You were in six episodes of that.
Speaker 2: That sounds right, yes, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, you know, which is pretty good--that's, you know, for a character to come in and do six appearances in a series is, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was fun.  I had a good time with, with my, with my dear friend--you know, we, we wound up--she actually got me that, that part, Victoria Rowell and then got to work with the legendary Dick Van Dyke who is from Illinois.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Danville.
Speaker 1: Is it?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: As is Gene Hackman, both from Danville, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yep.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dick Van Dyke is a, yeah, a legend.
Story_ID: 672978
Speaker 1: (Unclear) just gotta speed up maybe and go to--now, '99 [1999] is when you did 'Titus' and won the Satellite Award [Golden Satellite Awards; Satellite Awards], award, in the motion picture.  And so this is, you know, this is something you did like some years earlier on stage, and you're able to do it--and you talked about speak--filming on location in, in Europe.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did it, I think it was a four year differential between the play ['Titus Andronicus,' William Shakespeare] and shooting the movie.  Then the movie came out in '99 [1999].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And leading up to that you have--or around the same time, you're, you're on-- in 'JAG,' you're on 'Judging Amy,' 'The Practice' and a lot of different--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you're a familiar face on television--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, I'm a working actor--
Speaker 1: --to people that--right, you know.
Speaker 2: --on television.  I don't know how familiar I was (laughter) really, but, you know, I wasn't on there for an extended period of time.  I would just do an episode, as a guest star here, episode, guest star there.  And I was happy about that.  That was cool.  Also, you know, in '91 [sic. 1990] or, '91 [1991], I did--in the 'Perry Mason' episode ['Perry Mason: The Case of the Defiant Daughter'] where I played an assistant D.A. [district attorney] and went toe to toe with Perry Mason--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Did you?  Okay.
Speaker 2: --and lost (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, so you were like Hamilton Burger in that series--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right.  No, I met Barbara Hale--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and Robert Vaughn and Kevin Tighe, a bunch of great--Bo- Robert Culp.  They were all in that episode.  I got a bunch--a chance to meet a bunch of these terrific actors who I'd grown up watching.
Story_ID: 672979
Speaker 1: So, e- an exception of 'Titus Andronicus' [sic. 'Titus'] during this period, you're paying--I, I, I'm--as I think about the char- tell me if this is true, I mean--correct me if I'm wrong here, but you play characters, usually in a responsible position like a police officer or a, somebody that has--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You said--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --or, or the--
Speaker 2: --in my career?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in the, in--during this period especially.  I guess you, the roles that you get are usually a guy that is a responsible guy who, who is taking care of business and, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I guess so, yeah, probably, yeah--
Speaker 1: You don't play very many mavericks in this period of time or a guy--you're--so you seem to be cast as someone who's--who can present authority, authority and, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, I, I would say that that's, yeah, I would say that that's accurate, you know, in, in film and television, although in '97 [1997], you know, and around this time, I came back to the Chicago [Illinois] stage and did 'Ma Rainey's Black Bottom' [August Wilson] for the second time.  And, you know, on stage, I, I, I get to, you know, be things other than authoritative or responsible, (laughter) as you, as you would say--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So, did, did you play the same role you the first--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I did--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --first time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Same--okay.
Speaker 2: When I did it the first time, I was twenty-three, and when I did it the second time, I was the age of the character, which is thirty-two.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then in '99 [1999] or 2000, I came back then to the theater and played Walter Lee Younger, who again, is somebody who's not in the--in any position of authority, much to his chagrin (laughter).  But, you know, it was great to be able to work with Irma Hall and my friend, T'Keyah Keymah, and Dwain Perry [Dwain A. Perry], so, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I missed that production, but it, it sounds it was great.  We interviewed [HistoryMaker] T'Keyah Crystal Keymah years ago, and, yeah.  She's one of the Chicago--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's great.
Speaker 1: --people that came along about the same time as you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Her brother [William J. Walker] and my brother were friends in high school--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Really?  Okay.
Speaker 2: --and remain friends throughout their lives, yeah, so, so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I know she went to Catholic school too, I believe.
Speaker 2: She did, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  Okay.  [HistoryMaker] Irma P. Hall was in that production, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She's wonderful.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she, she is, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's wonderful--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: She stays, I, I stay in touch with her on Facebook, she's, she's, Irma--(laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She's a force of nature (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, indeed, yeah.  Yeah, she was at The HistoryMakers' reception in Texas when we were down there.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, that's--that was--now, this was done--now, what theater company did 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry] in, when was that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The Goodman Theatre [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: The Goodman, okay.  That was the Goodman, okay, as was Ma Rainey's, right, 'Ma Rainey's Black Bottom,' was that a Goodman production too?
Speaker 2: The second one that I did was in '97 [1997], yes.  It was the Goodman.
Speaker 1: And 'cause there, there was an arrangement at one time where [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards would come to town and direct the latest August Wilson play at the Goodman, before it was released in New York [New York].  It was almost like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, he did that at--yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --a few times (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: At least a couple of times.  He did the 'Fences' [August Wilson]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, 'Ma Rainey'--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No, Chuck Smith [HistoryMaker Charles "Chuck" Smith].
Speaker 1: Chuck, Chuck Smith did 'Ma Rainey'?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Did 'Ma Rainey' and he did 'Piano Lesson' ['The Piano Lesson,' August Wilson]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Lloyd, but, you know, he got ill, and then Marion McClinton took over, so he brought a couple here, I believe, yeah.  I know that he--'Radio Golf' [August Wilson], which I wound up doing on Broadway and so forth, but anyway, yes, Lloyd was here a few times.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a chance to interact with him much?
Speaker 2: No, once or twice--you know, I met him once or twice.  I might have done a panel with him or something once, and then I auditioned for something once for him.  But that was not an August Wilson.  That was actually 'Cat on the Hot Tin Roof' [Tennessee Williams], that was supposed to be done, and I don't know that it ever was performed--ever got mounted, at least not in New York (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So I didn't work with him.
Speaker 1: So the black version of 'Cat on a Hot Tin Roof' or was it a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: It's a--okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: It later got done, but I think Lloyd was already, you know, dead by that point.  I can't remember who wound up directing.  I'm pretty sure that it was Terrance--from--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Terrence Howard?
Speaker 2: --'Empire'--Terrence Howard--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --playing Brick and Anika Noni Rose playing--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: --Maggie [Margaret] the cat, and [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones is, is Big Papa, Big Daddy, and the great [HistoryMaker] Phylicia Rashad, of course, is Big Mama (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, that sounds like a--yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was, [HistoryMaker] Kenny Leon directed it, yeah.
Story_ID: 672980
Speaker 1: Now, in 2000, you were in the film 'Love and Basketball,' right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And, and this is Gina Prince-Bythe--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Bythewood [Gina Prince-Bythewood].
Speaker 1: Bythewood's--she's a director and a writer.  Now, now who--I mean what, what kind of role did you play there in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I played--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --'Love and Basketball'--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --right, I played the father to Sanaa Lathan who was the lead character.  Omar Epps plays her boyfriend, later husband, and Alfre--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So you had to play much older 'cause you wouldn't have been--(laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I did, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: That's right.  I'm not very much older than she--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You're not old enough to be her daddy (laughter).
Speaker 2: --couple of years (unclear), and Alfre Wood- Woodard [Alfre Woodard], who was Mary Thomas in the 'Mary Thomas Story' ['A Mother's Courage: The Mary Thomas Story'], I was her husband [Nathan Wright] in, in that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, she's an interesting actor.
Speaker 2: Oh, she's wonderful (unclear), yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, just--she's one of my favorites.
Speaker 2: She's great.
Speaker 1: Okay, so 'Love and Basketball' did fairly well at the box office.
Story_ID: 672981
Speaker 1: Now in 2001, you were part of the first American company to be invited to the Royal Shakespeare Company in the production of 'Cymbeline' [William Shakespeare], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Directed by Bart Sher [Bartlett Sher], now of great Broadway fame, just mounted a production of 'My Fair Lady' [Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe] and, yeah.  It was the first production, yeah, first company to be invited there.
Speaker 1: Now, is this your first trip to London [England] or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --had you been there before?
Speaker 2: We did it at Stratford-upon-Avon [England], and that was my first trip there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So this is--how were, how did it feel doing Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] in, in England?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, in Shakespeare's birthplace it felt great.  It was really cool.  You walk through the burial--you know, where he's buried at the cemetery, and you go to the church where he was christened and all of these things (laughter).  There's--it's really cool.  It's a charming town, Stratford-upon-Avon, and they had a great pub there called the, the The Dirty Duck (laughter).  And all the actors over the years have been there, so, you know, to just be in that tradition of actors who had performed on those stages was, was a great honor and we had a great time there.
Story_ID: 672982
Speaker 1: You're in 'Collateral Damage,' another movie in 2002; the film 'Pumpkin' and this--you're living in Los Angeles [California] during this period of time.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in, in 2002, though, you had a chance to play one of the iconic political figures in African American history, Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. in the movie, 'Keep the Faith, Baby,' right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: So, I really hadn't known much about Adam Clayton Powell, again, one of those people who'd been marginalized by history because of his tremendous advocacy on the part of the, the underserved.  But I found out a great amount about him, and I got to meet his sons, Adam III [Adam Clayton Powell, III], and Adam IV [Adam Clayton Powell, IV] and so finding out about his legacy with regard to sixty major pieces of legislation, including the National Endowments for the Arts and Humanities [sic. National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities Act of 1965], Head Start programs and all these Great Society contributions.  That was really under his authority, his aegis and his, his amazing efficacy as, as which--essentially, what would be Ways and Means [U.S. House Committee on Ways and Means] now.  He was that guy.  And the Powell Amendment which is, you know, which said that no publicly-collected dollars, tax dollars could be used to support something that benefitted one segment of society and excluded the other.  And so, it was attached to all of those bills.  So if white people were getting something with my tax dollars or rich people getting something with them and I couldn't benefit from it, that legislation which I think he was probably most proud of, you know, stood in the gap; fascinating polit- political figure, obviously, controversial, something of a womanizer (laughter) and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and a gambler (laughter), and, you know, a kind of--and great preacher, great speaker.  A matter of fact, Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] said that he never made a speech without conferring with, with Adam Powell about it, just because Adam Powell was the greatest speaker he'd ever heard.  His ability with, with rhetoric, his genius, really.  He's--one of his sons went on to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and is now a, an engineer, a materials engineer, Adam, the, the fourth.  And in any event, that runs in the family, that gene.  Adam III was vice provost at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] and had run Jesse Jackson's [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] presidential campaign, actually, was the first person who ran--to run NPR [National Public Radio] for a while, and who was at PBS [Public Broadcasting Service]--I think it was NPR and came up with a model that local programmers would sell their content to other stations, and that would be a way of making money for them, but an enormously intel- I won't enormous 'cause that's pejorative, an incredibly intelligent family.  All of those Powells had it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --like Adam would, could count cards, you know, at the, at the blackjack table (laughter).  He knew he, so if he needed some money, you know, he was able to go and, and make something happen for himself; desegregated the lunchroom in [U.S.] Congress.  So, just full of life and a bit of a, of an outlaw in his, in his mind, I think, you know, somebody that, that deliberately bucked the system, and did it so very well, so very capably.  And everyone owes him a debt of gratitude because we've all benefited from his leadership when he was in [U.S.] Congress, and, you know, they sort of railroaded him and excluded him from Congress, for no reason, unconstitutionally.  He got the seat back eventually but then, of course, lost to Charles Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] as he was dying.  He had cancer and, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and would, would later succumb to it, but a great, great man and somebody that I am so delighted and honored that I got a chance to play.  And I didn't even know when I won the part, so to speak, that, that it would be that rich with import and dramatic fodder, wonderful man.  I think there should be more about him.  I'd like to play him again.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is a role that--I hope you're, you're able to do it again too, because--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: --yeah, he's somebody that needs to be examined again--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and people need to know that--about his life.
Story_ID: 672983
Speaker 1: You mentioned the National Endowment for the Arts, which is something that was started when he was in [U.S.] Congress, and it was part of one of the Great Society programs of Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: I think Lady Bird [Lady Bird Johnson], that was her baby at the time, and when we interviewed Jessie Woods [sic. HistoryMaker Ronne Hartfield] here in Chicago [Illinois], who was in charge of Urban Gateways [Chicago, Illinois]--remember her?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I don't know if you ever were involved in Urban Gateways--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I wasn't.
Speaker 1: --when actors were going to the public schools and that sort of thing--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, I knew, I knew about it very well.
Speaker 1: --but Jesse Woods helped fashion the expansion arts program for the National Endowment, which was the money for us--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh wow, how about that, yeah, (laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --because the--yeah, 'cause as you said, you know, Powell's [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.], you know, legislation demanded, required that any public funds, you know, be used for everybody--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --you know, not just an elite.  So the National Endowment was what funded the major symphonies, major dance companies and all that, but expans- we didn't have majors.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So (laughter) expansion arts was to give us some, some of that money,--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, and so we could start up some things and just--and that's, you know, so I just--it's interesting that you mentioned him in that context 'cause that's a, that's a big part of why we have some of the black arts organizations we have today.
Speaker 2: With, without question--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --without question.  And then Chicago benefited greatly from it.  There are a number or organizations that start--that, CBUC [Chicago Black United Communities] and all of the--you know, all of the stuff that (laughter), that happened.  So it's, you know--we all owe him a debt of gratitude, and we don't even know.  Nobody mentions his name anymore when they talk about great political leaders in American history, I said--I listed to Harold Washington, Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]--because I met them, but of those that I never met, oh, man, he's gotta be in the top three easily.
Speaker 1: We have to keep raising his name, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, we do.
Story_ID: 672984
Speaker 1: Now, in 2003, you played Assistant Attorney General Parker in an episode of 'The Practice,' right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So this is another authority figure, you know, you play these authority figures, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, I guess, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You think it's the voice, and, you know--it's just that you look responsible, you know, I hate to say--have to say that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, well, thank you.
Speaker 1: --to, to tell you that.
Speaker 2: I think that was more my friend, Steve Harris, who's my business partner, was on the show as a regular, a couple of Emmy [Emmy Award] nominations at least, I think--at least one.  Anyway, he, he said, "Cast my friend" (laughter).  So that was more him, at least in that case--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think--have you ever wanted to play like a, just a bum or something, an alcoholic, that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I've, I've played it all.  I just hadn't done it, you know--I've, I've played just about every kind of character.  I haven't necessarily done it on film, but I think I might have played a, a bum on--I can't remember.  On film, I don't think so.  But in theater I have, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And there's a great scene in the movie--it's the one that Denzel Washington--the, 'The Manchurian Candidate' where Wright--what's his name?
Speaker 2: Jeffrey Wright, yeah.
Speaker 1: Jeffrey Wright plays this former Vietnam vet [veteran] who's alcoholic, and he's, he's, you know--it's just, I, I said, "Oh, it'd be fun to play that role," you know.  But I don't know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you're--you always play the authorities, it seems, rather than the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I don't--I wouldn't say always, you know, there's no--I don't do anything always (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but, yeah, like I said, I, I don't--my outlets are not cir- circumscribed to, you know, television or, or film.
Story_ID: 672985
Speaker 1: Two thousand three [2003].  Now, this is, has a--this is a movie that was a worldwide sensation with Chicago [Illinois] roots, the Wachowski brothers [Larry Wachowski and Andy Wachowski; Lana Wachowski and Lily Wachowski] who went to Whitney Young--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --High School [Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois].  'The Matrix,' you played--in 'Matrix Reloaded' ['The Matrix Reloaded'], you play--and in 'Matrix Revolutions' ['The Matrix Revolutions'], you played Commander Lock, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, this is another authority (laughter) figure--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --once again.  He's a commander, and, you know, it's, it's all right (laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm not--I mean I, I don't have any shame in, in my game, so to speak, but, yeah, I got, you know, I don't cast me.  People cast me as they see me--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 2: --and, yeah, and so, yes, I played Commander Lock, and it was a great time.  The Wachowskis were terrific to work with.  I got to work with my friend, Fishburne, Laurence [Laurence Fishburne], again, and a bunch of other great people, met a bunch of Australians who have remained very dear friends of mine, stayed at my house in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] for a while (laughter), for months.  But, yeah, it was a great thing to be a part of such a, a huge franchise that meant so much to people, definitely a cut above the average action film because of its phil- philosophical underpinnings like Cornel West was, was in it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and, boy, there's nothing more--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's right, he was.
Speaker 2: --exhilarating than to talk philosophy with him.
Speaker 1: So did you have a chance to do that early on--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Many times, yes, yes. He's a, he was both in Australia when we were shooting and I've met him, I met him again later at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] when I was doing 'Radio Golf' [August Wilson] there in 2007.  So, yes, every chance I get, talking with brilliant minds is one of the most rewarding things about being an actor.  You get to meet people who are very interesting and who know a lot of interesting facts from different spheres.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, once again, 'The Matrix' was a philosophical movie.  Now, have you heard this rumor that a black woman [Sophia Stewart] wrote the, a script that was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you--what do you think about that?  You have any thoughts about it?
Speaker 2: I, I think it is probably some truth to it.  I, I, I know that--I believe there was a settlement.  I think that that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I know there's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --at least a rumor around the Internet, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't think there was ever any monetary--she--there, there was a, some sort of--something was done legally that, it's inconclusive, and people have taken that for her--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, for some admission--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --receiving some huge settlement, but she never received it--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, interesting.
Speaker 1: --as far as I know, yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm not familiar.  I don't know the, the lady involved, and I don't know the terms of whatever was det- was determined or settled on.  But there's probably some kernels of the story that, that made its way.  But I believe that those--having been on set with the Wachowskis, that they have an enormous amount of creative fuel and they're extraordinarily intelligent and studied.  And I saw them--they created 'The Matrix,' whatever the script was--the script and the movie are two different things.  So there may have been some ideas that were in common.  I don't know what the truth of that is, but there must be something.  But whatever was created from that is a unique and separate entity from the script--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now this is a movie--is this the first movie you were involved in to have a lot of special effects, I mean, or the--at this point, you know, in your career.  I don't think you were in too many that had like this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I think you're right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --amount of special effects.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And were you in scenes that required you to perform in front of green- in, in front of a green screen or that sort of thing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Absolutely.  So, yes, it was, it was the first one that, that was on that scale, certainly, that had any special effects of note.
Speaker 1: Yes, I think the technology wasn't even available before to do some of the things that take--that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, that's true.
Speaker 1: --were done in 'The Matrix.'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was the first time, for example, with that bullet time thing, but, you know, the, the bullet, you could see the waves of the disruption that the bullet was causing as it, as it breaks the air and so forth.  It was very interesting, the movie, because we--I saw how that worked.  And then, there's a bunch of cameras in a circle, and it all snaps at a different time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Pretty cool.
Story_ID: 672986
Speaker 1: Now are you--now you're pretty observant anyway, you observe a lot of things, but have you thought about, you know, have you--were you thinking in those days of, of directing or, or how you would, how you would do some of these things yourself if you were in charge of the--
Speaker 2: I had been directing, you know, on stage from the very beginning, like from high school [Quigley Preparatory Seminary South, Chicago, Illinois] and certainly in college [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  I--and studied it and all of those things.  I never really had a great desire to direct on film.  I had done a couple of shorts that, that are good, you know, I think are pretty good, at least--but I--it's not my dream to be a film director.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: It's just I'm not--I'm more interested in the producing aspect of it just because it's, it's more comprehensive.  It's sort of--directing is kind of like conducting the orchestra.  Producing is composing what the conductor's conducting, yeah.  So I, I, I think of it that way, yeah.
Speaker 1: So there's more--you can put a, more of a intellectual stamp on it as a producer than as a director in some way.
Speaker 2: You wind up directing the director in some sense.  You wind up, you know, creating the template from which the thing is going to be told.  So, it, it includes directing, so to speak.
Story_ID: 672987
Speaker 1: Now, you were also, in 2003, in 'The Human Stain' with Anthony Hopkins, once again, right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, playing his father [Mr. Silk] (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Playing Anthony Hopkins' father.  That's, that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, and with Anna Deavere Smith as his, his mother [Mrs. Silk], essentially.  And, yeah, that was a great deal of fun, and I was honored to work with the great Robert Benton, who had directed, of course, 'Places in the Heart.'  It was a gorgeous movie.  So, so, so anyway, he--and, and what a wonderful director, great touch, great, light touch with his directing of the actors.  So, yeah, yeah, it was, it was fun to recon--reconnect with my old friend, Tony Hopkins.
Speaker 1: So what have been some of your experiences in film with directors?  You said, this--Robert Benton had a light touch.  I mean are there some that are really heavy-handed?  I, I've heard stories of old-time film directors that would shoot a scene over and over and over again.  And, you know, have you been in situations where the, a director wore you out basically, shooting again and again and again?
Speaker 2: No, no, not really.  You know, these days the kind of luxury (laughter) of repeated takes and burn rates of film, celluloid and all that stuff is--and time is of the essence now.  So, I, I think that it's a luxury to have several weeks to shoot something, you know. Like twelve weeks or fourteen weeks that we had on 'Titus.'  But Julie [Julie Taymor] is, you know, might be one of the more demanding directors.  She wants to get it right.  But she's, you know, I love working with her, and she's probably my favorite director to work with.
Story_ID: 672988
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're in a movie called 'Chrystal,' too, around the same time.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what role did you play in this one?
Speaker 2: I play a blind musicologist, a Muslim musicologist who goes into the Ozarks to find Pa Da played by the great Harry Dean Stanton (laughter).  And it was written and directed by my friend, Ray McKinnon, and with Walton Goggins and, and a bunch of wonderful actors.  And we shot that in, in the Ozarks, and Billy Bob Thornton, of course, is, is, is a lead role in that; got to meet him and, and work with him a little bit, not in the same scene.  But, but that was fun.  And while I was doing that, I was, I was moonlighting on 'Ray' (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were shooting that simultaneously.  And 'Ray' was being shot in, in Louisiana, in New Orleans and Baton Rouge and, and places, and also in Los Angeles [California].  'Ray' was taking a much longer time, and so forth, and so there was some juggling that had to be done, scheduling wise.  But it was great to be able to do both of those things.  You know, Joe Adams, on the one hand, this, this real character, real man, who had been in the war [World War II, WWII] and was the first black radio deejay to be broadcast coast-to-coast and had been on Broadway and movies, had been a Tuskegee Airman actually.  And I met him, but at the same time I would put on a different hat and become this blind man.  And it was very interesting because, of course, Jamie Foxx had to play Ray Charles who's blind--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And so, I, you know, I copped a couple things from, from (laughter) him, just in terms of, you know, how he moved around and, and stuff.  And so it was cool.  I--it was a very busy time acting wise, but, again, you know--and that's one of those cases where Razee [ph.]--the character I played in that is not authoritative.  You know, he's a musicologist--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --he's dependent on another man, in this case, played by Johnny Galecki, the, the great Chicago [Illinois] actor who's on 'Big Bang Theory' ['The Big Bang Theory'] now, and producing stuff.  So that was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the character is called Kalid, and then--so this, I mean the way you lit up when I mentioned that movie, I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and 'Ray' at the same time, I mean this must have been a really fun period for you.
Speaker 2: It really was (laughter), it really was.  It was--the curious thing that happened about that time was that I--my agent was leaving ICM [ICM Partners] and going over to CAA [Creative Artists Agency] and she asked me to go with her, and, you know, I didn't really reflect on it.  I was like, "Yeah, sure," you know.  Why, why wouldn't I?  She was my main agent, and then when she got there, CAA didn't want me.  And they cut me (laughter).  They didn't really cut.  They, they just didn't take me.  And then I was in, kind of voir dire for a little while there where I didn't have an agent, but I didn't need one, you know.  I was working, I was a working actor and was doing some, some pretty prestige projects.  'Ray' went on to win an Academy Award--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 2: --for best picture, you know.  Taylor Hackford, the, the director and all that.  The script was written by a brother named James White [James L. White], very cool guy.  And then I landed at the--finally, CAA said, yes, and then they cut me later, like in 2010 again.  They were like, "Well, you're not working anymore," I guess (laughter), "Get outta here."  But it's okay, you know.  Agents are, are just necessary, I guess, contrivances.  They don't--they're not actors.  What do they know?  They're just guys that get 10 percent or girls that get 10 percent.
Story_ID: 672989
Speaker 1: Now, what role did you play in 'Ray,' and are there any good stories from, from the production 'cause this is a--
Speaker 2: Nothing particularly dramatic.  You know, Taylor's a, you know, really competent director.  He knows what he wants.  He's clear about it.  He's a, he's a--again, he's a man's man.  So he's, you know, he can be gruff, but I like that.  I like a direct director.  It's like, if you're not doing it right, he's like, "Hey, do it again."  Absolutely, let's do it.  That's why I'm here.  I'm here to accommodate the vision, the overall thing.  I'm, I'm not trying to bend it to my will.  I'm, I'm an actor for hire, and he hired me without an audition, you know, and that was really cool 'cause I, I'd sort of--at that, by that point, I felt that my work was readily available to see, and you either know if I could do it or not, you know.  What's the point of going to these things?  I'm a grown man.  (Laughter) You're a grown person.  We can come to an agreement of whether or not we should work together.  It's--I don't, I think that the humiliation, as it were, at a certain point where you've established yourself as capable of doing whatever it is that they want.  We shouldn't have to go through those formalities, those obstacles.  It's, it's demeaning.  It's unnecessary.
Speaker 1: Now, what was--I'm trying to get, think of what he did before 'Ray.'  There was something that Taylor Hackford did that was really--well, what--you remember what it was?  Something that--
Speaker 2: He did a number of things.  He, he'd--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --done 'Officer and a Gentleman' ['An Officer and a Gentleman'], you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That was the, the first thing.  And then--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It was something closer to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that time--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --'Proof of Life,' with Russell Crowe, and, you know, it was right before that, I think--a number of things--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --numerous things.
Speaker 1: --yeah.  He's, he's, well, well, yeah.  Now, I--there's something I wanted to make a link to, but I can't think of it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He's married to Helen Mirren, Dame Helen Mirren--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, Taylor Hackford.
Speaker 2: He's great.
Story_ID: 672990
Speaker 1: Now, this is two thousand--I guess in 2003, you were in the film 'Barbershop 2: Back in Business'--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, right.
Speaker 1: --played a key role in that.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: And this is interesting because this is actually shot in your neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --South Shore [Chicago, Illinois].  And I remember I'd just started working with HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers].  I lived in the neighborhood too.  (Unclear) two blocks from 79th Street--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right.
Speaker 1: --and I remember the alderman's office, Alderman Lalowe Brown (laughter).  They started the sign up when I came back 'cause I was out of town when they were filming.  When I came back, the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Bob Wisdom [Robert Wisdom] plays (unclear) (simultaneous), yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah, yeah, wonderful actor.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) And the barbershop was located up around Exchange [Avenue], 79th--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yep, exactly.
Speaker 1: --and Exchange, yeah.  And so, well, tell us about that role and, and it had to be--it looked like it was fun.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was great, great fun, you know, to come back to the hometown and sort of local boy makes good type of thing (laughter), staying downtown in the miracle--in the Gold Coast [Chicago, Illinois] area when I wasn't in the old neighborhood.  But my nephews got a chance to come up and visit me on set.  My brother brought them up there, Larry [Larry Lennix], who's no longer with us, who died in 2010, but whose son was twelve or something at the time and stepson.  They came up, and they kind of--or in the movie at the very end, you'll see 'em in a line going into the old barbershop.  But that was, yeah, it was, it was, it was a great time.  It seems more like two thousand--is that 2003?
Speaker 1: The movie came out 2004--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: But I, I imagine you were making it in 2003 (unclear).  Is that, is that right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, sure.  I was just turning--yeah, we were.  I was just turning--I was about to be forty (laughter).  So, I remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and around the same period of time, you did 'Suspect Zero'--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Any stories from that era--
Speaker 2: No, that was in New Mexico.  We shot in Albuquerque [New Mexico], and they had some really cool bowling alleys in Albuquerque.  And I liked their--some really good barbeque there.  And the altitude was high.  It was very, you know--I got altitude sickness, and I trained the--but I would swim in the pool to, to acclimate.  And that helped me, you know, to sort of get more, to get more accustomed to the climate.  But I remember bowling.  I was a, a bowling enthusiast and so I brought my balls (laughter) there, and, and William Mapother and Paula Wagner produced it.  That's Tom Cruise's partner and I met Robert Towne there.  He would come out to visit, you know, the writer, screenwriter.  And, yeah, anyway, it was, it was cool.  It was pretty brief, and I was in and out of, of it.  But I worked again with Carrie-Anne Moss who was, who was in it, who had been in 'The Matrix.'  And, and I was--it was fun.  I was just working a lot at- around that time.
Story_ID: 672991
Speaker 1: I mean I haven't asked you this, but do you have a--is your process for doing a--what's your process for doing a film, I mean your process as an actor?  What--how do you approach it and, and is it different from your process for the stage or is it the same?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think it is a different process between the two.  My process is there is, if it's a historical figure, I, I do research.  And I study.  I like--and I like to study the, the period, the era, the mores and all these things of the time, insofar as they could be determined by, by me having not lived in them, if it is historical.  But I like to figure out as much as I can.  I like to know all that can be known, and then I try to get that into my bones, and then, from there, I create on top of that.  That is, you know, trying to make it fluid, trying to make, you know, learning the lines, figuring out the choreography of it.  But that's done usually on the day within the environment.  So, you can over-prepare where you lock yourself into a way of thinking that might restrict an even better idea that comes up, but, you know, to have a general idea of how you're going to navigate a, a scene, remaining true to the character within the context of the bigger picture.  I like to think of it holistically, that an actor is just a cog in the wheel.  It isn't about the actor, so to speak.  It is about--as we say, "The play is the thing," in, in 'Hamlet' [William Shakespeare], "wherein we catch the conscience of the king," is the second part.  But we usually just cut off that part and think about the play. The, the big picture is important.  And so I do everything that I can as an individual within the bigger picture.  That's my process, both on stage and screen, but in theater, of course, you get rehearsal time.  And so all of that is being worked out, and it's, it's an uneasy process when you're learning these big chunks of, of dialogue and scene and, and, and story all of the time, working with somebody like Chuck Smith [HistoryMaker Charles "Chuck" Smith].  You're blocked in two days.  You block the first act, the first day of rehearsal; the second act, the second day of rehearsal.  And you, you, you, you might stumble through it or run these things so it becomes facile and, and I like that process a lot and I've incorporated Chuck's method in that it's not always the same, and, but, you know, sacred space in a different way, like in film that isn't con--conducive to just the actors in a room with the stage manager and the director, you know, hammering out this stuff.  In film, people are watching the whole time, generally, unless you have private rehearsals, but there's still more people involved.  That said, I, I think I prefer the film process, although I enjoy the theater process 'cause it's so difficult and it's so--that, that's where you shred.  That's where you, you get in shape.  You get your muscle--you--'cause it's so intense with just the actors (laughter), and I, and that's--I like that in a kind of selfish way, although I prefer the kind of, almost improvisation aspect of making movies, the doing it right there in the moment, the spontaneity of that, you know, and figuring out what that is.  And as you beat up the scene, so to speak, tighten it up, you know, you shoot the wide and come in closer and closer.  And by that time, you've gotten your, your bearings.  But you're only doing little discreet chunks of material at a time.  And so, in some sense, the end result is more humane in theater, although less humane in process and vice versa for movies.  It's more humane in a sense in the process, now, but then, after that process is complete, it's out of the actor's hands.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And it's, it's in the hands of the director and the (laughter) editor and all that.  There's nothing you can do about it.  So, you know, they both--it's the yin and yang of, of performance.  So I, I like 'em both, but prefer the second (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 672992
Speaker 1: When you're making a movie, do you get a chance to come up with some of your own lines, I mean, you know--there's, I've heard that certain directors have a script, but the script may not be, you know, quite, you know, etched in stone--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --and they'll ask you to improvise something or to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Spike [Spike Lee] likes to improvise, you know.  And that's fun, you know, sometimes if you've got somebody that, that's, that's capable of doing that.  Working with Jamie Foxx, he likes to improvise, go off script, as we say.  I prefer to say what's written 'cause that's my--I consider that my duty as an actor.  Shakespeare's [William Shakespeare] not around to argue with them about what the (laughter) nuance of that line is.  August Wilson is no longer around to argue about those things.  And when he was around--and I worked with him, in the room, he wanted you to say the, the, the damn lines, "Say what I wrote."  He took his time to write it.  He heard it.  Say it.  And I, and I'm, I'm good with that.  I'm good with either one.  I trained in some improv stuff.  I've worked with my good friend, Susan Messing.  We did 'Messing With Harry Lennix' [ph.].  I did a little training with Del Close, the, the master of, of improve, of the Harold improv system of, of doing scenes, situations and creating a story around them.  So I did have some training in it, but it's not my area of expertise.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  And do lines--when you, when you do plays especially, do the lines stay with you?  I know of so many actors who, who delivered lines in certain situations in life, they (laughter)--lines that match situations, they, they spout 'em out, and they all, you know--I mean it seems to amuse everybody that's in theater, to be able to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --match a line to a situation (laughter) in life.
Speaker 2: Sure, yeah, I mean I, I think that if it speaks to you, and you remember the line as memorable, and it's, it's beautiful, yeah, it comes to you and--but it's a muscle, it's a muscle that has to worked.  You know, nobody is just spouting off Shakespeare without doing that a lot, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --it, it requires re-visitation.  It's a technique, and, and memory works that way too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's like the old matinee idol personality, you know, a guy walking around, you know, spouting Shakespeare everywhere he goes, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, like Maurice Evans on 'Bewitched.'  He played Maurice (laughter), Samantha's father, you know.  He would do that.  He did it so beautifully, that declamatory style--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: "Oh, that I'm here upon the shores," you know, that is (laughter), I love that, I love that.
Story_ID: 672993
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you did a--in 2005, you did, you appeared in the Northlight Theatre company's 'Permanent Collection' [Thomas Gibbons].  That's, that's up in Evanston, [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Skokie [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Skokie, yeah, right, North Shore [Chicago, Illinois], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, next door to Evanston, my old haunting grounds.  Yeah, that was about the Barnes Collection and the kerfuffle that took place when the director--I can't remember his real name, but I played kind of a semi-historical figure in that, the Barnes Collection, he ceded control of it to whoever ran the board of trustees of Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] which is very interesting.  And it's still, it's still in, in Pennsylvania, the Barnes Collection, but it's been housed in the museum.  There was an interesting dialect between what and who can judge art.  What is great art?  And what is, what is, what is considered great art, and what is considered not so great or primitive art in these things--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So this is--revolves around Lincoln University's art collection or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, they--it wasn't, it wasn't their art collection, but Frederick Barnes [sic. Albert C. Barnes] who, who collected all of these great impressionists' works ceded control of the collection and what was in the permanent collection, and how it can be displayed.  These things--he wanted to bring some of the stuff that was in storage up and put them on display, and there was a problem because the, whatever, the covenant with the display of these things were written in stone.  They were sacrosanct and, and this black man found himself, you know, at least in the play, at least as they determined it, found himself in some, you know, in disagreement with a white curator of the collection.  So that's what the play was about, and both wind up losing in, in this case.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: In the play.
Story_ID: 672994
Speaker 1: Okay, 2005, 2006, you receive the NAACP Image Award [NAACP Image Awards] for 'Commander in Chief,' right?
Speaker 2: I might have been nominated.  I don't believe I won.
Speaker 1: Okay, oh, nominated, right.  It does say that.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I thought you won it, but, okay but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Never, never got one of those, no.
Speaker 1: Really?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Hey, I'm okay with it.
Speaker 1: All right, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The things that win, they're generally dubious (laughter) in my opinion, particularly, since it's an image award.  They have some pretty disturbing images if that's what we're trying to propagate, that win things.  So I, I, I don't, I don't care.  I don't want one.
Speaker 1: I asked about that.  We, we interviewed the head [HistoryMaker Anthony Samad] of the Los Angeles NAACP [NAACP Los Angeles Branch, Los Angeles, California] about that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and he actually that--he said that he based the award on donations.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) (Unclear) sure--yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: He actually did tell us that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'cause I asked him about the Image Award and what, what it really signified, and he said it rewards donations, basically.
Speaker 2: I think--and that's fine, and, you know, as long--I'm glad he's honest about it.  That's really--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was, he was very--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that's, that's refreshing (laughter).
Speaker 1: --I, I forget his name right now.  But he's in the archive--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it was actually--I asked him the question.
Speaker 2: That's refreshing to know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --'cause I wondered too (unclear), you know--
Speaker 2: It's ridiculous.  All of those awards really are, are political in some way.  I don't think that these Academy Awards or Golden Globes or any--they're all compromised, without exception, popularity, hype, favors, who knows who, these things.  You know, and it's, it's a human thing.  I don't, I don't need them or want them or require them.  It's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: We, we interviewed one member of the Academy [Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences] that voted on the awards, and that was Janet MacLachlan [HistoryMaker Janet Angel MacLachlan], the actress that played the daughter of [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones in 'The Man,' remember?  The first--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, of course, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --black president movie--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I know Janet, Janet MacLachlan, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and it's interesting that it comes up at this juncture when 'Commander in Chief's' about the first woman president, I think--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and the first movie about a black president was, starred James Earl Jones--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in Irving Wallace's, production of Irving Wallace's book, the 'The Man'--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And Janet MacLachlan played his daughter, and she actually was on the Academy Award nominations committee when we interviewed her--oh, it had to be at least twelve years ago, twelve, thirteen years ago, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: She, of course, was the teacher in 'Sounder,' you know.  She played a teacher in 'Sounder.'
Speaker 2: I know (unclear), yes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Did you?
Speaker 2: She's, yeah, wonderful.
Speaker 1: Yeah, good actress.
Story_ID: 672995
Speaker 1: So, now, you, you were in 'Radio Golf' [August Wilson]--no, you did 'Macbeth' [William Shakespeare], you know, in Los Angeles [California], the title role, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, and produced it.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --produced it too, all right.  So, well, tell us about that process.
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to get my chops back, since I knew I was--I hadn't been on stage in a few years, and I wanted to (clears throat)--excuse me.  I wanted to get in shape for the Broadway run and just--'cause it's a different kind of conditioning, so to speak, more like a marathon.  And, you know, it's the second shortest of all of Shakespeare's plays.  It's extremely dramatic, fascinating character, historical.  But it was great to sort of exercise--exercise and exorcise some of those demons in that character.  He--it's a, a tremendous play written on commission, really, you know, Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] knew that King James I was coming to see the play.  And he was asked to write this for his visit, and, and he knew that James I, the guy who commissioned the King James version of the bible who was interested in demonology and all kinds of matters, spiritual, and he incorporated all of these things into the, the, the weird sisters which--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --later became corrupted into the witches.  But all of that stuff, that double double toil and trouble stuff was, at least in the eyes of Harley Granville-Barker, was appropriation, you know, the interpolation, I should say, and that was put onto that script, grafted into Shakespeare's actual script.  Anything that is not iambic pentameter is not Shakespeare in that play.  So all of that heptameter and all that stuff is not, is Thomas Middleton, who put that in.  And so we redacted it.  We, we script--stripped it down to what we thought were the essential Shakespeare of it.  And--
Speaker 1: So it doesn't open with the witches?
Speaker 2: No, we, we, we--there are weird sisters in it.  They're called the way- the weyward or weird sisters.  And they are, they do have a part, and they say things.  But the eye of newt and tongue of bat and all that stuff is (laughter), Hecuba, you know, entire figures.  They, they appear in the play, were interpolated by Middleton and retained, for whatever reasons.  But it was great to sort of reduce it to what we thought were the essential elements, and put it in a different context.  So it was--we put the play in a kind of black world instead of Scotland.  It was Dred Scott land.  So we didn't, you know, it is not mentioned per, per se, but we set it in this kind ethereal black place, a kind of psychological metaphysical land of these people who were struggling for autonomy within the context of, of Shakespeare's language because that's really what was happening.  These were--Macbeth and a bunch of those other guys were basically warlords who were trying to retain independence and, and figure out what their allegiance was to Great Britain, England, and, and it had a lot in common with, with the sort of fractured states of the black psyche.  And so, that was the, the concept behind it.  And it was very, very interesting.  It turned out to be pretty successful, you know.  We struggled in the first week or so.  But then word got out and people started coming, like in the last weekend, you couldn't get a seat.  It was really cool.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 672996
Speaker 1: So you went on to, to Broadway.  Now, this is your first, your, your Broadway debut--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --August Wilson's 'Radio Golf,' right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: All right, tell us about that role and, and the reception of that play.
Speaker 2: The role was, you know, the central figure.  He's probably, kind of a passive character, you know, but, but a guy who listens.  He's running for mayor.  He'd be the first black mayor of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and there's a house hanging in the balance, that he wants--and his partner, to tear down, to build up a neighborhood, urbanize it, urban renewal, these things.  But the house has significance beyond their realization, and, and that comes to light because of Joe Barlow, Old Joe [Joseph Barlow], who is a descendant of the people who were the, the original inhabitants of that house.  And that part is played by the great [HistoryMaker] Anthony Chisholm, in my mind, the greatest living American stage actor, and also with great--the great John Jelks who is a Chicagoan himself, terrific actor, just recently of, on Broadway, about to do 'To Kill a Mockingbird' [Christopher Sergel] right now, I think.  And it was a wonderful tribute to be able to do August Wilson's last play on Broadway and bring it to life.  From what my understanding was, August had me in mind when he wrote it.  They originally offered me the part back in 2005, but I was doing 'Commander in Chief' and couldn't--I was contracted to do it.  And so, other actors did it in various cities.  Then 'Commander in Chief' ended, and the Broadway of it came up.  We first did it at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], where, again, I, I got a chance to see my old buddy, you know, the, the--Cornel West and, and it was pretty great time.  It was intense, it was intense, being in New York [New York] and away from home, 'cause I had been in Princeton [New Jersey], you know, it was about, altogether, half a year.  And so it was a fascinating play.  I think August Wilson wrote it because he heard Obama's speech at the convention [2004 Democratic National Convention, Boston, Massachusetts].  And he thought, in two thousand and--would that be four, 2004?  And he was fascinated by what that portended.  And he died before, you know, Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was elected, I think, to [U.S.] Senate and then on to the presidency.  But he--and nor does he answer the question as to what happens when this person's trying to be the first political figure in a certain position and has an obligation to the community because what, what Harmond Wilks finds in the play is that he's actually related to old Joe Barlow through a descendant, who in another play, is basically exiled from the family.  Actually, the first play in the cycle is set ninety years before this, the last play in the cycle, although they're written--in the order of August's penning of these, they're next to each other.  But in the span of time, they're far away from each other, they're furthest away.  And it's--so there's intertextual, and you find out that it--they're actually related, and he takes his obligation as a family member for this community--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So, is 'Joe Turner Has Come and Gone' [sic. 'Joe Turner's Come and Gone,' August Wilson]?  Is that the, the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The play in which--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --the first one, the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --in which Caesar Wilkes appears is 'Gem of the Ocean' [August Wilson].
Speaker 1: 'Gem of the Ocean', all right, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, and that's set in the 1900s, the aughts.  And, and 'Radio Golf' is set in the '90s [1990s].  So it's, it's a fascinating (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --thing that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So it's that house, the house--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --he bookended these plays.
Speaker 1: --that's in, featured in 'Gem of the Ocean' is the house we're talking about?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nine- yep, 1860 something, Wylie [Avenue], or Wylie, the house on Wylie.  I can't remember the exact call number.  But--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, all these take place--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --address.
Speaker 1: --all ten plays take place in the Hill District of Pittsburgh--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Correct.  Well, not all ten.  The radi-
Speaker 1: 'Ma Rainey' ['Ma Rainey's Black Bottom,' August Wilson]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: 'Ma Rainey' is in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: In the recording studio, yeah.
Story_ID: 672997
Speaker 1: Now, what was, you know--August Wilson is such a iconic playwright--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --a black playwright, and--well, what was your impression of August Wilson, 'cause you knew him, really, you know.
Speaker 2: I did, yes.  We weren't best friends or anything, but, but I knew him, and, and admired him, and was very impressed with him.  And I liked him, and we had some conversations, had a couple drinks together, you know, over the, over the years and some great conversations.  He was fascinated by music.  He's--ear for music, particularly of, of archival jazz.  He knew all of it.  He knew all the blues musicians.  He knew a great deal of poetry.  He was a big fan of people like Leon Forrest and he taught himself, an autodidact who dropped out of school because he was accused of plagiarizing, such was his gift.  And nobody thought that he could write such eloquent papers, you know, at the age of thirteen or fourteen.
Speaker 1: This is a common--we heard the same story about Gwendolyn Brooks--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure, sure, yeah.
Speaker 1: --on Monday.  Her daughter, Nora [HistoryMaker Nora Blakely], told us about how she--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --was accused of plagiarizing--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --said, "You couldn't possibly have written that."
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: She was told.
Speaker 2: That's right (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right.  Yeah, I love that.  I, I--but, you know, he's taught himself well.  He taught (laughter) himself very, very well, hadn't even written a play, really.  He was just writing these kind of extended essays and, and monologues, poetry, essentially, but taught himself the form and became a master of the form, I thought--I think.  And I don't think I'm alone in that.  But I, I liked him a lot.  Again, I go back to this antiquated idea of a man's man, you know.  He was, drink his drink and smoke his cigarette and, and, and curse like a sailor and tell you what was on his mind.  He didn't, wasn't afraid of anybody, didn't back down from anybody.  He could debate with Robert Brustein on the stage of any place and hold his own.  And, and more than so, actually, win the argument (laughter).  And I liked him a, a lot.  I--he was kind of a fireplug of a guy, you know.  He always had this hat, and, yeah, I, I wish he was still around.  I miss him.  He was a treasure, a treasure, (unclear) you don't get a chance to hang out with people--imagine hanging out with Eugene O'Neill, you know, every once in a while, you know, when he was writing a play, you know.  As I say, I, I--the rumor had been that--as I said, he wrote the character with me in mind, and, and I was just in--incredibly flattered 'cause he'd, saw me play 'Ma Rainey' ['Ma Rainey's Black Bottom,' August Wilson] in, back in, in '88 [1988].  You know, he came and saw it some place.  And we developed a kind of relationship, and, yeah, he was a giant.  He was a giant, and is as fascinating as a man as the characters that he populated his plays with.
Story_ID: 672998
Speaker 1: Well, it's really quite an honor to be, you know, focused on like that and have, have a man like August Wilson write a play that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --with you in mind as the lead character.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, you know, it's, it's, I don't, and I, and I think it, it was actually when I did 'King Hedley II' [August Wilson] in Los Angeles [California] that, where we really got to know each other well 'cause I played Hedley [King Hedley II] there, and he asked me to go on to Chicago [Illinois] with it, but Broadway wasn't in the plan for me.  I think they may have been trying to get another actor, maybe Denzel Washington or Laurence Fishburne 'cause I know Fishburne did the original reading of 'King Hedley II,' but I, I wound up getting, you know, a lot of notice for it, and I think he--I showed him a side that he didn't necessarily equate with me, you know, all the, the things you said about authoritative or responsible type people.  I played a street kid 'cause I'm from the street, and so there's that side of me that I don't always get a chance to show, but he saw that in 'Radio'--he saw that in 'Hedley' and the--but he wanted the responsible guy in 'Radio Golf' [August Wilson] but that responsible guy becomes the street guy, and you see the, what the--he becomes a man of the people within the last five minutes of the play.  You see him take on this burden of becoming a spokesperson for his people and, and forgetting about his personal progress and success and what's in his best interests.  And it's a really--it was a very difficult part to play, particularly with such exceptional actors as Chisholm [HistoryMaker Anthony Chisholm] and, and Jelks [John Jerks], you know, they have these wonderful arias that they get to do where they're speaking for the people, and Harmond [Harmond Wilks] is just of having to explain the apologetics, as it were, of, of being black in a modern world where--in the, in the new millennium, even though the new millennium has not yet arrived.  We're on the precipice of it.  And it's a, it's a, it's a deeply (laughter) interesting story, philosophically, at least, you know, politically, yeah.
Story_ID: 672999
Speaker 1: Well, it's interesting.  I just was thinking that your life set you up to be able to understand that role on some level--
Speaker 2: On some level--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --growing up where you did and, and your experiences.  You said you--as you said, you grew up in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois], and it was by no means a easy place to grow up--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No.
Speaker 1: --and yet, you were not really a street guy.  You were--but you had to be on some level to stay alive, but you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was in the streets every day (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: But you're also a guy that was watching 'Nova' at home--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yep, and going to the seminary [Quigley Preparatory Seminary South, Chicago, Illinois] and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You knew who Robert Donat was (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right (laughter).
Speaker 1: Who in the, who knows this, you know.  But this is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, it's, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But we have people like that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You know it.
Speaker 1: --we have people like that.
Speaker 2: We certainly do.  August Wilson is such a person.
Speaker 1: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 2: He was both that guy, and, you know, I mean he wasn't Iceberg Slim or anything, but, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --but he was, he knew the people, you know, he grew up in that environment, that city environment that was Chicago [Illinois] when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you couldn't walk around 79th [Street] and Yates [Boulevard] and not know something.
Speaker 2: You could not, no, no--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: You had to hold your own.  You had to be able to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --to fight.  You had to be--if you, if it was called upon.  It's not fighting every day, but oh, I fought, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So even psychologically if not physically.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you had to be able to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And frequently, physically, but, you know, just walking from Phillips [Avenue], as I say, all the way over to Coles [Avenue], you're passing through other people's turf--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: --other people's neighborhood and they would try us, the kids at Bradwell [Myra Bradwell Elementary School; Myra Bradwell Communications Arts and Sciences Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Were you asked before--I mean, 'cause I don't know if [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock knew anything about Chicago's neighborhoods, but were you asked about gang activity, 'cause I know when, when you were growing up over there, gang activity was a big deal.
Speaker 2: They were recruiting--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I remember, yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know, the, the--of course, you had the Blackstone Rangers and you had the Vice Lords--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and you had the Disciples [Gangster Disciples].  And so many of my friends were affiliated and many of my neighbors were affiliated.  But my brothers were tough, Larry [Larry Lennix] and Michael [Michael Lennix].  And, and so were the Muslims, and so were the--so, when they came over trying to force their way, they'd didn't come back a second time because, you know, we, we--they (laughter), in particular, they were tough.  My brother was a Golden Glove boxer or whatever with the (unclear) organization, and later became a cop, Mike.  Larry stayed at that, in that neighborhood in that house for his whole life until he died.  And, and people didn't mess with 'em, not twice, not twice.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so there is a--but I know they were recruiting over in that neighborhood.  It was the Moes [Black P. Stone Nation], they called 'em.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --the, the branch of the--yeah, and I, and the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right, yeah. That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --and the Conservative Vice Lords--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --believe it or not, were--you can see their signature on the walls in South Shore (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yep, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --you know, with a, with a cane and top hat and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that's right.
Speaker 1: --gloves, the Conservative Vice Lords, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yep, yeah.  They would tag the buildings and, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, Yes.
Speaker 2: --right--that was my view, out of my second floor window (laughter) 'cause I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Their name would be on the side of Food Basket [Food Basket, Inc.] frequently, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --and erased again and they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yeah, yep, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yes, this is the, this is the--yeah.
Speaker 2: This was that time, and this was the neighborhood, and, and, you know, I think it surprises people sometimes that I'm from that environment, but if you push me, I'll show, I'll show that guy to you (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, but it's also a neighborhood where you had, as you said, Buzz Palmer [HistoryMaker Edward "Buzz Palmer"]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yep, that's right.
Speaker 1: --walking his dog to the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --down 79th and Yates, and, you know, a man--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was an eclectic--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --neighborhood.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: A lot of stuff going on.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: A lot--anything that you wanted, anything, any kind of exposure that you wanted from the height of intellectualism and academicians--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and so forth, bus drivers, and gangbangers, and country bumpkins and wino--it was everything, a universe really of people.
Story_ID: 673000
Speaker 1: Now, so 'Radio Golf' [August Wilson] on Broadway, now, how long did it run?
Speaker 2: Not very long.  It wasn't, we couldn't get the, the butts in the seats as they say.  It was a bunch of revivals up at that time, and it's the summer.  And it's just a tough time to put a play on, you know, in New York [New York] 'cause people are, you know, vacationing and, and so forth.  So it was, it, it had a tough go of it.  But it was just enough time.  It was enough time, a few months, couple of months.
Speaker 1: 'Cause typically, yeah, you know, shows like 'Lion King' ['The Lion King'], 'Dreamgirls,' lots of music and glitz and that sort of thing--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --you know, or design--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --right, that's what does well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --features are the--or (unclear) is it, for a summer audience, that's what--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --they're looking for, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  Those, yeah, these music- the things that do best on Broadway now are musicals and revivals of things that are tried and true.  Broadway's very rarely now as daring as, as it, it was.  It's pretty corporate.  I think it's lost a lot, frankly, and I think that the place where great new stuff is being done are places like Chicago [Illinois], to some cases, in some cases, places in Seattle [Washington] or, or even in Los Angeles [California] from time to time a play will come out.  I think 'Angels in America' ['Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on National Themes,' Tony Kushner], for example, started in L.A. or something.  So 'August: Osage County' started here by my, by my buddy, Tracy Letts and all that.  So, you know, it's like everything else.  It's changed.  It's evolved.
Story_ID: 673001
Speaker 1: Now, you played a Muslim in '24' was--what wa- named Walid Al-Rezani--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: And what was his--was he a terrorist or was he a good Muslim or what--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, he's an ambassador, basically.
Speaker 1: Ambassador, okay.
Speaker 2: And he sort of held, held--holds a position in a group like CARE, the Arab-Israeli relations or whatever that is.  So I was an ambassador there, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and they put me into a prison to glean information from potential terrorists.  And so I did--I don't know, three or four of those, I guess.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think so, yeah.  Now, you were in the movie 'Stomp the Yard'--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you--you must have liked that one (laughter).
Speaker 2: It was fun.  That was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) I see (unclear) (laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yeah, it was a good time, not, not a lot of heavy lifting.  I just, you know, basically, played my brother, Mike [Michael Lennix] (laughter) in that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is a busy year, 2007.  You're in 'Resurrecting the Champ' in this one.
Speaker 2: Right, with Rod Lurie directing who I'd worked with on 'Commander in Chief.'  He was the creator of, of the television series 'Commander in Chief.'  So I wound up playing Satterfield [Bob Satterfield Jr.], I think, yeah, his, his son.  The guy [Bob Satterfield] who was a real boxer, I'm his son and then Samuel Jackson [Samuel L. Jackson] plays a character who was pretending to be that guy.  And then I, I come at the end of it to kind of speak on the behalf of my father and to kind of redeem the Samuel Jackson character in a way, you know.  I wasn't there for very long, couple days, Calgary, yeah, Alberta.
Speaker 1: In Calgary, Alberta [Canada]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you go--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was there at the time of Stampede [Calgary Stampede, Calgary, Canada] by the way, which is very interesting (laughter).  So it was a huge rodeo thing that they do up there.  It's like the second and biggest in the world or so, after Texas or something.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  The Calgary Stampede.  So, when you go to a remote location, do you have like a routine or, or is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no, I think, you know, all locations in some way are, are remote.  It's actually a chance, really, for me to decompress 'cause if I'm here at home in Chicago [Illinois], it's nonstop, you know.  People I don't get a chance to see, you know, I'm busy seeing them and moving around.  So I like those days where I get to just concentrate on the work and the job at hand.
Story_ID: 673002
Speaker 1: All right, now, 2008, now, this is the year that, the first year of the Obama presidency, Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] is the president, and--well, before, I guess during the campaign, you're in a, you're in a movie called 'Across the Universe'--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, (unclear) a tiny, little part--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Small, okay.
Speaker 2: I play Sergeant Peppers [ph.] in the, in there.
Speaker 1: Sergeant--okay (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, right.  And then, then in--now, now, did you play any role in the Obama campaign?
Speaker 2: I did not, no.
Speaker 1: All right, now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was a surrogate for Hillary Clinton's [Hillary Rodham Clinton] campaign.
Speaker 1: In doing the research for this interview, I encountered some of the craziest stuff I ever seen in my life.  There was a, something on YouTube from a local radio show here, 'Mancow Muller Radio Show' [sic. Mancow's Morning Madhouse]--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --where they alleged that you were on the show and claimed that you created Barack Obama, basically.
Speaker 2: Right, I would never make such a claim.  I did not create him--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I wouldn't think so.  I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --the whole, the whole dialogue was filled with all kind of errors and things that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but this is the kind of fake news type--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 1: --that there, there are a lot of people that consume this type of thing.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --I guess, or it wouldn't be on the Internet.  There's so much of it.  It's, it doesn't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --it kind of boggles the mind.
Speaker 2: Right, well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And so, at any rate, but did, did you know President Obama at all before the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I do, and I knew him well, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I knew him well.  I did campaign for his Senate race, and so--the U.S. Senate race and, and so forth.  But I didn't for the presidential race.  I'm not--I, I still am extremely ambivalent about any upside to his presidency outside of the symbolism of having a, for lack of a better term, black president.  He's an African American, but that's a different experience.  His experience is different than being black coming from a slave tradition, and I think he did absolutely nothing for black people.  I can think of nothing specifically, for their benefit and very little for Chicago [Illinois], if anything--nothing.  So I, I don't know what the benefit was.  I think that the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq are alive and well, you know, during his presidency.  Guantanamo Bay [Naval Station Guantanamo Bay, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba], the PATRIOT Act [Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001] was alive and well.  The bailouts of the bank--it was essentially the third and fourth term of George Bush [President George Walker Bush] except for in rhetoric.  He said nice things.  He said things that seemed progressive, but talk is cheap.  And, and I think that that's why I supported Hillary Clinton 'cause she actually had tangible programs.  And I think that you could measurably or you could measure the impact, at least of the Clinton presidency and to, to--that to, to the good and to the bad.  You know, some of this three strikes thing started under President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], but, you know, that he actually apologized for the slave trade and he appointed people to positions that they had not been in before, that were black and did a number of things.  So anyway, I was extremely disappointed, like I think a lot of forward-thinking people were by, by what Obama promised, and what he delivered on.
Speaker 1: Were your expectations high?
Speaker 2: No.  They were not.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I didn't expect much from it because I didn't see anything in the Senate that, that was done.
Speaker 1: He was in there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Nobody went to, you know, nobody went to jail because of the lies about the weapons of mass destruction.  Nobody held anybody's feet to the fire, nobody, you know, and that, that would have been a time to do, to try to push through some form of, of justice, the things that were going on, the Hurricane Katrina, you know, all of these things were happening.  And stuff could have been done that was not done, and nobody seemed to hold the Bush presidency accountable until it was over, you know.  And, and, and I thought that there's the momentum and the hope and all of that, that fueled Obama's ascendency, could have been used and he squandered the first two years by passing through a now-irrelevant healthcare bill [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010] which benefited insurers and, and drug companies, but did nothing for the, for the people, really, making it compulsive to, to get insurance.  There was momentum, and it got wasted, and then the midterm elections, there was nothing to do but, but have an impasse, and it was too late by then.  And so you have one side accusing the other side.  And that's not effective leadership as far as I'm concerned.
Story_ID: 673003
Speaker 1: So I got this out of sequence, but you actually played the president of the United States in four episodes of 'Little Britain USA'--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 1: Now, what was 'Little Britain USA' about and what kind of a president were you in that?
Speaker 2: 'Little Britain USA' was an extension, I guess, of 'Little Britain' which these two British comedians, Matt and, I think Matt, right--I can't remember--David and Matt, I think and--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Matt Lucas and David Walliams, I guess, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.  They were great.  And my buddy, Schwimmer [David Schwimmer] was directing these for HBO, and he had just asked me to, he say, "Hey, man," (laughter), "Come and play the president."  And I was like, "Sure," 'cause he's my buddy, and directed me in a movie before called 'Since You've Been Gone' back in like '96 [1996] or '97 [1997] or something, and a bunch of Northwesterners [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] wound up in that.  But, so I knew his--he was very capable of, of directing.  He's a very funny guy, and I knew he would hold my hand through the comedic (laughter) stuff because I don't get a chance to do a lot of comedy.
Speaker 1: No, you haven't really done that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, not a whole lot, episode of this or that sitcom, like 'Living Single,' I had done an episode of, and 'Parent 'Hood' ['The Parent 'Hood'] with Townsend [Robert Townsend] and a couple of other things.  But, generally, you know, I'm not considered very funny.  I guess the funniest thing I've done recently is 'Chi-Raq' with Spike [Spike Lee], you know.  That's comedic, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so--now, this is prior to the inauguration of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], you play the president--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what was--did they anticipate a black president or was it--'cause this wouldn't be the first time a black actor has played a president, right?
Speaker 2: No, no, no--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Because we had like with [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones in 'The Man'--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I don't think there's anybody before him, but then we had Morgan Freeman, I know he played the pres- president in a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: '24' was on at this point, right.
Speaker 1: And there was a black president [David Palmer], yeah, Dennis Haysbert was playing the president there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  I think he takes some credit for (laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --for conditioning people to the idea of a black president.  I've heard it, him say it, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that is probably some truth--'24' was wildly popular.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was, yes, it was.
Speaker 1: So, and people watched that with a religious kind of fervor--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They loved it.  And they loved him, and, you know, he wound up getting some leads in other shows.  He went on--'cause his career was, was blowing up--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the black community--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --in a good way.
Speaker 1: --really supported '24'.
Speaker 2: Yes, I think because of that, of the--of him.  And so, yeah, so the idea had been there before.  I didn't think it was anything groundbreaking, me playing it in this comedy.  But it was fun, you know.  I had a great time working with Paul Rudd and a bunch of other people who were--David and Matt, of course.  So, yeah, it was a good time.  We shot all of it in a day, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, (laughter) maybe two days.  Vivica Fox [Vivica A. Fox] played my wife on it (laughter).
Story_ID: 673004
Speaker 1: Now, you were in--you directed a film called 'Fly Like Mercury.'
Speaker 2: Yes, a short that David Schwimmer produced actually, and my friend, Reggie--boy, I'm--
Speaker 1: Reggie Nelson [Reginald Nelson], yeah.
Speaker 2: Reggie Nelson, my good buddy--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --wrote it and is a terrific writer and a very good actor and had been my assistant director at the Congo Square Theatre company [Chicago, Illinois], where I'm on the board.  Yeah, so that was great.  We shot that in four days, I think, in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and that was my first time in the director's chair in a film.
Speaker 1: Now, you're a coach in this, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I, you know, I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Were you a basketball coach or--football--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Foot--track, track, track, track, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Track coach, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  But it, you know, you can't really--I'm just more or less an extra in it.
Story_ID: 673005
Speaker 1: Now, you, you were in twenty-five episodes of Joss Whedon's 'Dollhouse.'  Now, this is a series on, I guess on FOX, I guess, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, yep.
Speaker 1: And, so, okay, so tell us about this.  Where--what kind of role was this?
Speaker 2: So I play a handler of, of basically, people who are, who've been programmed.  It's a little, kind of like 'The Matrix', that is, it, it's set, I guess, in the near future when people's psyche and psychology and character can be switched out at, at will with a, a programmer.  And when they're in that state where they are on an assignment, in the case of something going wrong, they each are assigned a handler, and I'm assigned to the, to the lead actress, Eliza Dushku, and later become the head of security for the entire department, but, but it's, it's fun.  It actually has gone on to gain a kind of cult status for, for Joss Whedon's shows, some of which haven't lasted terribly a long time on TV, but some which, which have done well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Firefly'--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: 'Firefly,' yeah.
Speaker 1: We interviewed Ron Glass [HistoryMaker Ronald Glass] when he was in 'Firefly'.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ron Glass.
Speaker 1: He was, he was coming off the set when we interviewed him, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Ah, is that right (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Wow, Ron Glass.
Speaker 1: He was playing Reverend Shephard Book [Shepherd Derrial Book]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --in that one, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, terrific--I grew up watching him on, on 'Barney Miller'--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --and just adored, you know, I loved him.  I thought he was this coolest guy (laughter).  I really did.  So, but yeah, that's what that, that was.  It's a sci-fi (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, this--(simultaneous)--they say he had a Catholic school education.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: So, so did [HistoryMaker] Robert Guillaume.
Speaker 2: That's right, Bob Guillaume--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: They, they both had, had really great stories.  If you ever wanna hear the story of another actor that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'd love to, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --was Catholic--yeah, they, they really talk about it.   And they were really dramatic stories of them going to Catholic school, one in Evansville, Indiana and one in St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 673006
Speaker 1: You were also, you also--you played the character Draco in a film called 'The Interview.'
Speaker 2: Right, another short film.
Speaker 1: Another short.  Right, it says here, short film.
Speaker 2: I play a gangster in, in that, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, okay, in the interest of time, we'll, I'll rush up to--I don't wanna skip over anything too important, but, so you were in 'Law and Order' ['Law and Order: LA], you're in a movie called 'A Beautiful Soul'--so 'A Beautiful Soul' has a, is--it says here, it has a--it had a similarity to 'It's a Wonderful Life.'  Did you--
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I think that's, that's true, yeah.  I think so, not as, you know, well-wrought, I think, but a cute little movie, I guess; never saw it actually.  I can't even say.
Speaker 1: Now, do, do you watch your movies?
Speaker 2: Not all of them.  Fre- most of them, no, no.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Most of us who are not in movies would think that we--our ego is so big, we would wanna see ourselves all the time, but-- (laughter) and you (unclear), you're in enough things where you don't, really don't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You hear a lot of actors say they don't watch their movies.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's done.  You know, it's finished at that point.  There's nothing to do about it, you know, except for enjoy the movie, but it's hard to enjoy it when you're, you know, see yourself, you're taken out from it.  So--
Speaker 1: I would think, right, and it's just all--that I would think it would fascinating to see yourself at a younger age doing something or see yourself, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, from time to time, you know, I, I'll see something that I was in fifteen, twenty years ago or whatever, and it's like, oh, man, look at, look at how skinny I was (laughter) or whatever.
Speaker 1: Now, who, who gets a chance to do that in normal life, to see themselves, you know, twenty years ago?
Speaker 2: Well, I think every, everybody who's on Facebook now gets to do it, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --and those kids are growing up where there will be--they'll, their lives will be so well chronicled, visually, you know, with these selfies and all of that stuff.  They'll be able to see themselves in birth, for god's sake.
Speaker 1: Yeah, maybe so, but I, you know--when you see Kirk Douglas now, you know, and he comes kind of--he's wheeled out and everything--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and to see himself in 'Spartacus' or something, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean it's just a whole different--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --whole different thing.
Speaker 2: But I, again, but I think, you know, these, you know, there may be unique to the people in Kirk Douglas' generation and to a certain extent, our generation, but, but not anybody thirty-five, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They'll, they'll have, people have cameras and computers on themselves all the time.  They're photographed--I think the average American's currently photographed about thirty times a day without knowledge.
Story_ID: 673007
Speaker 1: Well, the, the role you're the most noted for and known for is the role of Harold Cooper in 'The Blacklist,' and that you've been--you started 'The Blacklist' in 2013--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --still on the air.  So tell us about this role.  How did you get the role and, and what has it meant to you?
Speaker 2: So, yeah, it was interesting.  I was just about to go back to college.  I was gonna go and get a degree in, in theology or music or something 'cause I'd, was wringing--I was done with acting.  I was sick of going in the waiting rooms and auditioning for twenty year olds and people just out of college who, you know, you have to do the dog and pony show.  And I was, you know, getting on to fifty years old, and I have a well-established career by that point, and had had enough of it.  I remember I was at some audition, and it was like waiting around for an hour, parking meter is running.  It was about to run out, rush-hour traffic (unclear) for something that was just for a paycheck.  And I left the audition and went and got a bottle of, of tequila and, and a bite to eat and called it day, and called my manager, Emily Gerson Saines, was like, like, "I'm out.  I'm sick of this.  I'm--this is dehumanizing.  If I were white and had as many accomplishments as I have, you'd pick up a phone and get me a job if I needed a job.  And I'm not doing this anymore."  And she said, "Give me a day."  You know, "Give me, give me," you know, "Give me a chance", I think she said.  And the next day (laughter), I got a call to meet Jon Bokenkamp, and, and a guy named Rick Pagano, literally a mile from my house.  I could have, you know, I could have walked to the audition.  But I had just driven a $600 car that I bought from my brother, Mike [Michael Lennix].  It was a white Lincoln, '97 [1997] Lincoln, completely pasted together.  I had driven it from St. Louis [Missouri] all the way to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and, and I had done, you know, already, by that time, I had just finished 'Superman' and, and, or 'Man of Steel,' that is to say--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: 'Man of Steel', right.
Speaker 2: And so I was, you know, I was about to hang up my spurs or sign with a different manager or what have you, just, you know, just in case something came up, but I was done with it.  And the call came in.  I went down and met Jon Bokenkamp--
Speaker 1: So you were seriously thinking about getting out of acting.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was, I was, I was out.  I was out.  Anybody who knew me at the time--my wife [Djena Graves] could tell you.  And the next day I got a call, went down to the audition the day after that.  They were like, "You're on a plane tomorrow.  Pack up a bag.  You're doing this pilot."  James Spader is in it, and, and, and in that, and I went to New York [New York] and been there (laughter) ever since, more or less (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, then once again, you play a fairly responsible character in this--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --who's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Very responsible character in this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --who's often not listened to in the context of the show, right?
Speaker 2: Well, Reddington [Raymond Reddington] is a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: He has--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --is an outlaw, so, you know, but my subordinates listen to me, you know, except for, you know, maybe Liz Keen [Elizabeth Keen], Megan Boone, 'cause she's got the DNA of an outlaw in her, in her veins.  But my, you know, the task force listens to me, and they do what they're supposed to do, right--at least, that's my reading of it.  I don't think that they ever really go outside of the bounds.  It's just that Reddington is a scoundrel--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: --and will do things that, 'cause he's not beholden to us (laughter).  He gives us names.  We pursue those names, try to apprehend criminals and from a law enforcement point of view, he's the goose that lays the golden eggs every, every episode, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so this has been on--this is a regular--how many months during the year do you, do you film?
Speaker 2: Well, about nine, but we're there about ten, you know, like, 'cause we have to get there and get the fittings and the, you know, get acclimated to the new season and new people, all that.  Then, there's the after-season stuff with the NBC event and the Sony [Sony Pictures Entertainment] event and the meet and the greeting, the sponsors and the advertisers and that kind of thing.  So, all in, it turns into about ten months out of the year.
Story_ID: 673008
Speaker 1: So this is a series ['The Blacklist'] too that's made during the era when, how--the way media is handled is way different from the way it used to be--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: We have Internet, television now; we have--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --different platforms.  People are watching on their phone, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, that's true, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And how has this changed things for you or, if at all?
Speaker 2: Primarily, financially.  You know, our job requirements are not substantially different.  We show up.  We learn the lines.  We put on the clothes, do the job and that's about, you know, that's about it.  So it's just the compensation and the residuals and all that stuff that have been, have been diluted substantially because of the Internet of it, and piracy and all of these other things, so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, that's, that's really something--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean you never think about--sometimes it crosses my mind at home when I'm watching.  I download a movie on Amazon [Amazon.com, Inc.].  I assume everybody's getting paid, but it's not, not like it used to be.
Speaker 2: No, no.  No, I mean you, you know, if you're doing an Amazon original, you might get paid, but actors derive little or nothing 'cause it's, it's gone.  It's already after the thing.  You go to Amazon to acquire it after its financial life and so forth.  They made--the producers and the studios might get something, but we, we do not.
Speaker 1: Where do you think this is heading?  Do you think it's heading--we're heading for some kind of showdown at some point, between the actors and the producers?
Speaker 2: I, I, I don't know that I think that that'll happen before somebody figures out how to monetize content on the Internet for themselves.  Some, one brave, ingenious soul will be able to, you know, go into a room like this, shoot a scene, get a bunch of subscribers and they'll, and they'll get paid.  They're already doing it.  So it's really just a question of finding a viable way to monetize what people are interested in.  And it doesn't have to be everybody that's interested in it, just enough people, you know, the people--for example, when there were only three stations, 20 million people were watching 'Gunsmoke' or 'Bonanza' or something.  Now, people are lucky if they get 5 million, you know, 'cause they're not interested in numbers.  They interested in the age group, the demographics because that drives the advertising dollars because young people, you know, cause the economy to run.  They're out there buying the tech and the stuff, and so that's who they're appealing to.  But you don't need the same numbers that you do anymore.  You just need enough, maybe 100 thousand people paying ten dollars a month to subscribe.  That's a million dollars a month, you know what I mean?  And a hundred thousand people the world over is a fraction of a percent.  So, you only need specialty interests and to provide specialty content for things that are gonna attract enough eyeballs.  And then you're solvent, and then you can do whatever you want, and, and to hell with the studios at that point.  So they're scared.  They're worried about that too.
Story_ID: 673009
Speaker 1: You produced a movie called 'Mr. Sophistication,' right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yourself, and that's the--is that the- your future in terms of industry--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, it's one of three films that I've produced.  That's the first.  I also did, something called 'H4' which is Shakespeare's [William Shakespeare] 'Henry IV,' set in black Los Angeles [California].  So instead of the, you know, the prince of Wales, he's the prince of--or prince of Eng- or the king of England or what have you, he's the king of Inglewood [California], although, you know, we, we use Shakespeare's language for the most part.  And then the third is the most ambitious of them all, and that's called 'Revival!', and it is the Gospel of John set to gospel music, black contemporary and traditional gospel music, using the actual story of Jesus' narrative, (unclear) life and ministry set in a context where music--it's a musical.  And, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So is this the production company, Exponent Media Group--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --with Steve Harris, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My friend and partner, Steve Harris, from the West Side of Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 673010
Speaker 1: And so, so this is, as we are running out of time, let me just ask you some of the questions we u- normally ask on the way out.  When you think about everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't do anything differently.  I mean insofar as I can control whatever it is that, you know, would change things, but I was--as an actor, I'm very rarely in control of those things, right, you know, I can't control watches.  That's really a matter of luck and all that, and I've been lucky, and I've worked a lot, and I don't know that I would change that.  I think that I wouldn't trade places with anybody, really.
Story_ID: 673011
Speaker 1: Did you have a project--now, the project about the gospel ['Revival!'], this is the Gospel of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: John.
Speaker 1: John--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: I know this is a project that's really close to you, and is--do you have a--well, do you wanna talk about that for a minute, and I--I don't wanna short change it, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, yeah, I would love to talk about it a little.  It's, you know, I did the, the script.  I did the translation myself, and I wanted to be accurate.  So I translated from Latin, and I, and--which is closer to the Greek in which it was written, although I don't--I didn't study Greek.  I should have.  But I thought, I think that it is the opening salvo to a new form of entertainment, what I'm calling black faith entertainment.  That is, I don't think that, well, you could see, you know, 'Gods and Kings' ['Exodus: Gods and Kings'] or the 'Noah' story or any number of other biblical stories from a white point of view, those people were not white really--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: So, and there's nothing that engages the faith of black people, even when made by black ministers or, or theologians and, and, and officials.  There's no entertainment genre dedicated to engage the spiritual lives of black people.  You might have a melodrama set in the church, but that's just the church as a backdrop so that these other work-a-day, rather more secular, profane things are happening, this drama that is happening--that could happen anywhere, but just happens to be taking place in a church scene or something.  But there's nothing that actually, to my knowledge, at least there's no genre established to engage people in their lives, their spiritual lives, that are people of color in America.  And I think that they are the most spiritual people, the most faithful people, the most--those who identify as Christians or either or just people who believe in God.  I think some 92 to 93 percent of black people have that claim, self-identify as faithful.  The numbers for white people are far lower than that, and even Latins is lower than that.  So I believe that my mission now is to provide a source of entertainment, where you can go and see and hear black culture, black spiritual culture, dramatized, on display in film, theater, television.  That would be--that's an open industry.  That's wide open territory, and I think the next phase of my life, even if I'm not as active acting anymore and once 'The Blacklist' is over or what have you.  Most of the time actors are not working, really, unless you're on one of these shows.  So I think that's, that's really where I'm going to at least focus a good percentage of my mental space, as well as doing other movies, the Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] of it, and the, and the independent movies like 'Mr. Sophistication.'  That's always going to be interesting to me.  I'm always gonna be doing that kind of content, but this is--that's my--this is going to be equally footed, so to speak.
Speaker 1: So producing is really where your future--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --lies.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 673012
Speaker 1: Is there any one particular big project that you have in mind that you, that you wanna produce that, that--
Speaker 2: I--several, but I, I'm probably not--I shouldn't talk about them yet because I don't wanna, you know, put my foot in my mouth--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right.
Speaker 2: --and not have them come to be.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  Now, one--do you have any thoughts about the 'Black Panther.'  That's the biggest--
Speaker 2: I enjoyed it.  I thought it was a very entertaining movie.  I, I, I was happy for everybody that was a part of it.  It is beautiful to look at, you know, all those colors, and the, and the fact that having, having all those toys at their disposal and seeing it, in the hands of, of a director that's so young and, and capable as Ryan Coogler was great.  I'm a fan of Michael B. Jordan.  I think he's a very, very good actor.  I like the young lady that played his sister, the, the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Letitia Wright.
Speaker 2: Chad Boseman [Chadwick Boseman] who is a very good actor- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Letitia Wright.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, she's terrific.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: So I was, you know, I, I went and, and was, you know, was enthralled by it.  I wish Wakanda existed (laughter).  It'd be nice (laughter), yeah.
Story_ID: 673013
Speaker 1: We have a note here that your favorite role that you ever played was Gatsby [Jay Gatsby]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in 'The Great Gatsby' [F. Scott Fitzgerald] on stage.
Speaker 2: That's probably true.  I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And why, why that?
Speaker 2: Because I so loved the novel when I was a young man, that was, I thought almost the perfect American novel, you know, that and 'Huckleberry Finn' ['The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,' Mark Twain], you could probably argue are the most quintessentially American.  It has been argued.  And I, and I think that it's--the, there is a kind of parallel experience between Gatsby who is an outsider, trying to get on the inside through bootlegging (laughter), and I thought that was like indicative of a lot of black people, you know, that is, been on the outside.  You've been here a long time, but you're trying to get in, and sometimes the means by which you can do that are, are not sanctioned by society--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --no less evil, no less ulterior, no less ambitious, but looked at by society as something that is illegal or unsavory or, or not endorsed, outside of the law.
Speaker 1: It's an American story.
Speaker 2: That's the American story.  That's the American story writ large, and so, you know, having fell in love--having fallen in love, I should say, with, with novel and with the character of Gatsby, to be able to embody it in this wonderful play that my friend, John [John Carlile], devised and, and staged, was great.  I was--I loved it, I loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 673014
Speaker 1: What advice would you give the young black actors today?  Is there anything--are things different today than they were when you came along or--what kind of advice would you give someone?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure how different they are, really.  I think that there's always been a fascination with black culture, black life, all of these things.  I think that there are more platforms.  There're probably more actors of color working, but the compensation has, like I said, been diluted a little bit.  But I guess my advice would be to study, study, study, as it says in Timothy [2 Timothy 2:15], "Study to show thyself approved onto the Lord.  Work but need not be shamed, rightly dividing the word of truth."  And I think that that comes with assiduous study.  And I think that the second thing is to create work for yourself and don't be reliant upon others to see your special nature, your qualities, your virtues, that you have to be your biggest proponent in that sense because if you don't believe it, it's gonna be difficult to convince somebody else to believe.  And that's even true in performance, right, so if I don't think that I'm this character, walking around and, and being this, in a, in a certain way.  I'm not a method actor, but you're convincing them.  In, in, in the movie 'House of Cards,' I think it says that a con man isn't someone who wins your confidence.  He's someone who gives you his.  That's the best con man.  He's the guy who can sell you on him.  He's not trying to get, you know, what you've got.  He's trying to get at your money (laughter), but he's giving you himself.  He's making himself available to you in a, in a way.  And he's, he's winning your confidence.  And so I think that that, that that is essentially what actors are.  We're magicians.  We're illusionists.  We're con men, and, and there's no shame in that.  Ford [Ford Motor Company] was the same way, right (laughter), Standard Oil [Standard Oil, Inc.], they're selling you oil, you know.  So we're just selling ourselves, and through ourselves, we sell a character in a dramatic context.  And people are entertained by it.
Story_ID: 673015
Speaker 1: This may be a little bit redundant, but how--what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, I would hope that, that we, that we recognize our great value, that we bring a tremendous amount to the economy.  We work hard.  We've been as diligent and patriotic and as credulous as any other group of people, perhaps more so, under extraordinarily difficult circumstances, more difficult than anybody else in this American context, outside of the Native Americans, who are, you know, through disease and all (unclear) of other manipulations dwindled in terms of their numbers in the population.  But I'm--I hope that we can unify and not in a way where we're segregated or separated from the other groups, but that we recognize our collective strength and that we create things that nourish us instead of consuming, the sort of empty calories in terms of content, entertainment, culture, the easy high.  We've gone through that rather than digging a little deeper and finding something that can sustain us, culturally, spiritually, intellectually and all the rest of it, financially, to create industries and institutions of our own because we have failed to do that.  So I want to at least help contribute to build an institution and an infrastructure in the entertainment, that is actually owned and controlled by us because those images, the images of people, are the most important asset that they have.  This is a new age, a brave new world, where communications is perhaps the last great contribution that America is providing, that is unique.  And we've been sort of coopted into it.  What looks, appears to be ownership and control, is actually under the auspices of multinational corporations, bigger fish that do not reflect or--us or have our best interests at heart.
