Story_ID: 57881
Speaker 1: My name is Samuel Adams with the History Makers.  Today I will be interviewing you.  And behind me is the videographer, Mr. Scott Stearns.  And our executive director is Miss Julieanna Richardson.  Could you begin by telling me your name, sir?
Speaker 2: My name is Clarence L. Love, Senior (Sr.).  That's spelled C-L-A-R-E-N-C-E, L, L-O-V-E, Senior.
Speaker 1: Could I have the middle initial spelling as well?
Speaker 2: That was Lorenzo, L-O-R-E-N-Z-O.  That was a (unclear) but, it was given to me by my parents.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: March the 20th 1929.
Speaker 1: And our address and location of where we are?
Speaker 2: We're at 2504 Sixteenth Avenue East better known as the Canal Road.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: March 20--April the 23rd 2002.
Speaker 1: And your occupation, sir?
Speaker 2: I'm a property owner and manager.  That's rather, see, I'm really not a landlord as such.  So we--that's what we do.
Story_ID: 57882
Speaker 1: Sir, each interview we begin with five questions, a short answer, just to break the ice and begin our interview.  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Vegetables, I guess, in general.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Brown.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination spot?
Speaker 2: Africa, all over Africa.
Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase you say?
Speaker 2: "There's no such thing as you can't do it."
Story_ID: 57883
Speaker 1: Sir, we're going to begin by--I wanna know about your parents.  Could you give this name of your mother and father and the spelling of their names?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Alberta Love, A-L-B-E-R-T-A, L-O-V-E.  My father's name was Ben.  We always knew him as Ben, but I think his name might have been Benjamin.  Of course that was B-E-N, then, L-O-V-E.
Speaker 1: Your siblings.  Could you give the names and the spellings of your siblings?
Speaker 2: The oldest one was Willie C. Love.  The second was Jonny B. Love.  The third was Edmund Love then we had a sister that came in the middle.  And then the--there was myself, Clarence Love, my youngest--the youngest of the family-- Eunice Love, the youngest sister.
Speaker 1: What was the sister's name before you?
Speaker 2: Eunice.  Oh, Annie Lou Love.
Story_ID: 57884
Speaker 1: Do you know any, do you know, do you know anything about your mother's parents?
Speaker 2: I knew my mother's--under my grandmother, on my mother's side, vaguely--went to see her.  She came to see us one time.  But she lived in Georgia and we weren't able to run up there too often.  But I did remember meeting her on occasion.
Speaker 1: Did you hear any stories about her?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My grandfather, according to my mother, was a real "churchy man."  And in Baker County where they came from, the white folks had told them you could not paint your church at all.  These were aggressive people.  So, my grandfather was away.  These very aggressive neighbors decided they would paint their churches.  So they painted a church and then--and the Ku Klux Klan came along and set all they churches on fire in the county.  So my grandmother called them outside and said, "Look!  Children come here, come here!  The world is on fire!"  Because they saw, they saw all these churches burning in the, in the county.  That was about the only thing I'd heard from my grandmother.
Speaker 1: And what type of man was your mother's father?
Speaker 2: I didn't know him that well.  He was just sorta in the background.
Speaker 1: Any stories about him?
Speaker 2: I don't recall anything about him.
Story_ID: 57885
Speaker 1: And how about your father's parents?
Speaker 2: My father's parents.  Actually, my--they were born in Alabama, from what he said.  My mother--grandmother seemed--did not remember them.  But my father apparently was correct that he--they came from Alabama over to Georgia--because he remember catching a, a ferry across the, the river or something.  And I looked back close to where they came from, and there was a river.  So I think he was correct that they did leave somewhere in Alabama and came over to Georgia.  It was told to me that my father perhaps was born out of wedlock.  Perhaps a couple was born out of wedlock.  But they met a "Love" man, this man "Love", who married my grandmother and organized the family and named them "Loves."  I think their names were "Davis" before.  The older children were "Davis" on their--his mother's side.  But their grandfather organized the family and they became "Loves."
Story_ID: 57886
Speaker 1: Now, what type of man was your father?
Speaker 2: He was an unlearned man, but a very, very good fella.  In the early years I had contempt for him.  And I realized--as you go--it was not contempt for him, it was that fear of challenging his authority.  That really what it was.  As I look back, I know that's what it was.  He was a very honest man.  He was thought of very well, very well in the community.  And we like to talk about our mothers and all.  You know, everybody talks about Mother's Day and this.  But as I look back, my mother was a good lady, but she did not teach me the values of life.  She did not refuse to teach me, she just did not.  She took care of what she did.  My father taught me to be an honorable guy, that a man's word was his bond, that if you didn't keep your word, you steal.  If you would lie, he said, liars and thieves were the same.  That's basically--and a man's word was his bond.  That became my philosophy in life.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about your father you'd like to share with us?
Speaker 2: He said once he was--when bicycles was just coming out--he was going you know, to court my mother.  He was flying down the road and had the bicycle....  The bicycle had what you called a "steady kicker", and it didn't have any brakes.  It didn't coasted, it kept moving, hit some sand.  He flew all over the place right in front of my mother.  He said that was kinda of embarrassing.  That's one of his stories I heard about him.
Story_ID: 57887
Speaker 1: But there were other stories that are more tragic.  When they were living in Georgia, they worked for a man whose--I right call, his name was Mr. Halex (ph.).  And this was Baker County, Georgia--that the reason they came down here (sic), because all people sharecrop.  I thought it was just Blacks, but all poor folks sharecrop.  This concerns me more than what happened else (sic).  That he'd worked several years tryin' to pay off the debt, and so, one year he decide he would go up and try to settle up his debt.  He told the son who was overseer at the time, Mr. Halex's son, that "I'm here to settle up."  So when they look at the book, Mr. Halex has all these extra charges.  He said, "Mr. Halex, I paid you these."  Mr. Halex cursed him out, told him, "You didn't do that."  So the father intervened.  And said, "Yes son, Ben paid you that, I remember."  He cursed his father out, and told Ben, "If you spute (ph.) my word, I will take my (unclear) and burst your brains out."  That put the fear of God in him.  Later on he sneaked out of Georgia, like many others did, and came down to (unclear), Florida.  And later on he was able to go back up and sneak the family out.  That's how we got into Florida.  Eventually, before my time, we moved to Terrasse (ph.) Island.  That's were I was born and the rest of the children were born.  My mother told me some stories too.  Again, about sharecropping.  There was a man who had gone to the bi... boss man to (unclear) about his debt.  And he asked him to, "Let's settle up today.  My, my family's in bad shape and needs some money."  So the guy says, "You know, you didn't quite make it this year, but next year I'm sure you're going to make it."  He said, "You have been telling me that for the last 10 years.  We are going to settle up today."  So the guy tells him, says, "No, no, Boy, you better watch your mouth.  You're going to get yourself in trouble."  He said, "I'm already in trouble."  He said, "If you don't shut up and leave me alone", the boss man tell him, "I'm going to hurt you or something."  The guy takes his gun and kills the guy.  He walks out through the woods, never heard from him anymore.  But, the nightriders came, she said, and they killed people--blacks--and killed them and they kill them.  Actually, they took the kids--babies, by their heels and just bust their brains up against the wall--until the federal troops came in and restored order.  That I heard it--she told that many, many times.
Speaker 2: And what--where was this in Georgia?
Speaker 1: Baker County, Georgia.  The "master's Georgia" is in Baker County.
Story_ID: 57888
Speaker 1: So what type of woman was your mom?
Speaker 2: Very good lady, very diligent.  She kinda tended the nest, and like you say, she made syrup from scratch from sugar.  She made gravy from scratch.  She made cake from scratch.  She did the things that women did.  But like I said, she was not the one instilled the values of life in me.  She did not take away from it.  But, I also want to say that they were not extremely religious people.  But, I never heard them say a curse word, not one, not a simple d-a-m-m--n, however you spell it, never did.  Like people curse their kids out--I've heard, never.  Fact, one time we had an old cow--everybody had to have their own cow.  We had this cow and she got loose and went over to my neighbor's yard.  So she called the sheriff on him (laughter) and when the sheriff left, he said, "I'm sick of this woman lying on me!"  I said, "Wow."  But my dad must be out of his mind, just by saying, "lying."  That's the--their respect that they had for our (sic) children.  As a result, I didn't do it either, didn't curse my children, nor curse in their presence.  These are some of the habits I take up.  And also, coming up, I was the last to leave home, not the youngest, but the last leave home.  And I dropped out of school when the World War II broke out and chef four years.  So went back (unclear)--back in the (unclear).  I was 16 years old.  So they were working on the farm.  I took it upon myself to learn to cook because they (unclear) came home late, and I got home early from school.  So I started cooking early in life.  And I, I probably picked it up from my father, because I can recall my father washing clothes.  I can remember him changing me as a very small kid.  So I, I didn't have this macho thing about housework.  I learned to cook early in life and it's partly why in relationship with my wife when she--we worked.  I would come home and cook, take care of the babies.  So that's where I kinda learned the gentle touch and relationship with the family.  I didn't think I had a--I don't think my wife has a "place" in my house.  We're just friends and equal in our family.
Speaker 1: Was your mother a disciplinarian?
Speaker 2: I think she probably tagged me more times than my dad.  But I learned early in life to go by the rules.  So I didn't get them past about seven years old.  I didn't get anymore.  I stuck with the rules.  And now that I'm grown, I still stay with the rules.  I don't have a parking ticket on my record, drive the speed limit.
Story_ID: 57889
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: We were born on Terrasse Island, in a place called--for a man whose name was Mr. Boyd.  My father worked in the grove.  My mother apparently worked in his house.  I remember going up--they had a barn.  I remember going up the barn on a ladder and went up in the loft, and I got, (laughter) I got confused.  I try to come down forward, but I couldn't come down forward, and I got scared and started to crying.  So my big brother had to come get me.  Also, I remember that my youngest sister--at this same place--they had an old pond in the back yard.  She went out there and fell in the water and floated on the water.  I guess on the--on the leaves or whatever was there.  Those are my early childhoods.  I remember my brother teach me to swim, my older--second older brother--teach me to swim out on Terrasse Island.  I remember a lot of things back there.  I remember when my father actually went away to prison too.  I think he was framed, because he was a very good fella.  He went for 18 months.  I remember that.  I remember when he came home.  We had moved to Palmetto then, right behind what is--where McDonald is now.  And my brother left and went to get him and meet him at the bus station--wherever he came.  And he came home, and this guy was with him, and when--I had lost the memory of him in that short period of time.  I was very young.  So when I saw my brother with this man--this man asked me, he said, "What say mister?"  I said, "My name is Clarence."  He said--and I said, "My daddy coming home today."  I didn't recognize that he was my father.  You know, that short period of time, there was, there was something missing and I could never put it back together.
Speaker 1: So what did your father go to prison for?
Speaker 2: Supposedly for stealing or something.  And then people were framing, they still framing, and I think that someone else did it, and he just got blamed for it.  And they didn't give it no--we didn't have no lawyer or anything, and they just sent you away.  I think he was gone for 18 months.
Story_ID: 57890
Speaker 1: Do you remember how the family made it, and lived...?
Speaker 2: My mother farmed.  She had a farm.  She did--I guess she did her sharecrop.  I remember that.  A guy named Mr. Tom Jones--was his name, she farmed for him.  And that's one of the times where I remember she made her mother take us to Georgia, to see her mother.  Got a guy to drive up in his car.  A guy name was D.H. Keaton [ph].  We all got in his car.  I was saying to my wife the other day, with this big Excursion I have we can put eight people and you get crowded.  But in a two--four-seat car, you put 10, 12 people in it.  I don't know how that made it!  But they got in the car and went on.  So he came....  Now, when he--then we moved over to (unclear)--over from Terrasse, to Palmetto.  Then he came home.  He came over to (unclear), over to Bradenton--Palmetto--where we were.  Then eventually he took over the head of the family.  We went on from there.
Story_ID: 57891
Speaker 1: Now what was your--what were the--what's the story behind your parents meeting?
Speaker 2: I, well, I know that they eloped.  My parent--my mother's father was a very strict guy and probably didn't approve my father.  So they eloped.  They went off--and they had these associations where people would meet at the church.  After they got married they showed back up again.  And he said, "Well, you're married now.  You may as well come on back and be part of the family."  So that's how they got together.  I heard him tell that a bunch of times.  Apparently, my father was a very handsome guy.  The "Love" guys, I know, were very handsome fellas.  And I'm sure he was a handsome guy too.  Probably swept mama off her feet.
Speaker 1: So, what type of education did your mother receive?
Speaker 2: She said she went to about third grade I believe, my father probably almost nine.
Story_ID: 57892
Speaker 1: So, the atmosphere of the household?
Speaker 2: They took newspapers.  They took magazines.  So I grew up looking at the caption on newspapers and magazines.  So I adopted from them,  I had magazines in my house and books and things; and took the children to the bookstore, and this type thing; and supply them with a lot of reading material.
Speaker 1: Now, in your household there were five... five children?
Speaker 2: Six.
Speaker 1: Six children in the house (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Six of our own, and one nephew we raised.  My mother died and left a grandchild, so we raised him--
Speaker 1: So....
Speaker 2: --And his name was Michael (unclear).
Speaker 1: This is your childhood household I'm talking about.
Speaker 2: Oh, the childhood.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, your childhood household, what would--how were the responsibilities delved out, and how did the household work?
Speaker 2: We, during those days, didn't have washing machines, didn't have things.  So one of the things, one of the dreaded things was the, was the, was the... get the wash water.  That was a hard job, pumping and fillin' about four tubs of water.  That was a hard job.  Also, you had to chop wood--we had to cut wood.  And you had chores early in life.  We had to work.  I mean, actually go out and work.  The first attempt I recall working was when I was about nine years old.  I worked in the seedbed.  But they, but they don't plant seedbeds now.  They just take the plants--just put them in the ground with a machine.  But we would clean the seedbeds off and probably got .50 cents a day, or something like that.  I don't know what it was.  But you brought that money home and gave it to your parents, and they used it as they saw fit.  When I was a young boy--when I was a boy about six years old, I can remember my parents went to, went to work and I was suppose to dress myself that day.  So, I went in the closet, and I picked out some clothes that had a hole in the, in the butt part of them. And I'd kinda like to add that if you had pants on, and didn't have no drawers on ... because you couldn't afford both of them.  So, (laughter) I went to school that day, and I stayed up against the wall for the recess.  But when the recess was over, I had to move from against the wall.   The little girls saw my little behind and they started singin', sang, "Goody, goody, we see Clarence booty!  We see Clarence booty!"  And I said--I cried.  But in three years I'd be makin' my own money.  And I ain't had to cry no more.  I took charge of me.  And I'm 73, and I've kept my welfare in my hands.
Speaker 1: So that was like a moment that--
Speaker 2: --Shocking.  It was shocking because we were, we were--didn't know we were poor.  But, we were poor.  You know, nobody told us we were poor.  I knew there were some poor neighbors around, but I didn't think it was us.  But it probably was us.
Story_ID: 57893
Speaker 1: What type of child were you?
Speaker 2: I kinda got off to a little bad start by the time I was about twelve.  But, I kinda straightened that out.  I don't want to get into it, but I kinda straightened that out.  And I guess when I started liking girls that probably helped straighten me out.  And that went on--I was basically--was a law-abiding kid; worked, helped my parents, help--sent money home to the parents.  I went off to--when I was in high school, I went off to work and sent money home to help repair the house, and whatever.  But I, basically after I was about 12, I was no problem.
Speaker 1: So, the community of Bradenton--at that time, when now you're living in the Bradenton community (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: That's when I was married.  When I left Palmetto and went to Bradenton, after I married.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you grew up in the Palmetto
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Area?
Speaker 2: I left Bradenton--I lived in Bradenton from '53' [1953] to '99' [1999]--'98' [1998], I think it was.
Speaker 1: Now, where's Palmetto?
Speaker 2: This is here.  That's here.
Speaker 1: Let me see it.
Speaker 2: Across the bridge--where you are going to go across the bridge--that would be in Bradenton.
Story_ID: 57894
Speaker 1: So, Palmetto area you grew up--what type of neighborhood (unclear) community was it--the families in the neighborhood where you grew up?
Speaker 2: They were all very good people, honest people, looked after each other.  And we didn't have a great deal of troublemakers.  Each community had troublemakers, but there was not a lot of them.  You did not see people around, breaking the law, children--it just wasn't that way.  You were afraid to talk back to the neighbors.  They would--I never had neighbors to punish me, but I know they would do it.  They would tell your parents.  They'd come down on you pretty hard.  And I remember getting in a little trouble one time, and the neighbor reported to my mother that I had done whatever.  And my mother--and I said, "Mama, I didn't do it."  So she said, "The neighbor is lying?"  And I said, "No, no, she's not...."  "Then, I'm lying?"  Boy, you were between a rock and a hard place."  But they would knock you out.  You just, you just couldn't, you couldn't talk back to people.  You just didn't--they, they, you, you just did not, you couldn't talk back to people--very strict.  I think that might've had some negative impact on us, 'cause I found out that children not able to have discussions--that's one thing, I didn't allow my children to sassy me, so to speak.  But, I encouraged them to express themselves, because if you don't practice talking, you can't talk.  So I didn't get into that, but, I--if they wanted to argue, you know, like talk--I'd say, "We can't have an extended discussion about this issue, that's final."  I never had to punish them that much.  That was--I used what I learned in the mil...--in the ROTC, is a command voice with them.  And I didn't always--I was not always telling them, "you can't do this, you can't do that", when I said that "you can't do it", I meant it.  It was not a thing I said all the time.  And we--they understood that.  They understand now, and they run up from ages 50 on down to early 40s.
Story_ID: 57895
Speaker 1: Were there any people, neighbors, community people, there that you admired or looked up to, or....
Speaker 2: Sure.  There was one lady who was (unclear) was a fortuneteller.  She had all the white folks coming to her, and she had a nice house.  And she was a nice lady.  Behind us there was a miss, madam queen who was a bootlegger, sold moonshine, and she made good money.  And she, she didn't allow the Black folks to come in her front door.  She only allowed the White folks to enter her front door.  The Blacks had to come in the back.  And she was, she was, she was--they were high livers.  There was "bolita", like you have--bolita was illegal.  And Cuba--it's a Cuban national lottery, I'm hearing now.  When they talked on the move--and they would pull a number--and they sold numbers here for that.  That type of stuff was going--and those people were the people that had--making good money.  So they moonshined, selling bolita.  It's like people sell drugs now.  I mean, a guy buying liquor didn't have to rob nobody to buy liquor, so people always did that kinda....  Fact, before we left Terrasse, my mother sold home brew, and actually sold it, made it, and sold it.  And they didn't think too much of it.  But I--and I never got into it.
Speaker 1: So you knew there were some people hustling(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Hustling, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --kinda sneakin' around (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --Yes.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about hustling that you can share with us?
Speaker 2: Well, people that told us that playing bolita was a thing that gamblin' was a thang.  But when I met a teacher named Mr. Esther [ph.] See you believe what people tell you, your parents, what to do, you say, no, no, no.  I was tellin' him, "My mama play bolita."  He said, "no, no, no, your parents are stupid.  They rippin' you off...."  So I raised the question to myself.  Well, no, no, what is it?  Am I right then?  I found he was right.  That, that, although you might get seven bucks, you'd probably spend a hundred to get it.  So I realized that was not a good move.  But, I, I didn't grow up understanding that.  I learned that later on in life--that you don't get something for nothing.
Story_ID: 57896
Speaker 1: So what--the elementary school you went to, what was that like?
Speaker 2: It was what we called "Washington Park Elementary."  It's right over--not too far from here.  I went there starting in about first grade and stayed there until sixth grade, I believe.  Then they closed it. During the WPA [Works Progress Administration] days, they built this memorial school and it still stands.  Then we moved from there.  But it was not a complete school.  It never had no auditorium or anything.  In fact, like my whole time of going to school, I never assembled in an auditorium, nor a gym, or anything.  And the science class probably had one microscope.  And the library had one set of encyclopedias.  There was really nothing, really.  And they didn't really teach anything of practical application, they didn't.  Another kinda of school had a travelin' basketball team.  They had technical schools, trade schools, but Manatee County did not have it for us.  We did not have a bus to travel in.  And when I didn't have a bus--the way we got a bus--the guy Harvey Blackburn said, "We just can't furnish you guys.... We can't give you a bus.  But what I'll do...." They tried, some of them tried.  ..."We got some old used buses.  If you guys can pay us, raise some money and pay us, and buy the bus from us, we'll do it."  So they had a "Ms. Memorial" contest.  This young lady won.  They raised about a thousand dollars.  We paid them--the school board--I think it was about six hundred dollars, for this, for the bus.  And they paid us mileage to operate the bus.  And high school students drove the bus.  That's the way it was the whole while I was going to school.  But, before that, there were some others who had, maybe had buses to take the crews to work.  And they would haul from Tallevast, some would come from Paris, some would come from Rubonia to bring kids in that way to school.  But we managed.  We did all right.
Story_ID: 57897
Speaker 1: Who were some of your schoolteachers?  (Unclear)
Speaker 2: James Tillman has a school named after him.  Mr. Carlos Hale has a school named after him, and one of the best ones I remember, Mr. Combs, who was our principal, and a strict disciplinarian.  The worse whipping I got was from him.  I think I made an "F" on something and the kids were laughing at me and I think I told them to "go to hell."  That was a capital crime.  I was taken in the book room, laid across the desk and gave 10 good ones.  And I think it's hurting me even now. But that was my last punishment.  That was by the time I was seven or eight years old.  I never got another punishment from anybody, really.
Speaker 1: So these teachers nurturing you and (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  They lived in the neighborhood.  Mr. Combs lived right down the street from us.  And I followed him the rest of his life.  Wherever we'd go, I would, (unclear) go to see him.  And a guy named Mr. (unclear), who was a very good fella.  Mr. Combs, Mr. Hale, McCray, is still living--he lives over here.  And I had very teachers who lived in the neighborhood. (Sic)  And they saw after you, they respected you, and they kinda took care of us.  It was quite a different situation than it is today.  They were in it probably--and this was an excellent job--and probably that they loved us.  I think they really cared for us.
Story_ID: 57898
Speaker 1: Now, what sights, sounds or smells bring you back to that childhood in Palmetto?
Speaker 2: Probably frying chicken, I guess, on Sunday mornings, and mama cooking biscuits.  You know, that time, biscuits once a week; a poor little rabbit who got misled and wound up in the way; poor turtle, turtle was crossing the road.  Boy, and what--I can remember when Terrasse Island--a turtle crossed the road and my brothers caught him.  And boy, she stopped what she was doing right then and there.  That turtle was in a pot in 30 minutes.  So we were, we were very poor, and kinda supplemented things the best we could.  Also, I remember as a child, it seemed to have gotten, it seemed to have gotten colder here then, than it does now.  I, I, I am convinced.  It might have been cold, or it could have been the house we were living in.  It would freeze during the winter and the freeze would kill the, would stun the "top fish"--they called them--the ones live near the surface.  And the people would go down there and gather them up and salt them.  And that's what they would use to... during the summer.  And they would salt, they would soak them up and we'd fry fish.  I'd actually go down there and catch fish.  I never went--my father would--they would go down to the....  After they worked all day long, they would go down to the trestle we called it--where the rear of the train went across to Tampa--like 10, 12:00 at night.  They would fish and catch fish, and bring them home.  That was part of the supplement that we had to live out of.
Story_ID: 57899
Speaker 1: Now, you're growing up in Palmetto?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: What is the life like for African Americans in that way, in that community?
Speaker 2: At that time?
Speaker 1: --At that time?
Speaker 2: Everybody worked on the farm.  Just, just, if you was big enough to hold the bucket of tomatoes, you picked tomatoes.  Everybody worked on the farm.  Preachers preached on Sunday and then he went to the farm on Mondays.  The pretty girls, the smart girls, the dumb ones, everybody was on the farm.  And "ole master" was in charge.  I worked at the Manatee Fruit Company as a teenager also.  And we knew that when a white guy came on the job, he's going to be the boss man.  He'd come on Mondays, didn't know anything.  He would hang around with us Monday.  He'd learn a little bit.  By Tuesday, he'd learn a little more.  By Wednesday he started getting independent, aggressive.  By Thursday, Friday, he was threatening to fire you.  He'd zoom up top that fast.  So that's kinda the way it was.  I can remember--Manatee Fruit was a place where everybody worked.  I mean they'd just take people on.  They didn't pay that much, but you could work there.  That you'd be--had a shack where they paid off.  And they would call on this black guy to handout the paycheck.  And when a white man came up, he reached over his head and paid him, above you.  You just, you had your place.  And I guess lots of them understood it, and that's the way it was.
Story_ID: 57900
Speaker 1: But we all worked.  And I have no regrets as of my childhood.  I had no problems, not problems, had no regrets.  I don't know anything I would change.  I enjoyed working on the farm, but I knew that was not for me because it was just hard work.  And I thought I wanted to go to college, but I guess deep down inside I did not, probably because I didn't have the finances either.  I learned to hang around the golf course, where I played around the golf course.  And I tried to play a little football.  That didn't work out.  I got hit pretty hard one day, and that knocked the taste right out of me with that football.  But in high school, about 8th, 9th grade, I was a sports writer.  I use to could write.  I remember a guy was playing pretty good, and the name was--they called him "Popsicle."  He was good.  He was pretty sporty.  And he would do his crip shots and I, I started calling him "Georgia Popsicle."  And how he did those crip shots, he got so fancy he shot himself right off the team.  (Laughter)  I understand that he was here Sunday, I missed him.  But I understand he was here just Sunday.  I enjoyed all that.  Going around different schools and so forth.  And eventually I graduated from high school and went to Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] for a while.  Went for a year, and I got married.  I never could shake this gal who was running around my veins.  So I got married.  And I attempt to go again.  I stayed out a year, and attempt to go again, but that kinda was the end, the end of that.  I had always planned to go back, but it's been fifty some years ago, and I have not made it back yet.  I don't think I'm gonna make it.
Speaker 2: Now, you said there was a break, a period in which you were getting education, there was a stoppage.
Speaker 1: Yeah, when World War II broke out, when World War II broke out, we were going to school in the summertime.  I didn't understand.  But I know they were in a place called Plant City.  They had the strawberry season, strawberry school time.  Which meant when the schools--when the strawberries were planted, and they came harvest, they just turned the schools out.  The black kids, they just turned them out, and they picked strawberries.  Actually we had the same thing in Manatee County, but I was not aware of it.  I noticed that when we went to school after Christmas, school was out for a little while, and they really picked tomatoes.  I was too small, but we picked tomatoes.  And I know we went to school in the summer, and it was just so hot. I just didn't feel, I just, I just--it was just so hot, I didn't want to go.  So when the War broke out, I'm like twelve years old, I just stopped and went to work.  And I worked for, actually four years.  But I, I took up some friendship with some good, some good friends, little girls that would--all the guys were gone in the service.  I was with the older girls.  I was just friends, really, all that we would do, talk.  And some guys, I took--one of my good friends, Elijah Poole, and he was a very smart guy, handsome guy.  And I took up with him, and I wanted to be like they were.  Which mean--and be with them, which means I needed to go to school. So after about--the War was ended in 1945, I made up my mind that I was going back to school.  So I was--I went back to school at sixteen years old, in seventh grade.  But it was no real problem, because many guys were coming back who had--didn't have the opportunity to go to school either.  So many grown guys were in seventh grade also.  But I stayed in it.  I went on through.  I think I finished high school when I was 20.  I think the average time should have been bout eighteen, or it might have been even younger than that, probably sixteen, at the time.
Story_ID: 57901
Speaker 1: So ever since you were the age of seven, you had a job?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what were you doing while you were sixteen and still go to seventh grade? (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I worked around hotels.  I, you know, you could, you could run the elevator at a hotel.  You could do yards, you could do anything, really.  Matter fact, my children, they ran a mower.  That's against the law--I mean gas mower.  That was a dangerous machine, but they could, they could do all that stuff then.  One--some of my friends tell me now--who is considerably younger than I am--so they would, before they would go to school in the morning, they would go pick strawberries, and then come back home and get ready to go to school.  Then when school was out in the afternoon, the man was there waiting to pick them up and take them to the field again.  So that's kinda of the way it was.  And I think it kinda made us a little better than what we are, what kids are now.  My grandkids, they won't, they won't sweep the floor.  No, they won't mop the floor.  They don't do anything. We gotta 725 out there that's, that's automatic drive.  They won't mow the lawn.  They won't do anything.  And part of that is our problem too.  We wanna--don't want my kids to be like I came up.  Well, wasn't too bad.  I always like to say that those tomatoes were so long, that when they put you down one, you went straight.  There was no movement from the right or from the left.  So that kinda helped us.  It was hard work, but it kinda kept us focused.
Speaker 1: Now, was that motivation to work this hard, still from that day you went to school where you had the hole in the pants?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the, more of it was that I met a pretty gal, man.  And them guys--them bolita guys, had lots of money.  So I don't need them guys helping me.  So, so I figured I'd better provide for her the best way I could--had a bunch of little, pretty little children that I really enjoyed.  And I enjoy her and those children now.  There were no--I had no skills.  I was unskilled, but I was young and strong.  (Unclear) so I would just work several jobs at one time--about four jobs really.  And I made, I really made good money.  I made more money than the professionals were making, cause I--we moved in a nice house in Bradenton, down the street from where (unclear) lives.  At the time it was like about fifteen thousand bucks.  That was substantial house, which we lived in it for--almost forty years.  And I made it working several jobs.  I started in the morning and the jobs was like--the main job was cleaning East Bradenton swimming pool, delivering papers.  I had two other swimming pools I, I kept, kept up.  Plus, I started collecting rent.  And rent collection was going to be my calling and my career for life.  That is the thing that I prospered at.  I was very good at it.
Story_ID: 57902
Speaker 1: Now while you're in school, are you, are you looking, are you looking toward, "what am I going to do next"?  Or, are you just in school to work and to go to school, and to finish out?
Speaker 2: Probably just graduate and, but that would be it.  But I had this thing in my mind, I wanted to go to college.  But, I was probably not a good student, either.  I was not a good student because I didn't know how to study.  It was not I was dumb, I just didn't know how to study.  As I see young people out, I be with them around the church, I see how they can keep records and write things, and write reports.  I did not know how to do that.  I was not taught that, so I didn't know how.  So that was probably my shortcoming.  But, I learned to read.  I read.  I have read quite a bit.  But I took up that on my own.  But, I still--I'm not saying that I can't do a book report, but I've never done a book report.  So that handicaps you.  When you look back, you know what your shortcomings were.  I can write things I see.  I can't write the book report as such, but I can--after I read it, I can write down whatever it is.  I'm good at putting things together on paper.
Speaker 1: So you are nearing your final days of high school.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 57903
Speaker 1: I would like to know how your relationships, if you ever had any relationships, or interaction with the white community in Palmetto?
Speaker 2: Didn't have much.  We were totally separated.  We were totally separated.  I never even really worked with white folks, cause--even when I went--most work I did was in a store or something.  And when I was in my late thirties, I worked in a factory.  I did not work with white folks.  We were totally separated.  To me they were foreign, you know.  I had the misconception that they were smarter than I was.  I don't know if it was because they were white, or because they had better opportunities.  But I found out, they were not.  I learned to be very wordy--I used a lot of words when I was coming up.  Like I said, I changed my manner of speaking.  And let me get back to that.  When my brother was in the Navy, you know, and training in Great Lakes, or wherever it was up in... they went to naval training up to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Great Lakes, Illinois.
Speaker 2: Great Lakes, Illinois.  The southerners would come up--the boys from Alabama and Georgia and Mississippi and they always wanted to be from the big city.  So the way for them, they would say I'm from "Shorecago" (ph.).  They knew that the people in Chicago say that like, "Shacago" (ph).  So they could always tell where they were from.  I made up my mind, at 12 years old, you would not be able to tell where I was from by the way I talk.  And really what I did, I learned to round my tongue out--curve my tongue instead of speaking flat.  And allow my words to come out whole and round.  And within a few--after I made up my mind, I was able to speak American, really.  And somewhere along the way, I started reading books.  I don't know where or how.  I don't know how I started reading, but I started reading.  And I have read ever since.  Not as much, not as fast as I would like to be able to read, but I have read a tremendous--in 50, 60 years, you read a lot of books.  So I read a lot.  And I try to increase my ability to speak fluent.  As I picked up words I would look them up and I incorporated them in my vocabulary.  I'm going to tell you a little story.  My wife went to the doctor a few weeks ago.  And the nurse said, "Why did you bring your wife to doctor?"  I said, "She was coughing and I thought she was heading for a crisis."  The nurse said, "crisis?"  So when the doctor came in, I said to him, I said, "What's my wife's prognosis?"  He said, "prognosis?"  "Where ya'll from, ya'll talking like that?"  I said, "We're from here, and I speak American."  That's what I learned to do, speak like the rest of the people.  I don't think you should be able to speak (unclear).  This, this became my way of speaking.  It's not putting on.  I don't think you should pick up the telephone and know where I'm from.  If you read my application you can't throw it in the garbage can because you knew I was from the other side of the tracks.  I think it's very important.
Story_ID: 57904
Speaker 1: So that desire for self-education, do you have any idea where it came from?
Speaker 2: I'm just not sure.  Probably from my friends I hung out with cause some of these kids I hung with were pretty, pretty smart guys.  And if I had understood the need for education, if I had understood the value of mathematics and things, I probably would have wound up being a good schoolteacher.  I probably would not be living in this house.  I'd probably be retired from the school and living in a nice house somewhere.  But the fact I didn't have skills and like I said, I really wanted to take care of my family.  I'd seem some things in life too, that, that--some things that I did not want to do.  The, the black guys who made money in those days were guys who ran crews up North.  They would take all the money and they had a half-a-dozen girlfriends, old raggedy cars, drink it up, gamble it up.  And I'm saying, not that I'm going to ever have anything, I might not even have anything.  But if I should ever get my hands on something, I was not going to throw it away.  I made up my mind that as I got things, I was going to build on it, build on it.  I did not want to be standing on the street corner with the boys talking about what I used to have, and I don't have it.  Because the opportunity come, I think we should grab it, however it comes.  I have trouble with these athletes and these sports guys and these entertainers who waste up their money.  Who had something that I know very well.  A guy got a $5,000,000 deal and in three years he's broke.  You get a million dollars; you should always have some money.  And you don't start looking out for it later.  You start looking out for it now.  Not when I get down, and go next time I get my next crip shot.  No, when you make your first one, that's what you do.  You're not, you should not--I don't think you should get a place in life and stop.  We moved in this house as I was approaching my 70th birthday.  And if something comes up again, I'll get that too.  I never intend to stop.  When the Good Lord calls me, if he calls me between seven and nine, 10 in the morning, I am going to be down to McDonalds.  I'm not going to be waiting on him to come get me.  If he comes by looking for me, my wife can tell him, "He's not here.  And tell him I said goodbye."  I don't think we supposed to quit anything.  Other people don't do that.  They don't quit.  They keep doing things.  And I think if you keep your mind functioning, you will probably be all right.
Story_ID: 57905
Speaker 1: Now, it seems like the motivation for you, has, was it the young lady you met when you were a teenager?
Speaker 2: That's true.  And, and I think I did, I worked around --
Speaker 1: Tell the story of meeting her?
Speaker 2: --Well, after we, after we come--actually it was before we consolidated the schools.  They had the proms in Bradenton, the prom, the prom in Bradenton.  It was up over--had a dance hall upstairs.  And I guess, I suppose we were probably invited, I'm sure that's how we got there.  And there were a couple of these good looking twin gals.  They were kinda on the-call them red bones.  And boy, that was our favorite, you know.  And I look and see, and she got on this little old fancy outfit.  And I could see her stomach, man.  And you know, (laughter) I say, "Boy this is really something here.  This is saying a lot."  And I was moved.  And I stayed moved until I actually met her.  And 50 something years later, I'm still impressed.  I really don't know when we started courting.  She said, probably just walking home from the movies or something.  But I know that we got into it and I knew I was on the right track.  Without her my life would be different.  I don't know what it would be, but it would be different.  She's been a good hard working person.  She came from a working family.  She worked in high school.  When we got married, she worked.  When I was cleaning buildings, she worked; delivering papers, she helped me.  It was all--the swimming pool, she helped.  She has always been a person--that we worked together.  And when I would come home, I would--in those days, I would clean house or cook, or pick up the babies, or whatever.  Cause I realized that, that then, in modern times, women cannot afford to work, put in eight hours and come home and put another eight hours at, at home.  There were benefits to having a rested wife.
Speaker 1: Okay. What are red bones?
Speaker 2: Well, I heard a guy say--this, something I just heard about--a fair complexion woman.
Speaker 1: Fair complexion.
Speaker 2: Fair complexion.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Not really "high yellow", between "high yellow"
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and brown skin.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Last night we heard about "Red rooster."
Speaker 2: You know about "red rooster"?
Speaker 1: What is the--wine or beer, or something
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: No, no, red.  No, no it's....
Speaker 2: It's pills.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah.  That's a bunch....
Speaker 2: So, I'll, I'll leave out the "well-rested wife" part.  I'll let that one slide by. So sir, you continued out of high school--one year out of high school you marry.  You get married.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 57906
Speaker 1: So, how do you get into what you call your life's work?
Speaker 2: I--in Bradenton, I worked at the East Bradenton swimming pools.  And there was a young guy, young Jewish guy, who was building the neighborhood where Cynthia lives (unclear) lives.  And I'd be mowing, he'd pass by, we eventually started to waving at each other.  We got familiar with each other.  Eventually he came up and asked me, "What do you do, other than work here?  I know you don't spend all your time here?"  I said, "Well, I deliver papers on the side."  He said, "I'm building some apartments.  I'm not going to collect--maybe you'd be interested in it."  I said, "I'll give it a try."  So I eventually started collecting and he was intended to build about 200.  But he built about 80.  And I started to collect rent--and I, and I learned how to collect.  And I got pretty good at it.  And later on--I heard him say one--in those days, white folks wouldn't sell blacks any businesses.  We just, we worked for people, unless you had a little shop, a little store or something.  But I heard him say that, "I know an organization that would buy these places."  When he said that, I realized he was willing to sell them.  So my friend, my associate, became a very wealthy man.  I read the paper one day he had been given unlimited credit by Standard and Poor.  Which means he could do anything he wanted to.  And I went to talk to him about some problem one day.  And his father told me, he said, "Joel is not interested in those apartments anymore.  He's really too busy.  Why don't you buy them?"  So I said, "With what?"  He said, "Talk to him.  He'll work something out for you."  So, I talk....  He said, "Yeah, I'll work something out for you."   So the bottom line is I refinanced my home, and got about $12,000.00 out of it-- in equity out of it.  And then I went to him, we signed the contract, and he--I paid, gave him $10,000.00 down.  He sold it for $330,000.00, which was like nothing--I meant with the $10,000.00, like, like nothing.  So he gave me the books and I collected.  Bill was $3,000.00.  I paid him, I gave him, I must have gave him $12,000.00 down.  And I collected the other $3,000.00 and give him the money.  So they took what we call "land contract."  They financed them for me for a while.  Eventually I was able to get them refinanced, after several years.  And I, I concentrated and worked at it and got pretty good at it.  The City of Palmetto is buying half of them now for a substantial, substantial amount of money.  So, we are going to use that to satisfy our mortgage.  But I, I really worked at it.  I got behind.  I didn't, I didn't understand how to collect--that's why we failed so much.  We didn't have any skills--no training in what we do.  Everybody owed me money.  So, I look at the book one day, and the rent was only $12.00 and something a week.  So on average, on the average, I think we collected about $1200.00 bucks a week at that time.  There was $1200.00 out.  So the man says to me "Seems that Bradenton got a lot of money out."  And I said, "Well, you know, that's the way (unclear).  But I'd like to get the money."  So, it came to me, he going to let you go and get somebody else.  So I learned how to type.  I typed a letter up, just a form, really, and sent it to the tenants.  " Blank, you owe us X amount of dollars, blank"--just blank.  And the rent is thus and so.  From this day forward, you will pay us the rent and $2.00."  The money start coming in.  I got it all.  Then I realized, if I was firm, they would pay.  So, "Can I miss"?  "No."  And those days you didn't have to go through all this court business to get them out.  You could just put them out.  You take the door off--you could do anything you wanted to.  But, anyway, I became very firm and I learned in life not to deal with your kinfolks and your friends just don't bother them at all.  They're not a good investment for you and your business.  So I got good at it.
Speaker 1: So what year did he sell you these apartments?
Speaker 2: 1973.  I started to work for him in 1960.  I worked for him 13 years.  And after I bought them, I took on another project for another guy.  And I ran those for the next 12 years.  I've been in the business now, 42 years.  My son is pretty well taking it over now.  I don't spend a lot of time fooling with it.
Speaker 1: Now, in 1960 when you began to collect, are thesehe owns these apartments in a black area?
Speaker 2: Yes.  (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now.  (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --Two black areas--Bradenton and Palmetto.
Speaker 1: Now, I heard there're some interesting stories of attempting to collect rent from people who don't want to pay.
Speaker 2: That might be so.
Speaker 1: Is it a dangerous--was there danger?
Speaker 2: Well, I have been shot once.  Without--but that didn't have to do with that.  It just, letting a guys come to my house, collect.  I shouldn't have let them do it.  I started out and that's the way it wound up.  But if they don't wanna--this is, this is not like Miami.  I think in Miami, they might can take control or something.  But if they didn't pay, I put them out.
Story_ID: 57907
Speaker 1: Now talk....I'm sorry.  I don't mean to interrupt--but could you explain the whole thing of land contracts?  Because that's a whole concept--that's the only way that--did you go in--that's the only way that black people really could get things, right?
Speaker 2: That's pretty well, that somebody trusts you.  Cause the bank would not let me have, would not gonna let me have any money.  As a matter of fact, after we had--originally, we didn't even touch it.  We didn't count the bank at all--wasn't able--we didn't go in there at all.  He just said, "Make the--here are the books--you make the payments to me."  Which was an excellent deal.  If I had managed it right, we would have been paid these things a long time ago.  Lacking in experience, you're running it for somebody else.  It's not the same thing as running it for yourself.  You don't understand you gotta escrow money for insurance.  You don't understand you gotta make repairs.  A lot of things you just don't understand.  So I got behind, and they only allowed me two weeks.  So they, they, they were attempting to foreclose.  I guess I never figured out people in the first place.  So they were attempting to foreclose.  Then I went and tried to get some money from the SBA [The US Small Business Association].  They laughed at me.  I went to some other people, they laughed.  I had some big-shots friends to getting.  They laughed.  My brothers laughed, because they didn't have no confidence in it.  So I went to the bank and asked the bank could I refinance my house to get some money to buy the apartments.  The guy said, "You can refinance the house, but the money you get, you going to put it back into the apartments.  You can't get it out."  Went to Tampa, a, a guy who (unclear).  He became--he was a little bank in Tampa, called a community savings, I think it was.  He said, "Yes, we will do it, Mr. Love.  Just get your house refinanced, or reappraised."  And they let me have--I think it was $12,800.00, something like that.  So, I took the $12,000.00 and saved some more money and paid him the money down on the place.  So I started that.  Then later on, after I had--when the folks had to get the money out--and they got the money to finance then.  So, I went to the bank--about $300--to get $300--about $200,000.00 at that time.  I had paid it down.  The bank said, "No, no, no, no.  We can't do that.  We can't do that kinda stuff."  So I went to Mr. Singer and told him what they said.  So he picks up the telephone.  He said, "Banker, this is, this is Joel.  He said, you know Clarence?"  "Oh, yeah, he's a good fella."  He said, "He needs $300 thousand.  He said, "Its ok, tell him to come on and get it.  We'll let him have it."  It was on his word, they let me have it.  And after that, I kinda took over and kinda (unclear).  I got into some straights from now and then, but I managed after that.
Story_ID: 57908
Speaker 1: Now, between this time '60 [1960] and '73 [1973], you're a businessman, an active businessman in the community.  What is it like being a black businessman during that period of time?
Speaker 2: Well, black people, kind of contemptuous of you.  And I don't think they mean any harm, but I think the problem is that, they're a little envious, I guess, I guess.  Also, they can't hurt the establishment.  They isolated somewhere, behind a great wall of something.  But they can do harm to you.  So they come after you.  Most problems I've had in my life, as an adult, have been from my people.  Not from the others.  I've had some serious, serious things to overcome with them.  Now, they want to interview me because I distanced them.  But it was hard.
Speaker 1: Can you explain that to me?  Any specifics?
Speaker 2: Well, well, I, I was delivering papers, one time.  I delivered papers for 13 years.  And I had my six little nephews, and at that time they referred to Negroes as "niggra" (ph.), "niggra" and "niggrasses" (ph.).  So, these high school kids, supposedly get upset with the Bradenton Herald.  And, instead of them going and boycotting the Bradenton Herald, then boycott my paper route.  And they were effective too.  I lost half of my, I lost half of my route.  Never was able to get it back.  Eventually, when I get the apartments, they boycotted me again.  And it really upset me, that I--and out of--in Bradenton, where I had about 44 units, I had like 12 apartments vacant because people just moved out.  And I really down in the dumps too.  But I went to a friend and I was, you know, crying on his shoulder.  He said, "Mr. Love, you got what they need.  You hang in there, and they gonna come back to you."  And sure enough they did.  It took a couple of years, but they eventually came back.  But it was a struggle.
Speaker 1: Why were they--what were their reasons for boycotting your, your business?  Your....
Speaker 2: They claimed that I had, had, had bothered someone was an out and out lie.  I hadn't bothered nobody.  They just kinda didn't want to pay.  And I'd make them pay.  They had to pay.  I wouldn't, I wouldn't put up with it.  And they have to pay now.  But things have changed now.  I deal with another group of people who believe they should pay.  And I get all of my money.  I don't deal--I don't collect by the week anymore.  I collect by the month and they give me money orders.  And about the 10th of the month, I have all my money. I collect 99.99 percent of it.  They understand they have to pay.
Story_ID: 57909
Speaker 1: Sir, as I was asking what was the atmosphere in, especially the racial atmosphere of the community when you decided to seek election to become the first black city commissioner?
Speaker 2: Actually, the first time I thought about it was some years earlier.  And I was advised by (unclear) said, "You're just wasting your time.  They aren't going to vote for you.  But later on, I, after I got the apartments, and going in and I still felt that I should do something.  So, I probably didn't seek anybody's advice.  I went on and filled out the papers and went for it.  What happened was, the--none, none of--for the most part, our people didn't support me.  That's tragic.  But none--our people didn't support me.  Whatever finance, financing I got; I got it from the other people.  Most of the votes came from them also.  And I barely made it in.  In fact, the first time I ran, I lost miserably to a guy.  And then, next time I ran, I won by about 18 votes.  And when I ran the next time, I lost again.  So, I was a very weak candidate.  They could put they, they could put their weakest person up against me, and have no trouble winning.  We're just not strong at all.  And, I kinda got out of it.  That was enough of that, tried and just let it go.
Speaker 1: So while you were in office, how were you received?  How were you received by both the black and the white communities while you were in office?
Speaker 2: I would say, at best, warm.  And probably to the black community, more like, less than warm.  I was a landlord for number one.  They wanted to hold that against me.  And, oftentime, our people don't understand how politics work.  That it works, but it works by the majority.  I'm just one person.  And, in politics, if anyone you vote "yes" for one guy, you're actually voting "no" for another guy.  And a democracy we need to understand how that works.  And apparently, they did not understand that well, 25 or 30 years ago.  They didn't understand it that well at that time.  But, I got in and got out.  And I've never had the desire to go back.
Story_ID: 57910
Speaker 1: Do you think you accomplished anything while you were on?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We got Section 8 program.  We got the community redevelopment.  We got a whole bunch of stuff going--sidewalk, streetlights--did a lot.  But, of lot of them didn't appreciate--like, I know once the mayor told me that, that, "We got somebody we can put some street lights up."  So, I had these streetlights put up, and a lady came up to my office one day.  And boy, I'm all excited.  Boy, somebody's coming to see me!  She said, "You put them street lights outside my house, and they shine through my window."  I said, "What"?"  "They shine through my window."  I said, "Why don't you close your window."  "I don't want to.  I want you to move...."  I said, "Ma'm, look, they tell us there're two things we don't get in a black neighborhood, that's street, street--sidewalks and street lights.  And ma'm, they here to stay.  You try to get use to them, cause they ain't going no where."  And that's--they stayed there.  She eventually got used to them.
Story_ID: 57911
Speaker 1: I have to ask you this question.  You said a few times that how you were not well received by our community, the African American community.  How'd you feel about this?  I mean, how did you deal with seemingly being rejected by your own?
Speaker 2: It's kind of a hard thing to deal with.  We all would be--we all would like to be liked by people, but people don't always like you.  That's life.  At the top, oftentimes it's a lonely individual.  That's the way it goes.  But you have to have confidence in yourself had a good family, and had good friends.  So, I kinda--when I was--I felt rejected, but I went on.
Speaker 1: Did you ever experience the outright racism that existed in this area?  Did you ever experience that?
Speaker 2: Probably not.  I say, we were, we were separate, separated from the one--the others.  And I, I, as a councilperson, we were a good team until it came time to run for next election.  I got tricked by some of the other council people.  But, I let it go.  I didn't pursue it very much.  And I don't want to get into it.  Well, here's what happened--one of the things that happened.  There was a lady who kept running all the time, and she lost.  So what the group decided to do since she was on the line of my ward and her ward.  They said, "We'll move the ward."  So when it come to one of their guys, one of their guys to run, he said, "I don't want to run against her.  We'll move the ward, and put her in your ward."  And when it's time for you to run, we'll move it back."  So they moved it and excluded her out of his ward, so he--she couldn't run against him.  So, when it came time for her to run against me.  I said, "What...."  "He said, "No, we can't do that."  So I knew that she had me.  Cause she--like I say--she was not a strong candidate, but she was stronger than I was.  And she won.  I, I lost.  And I had my wife to try to run and get her back, get her back, but she didn't make out too well either.  But it was okay.
Story_ID: 57912
Speaker 1: So, how did you enjoy your activity in city politics?
Speaker 2: Loved it.  Had a chance to travel a lot, learn a lot from people.  And was--I was commissioner of the fire department, or whatever that means, that means.  I was able to hire some people and be kinda over some people.  I was commissioner of the finances.  I was able to go around to meetings and talk about money and see people, and manage money.  It was kinda exciting.  I loved it.  Could charter some airplanes and fly all over the country and go to places.  That was great.  Got me my taste of wanting to travel.
Speaker 1: So, after you leave politics, then what do you do?  What's your next endeavor?
Speaker 2: I still had some other--you know, several jobs I was doing anyway.  And I began to work on my apartments.  And I did--did some of them--a lot of maintenance myself, as a young guy.  I could do the maintenance myself.  And I kept myself busy.  I got involved at church.  I joined a church 40 years ago, and I've been consistent in the church.  When I joined the church, they asked me what did I want to do.  I said, "I want to sing in the choir."  And I've been there ever since.  Love to sing.  Could not sing, maybe can't sing now.  But, I love to try.
Speaker 1: Now, have you provided housing for the low-income individuals in the city?
Speaker 2: We had the Section 8 program.  Yes.  That--we started the Section 8 program.  Instrumental in getting it set up.  The community redevelopment, I think that's what they call it now, where you re-do houses, and this type thing, was instrumental in that.  I back--in my platform, I had a stair with different things I had done.  I can't remember what they are though, cause I ran on my record.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: And I--that--I think I did all right.
Speaker 1: Now, as a landlord.  Do you like that term, or....
Speaker 2: Not really--That's why I say property management.
Speaker 1: --As a property manager (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --owner and manager, owner and manager.  I own them and manage them.
Speaker 1: --As property owner (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --property owner, yes.
Story_ID: 57913
Speaker 1: --how do you feel--what do you feel the purpose is--what would you want tenants in any community, specifically, African American community to know when it comes with how they should deal with property they live in?
Speaker 2: They should take care of it.  They should perceive it as their own house.  And that's where, that's where we have trouble.  It's still the landlord's place, so I'm not going to take care of it.  But I say, "You are the one living here, not me."  Say a tenant, they, they--oftentimes they tear up stuff, or they throw things in toilet that stops it up.  Which you shouldn't have to pay, but you go on and do it anyway.  They maybe break windows out, or tear the screen out to go in the house, or some other stuff.  They did--but there are some people, I mean, really take care of them--you say "eat off the floor."  There are some people keep them spic and span.  You can eat right off the floor.  And I think it's a training thing.  We need to be trained to do these things.  I think there is an attempt now to teach people.  I understand, in order to get a house now, you have to go through a training program.  That is a good idea, to train people what's expected of them.  They need to know what the law is too.  And putting people out can be kinda tricky at times.
Speaker 1: How is that experience?
Speaker 2: Some people want to fight, you know.  (Laughter)  But I learned--I don't confront them, number one.  I give them notice, and you pay this money.  And oftentimes when the sheriff came with a final notice, I stood back and let them deal with it.  And these guys, they're armed and this type thing.  They could bring trustees to put the stuff out.  So, I stay out of it.  Always be fair.  Treat the people right. Don't get no hanky panky.  Don't do no under the table stuff.  Stay right. So, when they start talking about you, they have to say that he put me out because I did not pay my rent.  Leave it at that.  Stay away from your kinfolks and your friends.  Deal with people--you are better off to have people not like you.  See you coming, say, "Here's the landlord, I don't like him, so get his money."  So you don't have to tarry.  Better at that than to come in and sit down and have a piece of chicken.  That's, that doesn't work, work too good. It's been a wonderful experience.  In fact, my whole life has been a wonderful experience.  And whatever few I got left, I expect them to be well too.
Story_ID: 57914
Speaker 1: I have to ask about that evening, November 18, 1993?
Speaker 2: We had been out. We had been out to collect.  These guys, this particular man knew I collect--we collect on Fridays.  He drove in the neighborhood and waited for us to come home.  The neighbor called and said, "There is a guy--some guys in the--sitting out here waiting, watching around you guys house."  So by the time we tell--my wife tells me that, the telephone--the doorbell rings, and she opens the door, I guess out of curiosity, I guess.  And there was the guy.  So he said he wanted to speak to me.  When I went to the door, he pulled a gun on me.  So, I would not slam the door because I figured he would shoot through the door.  So, I had to let him in and deal with him inside.  But, I could see no future, brother; because I figured this was it.  When he, he called his accomplice in, and he made us sit down.  I remember he--my wife said--she got upset--said, "I need to take a pill for my heart."  He said, "You ain't going to need one.  You ain't gonna need a pill."  So they robbed us.  They got a few bucks, not that much.  And when they finished, he sent the other guy out, and he told us, he said, "Get up."  He was going to execute us.  So I know momentarily there would be nothing, which means I've been dispatched.  But, he had a grapefruit in his hand, and I couldn't figure out what it was for.  When he put the gun barrel in it, I realized it was a silencer.  But he had it out to the side.  And I formulated a plan then.  And this is what I was going to do.  I can't save me, I don't think that's possible, but perhaps I can distract him long enough for my wife to get away.  So, I decided whenever he turned around and I felt he was ready to shoot, I would just lunge against the settee, I was up against the settee.  And when, when he did, when he--the gun went off--when I thought it the gun was going to go off, I lunged against settee and I heard the gun go off.  And I thought I felt something touch my forehead, but I'm just not sure what happened.  The old saying, "If you see the lighting flash and hear the thunder, it missed you."  So, I heard the gun go off, so I know I'm not dead, anyway.  When my self fall on down on the floor, So I fell down on the floor, and I guess when I hit the settee, it moved out from the wall.  So, momentarily it was quiet.  He didn't come back to shoot me anymore.  So I got up and the guy was gone.  I always like to say that's that extra 10 percent I put in church on Sundays.  Them brownie points I been working for.  Yep.  That's what it was.
Story_ID: 57915
Speaker 1: So, what was the outcome of--did they capture him?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did, several days later.  It was strange how they caught him, cause we couldn't identify him.  We just couldn't identify him.  We couldn't--no composite--couldn't do anything.  So I always go into McDonalds.  So I went to McDonalds, probably on Wednesday and my wife either called me, or something and told me they--police wanted to talk to me.  So I got home, they came out, and they came with these pictures.  And they put my wife in one room; they put me in another one.  And they spread about five pictures out.  They said, "Do you see him?"  I said, "That's him right there."  My wife said, "That's him right there."  They said, "We know where he is right now.  He on the job working.  We'll have him in an hour."  They went and got him later in the afternoon.  So, I call up there because they took--I give them (unclear)--I give them my ring.  So, I call up there and the lady said, "Well, you need to talk to the deputy that arrested him."  So, I talk to the deputy about the ring.  He said, "Mr. Love, he said, strange how we got him."  He said, "I'm going down the highway, out in the country, and a guy sees me coming, he gets out and waves me down."  This is up in (unclear) Florida.  I said, "Yes."  He said, "Didn't somebody get shot in down in Bradenton Friday night?"  He said, "I don't know."  He said, "Yeah.  I think so."  He said, "Well, I'll call my office and they will call Bradenton."  They said, "Yeah.  A man got shot."  He said, "See that guy sitting in that truck over there.  He did it."  He went up there bragging.  For his troubles he got, he got 35 years.  And his other friend got 40 years.  They got less than $100.00.
Speaker 1: Were they African American?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: What are your thoughts about that--about whatever life they led that would get them to that?  What--that they would be robbing you?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd had reservations about--I should have listened to the voice and stopped collecting at the house.  Stopped collecting cash.  And that helped expedite it.  But, one thing I did say, that when the, when the young boy came up, he was 15.  And I said to the court, I said, "General, you expect me to be cheering about this.  I said I'm really sad that this young boy think he can go get a gun and take other peoples stuff, and wound up in this predicament.  And I said, "If the government would get out of our houses, leave our children alone, let us raise--we could save some of this."  And the judge agreed with me.  He said, "Yes, Mr. Love, I agree with you."  And they gave him 35, 40 years.
Speaker 1: Fifteen years old?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He killed a guy the next week.  He didn't go for that.  The very--it was on Friday, so the next Thursday; he went to rob a Mexican guy.  And, apparently the Mexican guy didn't understand him, and he shot him and killed him.  Run right in the house and killed him dead before his kids.  Fifteen years old.
Story_ID: 57916
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: I do have some serious reservations.  Other minorities, they are coming in the country and getting a good toehold.  We're not managing our talents, resources well.  We're not going to school properly.  We're not learning what we need to do.  And one of the things that works against us--the fact that we talk about how Haitians come over and they do this.  And, Mexicans come over and they do this.  In these other countries, Haiti, poorest country in the western hemisphere, it is run by Haitians.  They develop an expertise.  Mexicans come over.  Mexico is run by Mexicans.  Black folks have not run anything in this country.  We have not develop expertise.  We don't understand our problem.  We need to be taught on a continual basis what the problem is.  Talk about economics.  We don't need to get into God bless Martin Luther King.  But that is not going to put any bread on the table.  You have to take advantage of what comes up.  And that's what I did.  I took advantage of whatever came up and made it work for me.  We've got to make things work for us.  And we need to look out for one another.  Other people do, look out for their own.  We got to look out for one another too.
Story_ID: 57917
Speaker 1: What's your advice to black business owners, or blacks seeking to become business owners?
Speaker 2: You need to be well informed about what you do.  You need to be real informed about what you do.  You gonna need some money.  You can't go to the government and wanna open a toothpick factory when you got no money and no skills in doing it.  These people are putting out money.  They think they gonna bring them some money in.  If they think they won't get it, they aren't gonna let you, they aren't gonna let you have it.  My daughter's working in a bank.  When I applied--another loan, I refinanced apartments a couple times.  And I borrowed $500,000.00, and the--well, about three times.  I borrowed $500,000.00 and she read the letter of recommendation to the board that lend me the $500,000.00.  They said, "Mr. Love is in a land--is in a business that requires great expertise and he is an expert at what he's doing.  I recommend we lend him the $500,000.00 because he's going to make us some more money.  It ain't about loving me.  It's about making money.  When you can produce something, people will deal with you.  If you have not--in the Booker T. Washington's, Booker T. Washington's--I think Up From Slavery, I think his name of his book is.  It's a young black guy up in Tuskegee County.  I think Tuskegee might be a county.  This young black guy was a--grew potatoes.  He had learned how to produce 350 bushels of potatoes per acre.  The top white farmer, the best he could eke out was 50.  It's now, don't like blacks, hate blacks, hang 'em.  But a guy that's seven and a half times better than you.  You got to recognize him.  So, when we get better at things, and can do things that work for us, people recognize us.  They do in athletics.  They do in other things.  They--we can do it in business too.
Story_ID: 57918
Speaker 1: So, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I really just want a legacy that I was a good family person.  Really, I'm more concerned about them than I am anything else.  I want my family to be working people.  People that mind their own business, stay out of trouble.  That's really what I want.  I don't have anything else for me.  I'm comfortable with me.
Story_ID: 57919
Speaker 1: What do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying.  I'm comfortable with me--just family.  A guy that command respect from his friends and neighbors.  And let it go at....  I don't need no plaque.  I don't need no nothing.  As I said, I'm comfortable with me.  I don't need anything.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much Mr. Love.
Speaker 2: Lucky to have been born in this country, put my parents on that slave ship and they let me off here.  Glad to have been here.
Story_ID: 57920
Speaker 1: That's my wife to be--Edith.  She's probably in about 11th grade at the time.  We were courting then and I--marriage was not too far away.  It's about 1959, I guess--'49 [1949].
Speaker 2: This is part of my family.  My daughter, my first two grandkids and two of my daughters.  I don't know who the other one is there.  I think that's my daughter on the left.  Let me, let me see that closer.  Which one is it?  On the left is Janice, center is Cynthia who is taller, and the other one is Cecelia.  And Janice's two children, and Cecelia's--one of Cecelia's children.  My three grandkids.
Speaker 1: That's my daughter, Cynthia, when she was probably 4 or 5 years old.
Speaker 2: We were at a black elected officials conference.  And Julian Bond is in the picture somewhere.  I think that's--Julian is in there somewhere, and my wife, and the hosts.  We were over in Coco at the time.  Julian Bond was a young guy.  He had been the speaker that time--at that time.  Sometime in '76 [1976].  I don't remember what year it was.
Speaker 1: And that's my--this is my sister--half sister, really.  And the little boy she was raising.  This is the sister, the sibling still alive.  Nineteen--early '60s [1960s].  Annie Lou McGoggan, I believe.
Speaker 2: We're on our first trips in Haiti.  We had just been out to a wine, a rum tasting place.  And I stood up to take pictures in the background.  That ship costs us; I think it was $139.00 each.  Boy, that was big time.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, that's the Clarence Love there.  In his humble days.  He was probably about 16 years old.  So that would be able 1946 or '7' [1947].
Speaker 2: We--and our property--okay.  We were in Mount Rainer in Washington, D.C. [sic]  Probably in 1980.
Speaker 1: That's my graduation picture.  Which would be June 5, 1950.
Speaker 2: That was my nephew that was raised in our house.  He was about--my sister had him out of wedlock.  He was raised in my mother's house.  And there was another, he had a sister, Bernadine, who raised in our--my mother's house also--my parent's house.
Speaker 1: We were in--this was in West Palm Beach, we had just flown from Nassau to West Palm Beach.  We just had landed.  That's my wife and that was our--we owned an airplane at the time.  1976.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: That was at a wedding.  My daughter got married in Tallassee.  And we had flown up to Tampa--up to Tallahassee--rented an airplane and flew up to Tampa--Tallahassee.  This is--left, I don't know who that is--the one in the back--the second from left, is my son, my son Anthony, myself, my wife.  This is my son.  Those two, I don't know who they are.  All this was in '76 [1976] (laughter).  Cause I say, yeah, I learned to fly.  Yeah, yeah, I learned to fly.  So a lot of it was happening at that time.
Speaker 1: This is my--I had sent my family on a train trip--no, no.  We had flown out to California--driven out to California.  And that's my daughter on the left, is my daughter Cynthia, Russell, who did all these pictures here.  And probably a niece there--this is my niece--tall lady in the center.  I don't know who that is on the bottom there, and I'm on the extreme right.  That would be in 70--early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: This is--that's my older brother, who is deceased; my son Benjamin, and my oldest brother that was living, and then my other brother who is deceased also.  Johnnie B is on the left.  Benjamin is in the center.  Edmund is on the right.  I was the photographer, so I was always--not taking--I was always not in the picture.
Speaker 1: This was in--when we were in Jamaica.  I think that's something about when Columbus had discovered Jamaica, or something.  I had my wife to point at it.  We were in Jamaica and that probably was in the early '70s [1970s] also.
Speaker 2: There it is.  The night after graduation.  That lady-to-be is flowing through my veins.  (Laughter).  Her name was Edith Lowe, Clarence Love.
Speaker 1: That's just a church picture there.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: That was little great--little grandson that my son had, and we kept him for several years.  His name was Kendrick Love.  He had a small part in the movie I can't think of it right now.  Kendrick Love.  Yes.  He lives in Savannah.  No, he was in a black movie about this black lieutenant up in Alabama.  No, I got the tape--it will come to me after while.
Speaker 1: That's my teenage children.  Clarence is to the left, his, his girlfriend in the center, and I think it's Benjamin on the right-hand side.
Speaker 2: Those are our small children.  That's Anthony on the left; Edith's is in the center, and Benjamin on the right.
Speaker 1: That is my mother, very beautiful, I always thought.  Her name is Alberta, A-L-B-E-R-T-A, L-O-V-E.  No, I don't.
Speaker 2: Group of the family, who is almost too numerous to mention.  But you see my wife sitting there.  She is the queen, and I'm standing at the top, standing up over her.  Just a group of family members got together for a family (unclear) photo.  40th Anniversary.  Yes.  We rented a hall and we had a big shindig.
