Story_ID: 34606
Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gines, and I am the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Anthony Pool is observing, Scott Stearns is the videographer, and also we have observing is Denise King [Lathan's daughter].  Would you please state your name and spell it for me, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: Lenon Lathan, L-E-N-O-N, L-A-T-H-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, Mr. Lathan, what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: 7-19-26 [July 19, 1926].
Speaker 1: And the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: Sturgis, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: August 19th.
Speaker 1: August 20th.
Speaker 2: Twentieth, oh.
Speaker 1: That's okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Twentieth--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --2013.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the location [of the interview] (unclear).
Speaker 2: The HistoryMakers [office] (unclear).
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation or former occupations?
Speaker 2: Pipefitter.
Story_ID: 34607
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you some 'People' magazine-ish type questions, okay?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Clearing throat).  What is your favorite food?  What do you like to eat?
Speaker 2: Well, I like to eat fish, beef, pork.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Salads.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I think summertime.
Speaker 1: And where do you like to go on vacation?
Speaker 2: I like to go on vacation in winter time.
Speaker 1: Where do you like to go?
Speaker 2: Where do I like to go?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Oh, somewhere down in the Bahamas or some, some warm country.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: And, lastly, do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: No, I've said (unclear) "Good gosh!"
Story_ID: 34608
Speaker 1: Let's begin the interview by talking about your family, and I'd like to start with your mother.  Will you tell me your mother's name and where she was born?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Mary Frazier.  She was born in a little place--a little country town called Germantown, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: And did she talk to you much about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Not too much.
Speaker 1: Do you know when she was born [December 4, 1900]?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: And did you--do you know about her schooling?
Speaker 2: I, I, I think she might have had grammar school.
Speaker 1: And what did she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't think any high school.
Speaker 1: --what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: Farming.
Speaker 1: And did she have brothers or sisters.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you know their names?
Speaker 2: Well, she had one named Viola, Helen, Clara, and she had a brother named Johnny, and one brother named Herman, and a brother named Arthur.  She had more than that, but those are the ones that I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay and what about her parents?  Do you know your [maternal] grandparents? (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What were their names?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was named Dave [Frazier] and her name was Emma [Sanders].
Speaker 1: And do you know much about them?  Do you remember anything about them?
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember them. I used to go visit them quite often.
Speaker 1: Do you have a story about what you remember when you'd visit?
Speaker 2: Well, they (laughter), they lived in a little place called Burkstown [ph.], and that's where all the, all the juke joints were, you know, and we weren't allowed to even go over there, not really.  But we would sneak over there every once in a while and go over there anyway.  My dad [Oscar Lathan] didn't want us to go over there.
Speaker 1: And, and, so they lived on a farm as well, is that right?  Did they live on a farm?
Speaker 2: No, they weren't on the farm, no.
Speaker 1: So they lived in the, in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In the little village (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --town.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 34609
Speaker 1: Okay, so yeah, let's continue talking about your [maternal] grandparents [Dave Frazier and Emma Sanders] and your mother [Mary Frazier] and the town where your grandparents [Burkstown (ph.), Mississippi] lived.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, tell me another story about when you used to visit.
Speaker 2: Well, I would visit, and they would--I'd love to visit because they'd give us treats that we weren't hardly used to.  You know, they just let us have our way, just let us take over the house, and they just let us do anything we wanted to do.  I'd love to go over there.
Speaker 1: Was your grandmother a good cook?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, ma'am!  Oh, yes, ma'am, the whole family.
Speaker 1: What are some of your favorite things that your grandmother used to cook?
Speaker 2: Peach cobbler and pineapple cake and teacakes, things like that.
Speaker 1: Did you keep those recipes?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  So, what else happened when you went to, to visit?
Speaker 2: Well, he'd take me fishing.  They had a, they had a fish pond down below the house that we could go down there and fish, and they--the folks had a boat down there and we could go boat riding.  It was, it was lots of fun.
Story_ID: 34610
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father now.
Speaker 2: My father--now to be truthful about my father, he was a good man, but he's a very mean man.  I thought he was the meanest man in the world; I really did, until I was grown.  When I grew up he was always telling me--I don't ever remember him whooping me, but he was always promising. I wanted him to whoop me so bad. But, I don't ever remember him putting his hands on me to whoop me.  But he's always say, "I'm gonna get you for what you did last week," and all that kind of stuff, you know.  He just fussed all the time.
Speaker 1: Tell me your father's name and where he was born.
Speaker 2: Oscar.  He was born in a, in a little place called Winston County, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And what do you know about his education?
Speaker 2: I don't know anything about it, not really.
Speaker 1: And what about his parents, your grandparents on your father's side, did you know them?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me their names.
Speaker 2: My grandfather's named Jacob [Frazier].  My grandmother also was named Emma [Head], the same as my other grandmother.
Speaker 1: And where did your grandparents live?
Speaker 2: They--now my grandfather told us a story about them coming up--my great grandfather coming over on the boat from Africa.  But he said that they would come down to Virginia, and then they got on this-off of Virginia and they followed the Eastern Seaboard down through North Carolina, South Carolina, and got to Alabama.  And my parents, they were born in Alabama.  So, my grandfather heard that they were allowing blacks to buy land in Mississippi, so they went over to Mississippi and did they buy land!  They had all kinds of land in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And how many acres--do you, do you know where (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, (simultaneous) he had enough to give, give each as ten kids--he had enough to give them all at least 200 acres apiece.
Speaker 1: That's a lot of land.
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Do you know how he earned the money to purchase the land?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I think we had a family reunion once, and they found out that he had been in World War I, I think.  And he had applied for some kind of benefits.  This is the story that I was told.  So, I, I don't know where he got his money from, but it probably wasn't no more than fifty cents or a dollar an acre.
Speaker 1: And tell me your great-grandfather's name.
Speaker 2: (No response).
Speaker 1: Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright (clearing throat).  So, so they settled in Mississippi.  Okay.
Story_ID: 34611
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Mary Frazier] and father [Oscar Lathan] met?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, I don't think I could tell you a story about them.  I don't know anything about them.  To me they've been married all their lives looked like.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was very young.  My mom was only fifteen [years old] when she got married.
Speaker 1: Alright, well, tell me about when you were born and your siblings.  Can you name all of them in the order in which they were born and where you fit in?
Speaker 2: Oh, wait a minute.  Now, the first one was a girl, Emma, next was Robert, next was Ceola, Leola, twins, the next was Howard, the next was John, and then Lenon and Clenon, the twins, that was my twin brother and I.  And then there was one named Eddie Mae, Billy, Mary Love, Horace and Herman, twins, and Minnie Pearl, the baby girl.  I think that's all of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you say Edward?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 34612
Speaker 1: So, there were a lot of children.  So, tell me how it was living with so many brothers and sisters.
Speaker 2: Ma'am, it was just like, just like in the movie, you know, when you have a house and you have a boardwalk from the house to a little shed house and a pot bowl--potbelly stove in the middle of it.  There were cots all over the floor in the room for all of us slept in those cots all around in there.
Speaker 1: So, describe your house to me, I mean, give me more a description of what your home looked like.
Speaker 2: Well, it was a--had a gabled roof on it, it was--I don't think we had two or three bedrooms, and then the big house we called it, we had a system way out on the back porch where you get your water when it rained.  And that's when we had an outside toilet.
Speaker 1: And, so was this on a farm or was this--
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am, it was on a farm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me what were some of the chores that you had as kids?
Speaker 2: My chores, when I got big enough, was to milk the cow.  I had to milk.  When I was about six or seven years old I learned to milk a cow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And besides cows, what other animals were on the farm?
Speaker 2: Oh, ma'am, there were, there were every animal you could name--chickens, duck, geese, turkeys, cows, horses, mule, dogs, cats (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you had them all.
Speaker 2: Lots of them, yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: And so what did your family raise--what type of crops?
Speaker 2: Peas, beans, peanuts, watermelons, corn, cotton, sugarcane, sorghum cane.  We raised everything there was to be raised on a farm, like beans and things.
Speaker 1: So you ate from the land?
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: So did you--
Speaker 2: Oh, I forgot about hogs--kill our own hogs--our own meat.
Speaker 1: And did you cure the meat or--
Speaker 2: At that time, yes we did, we cured it.  They had things called smokehouse.  We cured it in there.
Story_ID: 34613
Speaker 1: And tell me about the rest of the community.  Where was the closest farm, neighbor?
Speaker 2: Our closest neighbor was--like our garden--they were at the other end of the garden.  My uncle was there.  And then we had another uncle lived right in front of us, across the road, as we call it down there.
Speaker 1: Okay and were these all family members that lived in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, all family members.
Speaker 1: Okay and was this the land that the [parental] great-grandfather left?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So everybody owned their property?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Alright, and so, who were, besides the--you had a lot of brothers and sisters to be, you know, to play with, but who else were--were they just your cousins in a community, you know, in the neighborhood or the community that you played with?  What type of games (simultaneous) did you all play?
Speaker 2: There were a couple of more families that were not related to us that was in the neighborhoods like around there.  But, but the, see, but the place got named the Lathan Quarters.  That was the name of the place over there.
Story_ID: 34614
Speaker 1: Tell me more about your relationship with your mother [Mary Frazier].  What was your relationship like?
Speaker 2: My mother and I had a great relationship.  We were great.
Speaker 1: And what were some of the special things or the special bond that you had since there were so many children?  What do you think was special or what--
Speaker 2: Well, what is special is, every, everywhere I got to go somewhere other than home, she would take us with her everywhere she went, we would go with her.  I remember that (unclear).
Speaker 1: What characteristics do you think that you have gotten from your mother?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, how to treat other people, being nice to people, and just being friendly.  I think I got that mostly from my mother.
Speaker 1: And what did you get from your dad?
Speaker 2: Work.  How to work, that's about all he'd teach us how to do was work (laughter).
Speaker 1: Work ethic.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, that's a good thing (laughter).  Alright.
Story_ID: 34615
Speaker 1: So now, (clearing throat) besides living on the farm [in Sturgis, Mississippi] (clearing throat), when did you go to school?  How old were you when you started school?
Speaker 2: I was six years old.  I don't remember--I remember, I remember going to school, but I vaguely remember how old I was.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so where was the school in relation to where you lived?  And how did you get there?
Speaker 2: About a mile away.  We walked.  The first one got there made a fire in the stove.
Speaker 1: And how many kids did you, do you remember being in the school?
Speaker 2: About, I guess at the most, about fifty.
Speaker 1: And tell me about it.  How were the classrooms set up?
Speaker 2: Well, when the, when we first started there were no classrooms, it was in the church, and everybody had a section, each grade had a section in this church.  And finally this church burned down.  And then my dad [Oscar Lathan] and all the people in the neighborhood they got together and built a new church.  And they built five classrooms and an auditorium. And we were big time then--we had a big school.  And the school was there until--let me see, I graduated in '41 [1941]--'39' [1939]--and there wasn't a high school until 1946.  My younger siblings, they went to the high school.
Speaker 1: Okay and what was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Liberty Hill, Liberty Hill Methodist Church.
Story_ID: 34616
Speaker 1: And do you remember about going to church on Sundays?
Speaker 2: One Sunday?  I went to church every Sunday (laughter).
Speaker 1: Tell me about church.
Speaker 2: Well, I went to church so much I swore when I got grown I was never going to church anymore.
Speaker 1: Do you remember anything about the pastor of the church or the Reverend?
Speaker 2: Oh, there were several of them.  I remember most of the names of them.
Speaker 1: And who were they?
Speaker 2: Jones, Millers, Hill, Frazier, I remember four of them.
Speaker 1: So were there ministers that lived in the community or were they traveling, because a lot of time--
Speaker 2: We had a place called the parsonage; they lived right next door to the church.  And then most of them taught school there--they taught in the school there.
Story_ID: 34617
Speaker 1: Okay, and so, tell me more about the teachers then [at school in the church, Liberty Hill Methodist Church, Sturgis, Mississippi], while you were going to school there.
Speaker 2: Well, the teachers were--I guess, I think at that time, anybody that had a high school education they could teach school, they could teach grammar school, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the teachers?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, ma'am, I remember all of them.
Speaker 1: Okay tell me about them.  Tell me who they were.
Speaker 2: Well, a couple of them were my cousins, and I would get into a lot of trouble in school (laughter).  If I'd do something wrong, they'd threaten to tell my parents [Oscar Lathan and Mary Frazier], and I was pretty much kept--.
Speaker 1: Tell, tell me their names.
Speaker 2: One of them named Estelle Stiles, one named Gabriella Austin, and one was named--what was his name?  It was a Lathan [paternal cousin].
Speaker 1: So what type of student were you?  Did you like school?
Speaker 2: I, I think I was a very good student.
Speaker 1: And what, what subject did you like the best?
Speaker 2: I liked math.
Speaker 1: And what were you reading (clearing throat)?
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: What were you reading?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved to read short stories.
Speaker 1: What was your favorite--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Lots about animals.  One was called--Oh, I never will forget this one that the principal gave me for a Christmas present.  It was called 'Say It With Flowers'.
Speaker 1: And you remember that?
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am, I do remember.
Speaker 1: And who was the principal?
Speaker 2: Emery (ph.).  His name was (unclear) Professor Emery (ph.).
Speaker 1: And so is there anything else that you remember about elementary school?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember, I remember playing basketball with guys almost twice my age.
Speaker 1: So you were a good basketball player?
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: What other sports did you enjoy?
Speaker 2: Well, I played baseball.  And I played football later.
Speaker 1: With the basketball and the baseball, who were the coaches?  Who taught you all?
Speaker 2: Well, the principal always was a coach.
Speaker 1: Oh, the principal?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, we didn't have coaches as such, you know.
Story_ID: 34618
Speaker 1: So now, tell me more about what happens after grammar school.  You go through which grade at, at Liberty [Hill Methodist Church; school; Sturgis, Mississippi] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The eighth grade.
Speaker 1: --through at Liberty Hill-
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --you go through eighth grade.  And so then what happens with your education?  Where do you go to school next?
Speaker 2: Well, then there was a, there was a lady named there, the name of Mary Rogers.  She had a school down on the Gulf Coast called Gulf, Gulfside Institute [Waveland, Mississippi].  So she picked up four or five of us to go there.  So I went there for two years of high school, and then I left there and went to Mobile [Alabama], and I started going to high school [Dunbar High School] in Mobile, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay so how did you get there?
Speaker 2: Bus, on the bus.
Speaker 1: On the bus?  So they picked you up every, every morning?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.  How I got to school when I was there?  I stayed on campus.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay so it was a school that was a--you had a campus?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay and you stayed there for two years.  How often did you come home?
Speaker 2: I never did.  I never came home until World War II started.  Then I went home, and I was saying to myself, "Len, what are you gonna do?"  I could have gone to college but I said I couldn't be nothing but a preacher and a teacher, and I don't want to be either one of them.  So I walked around there for about, about a month.  And then I went down to the draft board and told them to call me for the service, military service.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 34619
Speaker 1: Well, before we get to the [military] service we still have some things we'd like to talk about in your early, earlier years, okay?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And one would be--you--there were two sets of twins in your family?
Speaker 2: Three.
Speaker 1: Three sets?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And so tell me about, about your twin [Clenon Lathan].
Speaker 2: Well, my twin and I, we weren't very close.  We didn't act too much like twins until the later ages in life.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, who were you closest to as your--
Speaker 2: I was closer to a brother, brother that's older than I am--one brother that's--
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: John [Lathan].
Speaker 1: John.  And so what did you and John used to do together?
Speaker 2: We fished together, we hunt together, and we talked about how we was gonna get away from down there [Sturgis, Mississippi] (laughter), and we, we were never gonna leave each other.  If he left, he was gonna take me with him.  If I left, we--then I'd take him.  We would go.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: That's mostly what we talked about.
Story_ID: 34620
Speaker 1: So you had some dreams and aspirations and one of them would be to leave there [Sturgis, Mississippi], but what was your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory was I had a cousin named Theody [ph.], and he would go down on the creek, as we called the river.  And we'd go down there and he'd throw us in the creek.  I was swimming before I was five years old.  And he would throw us in the creek and make us swim.  He said, "Swim, swim, swim or you're gonna drown."  We'd be kicking and we'd start swimming and kicking.  So, my brother, he never did learn to swim.  He'd run away.  They never could catch him.  He was cold (unclear).
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: He would do the girls the same way.  He'd throw the girls in there too.
Speaker 1: So everybody learned how to swim?
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.
Story_ID: 34621
Speaker 1: Okay, what about the other sets of twins, were they close?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a little bit too close (laughter).
Speaker 1: Why do you say that?
Speaker 2: They were, well, everything you'd give one--"Give Horace a piece, give Herman a piece." (Unclear) We'd give one a piece of candy and he'd want to give the other one.  And then, then they slept at night with their arms around each other.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  So they were just really, really close.
Speaker 2: Yeah they were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Why do you think that you and your twin [Clenon Lathan] weren't very close?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know, my dad [Oscar Lathan] always put him in front of me about--always bragged on him all the time because he was--he could hook up the mules and go haul some wood, or something like that, way before I learned to do that, you know.  And he always thought he was growner than anybody in the house.
Speaker 1: Well, you were a good student.  Was he a good student as well?
Speaker 2: I would say no, 'cause I was always two grades ahead of him in grammar school.
Story_ID: 36725
Speaker 1: Okay so let's, let's go back-and you were telling me about your siblings and the closeness between the twins.  And there was one other set of twins, and were they close as well?
Speaker 2: Leola and Ceola, yes, the girls, they were very close.
Speaker 1: Okay and--
Speaker 2: But one of them was, one of them was just like a mother to all of us really, one of the twin girls.  And every time my mother [Mary Frazier] would have a baby or something she would just have to take over the house and be the mother, you know.  And actually, she was more like my mother than my mother.
Speaker 1: And which sister was this?
Speaker 2: My sister.
Speaker 1: And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Ceola.
Speaker 1: Ceola.  Okay.  And was she older than you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How much older?
Speaker 2: Let's see, there was John, Howard.  There were two more--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: --older than I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36726
Speaker 1: Now, you said you dreamed about--and you and your [older] brother [John Lathan] would talk about leaving.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the town [Sturgis, Mississippi] itself.  Who owned the stores?  How far was it to--that you had to walk there?
Speaker 2: I remember one time there was a black guy who owned the store there.  And he started talking on the phone so much until the white folks, until they put him out of business.  And I never will forget this one time--there was only, there was only one, one, not a stoplight just a blinking light.  There weren't even stoplights in the town there, but there was like a cotton gin and stores and a couple of cafes, one black one, and Frazier's.  I knew practically all the names of merchants who were there.  But I never would forget--this is a story.  In my science class, we were talking about dry ice, and they said ask your druggist what is dry ice.  I didn't--I had never heard of dry ice, you know, before then.  So I went in this drugstore and asked the druggist what was dry ice.  He went back, back there and got a scoop and he said hold your hand up.  I put my hand out like this.  He put all of that dry ice in my hand, and it stuck all into it, sure did.
Speaker 1: And that was a very mean thing to do.
Speaker 2: I thought it was, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what did you do?  What happened?  What was your--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I just went to sling it down on the floor as much as I could, you know, and just walked out of the store.
Speaker 1: And did you tell your parents [Oscar Lathan and Mary Frazier] about this?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what did they--
Speaker 2: What could they do?  Nothing.  They never said anything to the people about it.
Speaker 1: Okay and was there, was there another incident?  How did, in general, the white population treat you and your family?
Speaker 2: Well, in town there were, there were really some nice whites that was friends of my family, really.  They were really nice to us.  We would--I'd work for a lot of them, you know.
Story_ID: 36727
Speaker 1: Did you ever have a job working in the town [Sturgis, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I never had a job, nothing but babysitting the chickens to see where they were laying in the woods somewhere, telling them where they were and stuff like that --
Speaker 1: Well explain--
Speaker 2: --mowing the lawn.
Speaker 1: Okay, the chickens, tell me about the chickens now.  They would be in the--
Speaker 2: The turkeys they were, they, they were, they were out in the wooded area, and I would go and see where they were nesting at so they would know where they were.  When they--the babies would come they would kind of bring them in (unclear) and I would do that.
Story_ID: 36728
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of your family traditions.  What did your family do on holidays?
Speaker 2: We ate like pigs (laughter), like most people down South.
Speaker 1: And, and what was Christmas morning like for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was chaos.  I'll never forget Santa Claus coming in front of the house.  He had all of the baskets on--the bags on his back.  When he came there everybody ran but me.  And I sat there and when Santa Claus came I thought he gave it to me.  I didn't wanna give the rest of them anything.  So (laughter) they had to make me share then.
Speaker 1: Any other stories about any family traditions?  Is there something that your family used to do that was, you know, special or--
Speaker 2: Well, we had to pray every night and say grace before we ate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Had to go to church every Sunday.
Speaker 1: What about recreation?  How did you and your brothers and sisters entertain yourselves?
Speaker 2: Well, we had baseballs.  We had basketballs--had hoops upside of the house and we'd play.
Speaker 1: What other types of games did you play?
Speaker 2: We played like--what's this game you play on the ground there, hopscop, hoopscuff [hopscotch]?  Whatever it was we played that.
Speaker 1: And did you have a radio?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes!  Oh, yes!  I remember Joe Louis' [African American boxer] fight.  Our porch would be swinging down with people coming to listen to the radio, listen to the fight.
Speaker 1: What other programs did you listen to?
Speaker 2: Country western.
Speaker 1: And did your family ever get a television?
Speaker 2: No, no we didn't get a television.  I think I was in Chicago [Illinois] before we got a television, I think.  Wasn't I, Denny [addressing his daughter, Denise King; observer at the interview]?  Yes, I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what are other types of things that the family did together?
Speaker 2: Well, there wasn't too much to do now.  We would visit.  We, we had an uncle lived in a place called, it's called the Mississippi Delta and it was called Indianola (unclear). My dad [Oscar Lathan] and them, every year they would charter a bus to go down to Indianola (unclear) to see my cousins and see my uncle.  But we never went, we never went down there.  We never saw them until World War II.  We heard if you go down there the white people would take you and put you on the farm and wouldn't let you out, you know, let you loose from down there.
Speaker 1: So you were afraid to go.
Story_ID: 36729
Speaker 1: So where did you travel before going away to high school [in Waveland, Mississippi and Mobile, Alabama]?  Had you traveled anywhere outside of your--
Speaker 2: Mississippi--
Speaker 1: --immediate area?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I might have, I might have gone to Memphis [Tennessee] once or twice.
Speaker 1: And who did you visit there?
Speaker 2: My uncle.
Speaker 1: And what do you remember about any of those trips?
Speaker 2: I remember it was a really, real good trip and was excited to be in the big city.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I always wanted to live in Memphis.
Speaker 1: Because it was a big city?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what other cities had you heard about that you thought you might want to visit?
Speaker 2: New York, Los Angeles [California], Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] I wanted to visit those.
Story_ID: 36730
Speaker 1: So going back to the fact that you and your brothers [Lathan's older brother, John Lathan] had talked about wanting to leave your hometown [Sturgis, Mississippi], tell me why it is that you wanted to leave?
Speaker 2: Because of the segregation.  And I, I was just telling him and he said and what do you wanna be?  I said I wanna be a Pullman porter, porter on the train.  I would just ride and ride until I got to a city that I liked, and I'd just get off there and that's where I would stay.  That's what I would do.  That was my dream.
Speaker 1: And so you say you wanted to leave because of the segregation, but do you have another story about what was bad about segregation, as far as you're concerned?
Speaker 2: Well, everything.  I remember one day my brother and I, we lived about a mile out of the village, and my brother and I were walking along the, the, the highway, and this white man stopped in his car.  My brother said, "Hey." And he stopped and he backed all the way back to where we were.  And he said, "I'm gonna have to take him with me the way you hollerin'."  And so he, my brother, he said get in. So he got in and I went to get in too and he said (unclear)--I went to go get in the car too, so he said, "Will you make sure that he never holler at another white man?"  And I said "Yes, sir."  And then we walked in the woods all the way home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he said, he said, "I'm gonna let him go but would you see that he never holler at another white man?"  And I just said, "Yes, sir" and walked away, walked back through the woods home again, scared to walk on the highway.
Speaker 1: So a lot of your years you were just afraid of white people, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And then my brother always said, he said when I left to go to high school we promised--I promised if I'd ever leave I was gonna take him with me.  Then he said--he tells me that now.  He--like he said, "You left me.  I still owe you one.  You left me there."  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Story_ID: 36731
Speaker 1: Okay, so now when you go to high school--let's talk about when you go to high school and you're in a different environment and you don't go home [in Sturgis, Mississippi] at all.  So tell me what was it like when you got there?
Speaker 2: Well, there were so many people and so many classrooms, I didn't know hardly what to do.  I wasn't used to all of that, you know.  So it was--it didn't take that long for me to get in line and get used to it.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, how many classrooms were there and how many students?
Speaker 2: There were a couple of hundred I guess, you know.  There was a classroom for every grade from one through twelve.
Speaker 1: And were these all black students?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: And were all the teachers black?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what subjects did you have or what was your favorite subject in high school?
Speaker 2: My favorite subject was still math.  We--now people talk about laboratories and things like that.  We didn't know what a lab was.  Our lab, laboratory was like alcohol in the bottle, you know, pickling bugs and things like that.  We, we had no laboratories in high school, not at all.
Speaker 1: But your science was different though, right?
Speaker 2: No, I think it was about the same.
Speaker 1: About the same?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell me about the students who were there.  Where did they come from?  They--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: All over, all, all over, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Gulfside Institute [Waveland, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Gulfside, okay.  And who was your teacher?
Speaker 2: How was she?
Speaker 1: No, who was she?  What was her name?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Ms. Henton was my favorite teacher.  That's my English teacher.  She was my favorite teacher.
Speaker 1: And why was she your favorite?
Speaker 2: She was always nice to me.  She'd see that I get in line and keep up my grades and things.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what you were reading then?
Speaker 2: I think I was reading like prose--like Shakespeare.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And math being your favorite subject, and you were very good at it, did you think of a career that might be--that might have to do with math?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  There was no career that I could think of--nothing that I could do with any of the education I was getting.
Speaker 1: Well, besides that teacher, was there anyone who inspired you about maybe going on to college or thinking about a career?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was one guy named Mr. Willis.  He always talked about it with me, going to one of the, the, the schools, you know, that would--could work your way through college. (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: And was that a thought for you?
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: Was that a thought for you, to go to college?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what college did you even think about going to?
Speaker 2: I didn't think about any of them at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't want to go to any of them.
Story_ID: 36732
Speaker 1: So tell me about the town in which the school [high school; Gulfside Institute] was in.
Speaker 2: It was in a place called Waveland, Waveland, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And what was that town like?
Speaker 2: It was like a little hick town.  It was, it wasn't a big--wasn't the, the largest town from there was a place called Bay Saint Louis [Mississippi], and New Orleans [Louisiana] was only forty miles away.  We had a bus that would take us to New Orleans.  Every weekend we could go there, go to the museum, go to the theaters and things like that there.
Speaker 1: Do you have a story about one of your trips to New Orleans?
Speaker 2: Well, my story about New Orleans.  When we got there they'd put us off and we'd all go to the movies.  And the black people start throwing stuff down on the whites, you know, from the balcony, and these lights kept coming on.  It had got to the place I didn't wanna to go to the movies anymore.  I'd go to the museum or something, you know, just walk around by myself until the bus got ready to go back to campus.
Speaker 1: And do you remember what was--when you were going to the movies, what was one of your favorite movies during that time.
Speaker 2: I don't even think I had a favorite one 'cause they all were the same thing.  It was cowboy movies; that's all they were.
Speaker 1: And you didn't like westerns.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And so besides the museums and movies and what-- were there any other towns that you visited while you were in high school?
Speaker 2: No, that's about all, Bay St. Louis and New Orleans.
Story_ID: 36733
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about sports during high school [at Gulfside Institute, Waveland, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we had, we had sports.  I played basketball.
Speaker 1: And anything else that was special about high school for you?  I mean, it was a big difference from being at the church.
Speaker 2: Well, it was special when we'd, we'd, we'd have plays, you know, and I was always in a play.
Speaker 1: And what type of plays?
Speaker 2: Oh, like comedies, mostly comedies.
Speaker 1: What was your starring (simultaneous) role?
Speaker 2: --Pardon me?
Speaker 1: What was your starring role?
Speaker 2: Dancing (simultaneous) musical (unclear)--
Speaker 1: So you liked to dance?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, what music did you like to listen to?
Speaker 2: I listened to jazz, pop music, all kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: What was the, the, the hottest dance during that time?
Speaker 2: Jitterbug, I would say.  That's the one I remember more than any other.
Speaker 1: So you were a good jitterbugger?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the plays, what was the name of the plays?
Speaker 2: "Down the Road We Go."
Speaker 1: And what was that about or who was it by?
Speaker 2: It was about a person leaving home and trying to find his way, just like myself I guess, you know.  (Unclear) And then there was, there were doctors in it and nurses and things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who was the drama teacher.
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't think we had what you call a drama teacher--
Speaker 1: Was it the English teacher?
Speaker 2: --it just be a teacher, just be one of the English teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember who helped with the plays?
Speaker 2: Ms. Harris.
Speaker 1: Ms. Harris?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Anything else that was memorable about high school?
Speaker 2: Uhh.
Speaker 1: And it was boys and girls, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, it was co-ed [co-educational].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you spent two years there?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And then after two years what happened?
Speaker 2: I went to Mobile [Alabama].
Story_ID: 36734
Speaker 1: Mobile, Alabama.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Why did you go there?
Speaker 2: Then I started Dunbar [high school].  I went to Dunbar and I--if you were--that's when the war [World War II] had begun then, and if you were a sophomore or more they would let you get out of school and go to the shipyard and work till ten o'clock at night. And that's where I--when I learned to weld.  It was a welding shipyard.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how did you--where did you stay in Mobile while you would go into Dunbar?
Speaker 2: Well, my sister had moved to Mobile and that's why I went there, and I went to stay with her.
Speaker 1: Which sister?
Speaker 2: The one, the favorite one, Ceola.
Speaker 1: Ceola.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And then she went to--she, she got transferred to California on her job, and I didn't wanna go to California.
Speaker 1: What type of work did she do?
Speaker 2: She was a, she was in the, in the infirmary in the hospital working as a salad girl.
Speaker 1: So you didn't want to go to California?  So what did you do?
Speaker 2: I went back to Mississippi and volunteered for the [Military] Service.
Story_ID: 36735
Speaker 1: So tell me about the experience traveling back to Mississippi.  And then you said you--was there a recruiting office [for the military] in your hometown [Sturgis, Mississippi]?  Where did you go?
Speaker 2: Well, when did I go?
Speaker 1: Where.
Speaker 2: Where did I--I went back to Sturgis.
Speaker 1: Oh, they had a recruiting office there?
Speaker 2: No, it was in Starkville [Mississippi], was the recruiting office, and then they would send me to Jackson [Mississippi].  That's where I met her [gesturing to his daughter, Denise King, who is observing the interview] mother [Lathan's wife, Mildred Barrow].  That's where I met her mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell me, when you went in, tell me the experience of going in.  Who did you talk to when you--and what did you say about joining because the draft [for World War II] had started by then, right?
Speaker 2: I, I went down to the recruiting station first and told them to call me in the next group that they call up, to call me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wanted to be in it so they did it.  And when I got there there were about 200 of us, and about six of us they picked and said go in the other room there.  I thought we were gonna be the failures.  Then they said you guys are going to the [U.S.] Marine Corps, and I didn't even know what the Marine Corps was--had no idea of what he was talking about.
Speaker 1: What were your expectations about going to the [Military] Service?  What did you think or what were your hopes of going there?
Speaker 2: I, I, I wasn't thinking about the fighting parts of it.  I just wanted to get away and just go somewhere, really.  I was thinking about the traveling I would do and something, you know.  I didn't think about, I didn't think about the danger I was gettin' into, really.
Speaker 1: So you--I mean, the war you said was going on--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: So there were--
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: --So, you were--you heard, especially on the radio, all the things that were going on but it just did not dawn--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, it didn't.  It did not go into me that I'd be afraid of--nothing that I'd be afraid of, no.
Speaker 1: So not knowing anything about the Marines, did you anticipate going into the [U.S.] Army when you were going to--
Speaker 2: I didn't care where I went.
Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't care.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36736
Speaker 1: So the [U.S.] Marines you knew nothing about.  And so what did you learn about the Marines (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was rough I'm telling.  I cried a many nights.  I wanted to go and get out, but I was too embarrassed.  I had volunteered.  And I said well, nobody told me to get in this.  Nobody got me in this but myself so I would get myself out.
Speaker 1: Okay, so let's, let's talk about when you got ready to leave and how did you travel to North Carolina?
Speaker 2: On the bus.
Speaker 1: So tell me about that experience.
Speaker 2: Well, we got on the bus in Jackson, Mississippi, and the next stop was Birmingham, Alabama so we stopped there.  Talk about segregation, I, I, I experienced a different type of segregation.  You seen where they had the little finger pointing--a black finger pointing at the, at the colored section, as we were at that time, you know, pointing there so we had to go around to the back and get the food.  Then we left there and we went to Montgomery, Alabama, I mean Atlanta, Georgia.  And then that's when they, they had the ropes on the bus.  The people that get on the bus say, "Get behind the rope!"  If they didn't, the bus driver had a gun in his hand.  He would just (unclear), I said get back behind the bus, you know, get back behind the rope.  It was awful, that's what it was.
Speaker 1: So, finally you get to North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we get to North Carolina.  So they put us in there and we've got to strip all your clothes off and you get your clothes.  Then you go to the barbershop to get the haircut.  Now, this is funny.  They had a guy from Connecticut, he had the conked hair, you know, all pretty. And (unclear) said what kind of--how you want your hair cut?  He said, well, I want it cut this way and that way.  The guy takes the clippers and said zoom, zoom, zoom, all of it off.  He'd be looking so--(laughter).  That was really funny (laughter) to see.  See how you would look when your hair on your head is skinned (laughter).
Speaker 1: Who did you travel with?  You said there were six guys that were going into the Marines.  Did you all travel together at the same time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Were all of you black?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).  I think we were (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so what happens next?
Speaker 2: Well, next was the boot camp.  When you start marching, you get in the front and you get in step.  If you get out of step the other guy behind you would kick you just as hard as he could.  And I don't think I was kicked too many times, not really.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the drill sergeants then.  Because--
Speaker 2: Oh, I swore I was gonna kill one.
Speaker 1: Which one was that?
Speaker 2: There, that was the first drill instructor.  At the end of the course, he was the nicest person you would ever wanna meet.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Johnson.
Speaker 1: [Sergeant Major Gilbert] "Hashmark" Johnson?
Speaker 2: No, not Hashmark another guy, Johnson.  The other guy was named Phil.  Hashmark Johnson, he was the--he was a sergeant major I think.  Yeah, he was a sergeant major.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: He came from the [U.S.] Army.
Story_ID: 34634
Speaker 1: Okay, so now you're in boot camp.  Now, let's talk about Montford Point because the Montford [Point] Marines [first African Americans to serve in the United States Marine Corps] are so very special.  What did you learn about Montford Point?  Because this was in Camp Lejeune [Marine Corps Base Camp, North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Right, it was in Camp Lejeune but we were, we were out on a--like being on a reservation, you know, where they built cronson (ph.) huts for us to live in.  And we had all the--all we had was a master sergeant.  It was the highest rank that a black person had at that time.  And we were--we couldn't, we couldn't even go to the main campus camp unless a white officer took you.  And then that way--it was that way until--I think '47 [1947] was when they integrated the Armed Forces.
Speaker 1: So Montford Point was built specifically for--
Speaker 2: For black people--
Speaker 1: --for black--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Marines?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: For them to be trained.  When you get there in '44 [1944], all of the drill sergeants in the higher command--you said master sergeant was the highest but were all of them now black.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, all of them were black except the, the--they, they had, they had platoons and things, certain platoons and things where they had--but the manager they were white, like lieutenants.  And then the commanding officer of the whole Montford Point camp was just a colonel.
Story_ID: 34635
Speaker 1: So tell me more about your training there in boot camp [at Montford Point, North Carolina].  What was--after boot camp what did you learn and did you have any advanced training after boot camp?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We'd, we'd go to San Diego [California] for a little bit of advanced training.  That's far as we could go in the [U.S.] Marine Corps.  We could go to Camp Lejeune and San Diego.
Speaker 1: But tell me more about boot camp.  Tell me, you know, about your, your days there.  And you said you cried at night (laughter), so what were your days like?
Speaker 2: The day was like getting up early in the morning and going out and drill and just--you, you--I, I, I think I drilled and marched more than anybody who ever went in the Service.  Every weekend there would be a parade and we'd be parading.  That's the first time I'd ever seen a president, a real live president; it was [Lyndon B.] Johnson [it was President Franklin D. Roosevelt], I saw him.
Speaker 1: And, and--
Speaker 2: And I was real close to him, as I am to you here and now, I was close to him.
Speaker 1: What was the occasion that you saw him?
Speaker 2: He just come on out to inspect the Marines, I guess, the black Marines, I guess.
Speaker 1: And the Marines are, are a tough group where they're supposed to be the very best of the Armed Forces.  Was that drilled into, into your head?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, ma'am.  You, you didn't fear.  It worked.  They would brainwash you, and it worked.  So it really worked on me.
Speaker 1: What were some of the things they would tell you?
Speaker 2: The only time that I've ever gotten real scared was when you go in the ammunition and they were firing over your head with those tracer bullets and things.  And I think they said they were six inches from your body, and you got to stay down, like crawling on your stomach.  And I just knew I was--I was praying to God that I wouldn't see a snake 'cause I would have, I would have jumped up.  I know I would have and my head would have come off too.
Speaker 1: What about--what else about the days?  Who were some of the men in your unit?  Was it a unit or a battalion?
Speaker 2: It was a--they called them platoons.
Speaker 1: Platoons, okay.
Speaker 2: There were about thirty people in the platoon I think.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of the men that were with you?
Speaker 2: I remember lots of them.  I remember most of them, yes.  I remember their names, like when were in Washington [District of Columbia] getting--receiving the Congressional Medal of Honor, I heard a few--couple of their names called but I never saw them.
Speaker 1: Who--what were some of their names?
Speaker 2: Just all typical black names, Smith, Johnson, Davis.
Speaker 1: And who were you closest to?  Who were you closest to while you were there?
Speaker 2: I had a, I had--my best friend--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --was a guy from Alexander, Virginia, Reggie Miller, who was my wife's sister's boyfriend.  He was from Richmond, Virginia; he was one of my best friends.  And a boy named James Mild (ph.) from Mobile, Alabama, I mean Birmingham, Alabama, he was one of my best friends.  There was another guy named Strickland from Gulfport, Mississippi, he was one of my best friends too.
Story_ID: 34636
Speaker 1: And so after boot camp or basic training [U.S. Marine Corps; at Montford Point, North Carolina], what was your specialty?  What were you trained in?
Speaker 2: Answer the telephone (laughter).  I worked at a place called the BOQ, the bachelor's training office, that's just where, where they lived.  And I would just answer the phone and tell them who called during the day and all that kind of stuff.  That was first--I was trained to do that.  And the other one, I had just regular combat training.
Speaker 1: And what type of guns did you use or--
Speaker 2: We--
Speaker 1: --what kind of rifle training did you have?
Speaker 2: We, we had rifle training.  We had to go to rifle range and qualify to shoot a rifle.  And then we had that and all kinds of tricks and things you did with the rifle.  But I was in an anti-aircraft outfit where they had the big guns, out of 105 Housing.
Speaker 1: Tell me what that, tell me what that means.
Speaker 2: That means, the big guns like the, like the canon, like you're shooting a canon almost.  The--they were like machine guns but they were big ones, you know.
Speaker 1: And where was, where was this used, on the ships, on the ground?  How--
Speaker 2: We were just, we were just on the side, the side of the ocean, on the side of the Atlantic Ocean just shooting at planes pulling the targets for us.  We had women flying the plane, white women flying the plane with the, with the--pulling the dummies.
Speaker 1: And was there anything else special about the training that you had?
Speaker 2: Trained how to dig a foxhole and survival training and what to do if we were captured and all like that.  They teach you all of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember any of that?  What were you trained to do if you were captured?
Speaker 2: We didn't have to do anything but give them your name and serial number.  That's all you were supposed to give them, that's it.
Speaker 1: Did you understand that when you went into the Service that, that blacks usually didn't go into combat?
Speaker 2: I, I never even, I never even thought about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I did learn that when I got there, but that's not true that blacks didn't fight.  If you got over there and there was a fight going on (unclear) fighters, you had to fight--to survive.
Speaker 1: You had heard of the Tuskegee Airmen, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you knew that blacks were in combat?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What other groups of blacks that you learned about that were fighting or had foughten, had foughten (laughter)--who had fought in a war before?  Did you learn any of that information?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 34637
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your personal life while at boot camp.  You said that you met your wife. When did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: When I got out of high school I went back to Mississippi, and I--that's when I met her [referring to his daughter, denise King, whi is observing the interview] mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was her name?
Speaker 2: Mildred, Mildred Barrow [ph.].
Speaker 1: And is there a story about how you and Mildred--how you met and how you got married?
Speaker 2: You know, it's strange.  They lived right there in the little village but they lived up--Denise, what was the name of that place that lived--Whitefield.  They lived in a place called Whitefield but I had never seen her.  But she went to high school in Little Rock, Arkansas, and she was home doing the sewing and that's when I met her and started dating her.
Speaker 1: Where did you meet her?
Speaker 2: They were working in a, in a little cafe there for the white folks in the little town there--it's City Cafe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay and you started dating and tell me the story about how you got married.
Speaker 2: Well, we'd write with each other.  I'd come home on furlough to visit her.  And then when I got--the year before I got discharged we got married.  Oh my God, that was a, that was a, that was a disaster.
Speaker 1: Tell me the story.
Speaker 2: Well, we got home I said--of course, we were already engaged and when I got home we were gonna to get married.  We don't--weren't gonna really have a wedding.  When we got married, we just went to town hall and got married.  And I took this license and showed them to her sister and (unclear) said anything so we went over to the mother's house after then.  When we got there, the mother said, girl, I thought you supposed--my wife was in college at the time.  She was at Mary Holmes--a place called Mary Holmes.  She was in college at that time.
Speaker 1: Where is Mary Holmes?
Speaker 2: West Point, Mississippi.  And, she said, "Girl, I thought you were in the school."  She said, "Yes, I was."  She said, "Well, that's that."  She didn't say anything so we went on, and so I went and stayed two days and went back over there.  Oh, and she jumped on me with all four feet, I'm telling you.  She said, "You had no business marrying me.  You should have told"--my God!  I said now if she was gonna raise all this hell, why didn't she say something when we first got married, you know.  I thought it was over with, but she really gave me the third degree.
Speaker 1: And so you had to go back because you were still in the Marines, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 34638
Speaker 1: So tell me after boot camp [U.S. Marine Corps; Montford Point, North Carolina] where did you go?
Speaker 2: After boot camp?
Speaker 1: When you left Montford Point.
Speaker 2: When I left Montford Point, I went to San Diego [California] and then went to Guam.
Speaker 1: So tell me about San Diego.  How did you get to San Diego?
Speaker 2: We got to San Diego on a train (laughter).  We'd get on the train, and we'd go through these cities, and the white folks be just waving, just waving.  When we'd get to the black--we were in the back of the train--the front of the train--no, the back of the train, and when they got to us you'd see the hands go down.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so when you get to San Diego, what do you do in San Diego to prepare to go to Guam?
Speaker 2: Well, we had a little combat training, like bastard packs, like making your own bombs.
Speaker 1: Making your own bombs?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  You had the dynamite and you'd put fuses in them, and they would teach you don't cut them too short because the enemy would pick them up and throw them back at you.
Speaker 1: And so then you got prepared to go to Guam?  So tell me about the travel to Guam.
Speaker 2: We traveled on the USS Dorothea Dix, Dorothea L. Dix.  About--took us about nine days to get there.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who was on the ship with you?
Speaker 2: Most of the guys that were in my outfit in the [United] States.
Speaker 1: And what about the chain of command?  How different was it from being at Montford Point and then going to San Diego and then being on the ship?  How were you treated by the commanding officer?
Speaker 2: We, we were treated civil.  They, they, they, there were, they were civil toward us; they were nice.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have any, any problems at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 34639
Speaker 1: So now when you get to Guam [as part of the U.S. Marine Corps], do you have an idea of why you're going and what the mission is?  What is your--do you have any idea of what the American strategies were or tactics, and how your group fit into the overall big picture?
Speaker 2: Well, well, well Guam was secure when we, when we got there.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And we just went there to protect it.  But there were still snipers, you know, guys that pretend they didn't know the war was ended.  They would come around the mess halls and getting food and stuff they were stealing.  You had to be careful.  We couldn't go anywhere unless two of us were in (unclear) together because they were still Japanese with guns all around the island.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there were Japanese around the island and you were secure--keeping secured the place there in Guam?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went, I went over there as a replacement for the 52nd Marine Battalion.
Speaker 1: And what was your battalion?  What was the name of your battalion?
Speaker 2: Fifty-fourth [54th Marine Battalion].
Speaker 1: Fifty-fourth, okay.  And so you replaced them, okay.  So tell me more about what you did while you were in Guam, besides--I mean I understand, but give me a little more detail about what you did to secure--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was a welder on--in motor transport, around--when I was in Guam.  If the trucks break down I would weld them back together.
Speaker 1: So, so how long were you in Guam?
Speaker 2: I was in Guam about eight months.  You see, they trick, they tricked me when I was in Guam.  They said anybody that re-ups now, they can go back on the next ship that go back to the [United] States.  And I was the first one up there to sign up.  And then when I got on the ship, I saw the same guys that didn't the sign up with me, they were on the same ship.  It was okay.
Speaker 1: So what was your--at this point--what is your philosophy about, about war or about the war [World War II]?
Speaker 2: You know, I didn't have too much time--I didn't think about the war that much, not really, but I think it was a necessary evil.  I think war is a terrible thing.
Speaker 1: And so what else happens in Guam?  Anything special that you can remember that happens while you're there?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I remember a lot of things that happened that wouldn't be (laughter)--it wouldn't be nice to talk about it right now.
Speaker 1: And, and, and that's because why?
Speaker 2: Because there were lots of bad things going on in there among us.
Speaker 1: And so you don't want to talk about it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 34640
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you get ready to leave there [Guam; with the 54th Marine Battalion] after eight months, tell me what happens next?
Speaker 2: Well, we got on the ship, and I never been so proud to see the Golden Gate [Bridge, San Francisco, California].  And I was really, I was really happy.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: And I would have, I would have re-upped for another couple of years, if my wife [Mildred Barrow] hadn't have got pregnant.  You know, it was so bad there in North Carolina for blacks to get anywhere to stay at all.  And then at that time my wife was, was babysitting for my commanding officer.  And he, he told me how hard it was gonna be and tried to get me to stay and said we'll figure out something.  I said, I said then supposing you could transfer us somewhere?  He said, "I'll take you anywhere I go, so you don't have to worry about that."  And I, I almost stayed [in the U.S. Marinews].  And when I got out, I had wished I had taken him up on that.  I started working at the steel mill [U.S. Steel].  I was like a stripper helper.  And like the--if the steel--when they'd go to strip the steel--the big blocks of steel--if it would stick, I had to go and turn the faucet on to unstick it.  And it was open, out near the lake.  And that wind was hitting me in the face when I'd go to do that.  And I said, oh my God, I think I'm going back.  I started to go back to the Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: Who was your commanding officer at the time?
Speaker 2: Colonel A. L. Booth.
Speaker 1: And that's who your wife was babysitting for.  Did anyone in your unit on your platoon--did anyone that you know actually see combat during the war?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that or anyone that you know.  Tell me what they might have told you.
Speaker 2: Well, they told me--they said when they got to, I think it was Okinawa [Japan], they were telling them to, you know--they weren't supposed to fight, you know, they were supposed to just supply the other--the whites with the ammunition and stuff.  They were--I forget what they call them.  They were just ammunition handlers, but they had guns likely by then.  So, like I said, if you were there, and you had the guns you, had to fight or die.  So you had to use your own discretion, I guess.  Nobody didn't have to tell you to protect yourself.
Speaker 1: And you were trained on the big guns.  Did you ever get an opportunity to use that in Guam?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Any other combat stories from any of your fellow--
Speaker 2: I don't think there was, there was not that many in my platoon, you know, that was training then.  They just went over before I did.  It might have been a few of them that were, that were there about, I guess, two months before the war [World War II] ended.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.
Story_ID: 34641
Speaker 1: Okay, so your--is this your wife's [Mildred Barrow], well, you and your wife's first baby when you get out the Service?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was the first baby, yes.
Speaker 1: And so tell me about your children.
Speaker 2: Well, my kid--my oldest was the first grandchild on each side of the family, on my side and on my wife's side.  My son is the oldest grandchild on both sides.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me your children's names in the order in which they were born.
Speaker 2: The first one is Alfred, the boy; the next one is a girl, Deborah; the next one was Michael, a boy; and the next one was Warren; the next one was Denise; the next one was Daryl.  No, was Daryl born before you, Denny [referring to his daughter, Denise King, who is observing the interview]?
Speaker 1: Denise King:  And Myron.
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Denise King: Myron.
Speaker 2: I said Michael.
Speaker 1: Myron.
Speaker 2: Denise King:  We called him Mike (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And then who else?  Oh, Stephanie and [Mary] Kimberly [and Thomas Lathan].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So you had a large family.
Speaker 2: Sure did.
Speaker 1: Wonderful.
Story_ID: 34642
Speaker 1: Okay, so now you thought about getting back in [to the U.S. Marine Corps] but you did not--.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So what was your next job, or did you go to school or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to Chicago City College [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay and what did you study there?
Speaker 2: English was my major.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell me what happens next?
Speaker 2: Well, I went and one day I was walking down the street and this guy came up to me and asked me did I have a job.  I said yes, not much of a job but I had one.
Speaker 1: What were you doing?
Speaker 2: I was working for Campbell's Soup at that time.
Speaker 1: Campbell's Soup?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What were you doing at Campbell's Soup?
Speaker 2: I was a--like I was a foreman.  I did make foreman before I left there but I did everything.  Came up through the rank.
Speaker 1: How long did you work at Campbell's Soup?
Speaker 2: About fifteen to sixteen years.  Then this guy met me and he said how would you like to be a pipefitter?  I said pipefitter.  And he said what did you do?  I said I was a welder.  He said what did you do when you were in the Service [U.S. Marine Corps]?  I said I was a welder most of the time.  He said, a welder?  He said, that's good so you can be a pipe welder.  I said okay.  So you'd have to go to Washburn [Trade School, Chicago] for about six months to learn blueprints (unclear).  So I said okay.  So I started to go into Washburn, and I'll never forget, it was about Christmas, and I got almost to school, and I had a little junky car and I had a flat tire.  And I, and I got to school the night we were supposed to take the exam.  And I said--I told the instructor, I said I'm in no condition to take no exam tonight.  He said oh go ahead and take it, you'll pass it.  So we get there and he--we sit there and he said, okay as I call your names you go in this room here.  He called off all of the names and we went in there.  And so about 10 or 12 of us out of 25 were left in the room.  He said may I be the first one to congratulate you guys since you passed your exam?  Oh, I jumped to the ceiling, hit the ceilings then.  So the rest is history.  So I went from three dollars an hour to nine dollars and fifty cents an hour, oh my God.  So the rest is really history (laughter).
Story_ID: 34643
Speaker 1: Now, let's go back and clarify some dates.  You came out of the [U.S.] Marines in--was this 1948?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were living in North Carolina?  How did you get to North Carolina?
Speaker 2: I was living in North Carolina.  When I got out of the Service I went back to Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Back to Mississippi?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that's where your wife [Mildred Barron] was, in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I thought you had said North Carolina.  Okay, so you were in Mississippi, and this is where she was babysitting your commander's [Colonel A. L. Booth] children?
Speaker 2: No, she was babysitting the children in North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was in North Carolina--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and then came back to Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, and you worked at Campbell's Soup and, and you said--how long did you work at Campbell's Soup.
Speaker 2: About, I think, to be exact it was about seventeen years, I think.
Speaker 1: So, when did you go to Washburn [Trade School, Chicago, Illinois]?  What year was that?
Speaker 2: Oh, about '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Alright, so now we have the timeline correct.
Story_ID: 34644
Speaker 1: Okay, now we're going to go back a little ways okay, because talking off camera we know that you have some fantastic stories to tell.  And the first correction I want to make is that the president during your time at Montford Point [North Carolina; at basic training with the U.S. Marine Corps] was [President Franklin D.] Roosevelt, not [President Lyndon B.] Johnson, correct?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, so now let's go back to Montford Point--and we'll pick up where we left off.  But let's go back to Montford Point and tell me some of the stories of things that happened while you were there.  One thing you were talking about was when you had to take bus rides and how you had to get tickets and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --how, how you were treated then.  So tell me the story about that.
Speaker 2: Well, the first place, I thought Mississippi was bad, were real prejudiced people there.  The prejudice place I've ever been in my life was North Carolina, really.  We'd go to the bus station to go and they would sell us about, sell the blacks about four or five tickets and then they'd cut it off and we had to wait until the next bus.  So we had a guy in there from Gulfport, Mississippi.  He, he was light, bright, damn near white, really.  He was blond, blue eyes, and he was just a white guy, he really was.  And I would tell him all the time (unclear) Strickland, I say if I was white as you ain't no way in the heck I would be a black person, you know.  So we would tell him, we'd say Strickland, go, go in the white side and get us some tickets.  No, I can't do that.  No, you can do it.  What are they gonna do?  They can't say nothing but get over here.  See, if you were black you can't go over there.  So he did, and so every weekend he'd be our little go-between, you know, to get tickets.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, you had to do what you had to do to get the tickets, correct?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now there was a story about when you worked for, for your--about your colonel [Colonel A.L. Booth], is that right?  You got to drive the car?  Lived in the house?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: And, and I got my (unclear) from many restrictions.  You know, and they say that I'd go in late go any time I wanted to (laughter).  They would say, say, Lathan was late, you don't say anything about him.  He says that's the colonel's boy, you can't mess with him.  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: Tell me about the job that you had.  How did that all come about?
Speaker 2: I didn't do anything, I didn't do anything for the colonel; my wife [Mildred Barron] only worked for him.  Like sometimes he would be coming in, I'd, I'd take the bus.  We caught the Piney Green [North Carolina] bus and the Camp Lejeune [North Carolina] bus.  I would take the bus and come back to camp.  So most of the time he let me drive, you know, drive his car.  And he had a military driver who could drive him anywhere on the base he wanted to go, you know, so he let me drive his car.
Story_ID: 34645
Speaker 1: What other--what else happened [while Lathan was at Montford Point, North Carolina; U.S. Marines]?  What else did the colonel [Colonel A.L. Booth] do for you?  You had a trip to New York City?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Well, when we got to New York City, I--that's my first trip out of Chicago [Illinois].  I hadn't been anywhere but Mississippi, North Carolina, Alabama, Georgia, and stuff like that, and I had never been to New York.  So we drove   and I got to New York.  We stopped in, in Pennsylvania somewhere.  We spent the night at a gas station.  So when we got to New York, we went through the tunnel.  When we got on the other side the heavens just broke loose.  I was scared to death.  I didn't know what to do.  So I pulled over and stopped and a guy said, you, you want somebody to drive your car?  I said yes, sir, I sure do.  He say (unclear) chauffeur, you can get a chauffeur for five dollars to drive you to your hotel.  And at that time, it was the Theresa Hotel [Hotel Theresa in Harlem], if you remember that?
Speaker 1: That's on 125th Street.
Speaker 2: That's where we were.  That's where we had planned to stayed and we didn't make no reservation or anything like that.  We just knew that we could just get a room without a reservation.  So we got down to the hotel, the chauffer parked the car, and he left and we went in the five and dime, Woolworth [store].  We had some coffee--no, no, we went to the hotel, I'm sorry, we went to the hotel and asked for a room.  There were no rooms, they said.  So then we went to the coffee shop, and they said oh, you look so sad, what's wrong?  I told them about the story about, you know, we had planned to stay in the Theresa and they didn't have any room.  He said why don't you go uptown, said you go uptown and stay at the Waldorf.  I said the Waldorf [Astoria] (unclear)--twenty-seven dollars a night at the Waldorf.  So we got in the Waldorf.  We got there and we called, called some relatives that we knew in New York.  "What the hell y'all doing up there?"  (Laughter)  "You ain't got no business up there.  You better get out of there and go somewhere else."  Like we had broke every rule (laughter).  So we stayed for awhile, and then I got in touch with a lot of my relatives.  I went all over New York and it, it was really exciting to see a big city like New York.  You know, I, I had, I had been to Los Angeles [California].  I had been, you know, most of the big cities, but I hadn't been to New York.  And I had never been to no city like that and never had gone to another one except London, England, look more like New York than any place I've ever been in my life.
Speaker 1: Well, how was your experience at the Waldorf Astoria?
Speaker 2: It was okay.  It was real nice--no, no problem at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.
Story_ID: 34646
Speaker 1: Were there any other stories while you were in Montford Point [North Carolina, U.S. Marines basic training]?
Speaker 2: Well, there--
Speaker 1: Any discrimination stories or how people treated you while you were there?
Speaker 2: What, on base?
Speaker 1: On base or off base.
Speaker 2: On base was fine but you'd go off base, it was, it was, it was terrible, like they would look at you different from anybody else, you know.  It was just a terrible place to be.
Speaker 1: Now you also had told us a story about you were preparing to go over to Guam [assignment with the 54th marine Battalion] and about the bombs, making of the bombs [at training].
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --So tell me a story about that.
Speaker 2: We were making these--there were two guys.  I was stand in between them and then the sergeant that was training us, he would tell you, said hold--when you, when you put the fuse into the dynamite don't make them too long, make them short because the enemy would take them and throw them back at you, you know, before they'd go off.  And so we were sitting up there and I was holding one in my hand and these guys were holding theirs and there they said hold it, hold it, hold it.  And I see that thing kept (unclear).  Oh my God, I said I'm gonna throw mine.  So I threw it.  By the time I threw mine the other ones went off.  Here's a leg, arm, hit me right across my face.  And, oh my God I had blood all over me.  And I thought sure I had been hit, you know, (unclear) I was hurt.  So they took me to the hospital with the other guys 'cause I never, I never saw them again after that.  But I didn't have a scratch on me (unclear) after they cleaned me up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I thought--
Speaker 1: Do you remember the sergeant's name?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay what about the two--
Speaker 2: The two guys, I remember their name.  They both had the same name.  One was named K-E-Y and the other one named K-E-Y-S.
Speaker 1: Keys, okay.
Speaker 2: Key and Keys.
Speaker 1: So actually what you're saying what happened was they held onto their bombs--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --too long--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and they blew up in--
Speaker 2: In their hand.
Speaker 1: But you had thrown yours?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Wow.  And do you think that (clearing throat) was intentional (clearing throat)?
Speaker 2: No.  No, it wasn't intentional, no.
Speaker 1: Why did he tell you to hold it for so long?
Speaker 2: He told us to hold it and don't let the, let the fuse burn down to the end before we throw it.  He said if you throw it the enemy would pick it up and throw it back at you.
Speaker 1: But they just waited too long?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, any other stories you want to go back and tell me about?
Speaker 2: No, I can't think of any more.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 34647
Speaker 1: Alright, well, let's, let's go on then.  So, I think we stopped where you graduated from Washburn Trade School [around 1968; Chicago, Illinois] and you get the job as a pipefitter--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --or a welder, pipe welder?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And for which company is this?
Speaker 2: It was 597, Local 597 [Pipefitters Local Union 597].  That's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --where you work out of.  But my first job was with an outfit called Chicago Conditionaire [Company].  Of course, anybody who had a contracting company you might work  for.  But you'd get all of your jobs out of the, out of the union hall.  And when, when I, when I graduated I went home.  The guy said, well go home, you'll be called to work.  And I went and I thought they were gonna call me.  I would just sit at home but I was supposed to go--I should have gone to the union hall right then and I could have gotten a job.  I sat at home almost two months before I--we went.  And then they told me when I got there, say, we been looking for you; where have you been?  I said I didn't know, so--one guy told me--another black guy told me that I should go to the union hall and get a job.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so where were you living at this time?
Speaker 2: I was living on Fullerton [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Fullerton?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Fullerton and--what was the name of that street?
Speaker 1: Denise King [Lathan's daughter who is observing the interview]:  Racine [Avenue].
Speaker 2: Fullerton and Racine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 34648
Speaker 1: So you and your wife [Mildred Barron], you have nine children, and I think you--we left out one earlier when you were naming your children--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I said--I left out Thomas [Lathan].
Speaker 1: We want to make sure Thomas (laughter) is in the count.  Okay.  So you have nine children?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay and you raised them in Chicago's [Illinois] Lincoln Park area?
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: So tell me about that because--
Speaker 2: Well, the first time I was living on Sheffield [Avenue, Chicago] in an apartment building and then there was a (clearing throat), there was a white friend of mine told me about the house for sale on Fullerton [Avenue].  He said I should go over and look at it.  So I went over and looked and the people were--I think they were Cuban whites were in the house when we went to buy it.  And they kept dragging their foot.  Every time we'd go they'd make an excuse or something like that.  And so finally he said, "Are you gonna sell the Lathans the house or you're not?"  He said, "Oh, yeah, we're gonna sell it to him."  So we go it.  And we--then in '71 [1971] we remodeled it.  And then in--well all of--we had a--that's the first time we ever had enough room to separate the girls from the boys, you know.
Story_ID: 34649
Speaker 1: Now right before you moved to the Lincoln Park area and you--the era while you're going to school is a civil rights era.  Where you involved in civil rights at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay. And do you remember where you were when [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was killed?
Speaker 2: I was at work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I never will forget, I got home my wife [Mildred Barron] was just crying, said why didn't you come home before then.  They were just crying.  All the kids were crying.  Of course, 'cause she was crying, I guess.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And what about [President John F.] Kennedy?  What did you think, being a military [U.S. Marines] man, that someone would actually assassinate the president?  What were your thoughts?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't, I didn't think anyone would do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Vietnam, what's your thoughts about Vietnam, the Vietnam War?
Speaker 2: I think it was unnecessary for that war to be (unclear).  Of course, I was out and gone by the time that war came back about.
Speaker 1: Right.  I just, you know, just wondering what you thought about the war.
Story_ID: 34650
Speaker 1: 1971 about, you're living in the Lincoln Park [Chicago, Illinois] area.  Tell me what it was like in comparison to living to the West Side or the South Side [Chicago].
Speaker 2: There, there was a, that was no difference in a sense, you know.  I didn't--my neighbors, I didn't bother them; they didn't bother me.  But a lots of them--but my kids, they, they, they had--all of their friends were white kids.  They played with white kids all, all while they all--when they grew up.  Of course, they had friends in school were black.
Speaker 1: I know that you, we, we named all of your children--
Speaker 2: And all of our relatives lived on the South Side, so they, they, they never had any problem.  There was, there was one, the mailman, he would give us all the news what the neighbors were saying.  So the one guy next door there, he's saying--one day he saw Mr. Street (ph.), his name was Mr. Street (ph.), and he had a grandchild the same age as Thomas [Lathan's son], the boy, and he had him by the hand and his grandson walking him to kindergarten.  And this guy named Wallace, the mailman, he said, "Oh my God, I can't believe Mr. Street was taking your son to school."  He said, "He was raising more hell than anybody in the neighborhood about you moving (laughter) over here."
Speaker 1: Well, it was a good thing so.  You were able to change his mind about some things.
Story_ID: 34651
Speaker 1: Now we did list all of our children and most of them graduated from a private high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell me why--
Speaker 2: And mostly private colleges.
Speaker 1: --And tell me how did you and your wife [Mildred Barron] decide not to send your children to public school or why?
Speaker 2: Well, we lived in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], and then we moved from Hyde Park on the other end of it on 43rd and Okinwall (ph.).  And the first grammar school that my kids went to was (unclear) (ph.) in--we--and I had heard about all the schools in Chicago, you know, how bad they were.  And then finally we moved, we moved from there and the kids were transferred over to Cosmiskey [school] (ph.).  That was in the other end of Hyde Park, on 55th Street.  Then when we left there we went to 71st and Yale.  Now I could, I could sit in my door and watch my kid go into Parker [school].  Parker was a high school and a grammar school.  And my kids went there for two weeks.  And that Friday when I came home from work, my wife told me, say you wouldn't believe this.  I say what?  She says the kids got notes on the--had notes on them like when they got home.  They're being transferred over to Burmell [school] (ph.), which was five blocks away.  They had to cross a big boulevard to go to school.  And I could sit right here and look at him.  So they had to go over there, and I said no.  Before my kids--before I let them go to an all black school in Chicago, I'll send them back down South where they could go to a good all black school.  I really said that and I really meant it.  So that day when we got in, when I got in that Friday--that Saturday morning--I got a letter from Chicago Housing Authority that I had an apartment in the project, in Cabrini-Green, one of the first high-rises that we lived in.  I was glad to get a four-bedroom, two baths.  Oh my God, that was super living then I thought, you know.  And then my kids transferred to Catholic school, and they've been there ever since, all of them, grammar school and high school and most of college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 34652
Speaker 1: And what are some of the professions that your children have now?
Speaker 2: Oh Lord, well, Al [Alfred Lathan], he should have a profession because he graduated from DePaul [University, Chicago, Illinois] and he just went around and chose to be a handyman.  And one is a carpenter.  And I--Tommy [Thomas Lathan] works at a, at a, he works in an office somewhere in some company he works for.  I didn't--he did work for the stock market downtown, you know, but they closed out down there and he got another job.  Then Deborah [Lathan], she works for the phone company.  She went to California.  She quit work and didn't work at all, but now she's working.  I don't know exactly where she's working now.  But Denise [King] works for Blue Cross Blue Shield, and Stephanie works for AT&T, and Kim [Mary Kimberley] works for State Farm Insurance.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 34653
Speaker 1: So, (clearing throat), so you worked for Local 597 [Pipefitters Local Union, Chicago, Illinois] 597 --
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: --for how many years?
Speaker 2: Oh, for about fifteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and what happens next?
Speaker 2: I retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I retired at sixty-two [years; age].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Glad I did it too.
Speaker 1: You're happy that you retired?
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: I retired in '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: And so what happens after your retirement?  You didn't really retire did you?
Speaker 2: I traveled a lot.  I did what I always wanted to do.
Speaker 1: What was that?
Speaker 2: Travel.
Speaker 1: So tell me where you traveled to.
Speaker 2: I've been into every state in the United States but one, and I've been into five continents.
Speaker 1: So tell me which--okay what state did you not go to?
Speaker 2: Idaho.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I probably went through there driving, but I just don't remember it, though.
Speaker 1: Okay and what countries have you been to?
Speaker 2: I've been to Europe, Asia--
Speaker 1: What countries in Asia did you go to?
Speaker 2: Where I did go to?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: China.
Speaker 1: Okay and how did you like China?
Speaker 2: Too crowded, too crowded, oh, my God.
Speaker 1: But was it spectacular to see the Great Wall [of China]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, it was real exciting.  People looked like little ants crossing the (unclear) street.
Speaker 1: Okay and where else?
Speaker 2: Well--where did I like most?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Japan.  Hawaii is my favorite place in the world to go.  It's as close to heaven as I'll ever get, I think.
Speaker 1: I hope not (laughter).  Okay and what countries in Europe did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to Germany, I went to Italy, I went to Switzerland, and that's all.
Speaker 1: So where is it that you would like to go that you haven't been?
Speaker 2: I'd like to go to Australia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the Netherlands, I'd love to go there.
Speaker 1: So what happens now?  You're doing some traveling, and--was there anything else that you did that was exciting for you?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess retirement is very exciting.  I can do what I want to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, wonderful.
Story_ID: 34654
Speaker 1: So now let's talk about some of the awards for being a Montford Point Marine [first African Americans to serve in the U.S. Marine Corps].
Speaker 2: Well, I got the Gold Congressional Medal of Honor--
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about that.  How did you first hear about it?
Speaker 2: Well, I heard about it--my son-in-law's cousin worked for the Marine Corps.  And it hasn't been that long ago.  And she was telling us about it.  And so my kids got so excited you would think they were getting the medal, not me.
Speaker 1: And so, I mean, were, were you excited?
Speaker 2: Well, they, they, they won me over.  Yes, I got excited.
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts about it?  Did you think well it's about time or did you think you'd never see an award for--
Speaker 2: No, I never thought I'd get the award.  No, I never felt that 'cause I, I had never thought about it, not really.  I just knew it wasn't gonna happen to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay and so have you--is--was that the only time that you were given an award, the Congressional Medal?  Did you go to Washington [District of Columbia] for something else?
Speaker 2: I went to Washington on the--as a flight--it's called Flight Chicago.  It's an honor, called the Honor Flight.  I went to Washington, D.C. for a day.
Speaker 1: Okay and what was that like?
Speaker 2: That was really exciting.  So I had lots of relatives live around the Washington area.  The first thing they told us when we got on the plane, they'll be calling your folks telling them to meet you nowhere (laughter).  That kind of killed me then (unclear).  So I was there a whole day and I had a, I had a staff sergeant to push me around in a wheelchair.  All--every time I got off a bus he was there with the wheelchair to push me where I wanted to go.  We saw, we saw most of the interesting things to see in Washington, really.  We didn't see everything but we saw most of it.  And one place I really was excited--was the Smithsonian and the [National] Air and Space Museum.  Those two, I would love to go back and spend more time there.
Story_ID: 34655
Speaker 1: Alright, so we're gonna talk a little bit about you owned your own business for a while--
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: --a lounge.
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: --And do you remember what year it was?
Speaker 2: Denise [referring to his daughter, Denise King, who is observing the interview], what year--I, I can't--let's see it was in--
Speaker 1: Denise King:  '80 [1980], '80 [1980], maybe--
Speaker 2: In the '80s [1980s], in the early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Denise King: That's when I got married and--
Speaker 1: So what, what type of establishment was it?
Speaker 2: It was a cocktail lounge.
Speaker 1: Okay and, and what made you decide to go into business?
Speaker 2: I'd worked for a guy part-time up on Chicago Avenue [Chicago, Illinois], and I was looking at all the money he was making, and I thought I was gonna make the same thing.  But I got--it's a strange things, when I, when I owned the bar, I was closed one time for prostitution.  This guy set me up real good.  He came in there and sat at the bar.  I never will forget--it was Monday night football.  He said--I said--he ordered a drink--and real nice guy.  And I said, "Why don't you sit down here?"  I gave him the best seat in the house where he could watch the (unclear) real good.  He said, "Could I have one of your girls?"  I said, "What do you mean one of my girls.  They're not my girls."  I said, "You can have anything you want in here, I guess, if they want you."  I said, "I ain't got nothing to do with these girls in here."  So, finally, he took one upstairs, and then he came back down there.  I was--oh, that really hurt me.  It really did.  I just couldn't believe that he would do something like that.  They closed me up for five days.
Speaker 1: Wow.  And so how long did you have the establishment?
Speaker 2: About six years.
Speaker 1: And I see that your kids say that your hobby is going--because you like to travel--gardening, and gambling.  (Laughter).  Three Gs, is that right?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  That, that, that's just about right. They hit it on the head then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so tell me more about, about your establishment.  It was just a place that you wanted to have for your business?  Was there anything else (simultaneous) that you want to talk about--
Speaker 2: It was a place you just come and drink and have fun, like any other place, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so after six years then you closed it down and what happens next--
Speaker 2: No, it got burned down.
Speaker 1: Oh.  And so you decided not to relocate it--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or open up again?  Okay.  Alright, so what happens next?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess retirement is next, I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay so that--so you retire really after that?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 34656
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back over our life, is there anything that you would have done differently?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think I would have done lots of things different.  I think I would have gotten my--the only thing I regret is that I didn't get a degree.  I would have gotten that.  I regret that I did that--I wish I could have gone back and got that.
Speaker 1: And--if you think about back over your life, what stands out the most?  What was the highlight to you of your life?
Speaker 2: The highlight to my life was when I got a job that I made enough money to take care of my family
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was, that was one of the highlights of my life.  That made me happier than anything I've ever been.
Speaker 1: So you were happy to be able to--you sent all of your kids to private school and colleges?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you bought your home?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 34657
Speaker 1: While we're talking about, about the different places that you lived--we were talking off-camera about Cabrini-Green [Chicago Housing Authority public housing project, Chicago, Illinois]--and what year was that that you lived there, actually?
Speaker 2: I think that was--
Speaker 1: In about 1956?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about '56 [1956], '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about--
Speaker 2: --Fifty--
Speaker 1: --about who lived there at this time?  Because, you know, later on we hear a lot of stories about Cabrini Green (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well,--
Speaker 1: --that are not really good stories (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, well--
Speaker 1: --in that time--
Speaker 2: --it wasn't that.  It was nice in there when we were there.  My next door--other next door neighbors were white when we moved in Cabrini.  And I lived in one of the first high-rise that was built there.  And then there was a priest in the projects--next to the project (unclear) said you all don't belong in here.  And then my friend, there was another white guy.
Speaker 1: He said you didn't belong in there?  Why did he say that?
Speaker 2: He just said that.  I, I didn't know that it had such a--it didn't have such a bad name then, you know.  I hadn't heard anything about it being bad.
Speaker 1: No, it was at that time.  That's the point I'm trying to get you to make, is that it was a nice place to live.
Speaker 2: It really was.  I thought it was the nicest place I had lived since I'd been in Chicago, so I was real pleased there.  I was real happy to get there.
Speaker 1: Because it was a housing project.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.  And then you moved and you were able to buy your house on the North Side of Chicago, which is very unheard of at that time.
Speaker 2: It, it wasn't easy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause the people, they wanted to back out after we had put the earnest money down, and they wanted to kind of drag their feet for a long time, but we finally got it though.
Speaker 1: When we were talking earlier, did you realize that the people in the neighborhood actually rented their homes and they didn't really own?  You were one of the few (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was--
Speaker 1: --that owned your house?
Speaker 2: --I was really surprised at that.  And there was, there was--I never would forget there was one white family, the Swattleys (ph.), they had a house full of kids, many more kids than I have.  And I said one day--we were--I don't know, it might have been at a party or somewhere, I said this would be a nice--I said the Swattleys (ph.), they should go in the project.  And they got angry with me about saying that.
Story_ID: 34658
Speaker 1: Now, this is gonna be a tape that many generations will be able to see and learn about your life and about the Montford Point Marines, the first black Marines in the United States, so you really make history here.  If you had to send a message to the future generations--just think of your grandkids or your great-grandchildren, what would you like to say to them?  What would you say?  What message would you send to them?
Speaker 2: About the [U.S.] Marines or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: About anything (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --or the [Military] Service?  Anyway, I'd send the message that if they're not going--high school--I never did think of any of my relatives or anybody dropping out of high school, really.  But I said if they're not going to college, I think the Service is a good thing for them to do is go and join the Armed Forces, if they're not gonna go to college.  But I'd tell them to go and get an education.  There's no sense in not to.  I know if I was younger again and knew--had the knowledge I have now about the things that are available to you to go to college, I would've definitely gone.  But I didn't have anything and I knew if I go to college I wouldn't have anything to go there with.  But now it's just, it's not like that anymore.  It's out there for you.  If you want it, go and get it.  That's what I'd tell to the younger generation now and especially the one that's gangbanging and going around now.  I'd really talk to them and tell them that they should do it.
Story_ID: 34659
Speaker 1: So what are your hopes or your concerns about the African American community?
Speaker 2: Well, my concern is that I can't understand a lot of things that happened and I still can't understand.  You know, you talk about--say we should open up businesses in this neighborhood and to do things like, but we can't do that.  You know, our own people will keep us from having a business in the neighborhood.  Like, I know my cousin was asking me about when we were giving a--like my kids gave me a birthday party for my eighty-fifth birthday, and he said, why didn't you guys go out and celebrate to give a party when you (unclear)?  I said, you name me a place in Chicago [Illinois] in a black neighborhood that you can give a half-way decent party, unless you give it at high noon in the daytime, you know, and that's the deal.  No, and I said there's a, I said the nicest place in Chicago that I know that you can have a place is called Mr. G's.  Are you familiar with that?  Now, that's a nice place.  But still, I wouldn't want to be caught there at midnight.
Speaker 1: So you're hoping that (clearing throat) it (simultaneous) will turn around--
Speaker 2: But they don't have to go, go through things like that.  And, like when we were younger in Chicago here, you didn't have to go anywhere for entertainment, shopping, and all that kind of stuff; it was all right, right there in the neighborhood and you could get it.  But now it's not like that anymore.  You know, you had the little ma and pa stores all in the neighborhoods, but now all of those are gone.  You don't see those anymore.
Speaker 1: Can you give me your thoughts on--did you ever believe that you would see an African American president [President Barack Obama] elected in the United States.
Speaker 2: Never in my lifetime, no, never dreamed it.  I sit down and think (unclear)--my dad [Oscar Lathan] used to talk about politics all the time.  I just wish he had lived to see it.  No, ma'am, I never dreamed that I would see anything like that.  And to me the way he got it he just came from out of nowhere.  I don't know where he came from.  You know, we know where he came from, but I just don't know how he got up there that quick.  It was all planned.  He got it, though.  And I thought I was gonna get to meet him when I got my medal [Congressional Gold Medal awarded to the Montford Point Marines in 2012], but they said that it was so many of us--that kind of security, they couldn't do that, so the senators gave it to us.
Story_ID: 34660
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you have not done that you would like to do in your lifetime?
Speaker 2: To be truthful, I think I've done most of the things I wanted to do, really.  I really do think I've done pretty much what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: I want people to remember me as--tell the truth and just say that's how I was.  I was all, I was always a, a, a people's person.  I love people and I think a lot of people love me.  I had lots of friends, lots of friends, real good friends.  And I, I would want, I would want them to remember me as being a good friend to all of my friends, and they know who they are.
Speaker 1: Well, is there anything else that you want to say or talk about?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think so.  I don't think there's anything else I'd like to talk about just to say that I'm sorry, I hope I, I wish I had been a little bit more prepared for this than I was.  I didn't even think about it, not really.
Speaker 1: Oh, you did fine.  You did, you did fine.  And this will be an inspiration to many, many students and people who watch and learn about your life and how you have contributed to history.  So we thank you for taking the time to come and, and share your story.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: It's really, really appreciated.
Speaker 2: Well, thank you for having me.
Story_ID: 34661
Speaker 1: Tell us who this is.  Tell us who this is.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: That's you.  Tell us when?
Speaker 2: Denise King [Lathan's daughter, who is observing the interview]:  Dad, they wanted--
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, that's right--that was in boot camp.
Speaker 2: That's one of my flights to--is that London?  London, England.  (Unclear) I was there.
Speaker 1: About what year is this?
Speaker 2: Uh, uh.
Speaker 1: '44 [1944]?
Speaker 2: '44 [1944] or '45 [1945].
Speaker 1: That was out of boot camp, just out of boot camp.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's when I was in shoe repair school.
Speaker 2: And what year was that?  That was while you were in the [Military] Service?
Speaker 1: No, that was in Chicago [Illinois] here.  That was in about '51 [1951] or '52' [1952].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You didn't tell us about shoe repair school. (Unclear)  Laughter.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I forgot about that one, yeah.
Speaker 1: My dad--I have my dad's hands.
Speaker 2: That was when we got married.
Speaker 1: And what's your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Mildred [Barrow].
Speaker 1: Oh, my gosh hold on.  I'm sorry.  (Unclear).  Okay.
Speaker 2: And tell me who's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And those are my siblings.  Those are the ones that were left during the time that that picture was taken.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's at a family reunion there.
Speaker 2: No, that's a camping trip.
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: That's the camping trip.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right.  Danny [addressing his daughter, Denise King], I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: This is the family when?
Speaker 2: I don't know what that is.  That's a family reunion there, I think, isn't it?
Speaker 1: That's about 1960 (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's the New York trip.
Speaker 1: That's you and your wife?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: When they went to New York.
Speaker 2: When you went to New York?  That's the Waldorf Astoria?
Speaker 1: No, that's not the Waldorf, I don't think.  It could be, I--
Speaker 2: Put your glasses on.
Speaker 1: I can't get them out of my pocket.
Speaker 2: This is you?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's me.  I was just getting out of high school then.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's my, that's my mom [Mary Frazier] and dad [Oscar Lathan] in Mississippi sitting on the porch daydreaming.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's me and my twin brother [Clenon Lenon].
Speaker 2: That's my wife and I in Club DeLisa.
Speaker 1: Which Club DeLisa?  Where is it?
Speaker 2: It was on 55th and State [Street, Chicago].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's gone now.
Speaker 1: That's me receiving the Congressional Medal of Honor in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia]. That's, that's a, that's a commandant on a [U.S.] Marine Corps.
Speaker 2: Eleven. 2011.  Ten.  Ten?  2010?  Eleven.
Speaker 1: '11 [2011].
Speaker 2: '11 [2011].
Speaker 1: (SHOWN PICTURE 15)
Speaker 2: That's a family portrait about '56 [1956] or '57 [1957].  That's the whole family.  We were in Creses (ph.).
Speaker 1: '54 [1954] because I wasn't born then.
Speaker 2: '54 [1954], that's right.
