Story_ID: 106484
Speaker 1: Okay.  Good morning, Mr. Lewis.  I'm Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers.  I'll be the interviewer and this is Neculai Burghelea, the videographer.  I will have you state your full name and spell it out for me.
Speaker 2: William Milton Lewis, Jr.  And you want me to spell all of that?
Speaker 1: Well, yes, for the record.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) W-I-L-L-I-A-M, M-I-L-T-O-N, L-E-W-I-S, comma, J-U-N-I-O-R.
Speaker 1: Now today's date?
Speaker 2: Is March 12, 2007.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: April 30, 1956.
Speaker 1: Place of birth?
Speaker 2: Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an investment banker.
Story_ID: 106485
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'll ask you five People Magazine-type questions.  Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Favorite food?
Speaker 2: Lasagna.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Oh, probably the Christmas season.
Speaker 1: And favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure I have one, "Now that's what I'm talking about."
Speaker 1: And you get to say that often?
Speaker 2: Say it all the time.
Speaker 1: In a positive way?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Excellent.
Story_ID: 106486
Speaker 1: So we're gonna start and we're gonna talk about your mother's side of the family--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --first.  If you can give me your mother's full name--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --her place of birth and date of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My mother's full name is Essie Mae, M-A-E, Taylor Lewis.   She was born July 30, 1917 in Jarratt, Virginia.  Jarratt is in Sussex County, Virginia, so rural Virginia in the South.
Speaker 1: Is that out in--so Jarratt is that outside of Richmond [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Jarratt is about fifty miles south of Richmond.
Speaker 1: Now was she born on a plantation, was it a farm?
Speaker 2: It was a farm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was in 1917 so slavery and plantations had elapsed or, or were ended.  So she was born on a farm, rural Virginia and born and raised in a big family.  So she was the second to the youngest and I can't remember how many siblings she had but, but over ten.  Many of whom we actually met as we were growing up.  Some of whom had died before we were born.  But, but her siblings were, were born, I believe, actually starting in the late 1800s and like I said she was the second to the youngest so in 19, in 1917 and I think there was one that was born in 1918 or in 1919.
Speaker 1: So your mother--what type of a farm was it?  Was it a working farm?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: What did they have?  She ever talk about what that experience was like?
Speaker 2: She didn't talk extensively about it.  I think it was a typical farm.  I think they--I know they had pigs.  I know they had cows.  I know they raised crops.  They was corn, there was peanuts.  But--
Speaker 1: When you think Virginia, you think tobacco.  Is that, was, was there tobacco on the farm?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't, I don't know.  I would, I would certainly guess that there was but when I think about, we used to call it going down the country, and so when I think about going down the country, I don't remember tobacco but I do remember corn.  I do remember peanuts.  I do remember pigs.  All right.  And I remember cows, so.
Speaker 1: So did the land stay in the family after she moved up to Virginia?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --I mean to Richmond.
Speaker 2: --to Richmond.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you went back for over the summers?
Speaker 2: Well, we actually, we went back not to, not to the farm that she was raised on but two of her sisters, my Aunt Catherine [ph.] and my Aunt Minnie [ph.] stayed and, stayed in Jarratt, basically for most of their lives.  In fact, we just had the funeral for my Aunt Catherine who was born in 1909, just died last October or last November and it was back in Jarratt, although she had left Jarratt for some period of time and then moved back.  They had, they had, their houses stayed, they stayed in, in Jarratt for a long period of time.  And my Aunt Catherine in particular had a small farm and that's actually the, my, my recollection of Jarratt going down to visit my Aunt Catherine so I can remember the crops and the, and the animals.  My Aunt Minnie really just had a, a fairly small house with her husband and a small garden.  I wouldn't call it a crop, if you will, but a small garden where she grew, you know, collards and some string beans and the like.
Story_ID: 106487
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Essie Taylor Lewis] ever talk about her mother and father?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you get to meet them?  Were they--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean I did, but I have no recollection of it.  (Simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Recollection of it.
Speaker 2: My, my grandfather--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Do you know their names and birth--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, sure, sure, sure.
Speaker 1: --dates of births?
Speaker 2: I don't know their dates of birth.  My, my grandfather on my mother's side his name was Jesse.  Actually (laughter), we have found out in recent years through family reunions that Jesse Taylor which was his name, at least the name we grew up knowing may not have been his name after all.  There, there, there appears to have been some scandal in the family.  And, and, and we have no way of knowing if this is true or not, but, but, but our cousins and relatives that have done a lot of research feel fairly confident that this is true.  Apparently his name was, last name was Vinsen [ph.] and I can't remember the first name now and he was, he actually grew up in North Carolina and was chased out of town because he stole a cow, is the story that we've heard in the last two or three years.  And he, he ran off to Virginia and changed his name to Jesse Taylor.  That's what we're told.  So, so for the first forty-eight years of my life, I've always known him as old man Jesse Taylor and his wife name was Isadora Taylor.   They both were born in the, obviously in the 1800s.  And they, they died in the, the late '50s [1950s].   They both were, were, were still alive when I was born and when my, my, my younger sister was born but I think my grandmother on my mother's side died shortly after my sister was born in 1957 and I can't remember exactly when my grandfather was died.  But I have no real recollection of them other than being told that they were very strict disciplinarians.  That they were fairly well-off for, for rural African Americans for that period of time.  They had a big farm.  A couple of my, my aunts went to college as an example.  Many of them got sort of good educations.  My mother chose not to be one of them.  But, but they were fairly well-off but they--it was rural Virginia and it was strictly segregated.  And so I heard a few stories but not a lot--not a lot of stories about what it was like growing up in rural Virginia in the, in the early '20s [1920s] during the Depression.
Speaker 1: But they made it.  So Isadora and Jesse lived in Jarratt [Virginia] also?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They, and they were the ones who had the ten [sic, sixteen] children?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They were your mother, your mother's parents?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, did they--just one story about something you've heard about their lives in Richmond on the, on the farm, on their big farm.
Speaker 2: Well, I've heard--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: What happened?  Let me ask you this.  Did, did they ever talk about how they acquired the land?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did they ever talk about voting?  Because--
Speaker 2: Did my mother ever--
Speaker 1: Your, your--did she talk to you about them, lessons they taught to her?  Any lessons they may have passed on to her that she says told you, you know my parents said--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, we have plenty stories along those lines.  First of all, they were strict disciplinarians.  So they got whippings all the time for almost any kind of infraction.  They were very religious.  And so there was, there was no--the only kind of music that they were allowed to play was sort of church music.  They all had chores.  And they, they, they pursued their chores quite, quite seriously.  Apparently, my grandfather was a stand-up kind of guy.  And really didn't take sort of any mess from anybody, including the, the local whites.  I'm told that, that, that he would routinely get into arguments with the whites when he went into town and he didn't back down at all.  And in fact, well I remember one story about a white guy who had a, a gun and the gun sort of fell onto the street sort of accidentally.  And there wasn't really an altercation but there was, there was, there was some tense moments that ensued.  So we, we grew, grew up knowing that, that, that he was a, a very proud man.  A fairly well-off man for his circumstances.  And, and, and really and was really, really a strict disciplinarian.
Speaker 1: So did your mother ever talk about her great--her grandparents?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.  So as far back as you can go is--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: As far as I can go on the maternal side.
Story_ID: 106488
Speaker 1: And now, let's talk about your father [William Lewis, Sr.]'s side.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Know even less, about--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --about, about--
Speaker 1: Your father's full name was it the same as yours?
Speaker 2: Except senior instead of junior.  My father was born September 14, 1912.  And my father died in, in 19--let's see when would have that been there '80 [1980]--'87 [1987] in, in September.  Oh, no in October right after--he died the Sunday before the stock market crash [Black Monday].  All right.  And so that's how I'll always be able to fix it in my, in my mind.  The stock market crash was that Monday, October the something, 18th or 19th 1987.  My father died that Sunday before.  But he, he, he was, he was born in a little rural town as well called Freeman, Virginia.  I've always wondered if that name--
Speaker 1: Had anything to do with--
Speaker 2: Had any sort of, you know, historical significance relating to slavery.  But he was born in Freeman, Virginia which is a part of Brunswick County, Virginia, which is also south of Richmond.  I think it's probably sixty or seventy miles south of Richmond [Virginia].  We never really visited Freeman, once or twice for funerals.  And that was, that was by the way the main reason for going back down to country, if you will, when we were growing up.  Invariably an aunt or an uncle would die, and you would sort of make that trek back for the funeral.  So I can remember going to Freeman at least twice for, for funerals but I don't remember going back sort of to vacation, if you will.  I get the sense that my father grew up in much more difficult situations and circumstances than my mother.  My father--my mother [Essie Taylor Lewis] dropped out of, of school in the seventh grade just because she got tired of it.  My father dropped out of school, I believe, in the first or second grade because he had to, he had to work.
Speaker 1: Where did he pick up the roofing skill?
Speaker 2: Umm--
Speaker 1: Is that something that was in the family?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.  I really don't know what led him to roofing except it was pure hard work and my father believed in pure hard work.  And he was good, he was good at it.  It was steady work.  And my guess is that even today most of the hot tar roofers are probably African Americans or probably now Mexicans and, and immigrants.  It is a very, very, very tough job.  I did it for one summer, so.
Speaker 1: Especially down South, right?  Because it gets so hot and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did your father ever talk about his parents?
Speaker 2: Nah, not really.
Speaker 1: So he left home then when he was very young because he had to stop school in first grade?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have no idea when he left the farm and, and, and moved to Richmond.  I believe he left and, and came to Richmond.  I know my mother, for instance, lived in several other cities in Virginia like Newport News, Virginia and Norfolk, Virginia before ultimately settling on, in Richmond.  I'm not sure about my father.  I think my father basically came to Richmond from the farm but I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: And one would come to Richmond during that time because there were better opportunities in the city than there would have been in rural Virginia?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would, I would imagine, I would imagine.  I mean during that time there were any number of sort of medium-size cities.  Richmond was one of them but there was Petersburg, there was Norfolk, there was Newport News, there was Hopewell.  And, and, and I think all of those cities benefited from, from African Americans leaving the rural, the rural parts of Virginia.
Story_ID: 106489
Speaker 1: So what year did your parents actually meet and under what circumstances, do you know?
Speaker 2: I know parts of it.  I'm pretty sure, I'm not pretty sure, I know that they both had prior marriages but I believe they met in, in Richmond [Virginia] in the mid '50s [1950].  I was born in 1956 so I believe they met, call it 1954 or 1955.  It wasn't a long courtship because my mother [Essie Taylor Lewis] was getting up there in age.  She was thirty-nine when she had me and I knew, she has told us that she wanted to have a family but she really had never found the right man and so when she met my father [William Lewis, Sr.] I knew she was focused and it wasn't a long courtship.
Story_ID: 106490
Speaker 1: And you have two siblings?
Speaker 2: I have, I have two younger siblings.  I had a half-sister who's my, my mother [Essie Taylor Lewis]'s daughter.  Whose name was Jessie also, Jessie Taylor also.   So you can figure out where she got her name from.  She was born in 1940.  And we never really spent much time with her because, first of all she was much older--
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was older.
Speaker 2: --than we were. And she, by the time we were growing up she had moved to Camden, New Jersey.  But she was very much a part of the family and it was always very, very special when she came sort of from, from Camden to visit with us.
Speaker 1: Because she was the big city girl?
Speaker 2: Well, she--exactly.  She was the big city girl.  She was, she was really, really fast.  I mean she was--
Speaker 1: What did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: She--that's a good question.  She spent, I believe, she spent most of her career as it was being a teacher's assistant.
Speaker 1: So then she was educated also?
Speaker 2: Um--
Speaker 1: She had gone to school?
Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't, I wouldn't, I wouldn't (laughter) call her, her, I wouldn't say she was educated.  I don't know how far along she went in high school.  I'm pretty sure she dropped out.  She was, she as, as, as far as, as sort of a spectrum of, of rebellion or conformity goes, my sister, my oldest sister was, was definitely at one end of a spectrum.  And in fact, my mother sent her away to live with one of her sisters early on just because my mother couldn't, couldn't, couldn't really handle her.  My mother has always been a little quiet country girl, churchgoing and my older sister was anything but.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: But that--so she was a teacher's assistant but I think that was really more along the lines of being sort of a guardian and I mean I don't think she was teaching per se, I think she was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: But she was in the classroom, assisting.
Speaker 2: --she was, she was in the classroom.  She was helping out.
Story_ID: 106491
Speaker 1: So what can you tell me about your earliest memories of your life in Richmond, Virginia?
Speaker 2: Umm--
Speaker 1: You were born in 1956--
Speaker 2: I was born in '56 [1956] and my earliest memory is of living for a very brief period of time in some kind of rooming house in the East End of Richmond [Virginia].  I grew up on, in East End, Richmond--
Speaker 1: Which is Church Hill?
Speaker 2: Well, well Church Hill is a part of, of, of the East End.  So I grew up in Church Hill.  And so my earliest recollection is, is this, this, this sort of small, I don't know one or two room sort of apartment that we sort of lived in.  And, and I don't have many recollections of that.  My, my, my--what I do remember is ultimately leaving there and moving, moving away from there like one Friday evening to a, to what seemed like a really big house in the, probably in the early '60s [1960s].  So I started school in '61 [1961] so this was before I started school, so, so I don't know if it was the late '50s [1950s] or the early '60s [1960s] but, but, but I remember distinctly moving into this, into this house, it was really two story house and we had the, the bottom story on a, on a Friday night after my father [William Lewis, Sr.] had gotten home from work.  And that really, that was 2204 East Grace Street.  And that, that was really the, the, the foundation of, of my, of my, of my Richmond experience.  My--that is what I remember.  We lived there until 1972, so well through my formative stages.  And we moved out of that, of that location in the summer of '72 [1972], so in between my sophomore and junior year of high school.  So, so, so I have all kinds of, of, of memories around East Grace Street.
Story_ID: 106492
Speaker 1: So when you were on East Grace Street, who were the neighbors on each side?
Speaker 2: Sure.  I--I've always--we lived in a, in a rather interesting neighborhood.  First of all, our block, the block of East Grace Street between 22nd Street and 23rd Street was, was all black.  It was all working-class black and I want come to back to that because, because people really worked.  But we had an alley that separated us from the other side of the block and that was really Broad Street.  So you had a block that was Broad Street, Grace Street, 22nd Street, 23rd Street and an alley separated the two.  Across the alley lived any number of, of, of really lower working-class whites.  Which was really sort of neat and interesting.  And then across the street from us on Grace Street was this huge convent, a big sort of nunnery or monastery, I mean all of these you had, you had you know it was just a convent, been there for, for years.  Then in the next block on Grace Street, separated by 23rd and 24th Street was basically, it was all white and all professional whites.  And these were historic homes that had been there since the 1800s.  And, and, and that block to this day remains whites.   So, my guess is that, that block has been white in Richmond since the beginning of time and for whatever reason whites never moved out of that block.  And then our school, was across the street from them.  So our school was one block away.  And then just one more sort of geographical observation of putting it in context for you.  In the next block was the famous St. John's Church in Richmond where Patrick Henry gave his "Give Me Liberty Or Give Me Death" speech.  So, so, so we grew up in a fascinating neighborhood.  Now, on my block we had just a wonderful, wonderful, collection of characters on my block.  First of all, above us lived a guy named Mr. Smith.  And Mr. Smith would, would be the nicest man throughout the week but on the weekend Mr. Smith would get drunk starting on Friday night and Mr. Smith would, would carry on all weekend long.  And occasionally my father and Mr. Smith would mix it up because Mr. Smith was just loud and he was yelling and he was drinking and he was screaming.  Of course, to us it was great entertainment, to the kids.  On the left-hand side of us lived the local bootlegger.  And that was Ms. Punney [ph.].  And her common law husband's name was Tefoy [ph.].  And once again during the week they were just the nicest neighbors you could have.  On the, on the weekends, starting on Friday when all of the guys, there was this big clan of guys who worked for a, a major construction company.  And these guys worked hard during the week, but starting on Friday they would come home with just crates and crates of liquor and beer and wine.  In Virginia, and I think it's still the case today, alcoholic beverages are sold through state stores.  There were called ABC stores which stood, I think stands for Alcoholic Beverage Control.  And so they would all come, they would come home from work on Friday night having stopped at the ABC store with all this booze.  And they would start selling booze and drinking booze starting on Friday and that would go straight through Saturday and into Sunday morning with just the best music, you know, all of the, the, the really originals, and the blues.  You know, the, the rock 'n roll.  It was, it was just, it was just, it was just a, a, a wonderful, wonderful time.  Occasional fights, shootings, cuttings.  Occasionally somebody'd get killed.  But, but, but you don't, you don't really sort of me--when I think back on those experiences I don't really think about that.
Story_ID: 106493
Speaker 1: On the right side of us were two really good, working-class neighbors.  Ooh, I can't remember their last names now, I want to say Taylor, but, but, but I, I just can't remember it.  Anyway, that was a house full of, of, of, people who worked very hard, kept to themselves.  Both of the families in that, in that, in that house kept to themselves.  On the corner, we lived three doors in from, three houses in from the corner so on the corner was the, the Dotsons [ph.] I believe or the Dobsons [ph.].  I think, I think it was Dotsons.  And, and the father was a career [U.S.] Navy guy.  And so he was rarely there, he was always off somewhere on some adventure.  And his son was named John Dotson, he was a really smart guy.  And the sister was Drucilla [ph.].  And, and above them once again were, I don't really, really remember who they were now but I used to run errands for the people that lived above them.  I ran errands by the way for our next door neighbors both on the first floor and on the second floor.  And then in the going back, now headed back to the left so Ms. Punney [ph.] and then above her lived Honey and I can't remember her husband's name, Joe I think, and I used to run errands for them.  They had two wonderful daughters.  And then my best friend lived next door to them, so now to the left.  And, and, and his mother's name was Ms. Slooty [ph.].  And Ms. Slooty and Ms. Punney were sisters.  So my wife [HM Carol Sutton Lewis] gets a great, great laugh out of hearing about these names.  But, but these were, you know, these were some original names, they were great.  And, and my best friends name was Tony, Anthony Logan [ph.].  And, and Tony had lots of sisters and lots of brothers.  I, I don't even feel like trying to think of all the names now, but we did everything together.  He was three years older than me so in a lot of ways he was a mentor and a protector because he was very wise to the street but he liked me a lot because I was pretty good in the classroom.  And so we had a, a really, really neat relationship.  Nobody could quite figure out sort of what we saw in each other cause I was sort of the nerd and he was a really, really, smooth, slick guy.  But we, we, we had a great friendship.  In fact, he came to my college graduation when I got out of Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in 1978.  I drove him up for my, for my, for my commencement exercise.  And I can just go straight down the block.  I mean I, I, can remember virtually every character.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Who were, in that block, who did you look up to as far as adults?  Or did you look up to them all?
Speaker 1: I, I, I didn't look up to any of them.  I respected all of them.  But, but I didn't really, I didn't sort of look up to any of them in a sense that I didn't, I didn't, I, I didn't try to emulate any of them.  I, I didn't look to any of them for advice or, or to guidance.  The, the people that I actually looked up to, you know, were my parents and then some of my school teachers and guidance counselors but, but, but nobody in the neighborhood.  I, I, didn't look up to anybody in the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Okay.  We have about 30 seconds left on this tape or and now a quick question then.  Where did the professional black people live, like the doctors, the dentists?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they didn't live on my block.
Speaker 2: But they still lived on the east side?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) but they lived, they lived, and they lived actually, some lived on the east side, the East End.  Many lived where my good friend Vita [ph.] lived, really on the north side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 106494
Speaker 1: You'll just pick up with the neighborhoods of the professional black people and then we will talk about you being so bright as a child.  How did that develop?
Speaker 2: Most of the black school teachers, doctors, dentists, guidance counselors, lived on the north side of Richmond [Virginia].  Arthur Ashe lived on the north side of, of Richmond.  And I'd say that on, on Church Hill, Church Hill was more of a working class community.  Although there were, there were school teachers for sure.  And there was a, a fairly extensive middle class part of Church Hill, but not where I lived.
Story_ID: 106495
Speaker 1: So, so where do you want to go?
Speaker 2: Since, so from there I kind of wanted to go into you being so bright as a child.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I let me say first of all, I always like to tell people this, that I was not anomaly.  There were a lots of bright kids.  When I found out about prep school, I found out about prep school alongside thirty or forty other kids.  We were all sort of called into an auditorium and we were told about this notion of prep schools.  Many of 'em had no interest in going away and I was, was not the smartest kid.  I was not the valedictorian in elementary school.  I was not the valedictorian in school.  There were plenty of, of, of smart kids.  It wasn't--it's not like today where somehow if you have an interest in books you're, you're viewed as being weird.  When I, when I was going to school there was this, this, this great feeling among everybody, even the kids who weren't that inclined to study, that somehow you had to have an education in order to have a better life.  That, that there was just tremendous hope and it was all around education.  And so, you know, early on there were I, I always felt that there were a lot of, of kids who were, very, very much in the same league as I was academically.  There's no question that, that our parents pushed us.  And I'd say that in particular my mother [Essie Taylor Lewis] took us to the library regularly.  We went to library regularly.  We went to the book mobile which was this sort of library on wheels.  And my sister and I in particular would, would just drag home tons and tons and tons of books.  So we had this incredible curiosity that, that my mother just, just fed nonstop.  And I, and once again, I was not unique.  Tony, my best friend, had no interest in it but there were lots of others who, who did.  And we had school teachers who really, really encouraged us all to sort of be all that, that, that we could be.  So, so I want to be clear, that in the '60s [1960s] in, in my neighborhood there were, a lot of kids who had a real interest in, in learning and studying and doing well in school.  I was by no means unique.
Story_ID: 106496
Speaker 1: So when you talk about your mother [Essie Taylor Lewis] taking you to the library and, and where do you think that came from?  If she dropped, if she quit school, so early in seventh grade, where do you think she got the, the, the wherewithal to say education is it and I'm going to take these children to the library?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't, I don't know.  It's a good question.  I've really never thought about that.  But all I know is from my earliest days that I can recall, my mother was intent on making sure that we had every opportunity to learn.  You know, she--we never got speeches from her about, you know, you've gotta do this and you've gotta do that.  She was really there as a guide, as a mentor.  So for instance, my, my sister and I were really, really interested in the books.  My younger brother really had no interest in the books.  He did sort of the bare minimum.  And when we found out one summer when we were, when we all went to summer school also, mainly because of the free lunches that's why I wanted to go, but when we, we, we discovered that my younger brother, Jerome, really wasn't going to school.  He was cutting school to work on the milk truck.  That didn't bother or any of us.  You know, my younger brother, Jerome, has always been focused on sort of hard work just like his father [William Lewis, Sr.].  And he knew what he liked and he knew what he didn't like.  And he's never sort of been interested in school work.  And my mother has never ever berated him.  My father did, but my mother never ever berated him and sort of said, no you've got to get an education.  So, so, so my, my, my mother was there to, to encourage us and to, to help us.  But she was never out front, we were always out front.  And so I'd come home and say I want to go to the library or I want to do this.  I, she never had to tell me to, to study or what to study.  I was always fairly independent in that regard.
Speaker 1: Did you have an idea at that young age where you, what you were doing?  Did you think education is my key out or simply your, like your hobby? (Simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, I just, I just.  Yeah, I, I, I, loved school.  I loved reading.  I loved math.  I loved learning.  I had this curiosity streak and, and we had these wonderful, wonderful teachers.
Story_ID: 106497
Speaker 1: Let's start with that.  Where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to Bellevue Elementary School [Richmond, Virginia].  Which always gets a great laugh in New York City [New York].  And it wasn't, and when I went away to prep school and I met these, these kids from New York and I said Bellevue and they started laughing because, you know, Bellevue is a, I guess, a combination hospital and (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Crazy hospital.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, well, mental, yeah, institution.  But I went to Bellevue Elementary School which was wonderful, classic old big, brick school built in, I believe, actually 1911 or 1912 up on this hill overlooking the James River in, in Richmond [Virginia] and I went there from, from K [kindergarten] through, K through sixth.
Speaker 1: Now, was it, it, you know, Brown v. Board of Ed happened in '54 [1954], so it was not segregated.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was absolutely segregated.  Richmond, Virginia, actually was part of the massive resistance movement.  Brown was decided in '54 [1954] but it wasn't until 1970 that, that Virginia and Richmond and other school districts within Virginia began to comply with the law (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: So sixteen, it took them sixteen years to--
Speaker 2: --Yeah, sure, sure, sure.  In fact, in, in certain parts of Virginia they actually shut down the schools and, and they, and they opened up what were called seg academies, segregated academies for the white kids.  And so black kids went without any kind of schooling in, in certain rural parts of Virginia for an extended period of time.  In Richmond--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: But this was in that sixteen year span?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: In the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: In, in, in the late '50s [1950s] and early '60s [1960s] there were still school districts that were shut down.  (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: And black kids were not--
Speaker 2: They just had no education.
Speaker 1: No education.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, none, zero.
Speaker 1: In the '50s [1950s], wow.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.  Richmond for, really for that sixteen year period tried its best to stay with separate but equal.  So, so for instance, we had brand new school books every year.  I never, ever felt that somehow I was not getting a good education in Richmond in the '60's [1960s].  It was exciting to go to school on the first day of every year because invariably we had brand new books or year old books for every course.  And we would get this long list of supplies that we needed.  And we would go shopping for, you know, scissors, and paste and tape and crayons and, and it was wonderful.  And our teachers were just incredibly excited and enthusiastic--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Were they all black?
Speaker 2: All black.  All black and, and just all caring.  I can remember Ms. Holmes [ph.] from kindergarten and in the first grade who, who, whose main theme was the magic words, please, thank you.  And, and, and those lessons have stayed with me forever.  And I can remember every single teacher I had at Bellevue and how each teacher--I can't imagine having a better teacher and couldn't imagine having a better elementary school experience.
Speaker 1: So these teachers made sure that it was equal?
Speaker 2: These--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Although it was separate?
Speaker 2: Well, well, I had--I don't know.  I certainly never felt that I wasn't being pushed.  And while some of the topics were, were easy for me like math, we started French in the fourth grade.  And French wasn't the easiest for me.  And we did field trips.
Speaker 1: So there was a French teacher--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the school.
Speaker 2: Mademoiselle Townsend [ph.] was her name.  She actually was not based in the school, she rotated either between two schools or among three schools.  I can't--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: And she is African American?
Speaker 2: She's a--every, everybody was African American.
Speaker 1: The principal?
Speaker 2: The principal was African American, Mr. Johnson, J. General Johnson [ph.] or something like that--
Story_ID: 106498
Speaker 1: --Had you encountered, I mean, so your experience growing up was entirely African American?
Speaker 2: No, remember, I just told you about the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: I meant the neighbors, but I mean, go ahead, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they didn't--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Unclear) we had, I had white people all around me.  When it snowed in Richmond [Virginia] which was once or twice a year, I would go to the next block which was occupied by all whites and shovel their snow for (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: To the wealthier whites or the poorer whites?
Speaker 2: The wealth--
Speaker 1: The wealthier whites, okay.
Speaker 2: --the wealthier to shovel their snow.  I had a, a weekly job every Saturday morning sweeping the bricks for the convent across the street.  So, so, so I had fairly, I wouldn't say routine contact, but I had contact with, with whites (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Well, what did you think about where those kids went to school?
Speaker 2: You know--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Did you ever think about where they--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: They were all there, actually it was funny.  That neighborhood was all what we would call yuppies later.  There were, these were just young professionals and I don't think there, I can't really recall any white kids in that block.  They were all young professionals, doctors, and just young people.  And occasionally we played football with them.  Like a couple of the guys who were in their sort of early twenties would come down the block and we played football in the middle of the street.  We were actually pretty impressed because some of 'em were pretty good.  There were, there was really no sort of racial tension that I was aware of in Richmond until the assassination of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  We went right through this 1965 period where you had the riots and, and Watts and in New York, I guess, after, after, after Malcolm X was, was killed.  None of that touched Richmond, at least none of that touched the part of Richmond (laughter) that I was in--
Story_ID: 106499
Speaker 1: Well, what about when you went out, I mean like to the doctor.  Was your doctor African American?
Speaker 2: Well we did not go, we did not have a doctor.
Speaker 1: But when you were, when you needed to go?
Speaker 2: When we, when we, I, I, I got my skull cracked open once by a kid and I went to the emergency room and I remember it very well.  My mother [Essie Taylor Lewis] took me to the emergency room, I was covered in blood and the doctors in the emergency room were white.  I remember that quite well.  Now Richmond [Virginia] had segregated hospitals, although I didn't really appreciate that they were segregated at the time but blacks went to St. Philip's and, and the whites went to I think it was called E. G. Williams or something like that.  They're all now a part of the Medical College of Virginia.  But, but, but if you got sick, you only went to a doctor if you got sick.  You didn't go to the doctors for sort of--now I look at the bills I get now and my kids, you know, we got like regular doctor visits, you only went to the doctor if you got sick or if, if, if you got hit in the head with a brick and then you went to the emergency room.  Invariably you'll show up in the emergency room.  Which by the way, is very much the way it is now.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: And so you go to the emergency room and, and there, you know, I really don't have any--I can't really recall if the doctors and nurses were black or white.  I do remember this one time when I had to get my head stitched up, I remember the doctors were white in the emergency room.  That's, that's all I can, that's all I can recall.
Story_ID: 106500
Speaker 1: But back to in, in the schools, in my elementary school [Bellevue Elementary School, Richmond, Virginia] there were no whites.  There were no white students, there were no white teachers, there were no white administrators.  And, and that was just fine.  I, I once again I--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: And what was the curriculum?  Do you remember--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: --how much black history you studied?
Speaker 1: Umm--
Speaker 2: During those early years at Bellevue?
Speaker 1: Umm--
Speaker 2: I mean who did, you know, about that were like--
Speaker 1: I,I--
Speaker 2: --accomplished African Americans?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I don't--
Speaker 2: Like George Washington Carver or Booker T. Washington?
Speaker 1: We learned about all of those guys but you know what?  It wasn't within the context of African American history.  It was just within the context of history.  And so we, you know, honestly growing up in Virginia you're steeped in all kinds of history.  You're steeped in the, the American history--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --Revolutionary War, St. John's Church was right across the street.  You're steeped in the Civil War.  And it's impossible, it certainly was for our teachers to teach those, those topics without dealing with the blacks at the same time.  And so we would go to Jamestown, Virginia or Williamsburg [Virginia].  I mean we had all kinds of wonderful field trips.  It was rare that any of those field trips were around African American history per se.  Those teachers were, were focused on just teaching us.  And, and there was never--the first time I ever recall any sort of distinct reference made to race or African American history was when I was in the eighth grade in elementary school and, and [President] Dwight Eisenhower had died.  And there was an announcement that came across the PA system that, that, that said we were gonna observe a moment of silence.  And we're like who's Dwight Eisenhower, you know, and why?   And so there was just this raucous and, and the teacher, the substitute teacher I remember her, she said, she was indignant, she said, you know, you kids show the proper respect for President Eisenhower because it was, it was, he was the person who sent troops into Little Rock, Arkansas, you know, ten years ago, whenever it was, to, to, to escort those, those black children and blah, blah. And that was really the first time that, that sort of within the schools, we had sort of talked about or focused on, on, on the issue of, of race, per se--
Story_ID: 106501
Speaker 1: And you were already in the eighth grade, by then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in eighth grade.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you said in '68 [1968] when [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated--
Speaker 2: That was in sixth grade, yeah.
Speaker 1: You were in sixth grade.  But that's when you realized that there were or that's when tensions grew within the neighborhood of the two white groups that lived on either side of you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wouldn't say there were--no, actually I'm sorry I didn't mean to say that.  There's, there never really was any tension within the whites in our neighborhood.  There were, there were a couple of incidents which were very small.  I can remember once, I'll never forget it, I feel, I feel bad even to this day.  I can remember the, the family that lived right across the alley from us was this white family and they had this, this boy named Tim who played the guitar and he was a good friend.  He was a few years older than me but I, but I considered him a good friend.  And for some reason one day a bunch of the blacks made fun of him and were harassing him and calling him names and I was part of that.  And I, and I felt bad about it then and I feel bad about it now.  But that was the only sort of tense moment I recall.  Other than when there was this complex of homes that had been turned into a mini office complex that was totally occupied by whites.  And then when Mr. King got killed that went up in smoke.  I mean that just, they had burned that thing to the ground.  And I remember, and, and one of the chemists who worked there had befriended me.  I'd go over, we'd have chats and he'd always give me a mint.  He, he kept a roll of peppermint Lifesavers in his desk and I'd go over mainly just to get a, a mint and then we would talk just about, you know--
Speaker 1: Chemistry?
Speaker 2: Chemistry, yeah.  I liked chemistry when I was growing up.  We talked about chemistry and we talked about, I can't remember what we talked about.  But, but it was a pleasant conversation.  He would always take five or ten minutes out to chat with me.  And I remember when their office complex was torched and there was some, there was some tension with a small T because he said, look clearly you know who did this and I said I don't know who did that, (laughter) you know.  And it was clear that he didn't really believe me, but, but, but that was that.  Other than that, there was no real, I can't recall--
Story_ID: 106502
Speaker 1: Well, where did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: I went to Mosby, Mosby Middle School, I think it was called middle school.  Maybe it was called Mosby Junior High then, but it was Mosby.  Mosby Middle School.
Speaker 1: And that's where you met the counselor who introduced you to the ABC program [A Better Chance Program]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's also where I met a lot of sort of middle class blacks.  I mean--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about those.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How were those different from you?
Speaker 2: They were, they were more refined.  You know, they dressed well.  They spoke well.  Their parents were sort of one, one rung up the socioeconomic ladder.  So my father [William Lewis, Sr.] was a roofer and my mother [Essie Taylor Lewis] wasn't working then but when she did sort of go back to work, she was a domestic.  And, you know, these people, their, their parents were like clerks or, you know, worked in the post office or, you know, you know, they, they--some of 'em parents were school teachers.  And so that was like wow, you know.  That was a real revelation to me.  So, so, so, the first people that I really met and got to know who were sort of more refined and, and better educated and, and sort of more articulate were, were African Americans and, and so Mosby was about a mile and a half from where I lived.
Speaker 1: Where would they have gone to elementary school?
Speaker 2: I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't remember.
Speaker 1: So Mosby--just go ahead (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Mosby, but Mosby was sort of a, a regional kind of, whereas Bellevue was a neighborhood school, Mosby gathered people in from--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Pulled you all together.
Speaker 2: --from a, from a broader, from a broader.  So for the Vita Bricks [ph.] of the world although she, I mean she wasn't in the neighborhood to go to Mosby but, but, but those were the kind of people I met when I, when I went to, went to Mosby.
Speaker 1: And that was an eye-opener because?
Speaker 2: I just never really had been exposed to, to African Americans kids who were suave, debonair, smooth.  You know, they dressed well.  They talked well.  They went to little parties.  And, you know, (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: So they were the Jack and Jill kids basically?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I guess.  Although I don't know that they were in Jack and Jill but if, if, if there was a Jack and Jill there, yeah they would have been the Jack and Jill kid, kids.  And once again there was no, there was no tension with them.  I, I, I fell in with them, you know, right off, or right from the get go.  I had a girlfriend, one of them was a girlfriend, and they were fine.  It was just, it was just a world I hadn't, hadn't really seen.
Story_ID: 106503
Speaker 1: So when you're at, Mosby [Middle School, Richmond, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: (Nodding)
Speaker 1: Is when you meet the counselor who introduces you--
Speaker 2: Ms. Ragland, who subsequently became Ms. Robbins.  Gwendolyn Robbins, Gwendolyn Raggin, Ragland.
Speaker 1: Is she still alive?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I often, I often ask myself that question.  I'd love to, I'd love to find a way to get in touch with her, Ms. Ragland.  And before her--but the first counselor I met though was Benjamin Kersey [ph.] who was at, at--
Speaker 1: Bellevue?
Speaker 2: --at Bellevue [Elementary School].
Speaker 1: And what did he do to inspire you?
Speaker 2: Well, once again, he was, he was, he was an awesome man.  He organized block parties and, and clean-up crews and enrichment programs which you did after school on the weekends.  And he also gave me a job to clean and to rake the leaves.  He lived on the north side.  He lived in this beautiful house on the north side, big yard, big front yard, big backyard.  And I used to rake the leaves for him.  But, but Mrs., but Mrs. Ragland was really the kind of old fashioned guidance counselor that I doubt exists anymore.  I mean she really spent time with the kids and she spent a lot of time trying to find enrichment programs.  So I went to, during seventh and eighth grade enrichment, I did these, these special math and science programs on Saturday mornings to supplement sort of what we were doing, during the regular curriculum at Mosby.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any--was she pushing you towards any career at all--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --at this time?  Just to be educated?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Did you have any idea what you wanted to do--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --at this time?
Speaker 2: No, for--I mean for the longest time I talked about being a doctor.  I talked about being an engineer.  But no, not really.
Speaker 1: So tell me about her exposing you then to the ABC Program?
Speaker 2: She--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Which wasn't unusual because you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --were in all of these other programs.
Speaker 2: The, the, the ABC Program had, had used Richmond as one of its sort of key feeder cities early on.  I think, I think A Better Chance was founded in 1963.  And Richmond, and Richmond had been, for whatever reason, one of the schools, one of the cities that has applied some number of ABC kids.  And so what Mrs. Ragland did was once a year she would invite kids when they were home for spring break to come to Mosby and speak to the current students.  And so, you know, in the seventh grade thirty or forty of us were called into the auditorium and Mrs. Ragland talked about preparatory schools.  I had never heard that word before or that phrase, had no idea.  And she said, you know, these are schools in New England.  These are boarding schools you go away and you have a better chance of getting into a really good college.  And then these kids would talk about sort of what the experience was like.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of those kids speaking?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, what were some of, what would they say, what would--
Speaker 2: Oh, it, it, it was basically the work is, is a lot harder but you have a much better chance of getting into a really good college.  And, and you have a wide variety of activities, participating in sports and arts and so forth.  To me it sounded like heaven.  I mean because the other thing that I don't talk much about was that whereas when I was Bellevue and in my first year at Mosby, it was very easy for me to sort of toggle between the two worlds that I was in.  The academic world if you will and sort of my academic friends.
Story_ID: 106504
Speaker 1: And then the--
Speaker 2: Tony [ph.].
Speaker 1: --the Tony [ph.] and those group.  And what we, what we, what we skipped right through was that I, I routinely got into fights.  I, I, I got into fights.  I didn't back away from anybody and I was always in fights.  And, and fortunately in the '60s, [1960s] the fights were just, you know, fists.  You know, you get a bloody nose, you know, you, you know, your tooth was loose.  A cut here, a scape there.  Then occasionally you get your skull cracked open.  But, but, but rarely did, did were knives or guns involved.  And so, and so I, I was never afraid to fight or run as the case might be.  You know, my brother still loves to joke about how, you know, depending on who was after me I had no problems running.  There was still guy T.C. who I, I knew I couldn't beat and I had nothing to prove.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: And so if T.C. was on the block, I was out of there.  But, but most of the people I, I, I never backed away.  I never backed away from a fight.
Speaker 2: That's shocking though for you.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean to hear that you were--
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, yeah.  I, I had--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --no problems.  Once again, I wouldn't do that today because--
Speaker 2: Of course (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --because, because, you know, people just go boom, you're dead.  But anyway, but, but--
Speaker 2: You could exist within those (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --as I got to junior, yeah, it was easy to move between the two [worlds].  And the girls, you know, it was easy to sort of navigate all of that.  As I got to Mosby [Middle School, Richmond, Virginia] it was becoming increasingly difficult because there the kids were tougher, there were cuttings, there were shootings and, and quite frankly I was getting really nervous.  I can remember going to a party in the seventh or eighth grade and a couple of guys came in with sawed-off shotguns in their, in their, in their pants, sort of walking like, like, like they had an artificial leg but, but you knew it was a sawed-off shotgun.  And that stuff was scary, you know, that stuff was scary.  So when I heard about prep school and going away and having your own room, I mean I was thrilled.  I was just thrilled.  And coming back to the point we were discussing earlier I was by no means the brightest kid.  I talked about all these doctors' kids and dentists, I mean, those were really smart kids who, who, who were smarter than I was.  But had no real interest in doing it.
Story_ID: 106505
Speaker 1: We were just talking about navigating these students that became tougher, so it was a dream for you to think about moving away to go to boarding school.  What did your parents think about you going away?
Speaker 2: My mother [Essie Taylor Lewis] was fully supportive.  And we talk about this even, even, even today.  Her attitude was a very straight forward, pragmatic reasoning that would characterize how I think about things.  She said number one, there's no question that the education would be better.  Number two, it's free.  They're paying for everything.  And number three, his teachers are recommending that he do this and, or he does this (laughter).  And, and, she said, you know, what am I missing?  You know, why wouldn't I allow him to do this?  And so, so my mother was totally supportive of it.  My father [William Lewis, Sr.] on the other hand was very, very apprehensive.  His view was nobody else is doing this.  Certainly nobody else that he knew.  And, you know, why do, you know, why do we need to, to do this?  Having said that, excuse me, he never ever voiced any concern or disapproval to me.
Speaker 1: Excuse me for one moment, we gotta pause.  I just gotta fix.  So I'm sorry.  Continuing.  So your father was--
Speaker 2: So my father was apprehensive but not to me.  I had nothing but the support of him and my mother when it was time to, to make the decision, so.
Story_ID: 106506
Speaker 1: So you accepted?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I mean the way it worked in those days was you didn't apply to a prep school.  You applied to A Better Chance [ABC program], you filled out an application, and then A Better Chance did the work for you.  They would look at your, your application and decide which two or three prep schools might be best for you.  And so they would be your interface or intermediary with the prep school.  And, Andover decided based on my ABC application that, that I would do well there, I'd be a good fit.  And so, and so the first time I ever heard of Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts was when I received an acceptance letter telling me, you know, welcome to, to Phillips Academy, the school is commonly known as Andover, blah, blah, blah, blah.
Speaker 1: And how did that feel?
Speaker 2: Well once again I, we were sort of led to believe that we were gonna get in somewhere.  And so, you know, Andover it didn't mean anything to me.  It was just a prep school up north.  I had never been up north.  I guess that's not true, I guess I had been to Pennsylvania.  But I certainly had never been to Massachusetts.  And so Andover didn't mean anything to me.  It just meant hey, this, you know, ready to move on to the next phase of my life.  This is gonna happen.
Story_ID: 106507
Speaker 1: So you arrived there as a freshman in ninth grade?
Speaker 2: I arrived there in the summer of 1970 just before my freshman year for a six-week orientation program.
Speaker 1: And what did you think about--once you arrived there what did you think about the school--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Loved it, ahh.
Speaker 1: --the students, the--
Speaker 2: Well, the summer session was very different than the regular session.  Summer session there were very few kids there in the summer who would also be there in the regular session.  So it was really just, it was an intense orientation around math, and English and maybe a couple of other things but I loved it.  I just loved it right from the beginning.  The bucolic campus, the size of the campus. I thought the food was great.  Your own bedroom.  I, I, I just loved everything about it.  And it was for the first time in my life, a chance was, there was an opportunity to be in an environment where there was no tension.  Everybody was there to focus on studying.  And so you didn't have to sort of navigate all these different worlds.  And so to me, I took to it like a fish in water.
Speaker 1: Were there other African American students?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's talk about this.  You can tell me like the insight.  Did they, at Andover, did they, did they put you all together or was there any sense of segregation?
Speaker 2: Well, well, the, the summer session was really and, A Better Chance summer session.  So, so Andover was so big, most of the ABC kids went to a summer session at Williams College [Williamstown, Massachuetts] or Dartmouth College [Hanover, New Hampshire].  And so all the kids, regardless of what prep school they were gonna go to in the fall, showed up at one of these two sites for their summer orientation.  Andover was different.  Andover was so big that they could have their own orientation session.  And so there were 30 or 40 of us that were going to be, thirty or forty African Americans and actually, and, and, and Hispanic students.  I had never seen a Hispanic student.  First time I heard a kid speaking Spanish I was like what?
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: So, but, but the thirty or forty or so of the Hispanic and African American kids gathered as a group.  We had our own curriculum.  So in that sense, we were segregated.  We took our, we took courses but we were getting ready to go to the regular session.  All the other kids was, was just there for the summer.  So we actually felt special.  We were like hey, we're the [U.S.] Marines.  We're here for the real deal.  You guys are just here for the summer session.  You're taking like one or two courses.  Like my daughter is going there this summer to just a summer session.  She's taking studio art and creative writing.  And that's what people go to Andover for, they go to take one or two courses of something that they're real interested in.  We were there to take real courses.  And so, so in a sense, yeah, we were segregated but we were segregated in the sense that we were the Marines.  And we were there to get something done in, in, six weeks.
Speaker 1: So how, as being like the Marines this is sort of the boot camp.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What did they teach you about getting you prepared to, to function in the broader--
Speaker 2: Zero.
Speaker 1: Zero.  Nothing at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But once again that is, that's more of a function of Andover than anything else.  Andover to this day, has always stood out as being a school that provides little structure and little guidance to the students.  The view is, is that kids have to learn to make their own decisions and own choices and then live by them.  And so that works well for a number of kids.  But if you are a parent and you feel as if your kid needs a lot of structure and you need to eat together with an adult and, you know, you need to check in at a certain time, Andover isn't, isn't really the school for you.  So the summer session was really sort of a microcosm of that philosophy, if you will.  There was no warning about what the real session would be like.
Story_ID: 106508
Speaker 1: Well, how, how did this then make you different from the people at home now?  When you returned home did you feel different?  Did you feel that you were, went to an Ivy League prep school [Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts], I mean they were preparing you for something that, the neighborhood at home--
Speaker 2: You, you--
Speaker 1: --was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: You definitely felt different.  You felt different in a lot of ways.  First of all, you just, you had been exposed to so much more.  When I came home, for Christmas of my freshman year, having been away for only three or four months, I'd, I, I knew immediately that I was, you know, I was different.  Already, my, I, I had become very conscious of my speech for the first in my life.  So all of a sudden, whereas I may have said--
Speaker 1: Ain't or (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, no, not, not so much as that.  But, but 12 became you see, the word 12.  I will never forget on the basketball court with some guys and the score was like 12-8 and I said, 12-8 and 12 came out as being really enunciated, and, and whereas I can't remember how I would have pronounced it before I went away to Andover. And so you became much more attuned, consciously and subconsciously.  You became attuned because a lot of times somebody would say excuse me, they just didn't understand what you said.  And they weren't making fun of you, they just didn't understand what you said.  So the word A-U-N-T, growing up in Richmond was always unt just, U-N-T.  Okay.  And when you got to Andover you said my unt Julia, they're like your, your what?	And so, you know, I got a thousand examples.  And even to this day my kids, you know, just this past weekend, my daughter was getting on my case about the way I pronounce guitar.  So, so, that's just a part of, of me that you'll just never sort of shake and I don't really care.  But, but to your question, you became very aware of it during the first couple of years of switching from New England to Richmond [Virginia], New England to Richmond.  And I'd say the speech patterns were the most obvious.  Aspirations for sure because you really began to understand sort of what the world was beyond, beyond, beyond Richmond, the Ivy League schools and all of that.
Story_ID: 106509
Speaker 1: Second year at Andover [Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts] or the first year after the summer session, what was your, the experience of your first year, ninth grade?
Speaker 2: And--I had a wonderful four years at Andover.  I never had, I had no problems adjusting.
Speaker 1: What about adjusting to the fact that there were kids who were extremely wealthy?
Speaker 2: Umm--
Speaker 1: It never came up?
Speaker 2: My, my roommate, my freshman year my roommate was a guy named Jim Armstrong who was from Armstrong Ranch, Texas.  His mother, Anne Armstrong, who's still alive to this day, was the U.S. Ambassador to the Court of St. James.  His father--they had the second largest ranch in Texas, behind the King Ranch.  When [Dick] Cheney shot that guy [Harry Whittington] a couple of years ago, that was on the Armstrong Ranch.  So my roommate my freshman year was one of the richest, from one of the richest families in the world.  We were fourteen years old, you know, what difference did it make?  He was shy.  I was better academically than him.  I was better academically than most kids.
Speaker 1: Did you ever go home with any of the other kids?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, go to their houses?
Speaker 1: Yeah, go to their houses like on a break, you know, you go to someone else's house--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or someone--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or someone comes home with you?
Speaker 2: No.  Although I never felt self-conscious about that.  Nobody certainly came home with me.  But I never, I don't recall, I may have, but I don't off the top of my head I don't recall going to anybody's house. But, but, but let me just digress for a second.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the chairman of A Better Chance for eight or ten years.  And what I learned at Andover [Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts] and what I came to very strongly believe as chairman of A Better Chance, is that all fourteen and fifteen year old kids have issues, have challenges.  There is no complete package.  There are kids at Andover who are, are, are very wealthy but come from broken homes, who are dependent on drugs, who, whose parents are dependent on drugs, whose parents are alcoholics, who have eating disorders.  There are kids like I, who didn't have a lot of money but had a lot of self-esteem.  So you put a bunch of fourteen year olds together, a bunch of fifteen year olds together in a prep school environment, there's gonna be an issue with every single kid there.  Some sort of issue that's gone require or should require some sort of attention to make sure that that kid leaves Andover or whatever prep school that kid is at, developed and mature and able to deal with the world given the baggage that that kid came to Andover with at age fourteen.  So--and I saw that clearly.  I saw kids getting kicked out because they used drugs.  I saw kids getting, leaving because of parental issues at home.  There are, there, there were issues.  I never felt as if I had such a terribly unique set of issue that set me apart.  I was poor, that was it.  But I was, I was, I was, there were, there were few kids who were better at math than me.  There were few kids who were better at physics than me, or a few kids who were better at, at French than me.  There were few kids who were better athletes than I, than I was.  I was a natural leader.  And so, I never ever felt disadvantaged other than in a monetary sense.  And Andover was wonderful in that regard because they paid for our plane tickets to go home and they bought our books.  And so other than sort of, you know, a shabby dress, if you will, I, I, you know, I felt--and, and oh and by the way in the '60s [1960s] and the '70s [1970s] everybody dressed shabbily.  So you could not sort of look at a kid and tell sort of who was on scholarship and who wasn't on scholarship.  The only way you could do that was go to their room and sort of look at their stereo systems.  And the rich kids had these incredible stereo systems, you know, amps, preamps, post amps all these, you know, speakers.  And, and, and if you were on scholarship you may have had a little, one of those little portable record players, you know.  So that was how you determined sort of who had money and who, who, didn't have money.
Story_ID: 106510
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So were, did they start to then, or did you start to become aware of, because there was so little structure you said at Andover [Phillips Academy, Andover, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 2: (Nodding)
Speaker 1: --were you then allowed to decide what you'd want to do after that or were there counselors saying okay, you're gonna apply to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you're gonna apply to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], or, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there, there, there were counselors.  I don't, I don't remember getting any good advice because once you're at Andover everybody thinks that they deserve to go Harvard.  And so, so for me, it, it boiled down--I applied to seven schools and got into all seven.  And it boiled down to, to Harvard and UPenn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.  But tell me the seven you applied to?
Speaker 2: I, I applied to Harvard, Penn, Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island].  Those were the four Ivy League schools.  I applied to, to University of Virginia because I was from Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia], and University of North Carolina [at Chapel Hill in Chapel Hill, North Carolina] because I was nominated for something called the Morehead Scholarship.  And I applied to Tufts [University, Medford, Massachusetts] because Tufts was also in the Boston [Massachusetts] area and a lot of my friends were applying to Tufts.  So, you know, I figured I had the waterfront covered.  And I, I would have been perfectly happy at, at, any of those seven schools.  They all had sort of positive attributes from, from, from my point of view.
Speaker 1: So what about places like Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] or did that register with you at the time or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --just didn't want to go to the South or Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] which was in your home state you didn't--
Speaker 2: No, you go to--it's interesting.  At, at Andover there was no discussion about Howard or Hampton.  At Andover the discussion was about Harvard or Yale.  And so, you know, I thought about Harvard and Yale.  I had nothing against Howard, or Hampton.  In fact, when I was in the eighth grade I remember competing in state math contests and we started, we did sort of a local one at Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia] and then we did the state finals at, at Hampton.  And I, I was very impressed with both of those schools, both of those campuses.  But when I got to Andover--
Speaker 1: That fades away.  You don't talk about those, so they--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah I--
Speaker 1: --fall off the radar.
Speaker 2: --it's just, yeah, it was off the radar.  Yeah, it was off--I'd say it was off the radar.  I think that the, that the historically black colleges and universities are doing a much better job today to stay on the radar so at Andover for instance I know that there are kids who are leaving and going to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Howard and Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  And so I, I--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Which was not the case when you were there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there, there, there was no, the, the those, the historically black schools didn't recruit at, at Andover, at the Andover in, in, in that time.
Speaker 1: So you choose Howard, I mean Harvard.  And you choose Harvard because?
Speaker 2: I choose Harvard because it was Harvard, when you cut right through it.  I, I was trying to decide between Harvard and UPenn.  And UPenn had recruited me to play lacrosse.  UPenn was in Philadelphia.  That was where all the brothers were talking about going, you know, to UPenn.  And it just seemed like a really, really hip scene.  And having been at Andover sort of so untethered, if you will, to the broader African American community I just felt that UPenn would be the right place for me.   A number of my friends were, were heading off to UPenn.  And then one day, the football coach said to somebody, not to me, said to somebody who in turn told me, "I don't understand Bill's deliberation.  He's got a full scholarship to Harvard.  What else is there to think about?"  And this was a Steve Sorota [Stephen Sorota], a very, very wise old man who had the ability to teach and to, and to educate with, in, in very, very simple ways.  And that statement was sort of the essence of Steve Sorota.  He was like, it doesn't get any better than Harvard and it's free.  Sort of like what my mother [Essie Taylor Lewis] had said when I was taking off four years earlier for Andover.  And that--a bell just, just went off.  And I said, okay.  That's right.  And so, and so, that was the end of that.
Story_ID: 106511
Speaker 1: So you get into Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  What were, what did your brother and sister think about you then?  Did you, did they, did you appear different to each other?  I mean now you were--
Speaker 2: You know, we, we, we never--
Speaker 1: --on this path.
Speaker 2: --no.  We never ever to this day, there was never any perceived differences among us.  When we get together to, even today it's just like when we were together in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: I should get their names because we didn't get them.
Speaker 2: My brother is Jerome Taylor Lewis.  And my sister is Julia Mae Lewis Murfree and she has two kids.  But nothing really changed.  When we were, when I went away to prep school, we wrote letters to each other.  Mainly my sister and I, my brother occasionally.  I came home, they were, they were, they were--I wasn't perceived differently in any way.  I didn't get any special attention, any special favors.  And they didn't, you know, they viewed me as just, you know, their big brother.  And, and, and to this day, nothing has changed in that regard.
Story_ID: 106512
Speaker 1: So when you're a freshman--and what year do you graduate from--
Speaker 2: Andover [Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 1: Andover.
Speaker 2: '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: '74 [1974].  And you go into Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] the fall of that, that--
Speaker 2: (Nodding)
Speaker 1: '74 [1974].
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Now you're prepared, I mean for Harvard because you've been at Andover.  So there's no culture shock let's say in going there.  Who was the president of Harvard at the time?
Speaker 2: Derek Bok.
Speaker 1: And did, at early the on, did you, were you attracted to economics or is that something that developed over the period of time that you were there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got interested in economics really my, my freshman year.  My background has always been analytical.  My best subjects at Andover were math and, and physics.  And, but I knew I didn't want to study math at Harvard.  And--
Speaker 1: Because?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I thought it was little bit impractical.  There was nothing to really do with it other than--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: And you can only teach.
Speaker 2: --you can only teach.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: And you didn't want to teach?
Speaker 2: I didn't want to teach.  I wanted to, I wanted to, I wanted to get a really good job and make what I felt would be some nice money.  And it's interesting.  When we were seniors at Andover, a bunch of us were talking about sort of how much money we wanted to make.  And my roommate at Andover said to me--
Speaker 1: And was this [Jim] Armstrong?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Someone else?
Speaker 2: This was my, now my senior year--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --now I'm fast forwarding four years.  And his name was Willie Robinson.  And Willie said to me that he had seen a study, and this was from 1973 to 1974, that said the average worker, college-educated worker would make a million dollars over the course of his career.  And he was very upset about that because his view was, he was gon' make a lot more than a million dollars.  And I said well, if you assume, I remember this conversation very clearly, I said if you assume you gonna work call it forty years as a career, and you make $25,000 a year, which was a lot of money.  When I started at Morgan Stanley in 1978 my starting salary was 13,500.  So, so I said if you, if you assume you make $25,000 a year on average over forty years, that's a million dollars.  And I said I'd be very happy with that.  And, and he was like well, yeah, I understand the math but I would not be very happy with a million.  So fast forward to, to Harvard and I was really just trying to find a major that was gonna be relevant.  I was not--I did not go to Harvard to major in something for the sake of studying.  You know, I wanted to find a major that was gonna help me get a job.  A really good job.  You know, I had spent four years at Andover.  I had been exposed to, you know, a world that I never, I never knew existed.  And I wanted a really a good job and I figured that economics would, would help me.  I didn't know how--
Speaker 1: But what made you think that though?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I can't remember.  I--Harvard didn't have a business major and I thought this was probably the closest to business.
Story_ID: 106513
Speaker 1: So you--economics major.  Who were some of the, the professors at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] back--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: We had, we had all the, the great professors back then.  [John Kenneth] Galbraith was still teaching and lecturing.  Otto Eckstein taught the, the major survey course of, we called Ec-10.  Harvard is the only place that calls economics, Ec.  Most people call it Econ but, but we always called it Ec.  So, so Otto Eckstein taught Ec-10.  Thomas Schelling, who just recently won the Nobel Prize, was one of my professors.  There were, there were, there were some wonderful, wonderful (unclear).  Medoff, Jim Medoff [James Medoff], was, was a labor economic professor.  He's still there.  I had, I had some wonderful, wonderful professors.  Although (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: What type of a student were you at Harvard?
Speaker 2: I was a, I was, well I graduated in my major magna cum laude.  I graduated cum laude over all.  And I got into Harvard Business School right out of Harvard College as opposed to being asked to defer.  So I'd say I was a pretty good student.   And, and Harvard was not as hard as Andover [Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts].  It wasn't even close.
Speaker 1: Because of the transitions?  There was no big transition?
Speaker 2: That, but, but, but Andover is all about academic excellence.  Harvard is about a lot of stuff in, in, in addition to the academic excellence.  And the, the, the--I just say it just wasn't that, it wasn't that hard.  It just wasn't that hard.  It didn't take as much time to prepare--
Speaker 1: Then what did you do with that extra time?
Speaker 2: I, I did a ton of things.  I played, I played--
Speaker 1: Lacrosse?
Speaker 2: I played lacrosse my first two years including varsity lacrosse my, my sophomore year.  I worked, I worked a lot.  I had a lot of jobs.  I was involved in extracurricular activities, newspaper, the latest stuff.
Speaker 1: What, what did your mom [Essie Taylor Lewis] and dad [William Lewis, Sr.] think about you at this time?  You're in Harvard (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Their, their views on me really didn't change at all.
Speaker 1: Not at all?
Speaker 2: From, from, from their point of view once I left to go to Andover, I was on this journey untethered from them, that was gonna lead ultimately to me having a really good job.
Speaker 1: And they believed that?
Speaker 2: They believed that.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) and so that was the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Excuse me.  Were there any professors at, at Harvard that mentored you?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or did--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  Harvard, Harvard was, Harvard was very much a way station, if you will.  Andover got me launched, Andover got me started, Andover's where my heart is today.  Harvard was sort of a place again, sort of check the box.  It, it, sort of rounded out, smoothed out the rough edges that I still had.
Speaker 1: What did you do during the summers at, at Harvard?  Did you do any internships like any of the (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: At the end of the--
Speaker 1: --Wall Street internships?
Speaker 2: I worked with my dad.
Speaker 1: Roofing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, roofing for one summer, between Andover and, between Andover and Harvard so between my senior and freshman year I worked as a roofer and that, that, that convinced me that that was not the--
Speaker 1: You didn't want to do that.
Speaker 2: --that was not the profession for me.  At the end of my freshman year at, at Harvard I worked for A Better Chance, the local, the, the national headquarters in Boston [Massachusetts].  At the end of my sophomore year, I worked in Richmond [Virginia] in city government.  I worked in the city manager's office for a guy named Manny Deese [Manuel Deese], who's still in Richmond to this day.  Great guy.  At the end of my junior year, I, I participated in a program at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois] that the American Economic Association sort of sponsored and underwrote to, basically try to identify more, not to identify but to create, if you will, a path or program for more African Americans with getting doctorates in economics.  And so since I, I was a pretty good student, they contacted me or I contacted them I don't remember, but this was a, an intense eight week long program doing graduate economic work at, at Northwestern.  And then at the end of my, my--and I, I concluded that I did not want to be an economics professor or get a doctorate in economics.  And then at the end of my senior year I went to work at Morgan Stanley.
Speaker 1: So how did investment banking come about?  How did Morgan Stanley come about because it hadn't been on the radar?
Speaker 2: It had not been on the radar screen.
Story_ID: 106514
Speaker 1: We were talking about your Morgan Stanley, being recruited to Morgan Stanley.
Speaker 2: During my senior year, as I was working on my honors thesis in economics, I realized that I was not going to pursue a doctorate in economics, and I started considering my options.  And so I applied to, two business schools, Harvard [Business School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Stanford [Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California].  And, and I think I had applications in to grad school as well but I just don't remember.  But I knew that regardless of those applications I wouldn't, I weren't, I was not gonna pursue an academic career.  So I got into Harvard and Stanford outright, which was, which was, was rare.  Because back then they encouraged you to work a couple a years and, and then go to business school on the theory that real, real work experience would help the, the academic part of your, your learning.  But I also realized that, that I had been away in boarding school, if you will, for eight years, four at Andover and four at Harvard and so I wasn't to just keep, to go straight to school.  And so I asked Harvard Business School if I could take off one year and they said sure.  So then I went to the placement office at Harvard and it was late in the process, all the, all the firms had come to campus and had interviewed.  And I asked, you know, what could I get at this sort of late date.  And they mentioned that there was still a few firms that had sort of internship kind of programs but that most of the full-time recruiting was over.  And so Morgan Stanley and First Boston were two such firms.  I think McKinsey [& Company] consulting was one and then somehow P&G, Procter & Gamble had a slot that was available, although it wasn't a two-year, it was more, it was a career kind of program.  And so I had never been to New York City [New York].  And so my first trip to New York City was in the spring of 1978 and I remember it just like yesterday.  Coming down the FDR Drive and, and going right across the street there to that white building at 1251 Avenue of the Americas, 50th and 6th.  Ms. [Gwendolyn] Ragland my guidance counselor, said don't say Avenue of the Americas, say 6th Avenue.  And, and so I had my interview with Morgan Stanley, I had an interview with First Boston and then I went to Cincinnati [Ohio] and had an interview with the P&G folks.  And I was actually quite excited about Cincinnati because Cincinnati is a sleepy little town just like Richmond [Virginia], at least back then it was, it's like--it actually left Richmond sort of in dust now. But, but it was, it was it was basically a southern town so it felt very comfortable in contrast with the hustle and bustle of New York City.  And I got offers from Morgan Stanley and P&G, and First Boston--and I didn't get an offer from First Boston.  And Morgan Stanley offered 13,500 and they said there'd be a bonus but I didn't know what a bonus, what it meant by a bonus.  All I focused on was the 13,500.  And P&G offered, I think, 15,000 or 15,500.  So in my way of thinking that was a much better deal because the cost of living was so much cheaper in Cincinnati that, that that was the way to go.  The problem with P&G though, was that even though they kept trying to spin it as, as a two-year internship, it really wasn't.  It really was the start of a career.  And I didn't want to start my career 'cause I knew I was going to business school I thought in one year.  So I ended up taking the Morgan Stanley job.  Showing up for work right over there in July of 1978.  And that was how I got into investment banking.
Story_ID: 106515
Speaker 1: Because you, I, I think I've read that you've said that, generally speaking people are, that are in investment banking come to it at a very young age, mean come to the awareness of it at a very young age, fourteen, fifteen, you know, something about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my kids are now seven, eleven, and fourteen.  They've known about investment banking their entire life.  So, yeah, many, many, many kids hear about investment banking and more broadly Wall Street at a very, very young age.
Speaker 1: But that was not the case for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, no (laughter).  I never really heard about it until I, I, I had no idea what investment banking was until I started to prepare for my Morgan Stanley interviews.  And still didn't really feel as if I had a great idea.  There's only so much you can do by reading.  And, and I remember in preparing for the Morgan Stanley interview, there, there had been a story about Bob Greenhill who was running the Mergers and Acquisitions Department at Morgan Stanley, and I remember just being fascinated by the character as opposed to what he was doing.  I mean, he was, he was just a very impressive sounding guy and somebody that I really wanted to sort of being around and learn from.
Speaker 1: So how did that internship change your life, your path?
Speaker 2: Well, at the end of the two-year period, it wasn't clear to me that I wanted to do investment banking.  What was clear to me was--and I decided to stay for two years.  I left, I left Morgan Stanley at the end of that two year period, headed back to Harvard [Business School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to go to the business school with the view that this has been a great two-year period.  That I had learned a lot but I still didn't know what else was out there.  We didn't have private equity as we know it today and there weren't hedge funds as we know it today.  It wasn't clear to me--
Speaker 1: And the interest rates were very high in the '80s [1980s], right?
Speaker 2: Uh--
Speaker 1: That was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, interest rates were very high.  The Dow [Jones Industrial Average] had been stuck at 800 [points] for about twenty or thirty years.  So it wasn't clear to me that Wall Street was the place for me.  But what I did like about, about Wall Street was just the incredible variety and diversity in the things that you did.  Everything was projected-oriented.  So you worked on lots and lots of different projects and they start up and they finish.  And no two projects were the same.  And you worked with lots of different people.  And, it was very clear to me that I probably would not be suited for a place like Proctor & Gamble where early on in your career you, you're trying to figure out to sell soap day in and day out.  And it just seemed to me as if the, the excitement and the variety of the, of the work that I was doing as a young investment banker combined with New York City, my uncle told me, I lived with my uncle for about a year when I first got here, my mother's brother, Uncle Lemmy [ph.].  And Uncle Lemmy said to me William, Jr., if a man, we should talk about all the different names I've had.  "William, Jr., if a man can't have fun in New York City, a man can't have fun."  You asked about one of my favorite lines, what my uncle, I use this with my wife [HM Carol Sutton Lewis] some time, but my uncle once said to me after my, my, my Aunt Julia who my sister's named for, complained to him that all these men were, you know, trying to hit on her.  And were sort of, you know, being fresh around her.  And my uncle said, "Well, if nobody else wants you, I don't want you either."  (Laughter) and so, so, I often say that to my wife as well when guys are sort of looking at her in a desiring way.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) but, what, you were, you were gonna tell me, you've had several different (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: With the combination of New York City, the excitement of New York City, and the variety of investment banking sort of sold me on wanting to come back to sort of the financial services industry in New York City.
Story_ID: 106516
Speaker 1: At the time were there other African Americans on the same path that you were on?  Did you see people that you could--and I'm just talking about physically identify with that looked like you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, actually at Morgan Stanley there were, there were, there were actually excuse me, a handful of, of African Americans.  There was Ira [D.] Hall, who was a senior associate actually in, in, in Corporate Finance.  There was guy named Logan Delaney [ph.] who was actually a senior associate in the Mergers and Acquisitions Department.  In fact, the first project I worked on at Morgan Stanley which was the, the acquisition of, of a company called P.R. Mallory [Company] which was Duracell batteries. That company was acquired by Dart Industries.  That, that--the senior associate on that deal was an African American named Logan Delaney.  So--
Speaker 1: And that was like in--
Speaker 2: This was 1978.
Speaker 1: --'70 [1970], '78 [1978].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, so it, it--but those are--and then there was one other, actually there were a handful of others.  I just can't remember their names now, in, in, in the late '70s [1970s].  And then when I got of [Harvard] Business School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] in the early '80s [1980s]--
Speaker 1: So then you, yeah, go ahead.
Speaker 2: There were, there were a fair number of them.  Pam Carlton [Pamela C. Carlton], was an associate.  Vicki [L.] Fuller, Morris Goodwin, James somebody whose name I can't remember.  There, there, there were, there you never felt, I never felt as if, of course, you would now if you just look at the numbers, but there were, there were so many young African Americans getting recruited either as analysts or as associates, that it didn't feel lily-white.  One of my good friends was a woman named Marlo Thomas [Barnes] who had finished Wellesley at the same time that I finished Harvard, we started off as analysts together.  I'll never forget, a cute story, I was, she was in the Real Estate Department and was in the M and A [mergers and acquisitions] Department.  And I was doing the exhibit on something called minority interests.  Now, you've got the look on your face that she had.  But in investment banking if you own twenty percent of a company, that's a minority interest in a company.  And so, I was telling Marlo, I'm doing this big study on minority interests see, sort of how it affects the stock price.  And she was like I can't believe that they're giving you a project on minority interests.  I didn't get it at first, I'm like what are you talking about, it's a great project.  She said a minority, doing a project on minority.  I said no, no, no, (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Let me explain to you what minority interests are.  But, while I wouldn't call Morgan Stanley particularly diverse then or now for that matter, it, there were, there were people of color there in professional staff and in the, and in the support staff.
Speaker 1: Then there was so (unclear)--
Speaker 2: There were no partners.  There were no African American partners.
Speaker 1: And it's--no one made partner until the '80s [1980s], right? The first--
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) I was first.
Speaker 1: You were the first.
Speaker 2: In 1989, yep.
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) In '89 [1989].
Story_ID: 106517
Speaker 1: Excuse me, so when you went on as an analyst and you, so you, what is the job of an analyst, just briefly?
Speaker 2: You're a gopher.
Speaker 1: A gopher.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So then you come back as an associate, what's the job of the associate?
Speaker 2: Gopher.
Speaker 1: A gopher.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when did you, when do you really start to sink your teeth into the investment banking?
Speaker 2: Well, this is the beauty of investment banking, this is why I've always loved it.  In investment banking you can really take charge of your career.  You can step up and do as much as you want to do.  And in fact, in investment banking the catch phrase is always step up.  Somebody always prepared to let you step up and do more of their job.  So a financial analyst has the primary responsibility for, for doing all the grunt work.  Preparing very basic analysis, financial analysis, pulling together a presentation, books information, books, doing the basic modeling.  Of course, back then we didn't have computers so there was no modeling per se.  So you did a lot of spread sheets.  Associates really are sort of the people on the front line who are guiding the, the analysts. And they are probably the ones who know the most about any sort of analytical aspect or informational aspect of the situation.  But a firm isn't hiring a Morgan Stanley or a Lazard because of how good your associates are.  Ultimately, it's the partners and the directors who are called on for judgment.
Speaker 1: So if, if you can just give me a ladder.  Its analysts, associates--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Analysts, associate, vice presidents, and then the next level is called different things at different firms, the director--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: --or executive director and then--
Speaker 1: Partner.
Speaker 2: Partner or managing director--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --is the way it--
Story_ID: 106518
Speaker 1: (simultaneous)--it went.
Speaker 2: So when you were at Morgan, at Morgan Stanley you rose through all of those ranks evidently.  So it's at some point you end up in Chicago [Illinois] for a number of years. But before I talk about that part of your career, I want to, I, I interviewed [HM] Carla Harris and she said that there were a couple of--and, and I may be paraphrasing but she says that an important thing to have in investment banking is a mentor and a sponsor.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Do you have that (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Only because Carla just introduced me--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --last week at the National Association of Security Professionals Hall of Fame.  So I had never really heard this distinction and Carla and, you know, who's, who's, who's just wonderful, started to talk about the differences between a mentor and a sponsor.  And so I'll just give you what Carla said because I've never really--I don't, I don't disagree with it--
Speaker 2: And, and, but what I want to know is who served those roles for you?
Speaker 1: I, I didn't have a mentor.  I didn't, I didn't have a mentor and we can talk about that.  I say that my sponsors using Carla's definition would have been--
Speaker 2: Which is the person who has your back when you're not in the room?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: This is what he did--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --let's put him in that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah exactly.  He deserves to be promoted, he deserves to get paid like that person--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I'd say that two people who stand out.  A guy named Jim Allwin [James M. Allwin] and a guy named Eric Gleacher.
Speaker 2: And can you just briefly, the biography of those two people.
Speaker 1: Jim, Jim went to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] undergrad and then Dartmouth College [Hanover, New Hampshire] and we worked together in the early '80s [1980s] as sort of the administrative team for the M and A [mergers and acquisitions] Department.  So Jim was the senior guy responsible for making sure the department was running, I was the junior guy, really responsible for staffing.  So I was what they called the assignments associate.  And, and that's like an incredibly important job to get early in your career.  Everybody has to come to you for staff.  You, you, you get pulled completely off-line, you don't do any deals--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: So basically, you're at, if they were a newspaper you'd be the editor?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You'd give, you're giving everyone--
Speaker 1: I'm giving everybody assignments--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --yeah.  And, and, and so that was just a wonderful, wonderful job to have.  And I did it really coming right out of business school.  Usually you wait a couple years into your career before you do it.
Speaker 2: And that was Jim?
Speaker 1: That was Jim.
Speaker 2: And then the other?
Speaker 1: And then, and then the other guy was Eric Gleacher who was running the M and A Department for--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: And where did he go to school?  What was his background?
Speaker 1: Eric, well, Eric's a lot older. Eric is, Eric is will be sixty-seven  this year.  So Eric--I don't really know where--Eric went to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] and before that he went to like Western Illinois [University, Macomb, Illinois] or some, some school like that and then he went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] graduate school.  And Eric started his career at Lehman Brothers and then came to Morgan Stanley in the, in the mid-80s [1980s] and he and I worked together on a number of very, very high profile M and A deals.  And we just became, you know, very close.  And since he was running the department, he had a major say.  So for instance, I got promoted early to partner.  I got promoted to partner in seven years at Morgan Stanley.  I got out of in '82 [1982]--
Speaker 2: Right.  Supposedly it's a ten year track (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Oh, it's usually somewhere from eight to ten.
Speaker 2: Eight to ten and you did it in seven.
Speaker 1: I did it in seven.  And I'd like to think that, that that combination of, of, Jim and Eric were responsible for that.
Story_ID: 106519
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm gonna talk one thing and then we're, I want to talk about why you didn't have a mentor.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I wanted to ask if race ever had anything to do with your career in investment banking?
Speaker 2: Umm--
Speaker 1: And by that I mean with, maybe affirmative action, maybe you didn't get something because you, or you were passed over because you were African American.  Did you ever get something because you were African American or race has absolutely nothing to do with it?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I would never say that race has absolutely nothing to do with almost anything in this country.  And I certainly wouldn't say, because I have no way of knowing first of all, if race had nothing to do with where I am.
Speaker 1: Is it the same, was it the same for you as it was your contemporaries, your, the, the other people on your same path that were not African American?  Everyone gets the same breaks?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure I understand the question.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm not sure I understand what I'm saying either.  So just answer (unclear)
Speaker 2: Okay.  I don't know why I was hired at Morgan Stanley.  I mean I had a pretty good track record.  I knew nothing about investment banking.  My guess is that being African American had something to do with it, even though this was well in advance of sort of the diversity programs and the like.  I mean there was no discussion of diversity when I joined Morgan Stanley.  But I've said this about affirmative action as it relates to education or the work force or what have you, that it can get you in, but it can't keep you in.  And there are a lot of people that can attest to that.  So I encountered sort of race every now and then.  I can remember once when we were working on a deal, Eric [Gleacher] and I, in 1984 and the CEO of--we were working for the Target and the company that was acquiring us had a CEO who had a reputation for, you know, being sort of a racist, if you will.  And Eric and I joked about it.  And in the middle of the night, we was always negotiating all night long, about two or three in the morning Eric said let's go in and see this guy.  We walked in and we, we sat down and it was bit uncomfortable I think for everybody involved but, you know, no big deal.  In investment banking, in contrast to so many other professions, it is really, really hard, I think, to be denied or to be assisted solely because of race because the--everything is so incredibly transparent.  You're working on a lot of different projects, you're typically working under a fast time schedule.  And things are either right, or they're wrong.  You either say things in a meeting with a client that make sense or they don't make sense.  There's no sort of getting around, there's no scale like on an exam you might take.  So, so invariably over a, a three to five-year period of time there is so much data on you, you've worked with so many people, you've worked on so many different projects, you've worked with so many different clients, there is a huge body of data and the data by and large is directionally correct.  You're either really good or, you're so--you're average, or you're so-so, or you're really bad.  And, and it's just really hard to get around.
Story_ID: 106520
Speaker 1: What makes you good at what you do?
Speaker 2: I have always been, my favorite word is passion.  And I have been talking to young people about being passionate about their pursuits, regardless of what the pursuit, pursuits are.  You know, for a long, long time I was passionate about investment banking.  Once I decided that this was the career for me, I really, really took to it.  I tried to learn everything there was to learn analytically and technically but I also tried to understand the art and the science of investment banking which fundamentally is about giving good advice to really senior and really important people.  And I spent, I rejoined Morgan Stanley in 1982 and I spent the next four or five years working nonstop.
Speaker 1: Eighty hours a week?
Speaker 2: Yeah, eighty, sometimes more.  I, I took very little in the way of vacation.  And I just dedicated myself to that business.  And there's no way around it.  I don't care if you want to be a, a doctor, a lawyer, whatever.  My attitude was, in investment banking in particular, the, the people who, who have been recruited alongside you, are incredibly hungry and incredibly passionate.  So you might think you're working hard and in fact you might very well be, but there will be people around you who are gonna work harder.  And you come into this office on the weekends and it look just like it does now.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean, so, so, passion.
Speaker 1: Did you know Reginald Lewis?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But did--
Speaker 2: I mean, I, I met with him once.
Speaker 1: Did you know about the big deal in '87 [1987] though when he--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Sure, sure, I was, yeah.  Our company Morgan Stanley was advising.  We were on the other side of the trade.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So do you--did Cleve Christophe [HM Cleveland A. Christophe]?
Speaker 2: I know Cleve very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I interviewed him.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know Cleve very well.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Good man.
Speaker 1: He's, he's great.  Did you know any, what, what, what--did you work on that deal at all with Beatrice Foods?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: No.  But you knew it was happening?
Speaker 2: (Nodding)
Speaker 1: Was it big deal within the industry that an African American man would be at the head of--
Speaker 2: (Shaking head no)
Speaker 1: All right.  No, no big deal at all.  Just another deal.
Speaker 2: Just another deal.  He had the money.  If Drexel was backing him, he had the money.  In the investment banking, business--
Speaker 1: Is there a quote unquote black Wall Street?  I mean and by that I mean are there like you, we look at the article the most powerful blacks on Wall Street, I'm sure there are more now than there has been in the past.  Is there collectively, collectively enough now to, to reflect back on I guess and say look at the progress that, that has been made?
Speaker 2: Oh, without a doubt.  With, with, without a doubt there, there is an extensive array of African Americans on the Street in virtually all of the different areas.
Speaker 1: And has that changed, changed in your career?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  There not enough--
Speaker 1: There not enough--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: There are not enough in the right areas.
Speaker 1: But--okay.
Speaker 2: But, but, but oh, without a doubt.  First of all I'd say that it is almost impossible for a, a student, an African American student coming out of college today with a GPA of 3.5 or better, that can't get a job on Wall Street.  That's just how, how aware the broader Wall Street community is to diversity.  And they're tripping all over themselves to find the same kids.  So, so I'd say the environment has changed tremendously.
Story_ID: 106521
Speaker 1: What I'd say hasn't really changed, is the ability to sort of make it to the top.  There is no sort of mentoring and nurturing.  Firms are doing a great job at, at recruiting the kids.  But don't believe for one minute all the rhetoric you hear about development and retention programs.  That's just not true.
Speaker 2: You said you didn't have a mentor.
Speaker 1: No.  And, and, and--
Speaker 2: By choice or--
Speaker 1: By, by choice on my part.  But, but, but if you were to talk to the head of any Wall Street firm they'd give you a bunch of mumbo jumbo about everything they're doing to retain and to develop people of color.  Don't buy one bit of it.  And I'm not sure that, that, that it's necessary.  I think that, I think--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: And you don't think it's necessary because?
Speaker 1: I think that, that the key is to get in.  And I think the firms are doing a wonderful job--
Speaker 2: At getting you in.
Speaker 1: The traditional Wall Street firms.  I still think we have major issues with hedge funds and major issues with private equity firms.  Those two areas of (unclear) which by the way are the most lucrative now, are still pretty much done based on connections.
Speaker 2: But that's because, because of the nature of, does like a hedge fund, and the nature of private equity it's who you know?
Speaker 1: It's, it's just because, it's, it's, it's yeah.  It's because it's who you know.  It doesn't have to be who you know.
Speaker 2: Because you can still do the job regardless of who you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 106522
Speaker 1: So let's go back to your career.  You become department head of Morgan Stanley Midwest Mergers and Acquisitions, what year?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I, left New York in '87 [1987] to go out and start the M and A Department in Chicago [Illinois].  So that was the end of '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: So the time you spent in Chicago, is--
Speaker 2: '87 [1987] through '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: '87 [1987] through '91 [1991]. And there were a couple of people that, I mean I, let me just remember the name, maybe there's somebody, a company out of Chicago, Richard, a small firm that, black firm that did really well.  Anyway, we'll change the tapes and I'll, I'll look it up, because they're in Chicago and I thought you might know them--
Story_ID: 105197
Speaker 1: So, were there, was the work in Chicago [Illinois] vastly different than being in New York?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, and just a little background.  I went to Chicago with a purpose.  I, there are, there are different phases of your career.  First part of your career is really about analysis and just understanding the situation and being right.
Speaker 1: And can you give me an example of that?
Speaker 2: Well, if you--yeah, very simply.  If, if, if, you're going to, if a client wants to look at buying company XYZ there are just some basic analytical things that have to be done.  You have to look at how the stock prices traded.  You have to look at what the company could be worth under different scenarios.  You have think about synergies meaning cost savings or the ability to, to put through additional revenue.  All kinds of analytical and financial--
Speaker 1: So basically have a check list?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a check list (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: That you create yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and check list is pretty standard.
Speaker 1: That the industry (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Everybody sort of knows the standard--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: --evaluation techniques.  And so, and so you spend a good portion of your time as a young person doing that sort of analysis.  Ultimately, your (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: You're doing that to--go ahead, ultimately.
Speaker 2: Ultimately, your success as an investment banker is determined by whether or not you can bring in business.  I mean, you don't bring in business, you can't sort of, you know, pay for yourself.  And so, and so every investment banker fundamentally has to think about where can they uniquely add value.  And I decided that after, and with, with Eric Gleacher sort of mentoring and counseling, I decided that after I made vice president in 1986 that I, I basically had done all I could do from a purely analytical point of view.  I mean I, I knew the models and analysis inside and out.  And I wasn't gonna get any additional credit for just having the numbers right.  And so what I wanted to do was to learn how to develop business.  I had to go out and call on companies and pitch ideas and basically convince those companies that they should hire Morgan Stanley and Bill Lewis.  And, and so that means going from being sort of an analytical type, a grunt type, to a business development type, a marketing type.  And so, and so I asked, and Eric was fully supportive of that 'cause he's always been very entrepreneurial himself.  And so I took, three other guys and we went out to Chicago and for the most part the job was about sort of knocking on doors, trying to get, develop business.  And, and we were pretty good at it.  And so, so that, that was--and then and I made partner from the Chicago platform.  I, I, I figured that because there were so many good people in my class, people who joined in 1982, that it would be real a crapshoot if I sort of stayed in New York and just tried to compete with them on the basis of--
Speaker 1: Getting business?
Speaker 2: Well, no, no.  Just on the basis of doing analysis.  And so I wanted to put myself in a position where I could really distinguish myself.  So like two of those guys had already carved off and they were doing private equity and they were looking pretty good.  And I figured that if I could sort of similarly carve off and, and develop business over the next two or three years, I would have a, have a real good claim on, on deserving a, a partnership.  So that's what I did.
Speaker 1: So what's, what stand out for you in Chicago as businesses that you were able to develop?  Which were some of the ones that you're most proud of?
Speaker 2: Well, now, you, our, our first week there we called on Whirlpool and to present our credentials and to pitch a couple of ideas.  And the following week we got a call from Whirlpool asking us to represent them on the hostile acquisition of a company called Roper.  So that was, that was, you know, it was two weeks on the ground out there.
Story_ID: 105198
Speaker 1: Another one that stands out is representing the Coleman family.  You see that, that that Coleman lantern.
Speaker 2: And now, now it's, I'm starting to understand it more though.  Once you develop that business it goes with you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean of course--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Because I'm looking at Whirlpool here.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well this is, this is actually funny.  This is Maytag.  The, the guy that I met, this is little bit convoluted but the guy that I met in 1986 or '87 [1987] at Whirlpool that I worked with, ultimately became the CEO of Maytag.  And, and I got a call from him about two years ago when I was here at Lazard.  And he said that they were contemplating doing something and, and, he wanted me to advise him.  This was almost twenty years later.  And so, and so, ultimately, we ended up selling Maytag to Whirlpool.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: So, so it had gone full circle.
Speaker 2: But to come back to the Coleman.
Speaker 1: But back to, to Coleman.  I, I met the Coleman family down in Wichita, Kansas in the, in the late '80s [1980s] and was helping them think through their strategic options.  And then they decided that they wanted to do a leveraged buyout.  And the young, the, the son of the founder, Sheldon Coleman, Jr. hired Goldman Sachs to represent them.  And I then in turn represented the company itself and we ended up selling the company to, to Ron Perelman [Ronald Owen Perelman].  And, and it was sad in a sense that young Sheldon [Coleman] put the company in play and ultimately lost it.  And there's a story behind, you know, each of these, these (unclear) I mean there are some great names here.  I mean there's Greyhound.  I sold the Greyhound Company.  American Tourister, I sold that.  Ball Glass, Texas Instruments, Outboard Marine.  Some real household names.  Overnight [Motor] Transportation.  This was actually a really neat deal because that happened in 1986, and Overnight was based in Richmond, Virginia.  So it was a, an incredible thrill to fly into Richmond on a private jet.  'Cause I was, I was actually in Cleveland [Ohio] and I was told that I had get to Richmond because this company was, was in play there.  They received a takeover offer from somebody.  And I thought how cool is this, I'm gonna fly to Richmond in a private jet.  And so I flew into Richmond and we worked on the Overnight.  We worked in these downtown, you know, downtown law firm offices, Hunton & Williams, or, or was it Hunton & Williams or McGuireWoods but I can't remember one--there are only two big law firms in Richmond, and it was one or the other.  And, and it was just, it was fascinating.  It was fascinating in so many ways.  To be sitting there with these lawyers from the traditional Richmond establishment, and I knew even then that I was worth economically more than any of those guys sitting around that table.  And so in, in, in just a, you know, fifteen or so years had, had elapsed since I had left Richmond and here I was back in a position of--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: In a short amount of time.
Speaker 1: --short amount of time.  So, yeah, so that, that was a real, that was a real, that was a real fascinating one.  First Alert, you know the, the fire alarm company.
Story_ID: 105199
Speaker 1: What brought you back to New York?
Speaker 2: Um--
Speaker 1: I mean do you, does it come to a point to whereas you, you get to the end of the road with Morgan Stanley and you say okay.
Speaker 2: You always get to the end of the road with anybody--
Speaker 1: But, but--
Speaker 2: --and in any, and in any sort of opportunity.
Speaker 1: But if you didn't get to the end of the road or if you were at the end of the road at--just say hypothetically at Morgan Stanley, what would have been next if you didn't leave?  Where would you--was there, was there any place to go other than out?
Speaker 2: Well, if you're asking two sort of--I thought you meant what, what got me back to New York (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) I want to know what you--
Speaker 2: Oh, that was 1991.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you came back in '91 [1991], I thought you--
Speaker 2: I came back in '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: --didn't come back up until (unclear)
Speaker 2: No, no, I came back in '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was only out there for four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I came back because we hit a, a downturn.  We had the economic recession and we downsized the Chicago [Illinois] office.  We closed down the M and A [mergers and acquisition] part and I just relocated back to pick up just doing general M and A.  And that was actually a deep part of my career development at Morgan Stanley because it was at that point in time that I asked for and received an opportunity to get into management.  Historically, well not even historically, for the most part you really want to establish yourself as a banker, as somebody who knows how to do deals, first and foremost, before you do admin or management.  And when I came back I really having, having done all the stuff I had done before I went to Chicago and then having done a really sort of entrepreneurial trek in Chicago, I really wasn't excited about coming back and just doing deals again.  And so around 1993 or so after I had been back for a year or two, I went to John Mack who was the president or a chief operating officer, he wasn't, he wasn't the CEO at the time, and I told him that I wanted to be a manager.  And he had been talking publicly about the need for more managers.  That the firm had gotten big, we needed people who could manage, who would like to manage.  And I said I thought I could be a pretty good manager.  And he, and he liked that idea (laughter).  So, and so on the spot he offered me the job to, to take over human resources.  His, he said, you know, Morgan Stanley needs a first rate human resource department and, and we don't have that here.  He said we need to be like GE [General Electric] and okay.
Speaker 1: That's a big job.
Speaker 2: Well, but, but, it's also a traditionally, it's a traditional spot for black people.  And so I said on the spot I said, John I don't want to do human resources.  I said, in corporate America that's where many, many African Americans get sort of pinned down in human resources.  And I don't want to do that.  That's not central to investment banking and that's not central to Morgan Stanley and I don't want to do that.  He said okay, I understand.  He said, I did not appreciate that, that, that was how the job was perceived.  I think it's a very strategic job, a very important job but I respect that.  About two weeks later, he called and said how would you consider running Municipal Finance?  He said the person who is running it, I'm gonna send her to China and I need somebody who can step in and run it.  And I said John, I don't have a problem with Municipal Finance but, but that's not me.  I'm, I'm an M and A banker.  I really don't know anything about Municipal Finance and, and so I'm not interested.  And he goes okay, I understand.  That summer I got a call, I was on the golf course on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] and it was John.  And he said, okay.  I'd like for you to go run the Real Estate Department.  He said the guy who's running it, Jim Allwin [James Allwin] at the time who was my mentor and friend, is going--I'm gonna ask Jim to take on a much bigger job and I'd like for you to take on real estate.  Well the truth of the matter is, I had no interest in real estate.  I didn't know anything about it.  I didn't know where they were located, if they were physically at another building.  They never had been fully integrated with the investment bank.  But I didn't feel as if I could tell John no for the third time.  I thought if I said no again, he would just think I was a flake and he would never sort of serve up anything to me.  So I said John, I'd love to do that job. (Laughter) and so that--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: And Jim had done the job (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: And Jim had done the job, that's right.  And so that's how I ended up in real estate and I ended up on the management track, and so--
Story_ID: 105200
Speaker 1: So I, I ran the Real Estate Department [at Morgan Stanley] which was sort of real estate investment banking and, and, and real estate merchant banking, private equity, if you will, until, until 1997.  And then one Saturday in 1997 in February, I got a call from Joe Perella [Joseph Perella] who was running the entire investment banking division and who asked me if I would go and run the M and A [mergers and acquisitions] Department which was, I mean that was like huge.  It took my breath away.  And he asked me to do it with a guy named Gary Parr, who's actually here at Lazard with me now.  And so Gary and I, starting in '97 [1997] became co-heads of Morgan Stanley's Mergers and Acquisitions Department.  And I continued to be head of real estate but we had just merged with Dean Witter at the time, and Dean Witter had a pretty good real estate department.  And so I agreed to share running the real estate department with the guy from Dean Witter.  So I basically had two jobs, running real estate and running M and A and I did that until 2000 when I was asked to run what we call the banking department at Morgan Stanley, which basically was the biggest job there.  It was--in investment banking, it was the biggest job there.  It, it involved running all of the industry groups around the world and all of the, the regional offices.  So, ultimately I had, you know, the technology group, the telecom [telecommunications] group, the utilities group, health care, all those groups reported to me as did all of our offices sort of around the world.  And that was a huge job and I did that until, from 2000 until 2003.  Gary--until 2004.
Story_ID: 105201
Speaker 1: Gary [Parr] had left [Morgan Stanley] in 2003 to come to Lazard and I'd say that over the, that period of time 2003 to 2004, as I talked more and more to Gary and to [HM] Vernon [Jordan] it became clear to me that for the next phase of my Wall Street career, Lazard would be a wonderful, wonderful platform for me.  And so that leads me to Lazard in 2004.
Speaker 2: And it would be a wonderful platform because what did it offer?
Speaker 1: Um--
Speaker 2: In the next phase?
Speaker 1: Lazard offered and still offers a wonderful opportunity to, first of all get back to being an investment banker because I had been on the management track for ten years.  So to get back on track to being an investment banker and so this Maytag deal was like the first big deal I did once I got back online.  But just as importantly, Lazard afforded me the opportunity to do a tremendous amount of not-for-profit stuff that I've always had an interest in.  So I'm the co-chairman of the Legal Defense Fund.  At the time I was still on the board of A Better Chance.  I'm on the board of Cancer Research Institute.  I was on the board of American Museum of Natural History.  I'm on Andover [Phillips Academy, Andover, Massachusetts]'s board of trustees.  I'm on the board of something called the Carnegie Endowment of International Peace.  And also had the opportunity to go on two corporate boards.  It was no way--
Speaker 2: What are the two corporate boards?
Speaker 1: The two corporate boards are Darden Restaurants which owns Red Lobster, Olive Garden, and a couple of other restaurants.  And it has an African American CEO in Clarence Otis.  And the other corporate board is Freddie Mac.  And I went on the Freddie Mac board in November of '04 [2004], ostensibly as part of the cleanup team, if you will, because they had encountered a fair number of problems prior to '04 [2004]. I could not, I could not have done all of that at Morgan Stanley.  I probably spend ten to fifteen hours a week on just the Legal Defense Fund stuff.
Speaker 2: And that's Elaine--
Speaker 1: It used to be [HM] Elaine Jones.
Speaker 2: Elaine Jones.
Speaker 1: The, the director-counselor is now a young civil rights lawyer named Ted Shaw [HM Theodore Shaw], real--very charismatic guy.
Story_ID: 105202
Speaker 1: So would you, would you--let's talk about some of the other people then that--oh, I know what I want you to do before we do that.  Is then you were recruited by Gary [Parr] and [HM] Vernon [Jordan]--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --to come to.  Had you had a relationship with Vernon prior to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had met Vernon, let's see this is 2007, I probably met Vernon in a, in a really personal way
Speaker 1: Golfing?
Speaker 2: Golfing in the early 2000s.
Speaker 1: Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: No.  Actually Ray McGuire [HM Raymond McGuire], Stan O'Neal [Earnest Stanley O'Neal]--Ray and I played golf one cold, cold October Sunday afternoon at Stan's golf club, one of Stan's golf clubs.  And that, I think that was really the first time that I had spent any quality time with Vernon.  I had seen Vernon, I had chatted with him off and on for a long period of time on Martha's Vineyard and other places.  But had never really gotten to know, know him in a very, very personal way.
Speaker 1: How far back do you and Ray go?
Speaker 2: Ray and I go back--
Speaker 1: Did he go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: He went to Harvard too.  In fact, I I, say I gotta leave--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: I mentioned I got, I'm doing a second video but this is for Ray for his, for his, for his 50th birthday a little bit later on.  I, I I've known Ray since he was a freshman at Harvard.  So I've known Ray since he was eighteen years old.
Speaker 1: Wow.  And you still, remained friends the entire time?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah remained very close ever since.
Speaker 1: What is it that the two of you can, can, talk about that you really can't talk about with other people in the sense of the, the business?  I mean do you talk about business?  Is there--I mean do you share stories with each other about what's going on within the, the--
Speaker 2: Ray, Ray and I talk about virtually everything.  And we don't talk a lot about business because except for a brief period of time when we both were at Morgan Stanley together, we've always been at competing firms.  And so, so it's, very, very tough to talk about specific situations and, and, you know, just given that sort of background.
Speaker 1: Well, can you give each other advice?
Speaker 2: We, we don't give each other advice.  We, we give each other heads-up.  If he's working on something where I've got some insights, I'll pass it on and vice versa.  We're actually doing something that has a potential to, to, to sort of involve us where we've already chatted a little bit.  But first, but, but you have to realize that it's sort of like, you know, Tony Dungy and Lovie Smith.  You're very close but there's only, you know, there's certain things--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you just can't, you can't talk about.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, you can't talk about.  So, so we don't spend a lot of time talking about the details of our business.
Story_ID: 105203
Speaker 1: Do you talk about your hopes for what you mean for other African Americans within the investment banking or like younger people coming after you?  Are you at a point now where you can look back and say this is what we publicly need to do to--
Speaker 2: We, we don't do a lot of that.  What we do, do is we hold ourselves out as informal mentors to lots and lots and lots of people.  And so people will come to see me and I'll send them to see Ray and vice versa.  And we spend a lot of time doing that.
Speaker 1: What is your advice for young people?
Speaker 2: It, it varies.  We don't, we don't have, we don't have standard advice.
Speaker 1: You don't have standard advice.
Speaker 2: But, but my sort of standard, to the extent I have a standard piece of advice, it is that this work is hard.  That you don't just sort of wake up and become a managing director at a major investment bank.
Speaker 1: And the managing director what you said is basically the editor.  Is that what you (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, no, that was the assignment associate you're talking about.
Speaker 1: That's the assignment. Simultaneous) and so the managing director--
Speaker 2: The managing director is the top, the partner.
Speaker 1: The partner.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And once you make partner, your responsibility is to--
Speaker 2: It's principally to bring in business--
Speaker 1: Bring in business.
Speaker 2: to developing business.
Speaker 1: Now how do you do that without having connections?
Speaker 2: Well, you, you know, I've been at this now for, you know, almost thirty years.  So--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you, you, you know, this, this, the CEO of Maytag was a junior guy at Whirlpool twenty years ago.
Speaker 1: So everyone grows up together?
Speaker 2: Everybody grows up together.  Everybody grows up together.  But you have, but you, you, you develop connections as well.  And all the, the old school ties stuff, the Andover [Phillips Academy, Andover, Massachusetts], the Harvard College, the Harvard Business School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], those are the--the golf clubs, I mean those, the, the extracurricular, the not-for-profits, all of those are ways to develop relationships.  People ultimately do business with people that they like.  I like to say that, that this business isn't rocket science, but it does require hard work.
Story_ID: 105204
Speaker 1: What other challenges?  You said it requires hard work.  When you look back, what has been most challenging for you within your career of investment banking?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I've been blessed.  I don't look back on my investment banking career and see anything that was particularly challenging.  I'd say that, that the phase of my career where I was absolutely required to be on the front line for developing business, that can be challenging because we're not selling soap.  You're selling your advice, you're selling your perspective, your experience, your firm's credibility and credentials.  And I'd say that that's always challenging.  To this day, that's always challenging.  When you're groveling and asking for business, you know, being told no is no fun.
Story_ID: 105205
Speaker 1: Who are the people within the business, and I mean there are tons of them, but for the sake of this oral history, I'd like to focus on the African Americans--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --that you respect, that you admire for what they've done within investment banking? Of course, [HM] Raymond [McGuire].
Speaker 2: Well, well, there are, there are a lot of people.
Speaker 1: And, and the reason I ask is also I want to feel out, I mean I kind of want to get to these people someday--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so who are some of those people?
Speaker 2: Well, well, well you have to start with [HM] Vernon [Jordan] who has had a number of careers.  And, and, but, but, but demonstrates at the end of the day, a great investment banker, at the end of the day is a great advisor and Vernon is a great advisor.  You have to, even though his business isn't investment banking per se, you have to look at Ken Chenault [Kenneth Chenault], because I do view American Express as a Wall Street financial service firm.  And they're down in the heart of the financial district.  And if you look at what Ken has accomplished, you know, he just has to be up there with the best.  Obviously, Stan O'Neal [Earnest Stanley O'Neal] has, has, has proven, has proven to be one of the best CEOs of all time on Wall Street.  There's just no question.  If you just look at sort of how he righted that ship, how he put in place strict accountability and controls and a clear vision for growth and how he has executed on that plan, you have to just really take your, your hat, your hat off, off to him.  You mention--
Speaker 1: One more, I'll just take one more.
Speaker 2: Well you mentioned, you know, Ray McGuire.  I mean I think, you know, Ray will go down as one of the best investment bankers of, of all time.
Story_ID: 105206
Speaker 1: I want to talk a little bit in closing about your family.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Because we didn't talk much about them.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: What year did you meet Carla?
Speaker 2: [HM] Carol [Sutton Lewis].
Speaker 1: Carol.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: I met Carol in, in 1985, November of '85 [1985] on a blind date.  And then we had a subsequent date in March of '86 [1986]. And we got engaged in November of '87 [1987] and we got married in May of '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: And how many children do you have?
Speaker 2: We have three.  We have a fourteen-year-old, Tyler Renee.  We have an eleven-year-old, Carter William.  And we have a seven-year-old Andrew Taylor Sutton.  I also have a thirty-two-year-old whose name is Jemina Rose Bernard who works in the, the Department of Education.  Jemina went to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and then Columbia Business School [New York City, New York].
Story_ID: 105207
Speaker 1: So when you look forward, I mean I know it's hard for you to do because you're in the present and you're in a great place in your career, but do you, do you ever think about what it is you want to do next?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No.  You know, I've had a very simple journey in terms of identifying things and ways to, to make a difference and how to add value.  I stumbled into investment banking almost thirty years ago.  And I was at Morgan Stanley for twenty-four years.  And I've been at Lazard now for almost three years.  And I came to the conclusion three years ago, that it was time for me to move on to a different platform and I had a number of, of opportunities and I thought then and I think now, that this is the best for me.  As I said earlier I split my time between banking and, and giving back.  My guess is that the next major move I make would be along the lines of giving back even more but I just don't know.  I'm, I'm particularly happy and comfortable with what I've done to date, I'm still young.
Speaker 1: Still very young.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so, so who knows?  But, but I don't give a lot of thought to it--
Story_ID: 105208
Speaker 1: All right.  A couple of more questions.  Was there a deal that ever, that you didn't get that you always wanted, that just slipped through your fingers something, you know, that--
Speaker 2: I've never lost sleep over--
Speaker 1: Perfect.
Speaker 2: --over, over a deal.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Either getting it or, or not getting it.
Speaker 1: Nice, nice.  Well when you look back over the deals, is there one that just stands out that you're most proud of having it happen?
Speaker 2: I think there are several deals that I've worked on that have been just a lot of fun.  Our defense on Union Carbide in 1985, '86 [1986] was probably one of the greatest professional experiences that I ever had.  I was, I was an associate when I got involved in that deal.  I was working with Eric Gleacher and Jim Allwin [James Allwin] but there was nobody in between.  They were two partners and I was an associate.  So that was, it was rare to have that sort of setup.  Usually you have a vice president and, and a director sort of in between you and the partner and I didn't have that.  Union Carbide had, had never fully recovered from a, just a horrible industrial accident in Bhopal, India where they killed, I don't know, 2 or 3,000 [sic, 5200] people when some, some fumes, some gases, you know, escaped into the air.  Their stock price got hammered and. and, and a number of corporate raiders came after them and they were backed by Drexel [Chemical Corporation], and we successfully defended the company.  We ended up selling off two or three big pieces but it took a couple of years to get it done.  And it was just a masterful piece of work if I must say so myself.  And it was a lot of fun. Worked on the defense of Phillips Petroleum the year before that, sort of '83 [1983], '84 [1984], where we dealt similarly with all the raiders, Carl Icahn, [Thomas] Boone Pickens [Jr.], Irwin Jacobs, Ivan Boesky, and it was, it was just a, a ton of fun.   I'd say that as I got more senior, the, the Coleman deal was certainly a very, very memorable deal for me because I believe that was really the key to me making partner at Morgan Stanley.  I was, you know, I, I developed the business by myself and then I executed the business.  And we had a very high profile client, not client, but high, high profile counterparty in Ron Perelman [Ronald Owen Perelman] on the other side and so there was a lot of attention focused from, within the firm.
Story_ID: 106523
Speaker 1: You were just speaking about the Coleman deal.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd say while I don't dwell on the deals, the Coleman deal was memorable only 'cause I developed that business--
Speaker 1: I think--
Speaker 2: --and I'd executed that business.
Speaker 1: I think I read something about investment banking you're only as good as your last deal.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's,--
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: --that's, probably true, yeah.  Yeah, that's probably true.  So that was a fun and memorable deal.
Speaker 1: So can you tell me what the last deal was that you've worked on?  Is that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  See I've, I've got a few here.  The--let's see.  We just--coming back to Whirlpool, sort of funny how the thing cycles.  After having sold Maytag to Whirlpool last year, Whirlpool then hired us to dispose of three other businesses that, that came along with Maytag, that they really didn't want.  And they were Hoover Vacuum Cleaners, Dixie-Narco which is a, a vending machine, and Amana which is a, a, a kitchen appliance brand.  And so those deals just closed in the last two or three months.  Probably the most recent thing I've done was serving as one of the underwriters for Fortress which is a big hedge fund that went public about three weeks ago.  And the managing partner's a good friend, a great relationship, we play golf together on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  And he saw fit for Lazard to, to, to be added to the, the underwriting group.
Story_ID: 106524
Speaker 1: So do you vacation any other place like, like--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we vacation everywhere.
Speaker 1: I know everywhere but I meant like a (unclear) do you go to the Hamptons?
Speaker 2: We have a weekend house on Long Island [New York], yep.
Speaker 1: And then Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] is just your favorite?
Speaker 2: We spend--yeah, Martha's Vineyard is our favorite.  We spend the month of August in Martha's Vineyard.  It's our, its where we regroup to get ready for another school year, typically.  And our kids work so hard they're exhausted and Martha's Vineyard is, is a place where we all recover.  Where we all just sort of look forward to every single day to lots of laughs, lots of fun, the beach, the golf club, the food, lots and lots, and lots of friends.  We started going up to Martha's Vineyard in the early '90s [1990s] with two or three friends and now there are probably thirty or forty families that we connect with and coordinate our vacations with.  And so it's just, it's just, it's just a wonderful, wonderful time.  And I happen to think that, that Martha's Vineyard itself is, is one of the best communities, if not, I'd say the best community I've ever been in as far as being a person of color.  It is truly the only place I've ever been in, where you don't feel conscious of being a person of color, of being a family of color.  And I've been to a lot of places, I've never had an experience like Martha's Vineyard.
Speaker 1: That's incredible.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 106525
Speaker 1: So do you, we were just--we talked about some of the people that you admired but let's talk about some of the awards, accolades you've received that have meant something.  I mean for three, well for the three times that they've done it you've been considered one of the most powerful African Americans on Wall Street.  What does that feel like?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I've enjoyed participating in that in, in that award because of the connections I make to young people.  (Laughter) when, when, when that magazine [Black Enterprise] is published, you get letters and calls from kids around the country.  And some of the letters are just ridiculous but some of the letters are very impressive and moving.  And so, so the, so the--what really comes out of that for me is just a way to continue to connect with young people of color.
Story_ID: 106526
Speaker 1: What does your mother think about what you've accomplished for yourself?
Speaker 2: My mother [Essie Taylor Lewis] and my father [William Lewis, Sr.] before he died, have just been sort of tickled pink as you might imagine.  Just a great source of pride and happiness and excitement from the get go.  And every magazine cover or article, and actually that would extend to my sister and brother as well, but every magazine cover or article has just, you know, led to just profound excitement.
Speaker 1: So you were on the cover of Ebony?
Speaker 2: No, that's a joke.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay (laughter)
Speaker 2: Linda Johnson-Rice is, is one of our best friends.  In fact, she is the godmother to our son.  And that was in connection with my thirty-fifth birthday.  She put together a fake cover.
Speaker 1: Nice.
Speaker 2: Which, which has been one of my most cherished possessions.
Story_ID: 106527
Speaker 1: So what do you think of, I mean, [HM] Carla [Harris], I had an opportunity to interview her and she felt that there was still a lot of room to improve as far as women on Wall Street is--
Speaker 2: Women of color or just women?
Speaker 1: Women, period.  And but I'm sure she--I can't and I won't say I won't remember if we were specifically talking about women of color or just women.
Speaker 2: She's right.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: She's right either way, women of color or women, she's right.  Now you look at Lazard there are no women around here and we just made the first, first two women partners, at least since I've been here, a couple of months ago.
Speaker 1: And, and, that's just because, it's because women don't golf?
Speaker 2: You know, it would not be fair for me give you sort of a simplistic response.  I think that, that women, professional women, have so many more challenges and pressures put upon them.
Speaker 1: Even in African Americans you feel or is it--
Speaker 2: Even more so than African American men.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now what I mean by, I mean every woman that would do well in this business, most women who would do well in this business have a number of other objectives as well.  They want to have families.  They want to have a balanced life.  And its, it's the reality, and I've looked at this now for so many years, the reality is that it requires a very sort of unique set of personal circumstances to be able to have it all if you are a woman.  And, and many don't have that sort of unique set of circumstances.  I mean it requires a husband who's prepared to think a certain way.  And provide, it requires kids who are prepared to think a certain way.  It requires a support network either people that you hire or people, you know, family members but it requires so much for any of us to do this, to do this job.  You know, my wife has a, a college degree from UPenn [University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and a law degree from Stanford [Law School in Stanford, California], and yet she had to walk out with our seven-year-old yesterday to help him find a turtle.  You know, I'm not walking out looking for a turtle (laughter).  And so there are certain things, that, that the mommies just do well and are expected to do and, and in many ways that's, that's, that's unfortunate.
Story_ID: 106528
Speaker 1: So we're gonna, we're going to end by talking about the, the role you play on the different boards and the not-for-profits.  And if you can just pick out a few for me and tell me why you choose that particular organization.
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I'll, I'll pick out, sure.  We'll start with Andover [Phillips Academy, Andover, Massachusetts].  I believe that I, I owe a tremendous amount of, of debt to Andover.  I, I loved the school when I was there and I continue to, to love it now.  And, and I believe that it is unique as far as prep schools go.  I really do believe that it's a private school with a public mission in so many different ways.  And, and so I devote a lot of time, energy, and money because I, I'd like to be able to perpetuate what I believe is so special about the place.  I'm the co-chairman of the Legal Defense Fund.  I think what Thurgood Marshall and others did in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] will benefit people of color forever and ever and ever.  And I still strongly believe that this country needs a public interest law firm where the clients are black people to get us to the promise and the hope that has been out there for so long.  And so I grew up, as I said earlier, with sixteen years of really massive resistance and complete stubbornness on the part of the public school administration in Richmond, Virginia, notwithstanding the good work that the Legal Defense Fund did.  And, and while the society has changed, the environment has changed, there is, there is still very much a need for the Legal Defense Fund.  And I'm in a position, I believe, to be helpful once again through my time, my energy, and my money.  And so, you know, I, I want to, to do that.  Recently I've gotten involved with several not-for-profits in order to really expand my, my brain.  So the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace which is based in D.C.
Speaker 1: And what do they do?
Speaker 2: They, they're trying to solve for world peace.  They've got a number of hot spots that they're focused on.
Speaker 1: What are the hot spots?
Speaker 2: The hot spots are Russia, China, and Lebanon, the Middle East.  And, you know, you could spend the rest of your lifetime trying to figure out how to deal with, with those, those hot spots.  But I know really nothing in a substantive way about foreign policy.  And, and I'm very excited to be in a position to learn more.
Story_ID: 106529
Speaker 1: One thing we didn't talk about was, I mean from your childhood, was church.  Did the family go to church?
Speaker 2: Oh, church was, was very big.  The family didn't go, my mother [Essie Taylor Lewis] and the kids went.  My father [William Lewis, Sr.] didn't do church.
Speaker 1: Was he--were you a Baptist, Episcopal?
Speaker 2: We were, we would have been whatever church was in the neighborhood.  My mother's attitude was you've gotta go to a church and there was church sort of right across the alley and up the block called St. Mark's Disciples of Christ.  So we grew up as Disciples of Christ because that was the church that was in the neighborhood.  My mother was a Baptist.  My father would wake up on Sunday mornings and turn on the, the spirituals on the radio and, and some minister would be preaching.  So, so from early Sunday morning through about dinnertime around 1 or 2 o'clock, the radio was on some sort of religious service, either it was gospels, spirituals, or service.  We went to Sunday school, the three kids went to Sunday school and then my mother would invariably join us for church and so we would hang around for church.  And that was our ritual every Sunday.  Every Sunday we went to Sunday school and then to church.
Speaker 1: And now is it a part of your life?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  We, we, but we have what we call, we break it up into two parts.  We have what we call home schooling for the kids.  They're required to do Sunday school every Sunday but, but we decided early on that the traditional sort of Sunday school stuff didn't work.  We would go to, we're, we're members of Riverside Church, so we'd go to Riverside and we'd take the kids and they couldn't relate to what Reverend [Dr. James] Forbes [Jr.] were doing.  And our kids never really had any interest in sort of sitting in the classes at Riverside and sort of learning the Bible stories.  So what we did, when our first kid was like two, we just, we just found, we found video tapes and Bible storybooks.  We have just reams and reams of material.  And so the first thing every Sunday morning, the kids have to agree on what they're gonna do for Sunday school.  Sometimes they decide that they're going to reenact.  So they might do, the three of them might get together and do a reenactment of Daniel in the lion's den or Joshua walking around the wall of Jericho.  I mean so, so they--it just depends on what they wanna do.  Sometimes they will just read stories, you know, all, all, you got all the Bible stories there, they'll just read the stories.  There are all these wonderful videotapes, they, the, the Veggie Tales and other sort of learning sort of tapes.  So, so the kids are required to do Sunday school every Sunday.  My wife and I, we vary our routine.  I'd say that up until this year, because Reverend Forbes has announced his resignation, up until this year we probably went to Riverside, oh, once a month or so.  What we do now is we still, I still get to tapes from Trinity United Church of Christ which was a church that I went to when I was in Chicago [Illinois] with, with [HM] Reverend Jeremiah Wright.  I've been getting those tapes ever since I left in 1991.  And, and now they're, now they're CDs.  And so what I typically do now is I'll listen to a sermon, which is one week old.  What we just started doing, in fact we did this yesterday, is watching television broadcasts.  Jeremiah Wright, Trinity now comes on television and my brother's church in Richmond comes on television and we like that pastor.  And so yesterday we watched, we watched, we watched the pastor from Richmond.  That's a long-winded way of saying, we don't do the conventional program where the five of us get up, and go to church, and listen to a sermon, and come home.
Story_ID: 106530
Speaker 1: So very last questions for this interview.  Why do you feel history, what you've shared today is important?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't particularly think it's that important.
Speaker 1: Oh, well it's important.  (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: But, but Julieanna [Richardson] certain, certainly does.  I, I hope that, that--let me back up.  When I was, when I was growing up, and I say this often to people, the difference that I experienced then and what I see today is, is a complete lack of hope.  When I walk, when I come to work I see little black boys and girls holding hands on field trips six, seven, eight years old.  And they're walking down the street right out here and they're happy and they're laughing.  And yet, I know that in New York City [New York], because that's another one of my not-for-profit things I do, I know that in New York City only about twenty percent of African American kids in this city graduate with real degrees.  You know, they get, basically what most of them get is a glorified certificate of attendance.  And, and I, and I wonder sort of what happens between the ages of seven and eight and seventeen and eighteen.  And I've concluded that so many kids have lost hope.  There's just despair.  When I was growing up in Richmond [Virginia] even though we were really, really poor, we didn't do vacations, we didn't have a car, we didn't have a television for most of my, my childhood we listened to the radio, there was always a sense of hope.  And I felt strongly that if I just did certain things that I would be just fine.  And so I, I, I never despaired as a kid.  I never lost hope.  I was always optimistic.  And somewhere along the lines that has no longer, that no longer remains this, the case.  So it's my hope that somehow, somewhere, we'll get to a period in time where lots and lots and lots of young people will conclude that in 2007 and 2010 and 2020, that there's no reason to give up on hope.  That life isn't that hard.  You just have to have a moral compass.  You have to know sort of what's right and what's wrong.  And you have to be able to make sort of good, smart decisions and work hard and be passionate.  And I feel that, that that sort of approach to life, regardless of your economic circumstances, regardless of your family circumstances, will stead you well.  It may not get you to Wall Street, but it will get you to a much better place.
Speaker 1: Well, we thank you very much.
Speaker 2: My pleasure.
Story_ID: 106531
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: So tell us what we're looking at.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You can just name the people going across.
Speaker 1: Well, this, this is, this was a golf outing with my good friend, John Utendahl, who has his own securities firm.  And this was on Bryant Gumbel's celebrity golf tournament to benefit the United Negro College Fund, I believe, yeah, I'm pretty sure it was, at Walt Disney World.  And on one day you play with a, with one celebrity so, there's John, me, and Gus Williams, that's Gus.  And then, and then I don't remember who the--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --who the other kid was.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And then, then the next day the celebrities on the far right, and that's Nick Buoniconti from the, the world famous undefeated 1972 Miami Dolphins football team.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Hold, hold that one.
Speaker 2: Are you ready?  Well, this is my family.  There's Drew, Carter, Tyler, and my wife, [HM] Carol [Sutton Lewis].  Missing from the shot is my older daughter, Jemina Rose Bernard.  But this is on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] and this is our, our favorite place in the whole wide world.  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a very special picture for me.  This was done by my son, Carter, probably when he was five or six years old.  And, and it reads my father is so funny.  And this is special to me because most people don't see the funny side of, of my personality.  They find me a little, a little intimidating, a little strict.  And it is very special to me to know that my kids think that I'm the exact opposite and are not the least bit intimidating as you can tell by this, this depiction of me.  They certainly don't think that I'm intimidating.
Speaker 2: This is a team picture of the Harvard Business School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] lacrosse team.  I'm number ten standing there on the second row in the middle.  I played, I played lacrosse at Andover [Phillips Academy, Andover, Massachusetts] and at Harvard College [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and this was the way to release a little steam when you weren't studying at Harvard Business School.
Speaker 1: This is one of my, one of my favorite and most cherished pictures.  This is a picture of, of [HM] John [H.] Johnson the founder and publisher of Johnson Publications which, which publishes Ebony and Jet and a, and a number of other magazines.  Mr. Johnson has been a hero to me, was a hero to me.  He has passed on now.  But this was at, at an awards ceremony for me when I was the outgoing chairman of A Better Chance and I was the, the guest of honor and Mr. Johnson flew in from Chicago [Illinois] to be with me for this occasion.  And I found him just to be a, a wonderful, wonderful businessman and a great counselor and a, and a great mentor.
