Story_ID: 70862
Speaker 1: Today is August 15, year 2002.  I am Adele Hodge, the interviewer for today and our camera person today is Matthew Hickey.  We are conducting an interview with the great mister Bob Love of the Chicago [Illinois] Bulls.  And we're located in the History Maker's office at 1900 South Michigan [Avenue] in Chicago [Illinois].  Mister Love, can you give us your name, spell it, your full name, spell it out, birthdate, age, and your place of birth?
Speaker 2: [Laughs] All right, my name is Robert Earl Love, I was born, I was born, December 8, 1942, and I was born in a little town called Delhi, Louisiana.  I was, I was the last person in my family to be born on a plantation; I was, I was actually born on the O'Neil plantation. If you're driving down, highway 17 west out of Delhi [Louisiana], you can still see the sign on the right side of the road, says "The O'Neill Plantation" [laughs], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and-
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm fifty-eight [58] years old, soon to be fifty-nine [59].  So--
Story_ID: 70863
Speaker 1: Okay, and now, tell me your mother's full name, spell it out, and tell me where she was born, then your father, spell it out, and tell me where, he was born; mother first.
Speaker 2: My mother is, Lula Belle Hunter, that was her maiden name, my father's name was Benjamin Love, Benjamin Love, my mother did not marry may father, my mother had me at a very early age, she was only fifteen, sixteen years old when she had me.  And my father, my father went to the, went to the [U.S.] Army when we were having World War II, I believe, and, I only saw him one time after that.  My father came home from the [U.S] Army-
Speaker 1: Okay, just-
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: I'll help you out by giving, I'll feed you the questions-
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Tell me, where was your mother born?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in, in a little town in Louisiana called Rayville. R-A-Y-
Speaker 1: Rayville, Louisiana.
Speaker 2: Is it R-A-Y-V-I-L-L-E, Rayville, is R-A-Y-V-I-L-L-E?
Speaker 1: Oh, let me spell that, R-A-Y-V-I-L-L-E.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Rayville.
Speaker 2: How far is that from New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 1: Rayville [Louisiana] is in the northern part, part of the state, it's probably, it's probably about two hundred thirty-forty miles, south.
Speaker 2: Okay, and where was your father born?
Speaker 1: My father was born, my father was born in Delhi, born in Delhi, Louisiana.  It was in the same place as I was born.
Speaker 2: And how many siblings do you have?
Speaker 1: I have, I have, I have eight brothers and, three sisters.
Speaker 2: All from the same mother?
Speaker 1: On my mother's side, on my father's side, I have four more brothers and, two sisters.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, let me see if I understand.  Your mother had eight boys and four girls?
Speaker 1: Three girls.
Speaker 2: Your mother had eight boys, and three girls?
Speaker 1: Three girls, right.
Speaker 2: Okay, and your father had, did she have those children with your father?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, and then your father had an additional, four boys?
Speaker 1: My father didn't, marry my mother, see, see, my mother married another person and then had those kids, yeah, my father had, four additional boys from two previous marriage, and two girls.
Speaker 2: Okay, how many of your siblings share the same parents?  How many of your sisters and brothers do you both have the same mom and dad?
Speaker 1: I'm the only one that doesn't have, that doesn't have the, the same, the same dad.  My mother's, my mother's kids last names are Cleveland, Cleveland.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: And all of his kids are Loves.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now you, your mother was about fifteen or sixteen when she had you and you're the baby?
Speaker 1: Fifteen or sixteen years old, yes.
Speaker 2: Are you the baby?
Speaker 1: Yes [sic, no] [laughs].
Story_ID: 70864
Speaker 1: Okay, your, do you remember anything about your grandparents?  You were telling me about your grandfather, give me his name.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, yes.  My grandmother raised me, my grandmother raised me, my mother, mother had to leave home, at sixteen or seventeen years old.  Because, because she, she didn't, she didn't like working on the plantation.  And I had worked in the cotton fields and piking, and being and, chopping cotton and all this stuff so my mother, my mother left me when I was, oh, when I was about less than a year old.  And she went up to Detroit, Michigan to work, so my grandmother, my grandmother raised me.
Speaker 1: Give me your Grandmother's name.
Speaker 2: My grandmothers name was Ella Hunter; E-L-L-A.
Speaker 1: Do you know where was she born?
Speaker 2: Yes, my grandmother was also born in Rayville, Rayville, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Did your mother visit often or you didn't see her much after?
Speaker 2: My mother came back, my mother came back when I was probably about three years old.  My mother came back from Detroit [Michigan], and by that time, by that time the war [World War II] had kind of settled down, and my stepfather, stepfather, my stepfather had came home, his name was Lee Cleveland.  And, he and my, my father were boyhood friends, were boyhood friends, and my father never came back to Delhi [Louisiana] so, Lee Cleveland came back and he married my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So when your mother came back to Detr--, back from Detroit [Michigan], that's when Lee Cleveland, that's when she became a Cleveland?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And she stayed a Hunter until then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, until my stepfather passed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 70865
Speaker 1: You are, so what do you remember the most about your [maternal] grandmother?
Speaker 2: What I remember most about my grandmother is that, I would love for my grandmother to hug me, to hug me and pat me on the head, and tell me good job.  So, I found out at an early age that every time I did something good, like if I went across the street and helped the old lady with her groceries, if I mowed a person's yard and made some money, I would always bring the money back to my grandmother.  And my grandmother would always give me a big hug, or tell me, "Good job Robert Earl, good job."  Good job, so I always liked that, and all through my childhood, I always did good things because, because I wanted my grandmother to be happy, and I wanted her to be proud of me.  You know so, I would, I would, I would I would mow the yard, I would clean the house, I would help her to do stuff, she, my grandmother never had to ask me to, to go get some water, to help her with this, go pick some greens, and then I got hey, I would always do that and, as a result my grandmother would always, would always  hug me, and give me the biggest hug, and give me the biggest kiss and that just made my day [laughs].
Speaker 1: So, give me a story that really, like, where you and your grandmother had a personal exchange, like, like maybe she's in the kitchen baking biscuits, and you'd get to talking.
Speaker 2: Well, all of my life I stuttered.  And, as a little kid, as a little kid, so big, some days I would come home from school crying, almost every day because kids, kids at school would laugh at me, and make fun of me, and talk that I couldn't do this, and I couldn't do that.  And, every afternoon about three-thirty, four o'clock, my grandmother would always meet me at the front gate that we had, we, we had a little fence around our house, you know, and she would always have a little, have a little hat on, and her apron and a big old dish rag in her hand, and stuff.  And she would, and she would be, "Robert, why you crying, what's wrong?"  I said, "Grandmother, kids at school laughed at me all day because I couldn't talk."  She was just, she would just cut me, she would just cut me the biggest hug, kiss me, she said, "Robert Earl, let me tell you something," she said, "Son, there's only one perfect person to ever walk this Earth, and it was the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. She said that everybody has a handicap, everybody has a disability, but what you got to do son," she said, "You gotta have a dream, and you got to hold onto those dreams."  And you know, I never forgot those words, and I'm, every night I would go to bed, I would dream that I was, I was, that I was Dr. Martin Luther King, I was one of the, I was one of the great speakers, and I would always be on a podium, and I would just speak to thousands of people as far as you could see, there was nothing but people, the words in my mouth just flow out like music, and I, and a lot of times I would dream that I was playing against the five greatest basketball players in the world.  Man, I could see them guarding me boy, and I would dribble between my legs, go behind my back, shoot my jump shot, dunk on 'em, and I would tell my grandmother about my dreams.  She would pat me, an she would say, "Robert Earl, one day those dreams are going to come true, just hold on to them."  You know, and I never wavered from those dreams, I always held on to them.  And my grandmother got to see me play a couple times, and the strangest thing, the strangest thing, and once you reach that level of sports and stuff, which is kind of rough, to get, guys will knock you down and they'll put you into the sand and stuff.  Every time they would knock me down, my grandmother always had a good seat there in the stadium.  We were playing the Los Angeles Lakers one time, I'll never forget this, I went in for a layup, and a  guy knocked me in the stands, and my grandmother jumped up out the stands, "Don't you knock Robert Earl down!" [Laughs], she grab that person, the ushers had to hold her back, [laughs], had to hold her back, said, "Don't you knock Robert earl down anymore," [laughter].  I will never forget that boy, I'll never forget that boy, she put her little hat back on straight, her purse, she always kept this little purse wither her.  Boy it was, [laughs] yeah, so you know.
Speaker 1: That's a true guard.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah [laughs].
Story_ID: 70866
Speaker 1: How old were you when your grandmother died? How old were you when your grandmother died?
Speaker 2: I retired, I was probably, probably thirty-four--
Speaker 1: And-
Speaker 2: But my grandmother never got to see me speak though, she, she never got to see me speak but she would always encourage me, she said, "Just keep on holding, holding on to your dreams son, she said one day you're 'gonna have to do, one day you're going to do it, one day you're going to do it, just hold onto your dreams, and don't waiver."
Speaker 1: So, when, when your grandmother died and you were thirty-four, and you had retired, she had soon before, she had seen you kept one of your dreams.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What kind of feelings were going through your mind at that time, when you lost your best friend?  I imagine your grandmother was your best friend.
Speaker 2: Well, that one was one of the most hurting days of my life, and stuff.  When she, when she died, I, I, I, during that time, I was win college, my sophomore year, in college, I won the most valuable player trophy.  And I gave it to my grandmother, it was a 1962, it was 1962, wrote on the trophy, and I came that summer and I presented it to my Grandmother; I said, "Grandmother, look what I got for you."  My grandmother, my grandmother cried, she was, she was so happy for me, and, any my grandmother she put it up on a little shelf there, there, at the foot of her bed and stuff, you know she kept that trophy, she kept that trophy, everywhere she would go she would always pack it in a little bag and she would always take it and she would always show it to everybody, and, and, and, before my grandmother died, before my grandmother died, I went into the house, then I took the trophy, and I took it up to a jeweler downtown in Bastrop [Louisiana], a little town that we were living in, and I had the jeweler to shine it up, shine it up, really, really, really, make it look good.  And that day at the church, I brought the trophy, I brought the trophy, and everybody was (unclear) you know and stuff, I brought the trophy, [chokes up] I brought the trophy there and, I laid it in her coffin.  [chokes up] The first time I talked about this, excuse me.  I laid the trophy there in her coffin there, and I gave it to her, and, and, I remember the last person came around and stuff, you know they covered her up and stuff, I laid the trophy down, and it, and, and I buried her with that trophy.  And, that was the happiest time of my life I think, then and stuff.  You know I said, my grandmother will always have my trophy with her, so-
Speaker 1: Who, how old was she when she died, how old was she when she died?  How old was your grandmother when she died?
Speaker 2: My grandmother died when she was about, about, about eighty-five I think.
Speaker 1: Oh, really.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah see my grandmother, see my grandmother was, I was really really young when she married my grandfather [William Hunter], my grandfather was like, like, thirty years older than my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so, in the household with you and your grandmother, how many of your other siblings were, lived in the same household?
Speaker 2: All right, it was fourteen, my grandmother had, had, nine boys and five girls, and I was, and I was the other person in the house.  Yeah, I was, I was, always the youngest, I was always the youngest one in the house, so I guess, everybody kind of looked after me and stuff, you know?  [Laughs]
Speaker 1: You got by on easy street, [laughs].
Speaker 2: Yep, yep, [laughs].
Story_ID: 70867
Speaker 1: What kind of relationship did you have with your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother, my mother, I always loved my mother, always loved her, my mother.  But back in those days, when a person got married, they were married, they were married for life.  My stepfather didn't like me, my stepfather didn't like me because, because his childhood buddy, was my father.  And, it was, it was always kind of a rival between those two, so, all during my childhood I only got one toy for Christmas.  One time, one time, my grandmother bought me a little rubber tractor, a little rubber tractor, rubber John Deere tractor, I would, I would grab it by the string and I would run around my grandmother's house, run around my grandmother's house, I was just make a circle around my grandmother's house.  But, my brother that was next to me, my stepfather would always buy him a lot of toys, buy him, buy him the BB gun, buy him little trucks and toys and all that, and I could tell, I could tell my mother, my mother really, really hated it and stuff, you know, but she never really said anything.  But like, maybe two, three months after Christmas, my mother would always bring me one of his toys, she would bring me a truck or something over, over, over there to my grandmother's house.  Because, I ran away from home, I ran away from my mother's home when I was eight years old.  My stepfather beat me one time with the, with the buckle of his belt, and, and, and, my back was bloody and my leg was bloody, and my elbows was bloody and stuff, and you know I broke away from him and I ran home.  I mean I ran over to my grandmother's house, and the next, the next day my stepfather came, came over there to try to get me, and my grandma, my grandmother always had an axe behind the door, you know my grandma, my grandma had the axe behind her she said, "What you want?"  He said I came to get Robert Earl, she said, she said, she said this is, she said, this is, this might be kind of bad to say, she said, "If you don't get your black ass away from me, I'm 'gonna hit you upside your head with this [laughs], stick."  She raised the stick up, he would spin, and he never came back to my grandmother's house again [laughs], and he never came back to my grandmother's house, and I never spent another night at my mom's house, never; Yep.
Speaker 1: Is your mother still living?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother, my mother is living, I talk, I talk to her often, I talked to her yesterday matter of fact, my mother, my mother, like I said my mother, my mother is like seventy-five years old, seventy-five.  Good looking woman, good looking woman, she never remarried, she never remarried, but, she's, she, she just love me, we talk often.
Story_ID: 70868
Speaker 1: You get the height from your mom, or dad's side of the family?
Speaker 2: My height came from my mom's side of the family, see my grandmother is about six feet one, about six feet one, strong woman.  Strong woman, but see, all of my, all of my, all of my mother's kids are kind of short, are kind of short and stuff, you know, and I always try to tell them the secret of growing, [laughs], I said, "Now, now, if you want to grow I said, all you gotta do, you gotta get you an orange, every day.  You gotta eat the orange and when you peel the orange, you gotta eat that little white stuff off the peel, you gotta eat that [laughs], and you'll grow tall, and you'll grow tall," and they said, "Oh you're just kidding, that's, that's, that's not going to make you grow tall," I said, "Watch me, watch me."  So, I'm eating those peels and stuff and one summer, I grew five inches once summer, [laughs],
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Five, five inches.  I came back to school and nobody knew me, no body know me, so, "who's that tall guy there?" [Laughs].  Yep, I grew five inches one summer, next summer I grew, I grew about two or three inches, and-
Speaker 1: Oh. And I was, and I was, eating an orange, eating those orange peels every, every day [Laughs]
Story_ID: 70869
Speaker 1: Maybe it worked.  Your dad, you said you never got to see your dad after you left the house.  Did you ever hear from him or anything?
Speaker 2: I know I saw him one time when I was, my grandmother said that I was about, three-four months old.  My father came back from the [U.S.] Army, and he came up to my grandmother's house, that had, that had, my grandma, my grandma had me sit on her lap she said, she said, that my father was sitting over there in the chair, and I, and my father had never given me anything, had never given me money or nothing and stuff, so, what'd he say, my grandma, my father opened up his wall, gave me his wallet, and he opened it up and said, "Now you take anything out of that wallet you want."  And, and my grandmother said I reached in his wallet and I only got one dollar out, one, one dollar.  My grandmother said, my grandmother said she wanted, she wanted to tell me, "Son, grab the whole wallet," [laughs].  And, and, and the strange thing about it, my, my father did not give me anything else, he just, my grandmother said he took the wallet and said he put it back in his pocket.
Speaker 1: Oh wow.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yeah, and, I didn't see him again until I was thirty-three years old, I had heard about, I had heard that he was the preacher that, his name was Dr. Benjamin Edward Love.  And he's preaching over in Indiana, he was, he was in Michigan, so my last year with the, with the [Chicago] Bulls, it was 1977. We played a game in Detroit [Michigan], and my Aunt Donatella (ph). she said, "Robert Earl, I found out where your dad is, your dad, your dad is up in Detroit, Michigan, and he has a church up there."  So, I just so happen, I just so happen, the next, the next, day was Sunday, we're playing a game there and, I looked in the phone book, looked in the phone book and, sure enough, Dr. Benjamin Edward Love.
Speaker 1: What church, what church in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: I don't know the name of it, I forgot the name of it, but, I got on the phone, I got on the phone, I was really, really nervous, I was stuttering really, really bad, and stuff, you know?  And, and I, I called and I, I said, "May I speak to, make I speak to Reverend Love?"  Reverend Love, one of his kids, answered the phone and stuff, he said "sure," then he got on the phone, I was so nervous I couldn't say nothin', I, I said, "Dad this is R-R-R," he said, "Bob, this you?"  He said, "Son, I'm so glad you called me," he said, he said, "All these years," he said, "I, I wanted to call, I wanted to call the Chicago Bulls and get in touch with you," he, he said, "But, but all the, all these years had passed and all the time that passed," he said, "I was actually embarrassed, I was ashamed, I was ashamed to call you.  All these years," I said, "Dad I, I, I said don't feel ashamed," I said, "I love you, I said I've always wanted to meet you all these years," and then that night we played, I got him, I got him and his wife and my three brothers and sisters, my three younger brothers and sister, I got them to the game and stuff, you know they got a chance to see me play, they came, they came to the game, and after the game, after the game we all, we all hugged, hugged out there, my father, my father said a prayer, and, and I kind of stayed in touch with him, I kind of stayed in touch, with him, with him until he passed, in the '80's [1980s].  In the late '80's [1980s], we never got really close, because, because of all the years had passed and stuff, you know, but I tried, I respected him as my father, I loved him and I never, I never, I never questioned him as to why he didn't call, or why this and why that, I didn't have time for that because, because see my, my grandmother raised me up to be a loving, a loving person.  Loving and forgiving person, she said that if you hold grudges and you hold hates, she said you waste your body away, you waste, you waste time, it doesn't do any good.  And, and, and all the bad things that have happened to me, during my life, all the tough times, I've gone through I never, I never blamed anybody, all I would do every night I would just pray about it, and stuff you know.  And I, and I kept moving, and, and every time something bad would happen, I would always, I would always wake up the next day and I would try harder, I would try harder at something new.  I would think of new ideas and stuff to do, so, and it proved, proved to be very beneficial to me in the, in the, in my life, really, so.
Story_ID: 70870
Speaker 1: When you think of growing up, in your childhood and through your teen years, what kinds of sights, sounds, and smells come to mind?
Speaker 2: [Laughs], oh boy, oh boy the, yeah the sounds, the sounds were, the sounds of trains, roaring through my little home town there in Bastrop [Louisiana].  The train whistle, we would always go in the woods, we'd always go in the woods, we could, we could tell when the blackbird would sing, the red bird, the little brown birds, we called them chi-chis (ph), the little Chi-Chi (ph) birds would whisper, and at nighttime, night time we'd hear the owls, the hoot owl, "hoot-hoot hooooo," and, and my favorite bird of the night was bobwhite, the bobwhite bird, it would live, it would live kind of in the country, and it would go [whistles] but it would sound like he was saying "Bob White," you know-
Speaker 1: [Laughs]
Speaker 2: [Whistles] All the kids, all the kids in the neighborhood, we would always, we'd always go around and say, "Man I can't wait, I can't wait until the night so I can hear the bobwhite, whistle, you know, "bob white, bob white"--[laughs].  And the smell, my little hometown of Bastrop [Louisiana], about to move to Delhi [Louisiana], we lived in Bastrop, I, I-
Speaker 1: How do you spell Bastrop, B-A-S-T-R-U-M?
Speaker 2: B-A-S-T-R-O-P, Bastrop.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: B-A-S-T-R-O-P.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, got it.
Speaker 2: Bastrop [Louisiana], now Bastrop, was the headquarters, and we had a big paper mill, there and stuff.  And, and in northern Louisiana they would always, they would chop down a lot of, pine trees and stuff, and then load them on these big ole, big ole trucks and they would roar through the town, all the time.  I remember, and later in the afternoon, later in the afternoon they would let all, all of the residue fall from the pine trees and stuff.  The made paper, they made milk cartons, the made pretzels, they made, they made everything at this big paper mill.  And they had to let the residue, out of, out of the mill, there, every afternoon at four o'clock, and this big ole ditch, ran all the way from the paper mill, all the way to the black neighborhood and it ran down to I guess, you know a big lake, Bayou.  And you talk about, the, the smell, it smell like rotton eggs, every day, [laughs], every day, every afternoon, every afternoon boy that water would come through that big ole ditch, they be callin it the the pup ditch (ph).  You know, because, because of the residue from the wood, man, and it would stink, it would stink for about, four hours, and then the smell would finally, finally go away.  But, we kind of got used to it, we kind of got used to it, and I, every Saturday, every Saturday, I was a little boy, maybe twelve years old, ever Saturday afternoon, I guess around five o'clock, the Ku Klux Klans would always come in the--
Story_ID: 71694
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, as a young kid about twelve years old, I guess and stuff, you know the Ku Klux Klan, the Klansmen would come through our neighborhood every Saturday about five o'clock, I guess and they had this cross, these guys, they would jump out of this car with these hoods on they head and stuff and they would jump out of the this car, they would stick this cross in the ground and then light it, then they'd, take off.  They would take off, and then, and about five minutes later here come the police, here come the police, with the sirens, and they sprinkle the cross out and stuff.  One afternoon, one afternoon a bunch of, a bunch of friends and myself and we got together, we said, we said, we said, "Next time they come now, all of us, we 'gonna, we 'gonna hide in the bushes here, hide in the bushes here with these rocks, and we gone through these rocks, we gone throw these rocks at them."  Man, they came through that afternoon they jumped out the car and they lifted they, man, and all the young kids in the neighborhood, we jumped out the, we jumped out from behind the bushes and we started throwing rocks, and sticks, and stone man, and they got back in that car and they shot off, [laughs] they shot off, and you know what, I, after that incident I don't think they came in our neighborhood anymore [laughs], I don't think they did [laughs], yeah but that was fun though, it was fun to do those things,
Story_ID: 71695
Speaker 1: Yeah, yes sir.  So, now tell me the elementary school and high school you went to and tell me about your school years, who were your favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: My elementary school, it was called Morehouse Parish Elementary School [Bastrop, Louisiana], I remember my first grade teacher, my first grade teacher, her name was Mrs., Mrs. Moore, and I was the only kid in the class that stuttered.  And, and, and my teacher, my teacher, my teacher found out this was, found out I stuttered and stuff so she would always kind of, she, she, would always kind of make me her pet, she always kind of made me her pet kid and stuff like that, so, she wouldn't embarrass me in the class or nothing like that and stuff, you know but all my class mates, all my class mates really, really liked me and stuff, you know all of us were buddy buddy's and stuff, you know but kids, kids are small kids, they could, they could really be mean to you sometimes and stuff, you know they laugh at you, or they imitated me all the time and stuff you know, with all that stuff and you know and all of us, all of us would make a, make a big joke out of it, but it really, really hurt me inside a lot of the time, a lot of time, like I told you, I would, I would go home almost every day crying and stuff, because, because the kids really made fun of me and stuff but, but, all of us were friends, they liked me and stuff, you know, and so, so I'm, I got over that and stuff, and all of my, all of my, all of my teachers, all of my teachers, in elementary school really, really liked me and stuff, and you know, I, and I was always smart, but I couldn't talk, and stuff, so you know, so, I really found out that at an early age I wasn't the most, one of the most devastating that could happen to a person is the inability to, to express themselves, or to communicate, you could be in a, wheel, wheelchair, you can have anything else wrong, or wrong with you, but if you can't talk, people think that you're not smart, that you're dumb and stuff, you know but that part, never really, never really, never really bothered me because, on all of my exams that I had to write, I would always make, I would always make some of the highest scores in class, and I  could always spell, I was a spelling bee champion of my class, of my class.  But I couldn't talk, so, so, I went out for football-
Speaker 1: In high-
Speaker 2: In the ball of persistence on the team, I went out for quarterback, I went out for quarterback, the guy that, the guy that had that had to do the taking, the dude that had to call the plays and stuff, and, and, and, I found out what's that once I got on that football field, hey, my entire thinking of my image changed, I was no longer "Bob Love the stutterer," I was, I was "Bob Love the quarterback," I was Bob Love the quarterback.  Hey and I, hey I love, I love the football, I never got called for too much time in the huddle [laughs], we won, two state championships, and I was the starting quarterback for three years for my high school team.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And it's all because I would, I would, I would always dream about doing those things, and stuff you know my, my entire image changed once I got on the sports field, I was, I as no longer a stutterer, you know I was, hey, I was the greatest athlete out there [laughs].
Speaker 1: What was your high school, the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: The name of my high school was Morehouse [Parish] High School [Bastrop, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Morehouse Parish.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: High School.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you stayed in elementary
Speaker 2: Parish.
Speaker 1: And high school the same school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean you just went through, okay.
Story_ID: 71696
Speaker 1: So you were so good in football, what happened you didn't stay with that, when did you start that dribbling and practicing with the coat hanger?
Speaker 2: I, well down South and the summer time, summer time we played baseball, and basketball.  In the winter time, the winter time, in the fall time it was always football and something else and stuff so, all of us would always play sports.  I could play, I could play everything, I ran track, I high jumped, I, I ran the mile, I-
Speaker 1: All American?
Speaker 2: My last year, my last year in high school I got, I got really, really good in all the sports, really, I, really, really good in all the sports so, my high school basketball team, my high school football team, we won the championship that year we won the state championship that year [1961], my, my, my high school basketball team which I was, I was, I was the star on, we went to the state, we went to the state championship but we didn't win it.  We did not, another team won it, but I was really, really good, but all of the black college back in that time, all the black players were not allowed to go to the, the white schools and stuff you know if, back in the early '60's [1960s], 1961 was when I was when I got out of high school, so, I got a scholarship to Southern University, down in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].   I got down there in the summer, I went there on a football scholarship to Southern [University, Louisiana], and I got there, and all the players were there and stuff, and I was, six feet eight,, and I weighed about one hundred eighty-eight pounds so, I thought I was tall, you know I thought I was tall, I thought I was good at sports.  I walked out there and I saw these big ole guys, who were six feet nine, six eight, three hundred fifty pounds, two hundred eighty pounds, and, and I looked at these guys and I said, "Man, I don't want these guys to fall on me" [laughs].  And so, so, I went to the basketball courts, courts, and I was really, really stuttering, I was nervous, I was nervous, and I went to the athletic director, and I said, "Can y'all please, let me play basketball?  I said, I said I changed my mind about football, I don't want to play football, those guys are too big, too big," and they let me go out, they let me go out for basketball, oh man, the greatest thing in the world.  Greatest day in the world, I went into the gym this one afternoon, and they had all, all of the players there from there, from the team, from the previous year and stuff, you know and they were hot shots man, they were juniors and seniors, and I came out there, I was the little freshmen, and they thought I couldn't play man, I got out there and man, I started hitting that jump shot man, man I was driving, driving around these guys, I was ducking over these guys, man they said where this guy from, I ain't never heard of this guy.  It just so happens, the, the head coach is up in the stands, and boy if they could, or they could not believe a freshmen could play that good and stuff, you know so, so, the first game, the first game, I didn't start, I didn't start, but they got me into the game, they got me into the game, like in the second quarter or something, they got me in the game and I'll never forget that.  I scored, twelve points, oh man, that was the greatest feeling in the world for me, scoring twelve points.  Man, the next game, the next game the coach, the coach didn't start me again, and, but I got in, in the first quarter this time, went on, I about, about, I got about, I got about eighteen or nineteen points.  And you just see these guys were knocking me down, and they were trying to make scared, you know they just trying to scare me, you know bully me, bully me, but every time they would knock me down I would get the ball and I would go right back in there and stuff, you know, I was, shooting the ball all over my head, I was, ducking, I was shooting my jump shot, and the third game, my, my freshmen year at Southern [University, Louisiana], I started, the third game, the third game, and I started all four years from then on.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: I, I, I made All American my sophomore, my junior, my senior year, I was the first black player, to make the All South team.  Now, this includes all of the white colleges and everything and stuff, you know I was, I was the only player to make the first team, the first team and stuff, you know and, but I couldn't talk, I still couldn't talk.  1964, I tried out for the United States Olympic Team, and I was one of the last players cut, yep, yeah so, so.
Speaker 1: So, when you were-
Speaker 2: And that really made me feel good, you know.
Story_ID: 71697
Speaker 1: How old were you when you were practicing with the coat hanger, when did you get that idea?
Speaker 2: Oh I got that idea as a little kid, as a little kid, I was always good at sports, you know as a little kid, growing up, growing up-
Speaker 1: What about ten, or something?
Speaker 2: I would, I would always have these dreams and stuff, and, and my grandmother never had any money to buy me a real basketball, or real basketball clothes, so I, I always had a great imagination, I went into my grandmothers closet one day and I stole this coat hanger out and I, got it, and I stretched it and made it like a little basketball, and I got a staple, and I nailed it on the side of my grandmother's house, that, and my grandfather had a lot of old, a lot of old, smelly socks laying around the house, then I picked up one, I picked up one that had a little hole in it, in it and stuff, and I got it, I got, got some grass and paper and stuff, and I stuffed it, and I made it pretty big, I tied it up, and, and I made it look like a basketball, and stuff.  And I couldn't dribble it, but I would pretend that I was dribbling it man, let's pretend all guys were going out on me, Wilt Chamberlain, Oscar Robertson, Eldridge [Recasner], and all those guys, guys that would be guarding me, boy I would get that ball, man I would take the ball over they, over they head, I would go, and I would go and slam dunk on em, I would slam dunk.
Speaker 1: Were you about ten years old, then, ten, eleven when you started?
Speaker 2: I was somewhere, yeah I was about nine or ten years old, something like that, eleven years old, something like that, and, and I would have that dream, I would have those dreams, and, and I would go out there and I would pretend, and I would get so engrossed in, playing against these guys that almost it seemed like I could hear people in the stand, cheering and, hollerin' and stuff, and, and, and, one of my greatest things was that, was that the game was tied, the game is tied, but I got the ball and I'm at the free throw line, I'm at the free throw line, I got to make this shot, I only got one shot, one shot, one shot, I could win, I could win a game, I could be the hero.  And I get my little (unclear), of course, you know I would always make the shot, you know [laughs], you know and I would always get the ball, three seconds, three seconds left on the clock, I'd have the ball, and man Wilt Chamberlain was guarding me, man I get the ball, I drive around, go up there 'comin out the side, (unclear), fake like I'm driving up from a follow up shot, oh, some of the greatest times of my life.  Young kids now don't, they don't have the imagination that we had, and stuff, we didn't have the T.V., we didn't have the video games and stuff, but, but we had a little radio.  I would listen to the, to the little sounds, and the announcer would say, "Wilt Chamberlain has the ball", and then the sound would fade out.  Then on the radio and then, "Wilt Chamberlain scores!"  But see I could imagine, what he did to those guys and stuff, it was, it was such fun.
Speaker 1: Oh great.
Speaker 2: It was so much fun, [laughs].
Story_ID: 71698
Speaker 1: What was social life like, for you in high school?
Speaker 2: Wow, well I only had one girlfriend, and that was in the fifth grade.  A young lady, her name, her name was, her name was Jenny Mae Taylor, she was, she was the blackest, prettiest little girl I had ever seen in my life, and I loved Jenny Mae.  But I couldn't talk, see I could talk, I stuttered, and, about a year and a half later, about a year and a half later one of the upper classmen, already had the eye for her I guess, you know.  She was kind of mature, I was kind of, kind of mature, and the seventh grade I think I think that Jenny Mae dropped out of school because one of the, one of the upper classmen got her pregnant or something like that and stuff, you know.  And, and it broke my heart, because I loved Jenny Mae, Jenny Mae, I mean Jenny Mae was my friend too and stuff, and she, she would always try to talk to me and stuff, but I, I couldn't talk, I couldn't talk, I stuttered so bad and stuff.
Speaker 1: So, did you date a lot in high school and college?
Speaker 2: Did, did I date?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't date in high school, I didn't date anybody in high school at all, [laughs], at, at all, all of my friends would go out on these dates and stuff, and they would take the girls to the movie, I would either go to the movie with a bunch of guys, with a bunch of guys, and I would go by myself.  And, and I'd spent most of my time, most of my time, on the basketball courts, football field, baseball field.  Practicing athletics, running, jumping, and doing all this stuff, while my other friends were, while my other friends were already dating, and,--
Speaker 1: Did you do better--
Speaker 2: I wanted to date too but I never really thought anything about it, definitely, definitely because, my main goal, goal was, to make my grandmother proud of me, I wanted to, I wanted to go to college, I wanted to, I wanted to go to college and get my education, because, I didn't want to have to stay in my grandmother's house.  It was, thirteen other kids there and stuff, you know and, and, and in that house, you know there was only three beds.  And I had to sleep on the floor a lot of times, on a pallet, and after I got to be a senior I said, I said "Lord if I ever get outta here," I said "I never, I never come, [laughs] I never do this again."  Never come this way again, and the Lord blessed me, the Lord blessed me to get a scholarship to college, and succeed and after that I, I only came home, I think I came home twice.
Story_ID: 71699
Speaker 1: All during the summer time, like all of the other, the rest of the time, I was at college, I was at Southern [University, Louisiana], I had my own little room there, could go and I could take my own shower, and stuff, you know, you know it was just like home to me.  And, and, and I loved college, I loved that atmosphere. Who was your greatest influencer, while you were in college?
Speaker 2: Who is my?
Speaker 1: Who influenced you most, in your college years?
Speaker 2: Well, the other people that really influenced me most, were my coaches.  Were my coaches of my high school football coach, my high school basketball coach, my college basketball coaches.  Those, those, those guys were the guys that I wanted to be like, I, I, even though I would dream, I would dream about Wilt Chamberlain and all those guys, I never really considered them my role models.  I wanted to be like my coaches, I wanted to be like my coaches, I wanted to be, I wanted to finish college and get my education, and I wanted to be somebody.  I, I never had any idea that I would get enough, to, to play in the pros, but I knew I was good.  I knew I was good, I went to the Olympic trial, trial camp, but it had guys from, from all the major colleges in the country:  U.C.L.A [University of California Los Angeles], and [University of] Kansas and stuff, and, and in the in the newspaper would always say, it would say this guy is a great, is a great plyer, I did this, but, we would, we would, we would get in the locker room and I looked at him, I said wow these guys are putting on their gym shoes the same way I put on mines.  They're slipping in their shorts, they're putting on their shirts, and I would get out there and I would find out hey, I could drive around there and I could shoot my jump shot just like they did.  Oh man, and I would get out there and I would tear 'em up [laughs],
Story_ID: 71700
Speaker 1: How did it feel when you got your first, professional, offer?
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: 1965, 1965, they had the NBA [National Basketball Association].  I had to get letters from New York, from the New York Knicks, the Baltimore Bullets, the [Los Angeles] Lakers, I had gotten letters from all over, from all over and stuff.  But I, but back in those days, there was only eight teams in the entire league, eight, eight teams, and there was just as many players getting out, but every team would have like, forty-five, forty-five rounds, to draft guys, or fifty rounds, to draft, to draft guys, and then they would bring in other guys, they would bring in free agents.  So, the day of the draft, the day of the draft, all these teams that was drafting they had the number one draft choice that came from a major school, we were number two, and, and, and then finally the Cincinnati Royals, oh but it came up in the fourth round, the Cincinnati Royals, they said, "We select Robert Earl Love, six eight forward from Southern University [Louisiana]."  I couldn't believe it, I was the fourth round draft choice, fourth round draft choice, and, and, and in that time it was, it was only one black, there was only two black players, from small colleges, and one guy was Willis Reed, from Grambling [State University, Louisiana] college, and another one from Tennessee, say, Dick Barnett, but the rest of 'em were from major colleges, I was drafted in the fourth round.  I could not believe it, man, and I heard that I had slipped on my gym shoes and tied 'em up, and put on my shorts, man, I went out to the football stadium, boy I start running up the stairs, you know, I wanted to, oh my, then I went to the gym, I start shooting.  Man, I said, "Hey, I'm 'gonna make this team, I'm 'gonna make this team," I made that team, made that team, and, and, and I played with the Royal for, I played for the Cincinnati Royals for two years, for two years, and, and hey traded me, they traded me.
Story_ID: 71701
Speaker 1: Tell me, what was your feeling about the period, when you initially became a pro.  What was it like to be practicing, being on the road, the relationship between you and your other team members?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, oh, well of course I had never been to the big city in my life, you know I was a country boy for Louisiana and stuff, we would, we would, play nobody but the black colleges from these little Mississippi towns, and Louisiana small towns, and I had never been to Chicago [Illinois], I had never, I had never been to New York in my life, boy.  Oh boy, but I had always had, always, always had dreamed about going there and stuff, but I always got to, I got to be, I got to be roommates, and I got to be really good friends, friends, and on these guys,  I would, I would dream about playing against, Oscar Robertson, Oscar, man he said he, he said, he said, " 'Bayou Beans', but I never I never had a roommate before," but he said, "I want you to be my roommate," he said, "I'm going to show you the ropes."  That made me feel like a million dollars, Oscar Robertson wanted me to be his roommate?  Man, I could not believe it, I could not believe it, I was walking on a cloud, man, oh, oh the greatest feeling in the world.  So, so, all the guys, all the guys on the team found out I stuttered, I stuttered you know, oh man, they made fun, but it was always jokes, it was always jokes and stuff.  You know, they would imitate how I would talk, so then everybody would laugh and stuff you know, so I, so I became friends with, with all the guys and stuff.  So, our first road trip, we went to, we went to New York, oh man, and I had always heard about Manhattan [New York].  Manhattan New York, I said, I said, I said, "Oscar man, when we get to New York, man," I said, "I want to go to Manhattan."  So, the stewardess was 'comin around, coming around, giving everyone drinks, drink, they was taking your order, what you want, what you want and see, I had never had, I had never had a sophisticated drink.  We had some beer, Foster, Bud, Budweiser stuff, like they would, Oscar was from the city, and, the guy said, "Give me, give me Crown [Royal] and Coke," Jerry Lucas would order, would order, "Give me Bourbon and water," (unclear) and rum, and all the guys would, then the lady got to me, and all the players wanted to see what I was going to order, so I, I really didn't know what to order.
Speaker 1: [Laughs].
Speaker 2: I said, I said, I said, "Miss would give me a Manhattan with water?"  And when I said that, everybody just bust out, bust out, bust out laughing, see you're supposed to have it on the rocks [laughs], but you see I wanted to be like them, I wanted to have something too, and I said, "Manhattan with water," [laughter].  And, and they still tease me about that, forty years later, they still tease me about that same incident, they said, "Buddy you ordered that Manhattan with water."  Said, we're, we're, "We will never forget that incident," oh boy that made my day though.
Speaker 1: What kind of-
Speaker 2: When we flew into New York, I was looking out of the plane, looking down at the Empire State Building, I had only seen pictures of it.  The greatest feeling in the world, Oscar [Robertson] said, Oscar said, "Now 'Butter' you stay with me at night, you stay with me, I'm 'gonna show you the ropes."  We got to New York, we got to New York, then all these guys knew Oscar Robertson, you know he was, famous man, he was famous boy, he would, he would get there, man, he would, he took me to the restaurant, he would buy me steaks, and stuff, like that, and every night, after the game, Oscar say, "Come on lets go and relax, and we'd get a little pint of Old Crow [Bourbon], Old Crow, and a coke [laughs], Old Crow and a coke boy," and we'd get ice, we'd get a ice bin, he get us a glass and pour us an Old Crow, and then he'd get us this Coke, and I would always have a beer, I would always have beer, or pop or something like that and stuff, I was, I wasn't.  We would go over the games, now this guy was so smart he could tell you how to play every guy on the league, what they did, what they liked to do, they wouldn't even tell you how to score on them and stuff, you know, we would just talk, oh man, we'd stay up until the wee hours of the morning, and sit down talking about, basketball.  And you know what, Oscar [Robertson] and I are still friends, the greatest player that I've seen.
Speaker 1: What is Oscar [Robertson] doing today?
Speaker 2: Oscar Robertson has his own, has his own, construction company up there in Cincinnati [Ohio], and he does a lot of other stuff there in the community and stuff.  He is doing very well.
Story_ID: 71702
Speaker 1: Very good.  What kind of challenges did you run into initially, when you, as a new, as a newcomer to the world of professional basketball?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I found out that, that you had to, you had to be able to communicate and stuff, you know if you wanted to, if you were a good player, and you wanted to make the All-star team, you wanted to get endorsements, you had to, you had to be able to talk and stuff, you know and I ran into all kind, all kind of obstacles, because I couldn't talk, and all the sports writers knew it and stuff, they would very seldom interview me after the games because, they didn't have time to wait, wait on an answer from me and stuff, and, and I basically understood that because, because it took a lot of pressure off me a lot of times too.  But, we had to, we had to take care of our bodies, we had to, we had to stay in shape all year round, and they didn't have programs, like they have now for the players and stuff, once the basketball season was over, you had to go out, you had to go out and do a job, you have, you had to go out and find a job, and you had to work, and because I had a speech problem, the team never really cared and stuff you know, all they really wanted you to do was be ready for the next season and stuff, you know and I never knew that that a bunch of guys were coming in the next year and, I had to be ready for the next season.  So, I never really got into therapy, I may had gone into therapy one  time, and, and the person embarrassed me so, I didn't want to go out on the street and meet a total stranger, and the next day go out and talk to him.  Can you imagine a big ole guy like me, six feet eight, I meet you, and I meet you stuttering, pushing and stuff, it would scare you to death [laughs].  And, I would always quit, I would, I would always quit because they never, they gave me any techniques on how to control my blocks, and whatever and stuff, you know they never told me anything like that.
Story_ID: 71703
Speaker 1: What was the value of your first contract?
Speaker 2: The value of my first contract, 1965, I signed a contract for eight thousand dollars [$8,000].
Speaker 1: Really.
Speaker 2: I had never dreamed I would make eight thousand dollars in a year, eight thousand dollars, and they gave me a two hundred dollar bonus. I went into the general, general manager's office after, after the draft, I was, I was voted the top rookie, I was working the camp you know I, I played all the guys from the major schools and everything and stuff, you know, the newspapers voted me the top player.  The general manager called me into his office, he said, "Bob, Bob you're a good player son, and we really, really want you on this team."  He said, "I got three stacks of money here," there about a stack about this big, and there was another stack about that big, and he said, now if you sign this contract here, I'm going to give you one of these stacks of money, man I looked at that money and I said, "I never, man I never, man I never seen that much money in my life."  You know, so I signed the contract, eight thousand dollars, man I was so happy, I didn't know what to do.   And then, and then he gave me the small stack, but, but it was kind of big though, it was kind of big to be, man I looked at it, I didn't need to count it, I put that money in my pocket, and I had so many ones and fives, man my pocket had (unclear).
Speaker 1: [Laughs].
Speaker 2: Man, I got outside there and I counted it up, and there was ones and fives and tens, two hundred dollars, oh Jesus.  I ain't never had two hundred dollars in my life, never had it at one time in my life, I ain't never had two hundred dollars in my life.  I went back to school, and all my buddies met me at the airport, man they flew me back.  Man, they met me at the airport, and we drank beer for two weeks on that two hundred dollars [laughs], pitchers of beer, me and my buddies, we were loaded up, that was--
Story_ID: 71704
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your transition from--
Speaker 2: Off the court, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, off the court.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, from fifteen-
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What, what was it like when you came to the end of your, tenure with the-
Speaker 2: Well of course, if your play sports all of your life and stuff, this is, this is, this is your life, it's like, like being a school teacher, if you're a school teacher all your life, you know, you a school teacher and it's difficult, a lot times, how to make a transition.  But, I had a degree in food and nutrition [Southern University, Louisiana], and I was under the impression that if I had a degree I wasn't, I wasn't gonna have any problems, problems getting job.  But once I retired in 1977, I, I was, I was in for the shock of my life.  I, I could always get into see the, see the personnel director or the president of the company, or the general manager, because, because, because everybody remembered me playin' and stuff, you know.  I would go in there, I would go in there, they would, "Bob Love, how you doin, man, Chicago Bulls, man I remember when you scored forty points against this team, you scored thirty against New York, and you were a great player."  And then, I was still trying to sell myself you know, to get those jobs, I would stutter and stutter and the person interviewing me would always try to help me push out the words, Bob, Bob--  Then they would say, "Hold on a minute, I got a call here, hold on I have to walk outside," and stuff you know, and I could tell that it was excruciating for them because, because it was, it was, really, really, hard for me.  And, and they would come back in the room, and said, "Bob, it was really, really, nice meeting you, meeting you man, said, you were one of my, you were one of my, heroes, but, I'll call you.  Don't call me," and I, and I never heard from these people, I, and I just, I went maybe three years without a job, without a job, because I, I would always work, I would always work some dead end job, so, I had to do, had to do a little construction, and stuff you know, and I would, I would work at a night club sometimes, and stuff you know just to, dead end jobs.  It was, it was, actually nothing, it wasn't really paying nothing.
Story_ID: 71705
Speaker 1: Okay, let's come back to that period, let's follow you from when you left your first team, and went to the [Chicago] Bulls.  Was, was that the time it was difficult?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Nordstrom's?  That era?
Speaker 1: What was the name of the first team you were with?  The first team, Cincinnati.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, when you went from the [Cincinnati] Royals, to the [Chicago] Bulls, is it after you left the [Cincinnati] Royals that it was hard to get the job?
Speaker 2: It was, it was after I left the [Chicago] Bulls.
Speaker 1: Okay, what happened when you left the [Cincinnati] Royals?
Speaker 2: The [Cincinnati] Royals, the Royals I was traded to the, the Milwaukee Bucks, in the end, in 1968, exhibition draft.
Speaker 1: What does it feel like to be traded?
Speaker 2: It was kind of, it was kind of a down feeling, but I was a young guy then and I was, I was only twenty-two, twenty-three [sic, twenty-six] years old and stuff, you know so it really didn't matter, I really didn't have any roots anywhere.  But, but I was traded to the Milwaukee Bucks there, and I lead the bucks, I lead them in scoring in during exhibition season.  I, I average about nineteen points a game, but two days before the NBA season started, I got a call from the general manager of the team, he said, "Bob Love son, we, we are gonna have to cut you Bob."  I said, "Cut me, hey, I just lead the team in scoring," he said, "Bob, he said that, that, that doesn't matter son."  He said, "I'm sorry, he said, number one, you can't talk, you're a stutterer; and you'll never be any use to the Milwaukee Bucks."  It really really hurt my feelings, I said, "Sir can you please try to trade me to someone, I know I can play."  He said, "Well Bob, there may be this one team that might take you", he said, "I'm going to call the Chicago Bulls in the morning" [laughs].  Well one day, one day later I was traded to the [Chicago] Bulls, and, and my life has never been the same again, because, I came here and I'm the guy that set all of the records, for the team.
Speaker 1: What was it like for you when you got to the, to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: It was a greatest feeling in the world, I had, I had always wanted to come here, and I always wanted to live here and stuff. Here in Chicago [Illinois] and stuff, because you know, like, it was such a good, good, big city, and a lot of people I went to college with were here, were here, I was just, it was just a good city, and it was in the winter time man, snow on the ground, it was, it was greatest feeling, I love Chicago [Illinois].  Because there was always something to do, always places, to go, to go and I played with the team, with the team as you know, as you, I set all the records, records, and only one, only one person, has ever broken my records, and that's Michael, Michael Jordan.
Story_ID: 71706
Speaker 1: So...
Speaker 2: Talk about the, what you were experiencing inside, in that period when you were setting all the records, and like burning up the court.
Speaker 1: During the time I was here?
Speaker 2: During the time with the [Chicago] Bulls, right.
Speaker 1: Well, well I came here in 1968, '69 [1969], season, I found out later on that, that, the the [Chicago] Bulls, didn't actually want me.  They wanted this other little left handed guy from Penn State [University, Pennsylvania], he was from a major college, they really, really wanted him, like, even though I wanted, I was a far more better player than him, and stuff.  You know, I was from a small college, but I just got here, I just got here and I got a break, I got a break to play, I got a break to play and stuff, you know and I, and I became so good, you know until they had, until they had no other choice but to keep me, but to keep me.  They tried to trade me a couple, a couple of times, you know but they couldn't, then all of a sudden then I got good, and they didn't want to trade me, [laughs].  Then I, I was okay, but that was okay, that is, that is all part of life and stuff, you know, and I accept that; but a lot of embarrassing moments.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can you hold...
Story_ID: 71707
Speaker 1: Okay, you can continue now.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: So you played eight seasons, here?
Speaker 2: Yeah about, about eight and a half years here, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and top score
Speaker 2: For seven straight years, for seven straight years, I lead the team in scoring, I was the first [Chicago] Bulls player to score over two thousand points, in a, in a single season.  Outside of Michael Jordan, I had the highest score and average, but after all the games, after all the games, we would go downstairs and stuff, and reporters would see me sitting at my locker, they would, they would walk over to me, pat me on the back, rub me on the head, shake my hand, and would always tell me, "Bob man, you played a fantastic game, great game, great game Robert, but, we kind of got a deadline here, we kind of have a deadline here, we don't, we don't really have time to interview you and stuff, you know and stuff," so, but I didn't really, I didn't really mind that, even though it kind of hurt at times, and stuff you know, and I understood, I understood because it took a lot of pressure off of me too.
Story_ID: 71708
Speaker 1: You, you say you sought therapy before, but you didn't have a good person.  You never tried to get another person?
Speaker 2: No I didn't, no I didn't, it was, I was in a situation where, where I, I had a degree, I had a degree, and I never thought I, I never thought that by speech, my speech problem, would interfere with me, getting a job, but, once I retired like I said, I was, I was, in for a rude awakening.  The ability to, enunciate, pronunciation, the English language is one of the greatest assets a person can have, and if you wanna, you wanna get any, anywhere in life, you must be able to, you must be able to speak, and, and it never really crossed my mind, during those times and stuff, you know, I just, I guess I took it for granted. And I was, I was always trying to, I was always trying to prepare for the next season.  I had to work it all season, I had to take care of my family, and after I got off of work off these jobs, I would always stop, get off the bus and get on the basketball court, and stuff, it just seemed like I never, like I never really had the time to really, to really do it, to really do it.  And the players union at that time, wasn't as strong, as it is now, and the players wasn't making this kind of money, see these guys, guys, guys now, if you making any kind of salary, now and stuff, you never have to work again.  So, it was, it was a different time, a different era.
Story_ID: 71709
Speaker 1: At what point in your career did you marry, and who, who was your wife, and, tell me about that car accident you had.
Speaker 2: [Leans forward].
Speaker 1: At what point did you marry, and you had a car accident?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, oh, my first-
Speaker 1: That was before you came to the [Chicago] Bulls right?
Speaker 2: MY first wife, I married her in college, we had, we had five kids, and, they were here, they were here, with me, all the time I was with the [Chicago] Bulls, but once I retired, we, we ran into marital problems and we got a divorce.  And in 1983, I had to have, I had to have a back operation on my back, because all the years I played, and stuff, my disks had slipped, and, and I had met another younger lady there, and I married her.  But, once I got my divorce, I mean, once I, once I had my back operation, the doctors told me I would never walk right again; I would always have to walk, with a cane and a crutch, the rest of my life.  And once, and once my, once my wife found out about that and stuff, you know, she kind of, she kind of moved to the other side, and once I got out of the hospital one day to the apartment, there and stuff, and I found a note on the floor.  Basically said that she didn't want to be married to a guy, a guy that couldn't talk, you know, and she definitely didn't want to be married to a guy that was going to be crippled the rest of his life.  And I tell you, and I tell you it was one of the most hurtin feelings, that I had, that I had ever had in my life, I got scared, I didn't know what to do, I didn't have any money, nothing.  But-
Story_ID: 71710
Speaker 1: You were still in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, I had moved up to Seattle, Washington, during that time, during that time after I had gotten my divorce.
Speaker 1: What made you move to Seattle [Washington]?
Speaker 2: Well, I played there for three months, I played there for three months, and I then I retired because, because, because my back got bad, my back got started, my back had gotten really, really bad, and, but that night after I got home, I, and I found this note on the floor, it said, it said that she didn't want to be married to a guy who couldn't talk, and she definitely, definitely  didn't want to be married to a, to a, a guy, a guy that was going to be crippled the rest of his life.  Like I said, I got scared, all kind of thoughts are running through my mind, because I didn't have any money, didn't have no way, no way to make a living, or nothing, or nothing, and stuff.  But what I did, I went into my bedroom that night, at night, and once again, as I, as I've done all of my life, I got on my knees and asked the lord to give me strength to give me courage to go on.  And the next morning I woke up, I just put my cane in the corner, and put my crutch over by the door, then I walked outside, I walked outside, then I started walking, I was limping, I was limping but I walked about a mile that day and stuff, and came back, you know.  The next day I did the same thing-
Story_ID: 71711
Speaker 1: --And after about a month, I began to get really, really, really strong and stuff, you know I was praying every night, and, and I was motivated to do something, to do something better, better, and stuff. And after about a month I walked downtown, I went to a company called Nordstrom's [Nordstrom Restaurants] up in Seattle, Washington.  And I asked for a job, and sure enough they said, "We'll give you a job son, but you got to start off at the bottom."  And starting off at the bottom for me, believe it or not, despite having a college education, having accomplished everything in the world of sports, that could be accomplished, I was all American All Star, All pro, all world, I had done it all, but I couldn't talk.  I had to start off washing dishes, and bussing tables, for four dollars and forty five cents an hour.  A lot of time, a lot of parents would bring their kids to the restaurant, a lot of players and ex-players and come in, and boy they would see me, with this white hate, apron and stuff, white jacket on, pushing this cart, but I could always hear everybody was whispering ab0ut me.  "Wow man, that's Bob Love and he used to be a, used to be a great basketball player, look at him now, he's bussing tables and washing dishes; what a shame."  What a shame, well, well it really hurt, but, what I did, what I did, I became the best bus boy the best dish washer in the world, because I wasn't going to let anybody said a thought, that would keep me from reaching my goals.  I worked that job, for six straight months, I didn't take one day off, every time a person in that restaurant wanted a day off, hey, I was the first person volunteered to take their place.  I worked overtime, anything I could get and stuff so, one day one of the owner's came in, said, "Bob, we really notice that you've been doing a really good job, son, and we'd like to, we'd like to promote you, but, but we cant bec--, because of your speech problem.  But if you're willing to take the time out to do it, to get help," said, "We'll pay for it."  And I tell you, for the first time in my life, I felt that somebody cared about me as a person, felt, felt like the weight of the world just dropped off of my shoulders.
Story_ID: 71712
Speaker 1: I didn't know, where to go to get speech therapy, but I didn't have a car at that time, I didn't have anything, I would ride the bus to work, and every morning I, every morning I would ride this bus to work, I would look on the side, and I saw this big old gray building, every morning it said, it said, Speech and Hearing Center.  And, that was the only place I knew to go, so I went there, I went there I called there, made an appointment, and I went there, and, I met a young lady, named Susan Hamilton.  And from that day on, my life changed, my life changed because for the first time a person, a person actually took me, and they showed me how to speak and stuff.  You know, I'm not perfect now, but, I can go all the way around the world, you know I could speak at large groups, small groups, I could do radio interviews, T.V interviews, I could do anything I want to do.  The lady was very, very patient, she actually told me that in order to produce a sound, you have to let a little air out and your vocal cords, have to start vibrating, vibrating and once they vibrate then you can pronounce a word.  I, it kind of took me a little while to get it, to get it and stuff, because I had been, I had been a stutterer for forty-five years, that was the only way I knew how to talk was to stutter.  And I finally got it, and I began to gradually improve, and of course, my, my, my employers, they promoted me from dishwasher to spokesperson for their company and stuff, you know.  And I would go all over the country and I would represent Nordstrom, I would tell me story about what happened to me and my speech problem and how they helped me and stuff.  You know and it was very, very beneficial for the company, and, and, and, it was some of the, it was some of the best times, of my life I think, I think, to be able to do that.  See I was, I was, I was down as a little kid, then I went up and I made the professor ranks, then I had to go all the way back down.  And I had to pull myself up, a lot of times, a lot of times, a lot of times when I was bussing tables and washing dishes, I had to ride the bus home.  And I had, and I had to walk from the restaurant over to the bus stop, and it just so happened the bus stop was in front of this, in front of this big ole hotel. And every afternoon, all the, all the brothers and everybody, and everybody would get off of work, these guys was dressed in their suits man, starched and ironed shirts man, they would be in there, and they would, they would be drinking cocktails and beer.  And, I was walking to the place, and I had on my white pants, and a white shirt, and I had mustard stains, and ketchup stains [laughs], on my pants and on my shirt, and stuff.  You know I was always, I was always kind of embarrassed, cause I would walk in, and everybody said, "Hey that's Bob Love," then all the guys would all, "Hey, hey, Bob Love, how you doin, man?" "Man, that's Bob Love," then they'd always tell the waitress, waitress would you take that guy a beer over there, "Would you take Bob Love a beer over there?"  It was really, really embarrassing, but I accepted it, when I took it I said, "Guys, thanks"  Drank the beer, drank the beer and by that time my bus would be outside, and I'd be gettin on my bus.  And I'd walk, I said, this went on, this went on about a half a year, about a half a year and stuff, but I did it, I did it, and I always gracious, I was always smiling at the guys and stuff.  And I, and I, you know what, all those guys that were laughing, all those guys, those guys that they were talking to, talking to about me and stuff, (unclear) about me, once I, once I rose up, all them were nowhere to be found, they had, they had, they had either lost their jobs, or they had moved on.
Speaker 2: Okay, how long did-
Speaker 1: I was the only person there, [laughs].
Story_ID: 71713
Speaker 1: How long did you take your therapy, and how many times a week and all that?
Speaker 2: I took my therapy about a year, yeah, yeah it took me about a year, I, I was in intensive therapy, for about four months.  That mean I would, I came three days a week, two hours a day, and it and it was really, really hard.  Really, really hard because, because a lot of time, a lot of times you wanna, you wanna you, you wanna kind of give up, you want to kind of give up because it is something new to you and it's really, really hard.  But I, I, I never gave up, I never gave up, I was motivated to, I was motivated to do something positive, you know, to correct myself, and, and I always wanted to be a speaker.  I couldn't, I couldn't talk, but I always wanted to be a speaker, and, and that was my goal, that, that was my goal.   And I stayed there, I stuck it out, I practiced, and I practiced, and I practiced and I prayed, and I prayed.  And, it just seemed like one night, one night I went to sleep, one night I went to sleep and something told me, said, "You been through a lot of hard times Bob, Bob and you never wavered; now you can go out and talk.  You can go out and talk," like I said I'm not perfect, but I can get up before anybody, audience, and I can talk, I can talk, and it's the greatest feeling in the world.  I wouldn't trade it for nothing, I wouldn't trade all the stuff that ever happened to me, all of it, all of it happened for, all of it happened for a reason, the Lord was putting me through a test.  And, once I passed that test, he said, "Bob, you can go out, now you can tell your story," and I've been telling my story.  They, they took a poll not too long ago, of a thousand athletes who never had anything wrong with them, they were all pro, hall of famers, had done it all, and out of thousand guys, on the, on the speaking tour, I was rated number five in the entire country.  As, as a motivational speaker, and, it is the greatest feeling in the world, yep.
Speaker 1: Do you keep in touch with Susan Hamilton, your therapist?
Speaker 2: Yeah I, yeah I call Susan [Hamilton] every once in a while and stuff, you know and I always, I always refer people to her, to her because, everywhere I go, believe it or not, there are million, millions, millions of people who stutter, or they have speech problem, problems, and they've, and they've been struggling all of their lives, all of their lives to get through this affliction.  It's the hardest thing in the world to do, and, and they always want to know who did I go to, or their name and their address, and stuff, and you know I always I always, and I always refer people to her.  Because, because, she is a good person.
Story_ID: 71714
Speaker 1: And the person at Nordstrom [Restaurants, Seattle, Washington], who said that they would then give you these-
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Speech lesson, where is -- (Simultaneous).
Speaker 2: It was actually three of them, it was, it was, it was the three brothers who owned the company, John Nordstrom, Bruce Nordstrom, and Jim Nordstrom.  They would, they would always come into the restaurant in the, in the morning time, maybe, maybe nine-thirty, ten o'clock, and they would have coffee, they would have coffee, and they would discuss the strategies of the day and stuff, you know, the business.  And I was never, I was never ashamed to go over and speak to them, I would go and shake their hand and speak, and speak to them, they was always impressed with that, I guess and stuff.  You know, they would, they would always say, "Hey, here's the guy that was an athlete, and we got him bussing tables and washing dishes," and stuff.  But then see, he would always come over every morning, and I would always go over every morning, speak to him, clean off their table, I would pour coffee for them, and stuff, they would ask me how everything was going and stuff, and I would tell them, and I would tell them it was going great.  You know, I was enjoying myself, and, and, and not knowing later on down the line that they would have plans for me, and stuff, because, because of my personality, and what I did.  You know, so,
Speaker 1: You talked-
Speaker 2: It all worked out, it all worked out, they're some of the greatest people I've ever known in my life, I mean, I mean, human beings, down to earth.
Speaker 1: Have you kept in touch with the Nordstrom gang?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, yes I do, yes I do, I go into all the Nordstrom stores, and all the general Managers know me, all of the, all of the, all of the people who are in charge, they remember when I started, and, and I would talk about, we'd talk about old times, and I go back up to Seattle there, and, and I talk to John's son, I talk to Bruce's son, and I talk to all the guys, and they, they, and it's just like old times, it's just like old times.  Like nothing's changed, like nothing's changed, because every time I make my speeches, I, I always mention Nordstrom, Nordstrom, because it's a great company.
Story_ID: 71715
Speaker 1: Now, how has all of your experience and, and, how have you shared that with your own, kids; you got five right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In which ways have you been able to share that with them, I know you share it with the world.
Speaker 2: Well, well I tell 'em, I tell 'em, I tell em a couple of, a couple of things and stuff, you know, they must, they must get their education, they must stay in school and get their education.  And I always tell them, that once they finish school, once they finish college, two things are going to determine whether they get a good job, some job, or no job.  Number one is their communication skills, they must be able to speak well, they must be able to express themselves, number two is their attitude.  They must, be able to get along with their teammates and their bosses, and their office workers, or, whoever, whoever.  And no matter what, no matter what they accomplish in life you must get on your knees and pray every night, and you must remain a good person, because once your career is over, I don't care if it's in sports or business, people are not going to remember, how many deals you made, homeruns you hit, slam dunks you made, but people always remember whether you were a good person or not.  And everywhere I go, everywhere I go in this city, people always tell me, "Bob, you signed this autograph for my little son" or your did this for me, when I was a little kid, I remember you hugged me, and you pat me on the back and stuff.  And, and that over shadows all, all of the jump shots I made, all of the layups I made, and stuff.  You know it makes me feel good to be able to know that kids are able to remember that hug, the hug I gave them, the pat on the back and stuff.  Hey, that's the greatest feeling in the world for me.
Speaker 1: Can you give me your, sons and daughters names, and tell me how old they are?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, my oldest son his name is Robert Jones Love, my other boy is Kevin Patrick Love, Kelly Paxton Love, Basha Gay Love, Barri Elizabeth Love, Keith Patton Love, Kerry Parker Love, Nathaniel Hunter Love, Robert Earl Love Jr., Brody Love, and my last kid his name is Chance, Chance Jamal Love.
Speaker 1: How many was that?
Speaker 2: Twelve, ten, ten, ten [sic, eleven] I think.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you had five by your first wife?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And five by your second wife?
Speaker 2: MY second, my second marriage I didn't have any kids in my second marriage.
Speaker 1: Oh, you had, so you had ten with your first marriage?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but my third marriage I had two kids.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Eight, and two?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the young lady, the young lady that, the young lady that left me the note, we didn't have any kids,
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, she was the second one?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you're married now?
Speaker 2: No, no I'm not married now.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the age range from the oldest to the youngest is what?
Speaker 2: The oldest one is thirty-seven,
Speaker 1: The youngest is-
Speaker 2: Thirty seven, thirty-five, thirty-three, twenty-eight, twenty-six, twenty-five [sic, thirty-one], nineteen, seventeen, seven, six, and a year and half.
Speaker 1: And you got-
Speaker 2: [Laughs], and I got it right.
Speaker 1: You got it right.  You enjoy your family and-
Speaker 2: I do enjoy them, yes.
Speaker 1: You got any grandkids?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Grandkids yet?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have, I have three, four, five grandkids.
Speaker 1: Oh, great.
Speaker 2: Yeah, all of them are girls [laughs].
Speaker 1: Oh wow, okay he's gonna change tapes, oh that's great!
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 70893
Speaker 1: --"Butterbean", and, and, and hey I love butterbeans, I love em.
Speaker 2: Listen, in fact that's what-
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: One of our questions that, if I did ask it, I want to re-ask it, favorite food, what is it?
Speaker 1: My favorite food is, the reason I got my nick name, "Butterbeans", I love those butterbeans, butterbeans, butterbeans with a little pork in it, salt in it, and pepper, pepper onions, oh, oh, a little cornbread on the side, you know, it's great.
Speaker 2: Do you remember when you first ate butterbeans?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes I do, growing up in a small town in Louisiana, in Louisiana, we didn't have, we didn't have a lot of choice of foods, my grandmother had a little garden in, in the back of the house, and my grandmother always would grow these big ole butterbeans, big ole butterbeans and every afternoon I would go out there, I would go out there, and pick em, and stuff, so she could cook them.  She would cook them in the morning, we had them for lunch, and we would have them at night.  Man, she'd have a big ole pot of em and stuff, with a little fat back in em, onions and stuff, and I loved them butterbeans, I loved them, and all my friends, they found out that I liked butterbeans, and, and everybody started calling me butterbean, butterbean love.  I got that name, probably the seventh grade in high school, eighth grade in school, you know, all my friends say, "This guy eat butterbeans all the time, man, oh boy."  Back then, back then though, everybody had nicknames, everybody had nicknames, they would call guys, a lot of guys would call them "shoe," or "stick," or, just anything, [laughs], anything, so, that name stuck with me all through, all through high school, college, pros, and all of my friends now, they still call me butter, or they call me "Bean," or they call me "Butterbean."  Oscar, Oscar Robertson called me, "Bayou bean," you know from Louisiana, the Bayou country [laughs], "bayou bean" [laughs].
Story_ID: 70894
Speaker 1: That's cute, that's great.  Take me back to your last season with the [Chicago] Bulls, as a player.  Tell me what that was like for you, and what made you decide to res-
Speaker 2: My last season with the [Chicago] Bulls, my last season with the [Chicago] Bulls, my back started hurting me really, really bad, my average had dropped from, from twenty-two points the previous season, down to nineteen.  And I was finding, I was finding out that I couldn't really jump, couldn't really jump, couldn't really move like I had been moving the previous year.  And nobody, nobody really knew why and stuff, they though it was my, they thought that my knee was hurting and stuff, they would give me a lot of shots in the knees and stuff.  And I come to find out it was a, it was, it was my back you know and they traded me, they traded me to another team, another team and stuff, so I, I.
Speaker 1: What team, what team?
Speaker 2: They traded me to, they traded me to the New Jersey Nets, but I was only there for about, for about three weeks, then I went to Seattle [Washington, SuperSonics].  It was, it was a real shock for me, because I had, I had been on a starting team, I had lead the team in scoring for eight straight years and stuff, eight straight years, whatever it was and stuff, and it, and it, and it was kind of a shock, I had, I had a hard time adjusting because, because I couldn't believe, Seattle [Washington] I mean, all my of roots were here, my family was here, my home was here, all my friends that were here and I, and I thought that I was going to the opportunity to really, really retire here.  But it, but it did happen, it did happen an stuff, you know I had to, I had to keep moving, and I like I told you I spent my last three months up in Seattle there and stuff, so I moved from here up to Seattle Washington, and, that's where everything started, that's where everything started.
Speaker 1: Now, you had, prior to your last season, you had some problems with them wanting to pay you what you were really worth?
Speaker 2: With my?
Speaker 1: With the Chicago Bulls, when you were a player. Did you-
Speaker 2: The only problem, I never felt, I never felt, I was paid what I was worth.
Speaker 1: What was your final contract?
Speaker 2: And I probably held out, I probably held out three years in a row, I held out three years in a row for a new contract, and they would never, they would never give me a new contract and stuff you know, so, one thing lead to another.  But that's sports though, that's-
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's-
Speaker 2: It happens to, it happens to a lot of athletes and stuff.
Speaker 1: What was the value of your last contract?
Speaker 2: The value?
Speaker 1: Mmhmm.
Speaker 2: The value, the value, of my last deal, I think, I made probably one hundred fifteen thousand dollars [$150,000] or something like that, yeah.
Story_ID: 70895
Speaker 1: What would you say to, a young student out there today is very different from when you started, and you see a lot of the young people playing ball, they want to be another Bob Love, if you will.  What kind of warnings or suggestions do you have for that kind of student?
Speaker 2: Well, I talk about this in the schools almost, almost, almost every, almost, almost every day, basically.  I always, I always wanted the young males, the young males especially, sports, it's, it's okay.  But use sports to get your education, don't let it use them, because, in any sport, once they reach the age of thirty, they, they are considered an old man, an old lady, and those teams are gonna really start looking for younger players.  And, and if a guy think he's good here, hey go to New York city, there are five good players, you go to Boston, Massachusetts there are eight good players, you go to L.A [Los Angeles], there are hundreds of good players.  So, the value of your education is the most important thing because once they get that education, they'll never have to say, "They won't let me do this, or they won't let me do that." No one's ever gonna let you do anything, you got to take it, and the only way that you can take it is by getting as much education as you can get, and the sky will be the limit.  You determine, you determine, how far you want to go, once you get your education, but otherwise, otherwise if you depend on those sports, hey.  The average NBA [National Basketball Association] player only play three years in the NBA.  The average NFL [National Football League] player only plays two years in the NFL, yep, two years and those years pass just like that.  You gotta be, you gotta be lucky 'cause every year, its new players comin in.  Every year, great players are coming in, and, and, you just gotta be lucky, but if you get that education, it doesn't matter, it doesn't matter, it doesn't matter who come in [laughs].
Story_ID: 70896
Speaker 1: One big wave in basketball, professional basketball is of course women.  WNBA [Women's National Basketball League], what do you think of women, professional women basketball?
Speaker 2: All right, the WNBA, the WNBA has, has really opened up a new, it has opened up a new avenue for women, for women.  I believe that, three years from now, the WNBA players will be making, will be making, will be making on par, maybe not as much, but they're gonna be making three, five million dollars a year, playing basketball.  But, but, only one female in every twenty thousand makes it, makes it in any professional sport past college, that's, that's tennis, track, whatever, basketball, only one in every twenty thousand, yup.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yes, not a lot of, not a lot of avenues in basketball, basketball, tennis is even few, even fewer, track is even fewer.  So, the young kids, they must realize that life is all about education, it's all about that knowledge, it all about that knowledge you get.  You can go into your business, always, always  let young kids though, I said, I said you guys are reading the paper about Frank Thomas making eight, nine, ten million dollars a year, this guy's making five, five million dollars a year, I said, that's no money, I said if you really want to make some money, you ought to be an entrepreneur, I said you should be the man that makes the hot dogs, the cookies, or the itty bitty buns, or, now you see, see that's old money there.  That's money that's going to be coming in from now on, from, don't let that sports, don't let that sports, be your only avenue.  Be a, be an entrepreneur, be the man that cleans up the uniforms, be the man that develops, develops, a new baseball, or just anything, anything, and you'll have money coming in from now on, from now on an stuff.  And, and I really think that the young kids are really, really starting to get it man, and stuff you know I said so, I could, I could see a lot of improvement, a lot of improvements, and it, and I really cross really young kids who I spoke to maybe when they were twelve, thirteen years old, and now they're in college, and they always tell me, they say, "Bob, I remember when you said this, you came to my high school and you said this, and you said that, and, you know and I took that with me."  I said, "What, you did" [laughs]?  "I sure did, they says I'm going off to college now, I'm going to start my own business, I'm going to be an attorney, I'm going to get my masters, I'm going to get my Doctoral degree."  And that really, really makes me feel good that the kids, kids are remembering me when I came in, and I told them this, you know so, you , you slowly get through, you don't, you don't reach them all, but I try.
Story_ID: 70897
Speaker 1: Now, for the, the young teenager boy or girl, who has the challenge you had growing up in, in, hoping, wanting to communicate, like his or her peers.  What message do you have for them directly, when you think back on your own pain of, having this barrier between you and the people around you, the barrier of speech impediment?
Speaker 2: Are you talking about any person that has a handicap?
Speaker 1: No, I'm just talking about what would you say to them, what would you say to this young person, remembering when you were their age.  To help them keep going, and not feel the hurt and the pain; to kind of minimize, how to keep going.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, all right, but see I bring that, you know, I bring that too a lot of times in the school, because I go into the schools, I go into the schools, a lot of kids, they come from great families.  They may have, they may have, a fine home, mother father may have money, they may dress better than the other kid dress.  You know I always tell the kids this, I said all the, all of you young kids here today I said, I said, "You may live in a home, you may live in an apartment, you may live in the projects, or whatever."  I said, "once you finish high school young people, it's not gonna matter, what, what, what your parents got, what your uncle got, it's not gonna matter.  Because, once you finish high school, all of you are gonna, are gonna be on even ground.  And the person that has a dream, and the motivation, is a person is that will be standing here years from now, telling young people that hey, anything that you can dream about, you can, you can make that dream come true because things change.  Change, and the person who is motivated, the person that has the dream, is the person that's gonna, that is gonna succeed."  Like I says, "Because once you get outta high school, your parents, your parents, your parents, can only tell you, they can only tell you what to do.  It's going to be up to you to, do that, to move forward, to move forward to keep those dreams alive, to have your motivation.  You have to be motivated to do anything."
Story_ID: 70898
Speaker 1: Would, would you tell, a younger person who has a speech impediment to ask for therapy?
Speaker 2: Oh, of course.
Speaker 1: Because most students don't ask.
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: They don't think of that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They don't think they can be helped.
Speaker 2: Right, I always tell them, I always tell them, that if I, I wasn't privileged as these young, as these young kids, kids have now.  Growing up in a small town in Louisiana, we didn't know anything about speech therapy, my grandmother, my grandmother used to, my grandmother used to put three marbles under my tongue, and I would get in my Sunday school class, there and stuff.  You know my grandmother said, "Robert Earl, I put these marbles under your tongue, and once you get in your Sunday school class, you won't stutter, and stuff."  And, so, I would, I would always stick the marbles under my tongue, and I would get in my Sunday school class there and my teacher would be calling on me to read the Sunday school book.  I would get up there and I would start stuttering, and I would start stuttering, and I would swallow two of them suckers every time [laughter].  Every time, every Sunday school morning, I swallow two marbles, so one Sunday morning I tell my grandmamma, I said, "Grandmother I'm up to my neck in marbles, and I still stutter, let's try something else" [laughs].  And, then, a lot of the time, a lot of the times I would go outside there and I would have my little fantasy game against these great players, and I, and I would get tired and thirsty and stuff, and I would run back inside my grandmother's house and try and ask her for some water.  Most of the times, my grandmother would be washing dishes, with some big rag, and washing the table and stuff, and I would start off stuttering, and stuttering, "Grandma can...I...have some...water?"  And, before I could get that water, my grandmother would hit me in my mouth with that rag, and she would say to me, "Spit it out Robert Earl, spit it out" [laughs].  But, I never spit it out but you know what, I learned to stop asking her for that water, you know [laughter].  Then I went and got my own water, but, but I always encourage them to, to get help at any early age, and stuff, don't be, don't be bashful about it, and you got to be motivated, you got to be motivated.  You, you got to have a goal, a lot of people just want to be able to, to go, to go to the office, answer the phone, and maybe say hello to somebody and stuff, but I was motivated.  I wanted to become the greatest motivational speaker in the world, and stuff, you know, and I still do.  And, and I would dream that dream, I would tell them hey you got to be motivated you got to have a dream, and, and, and you got to, once you, once you go to therapy, I said you go to, once you leave that therapy room, the therapist can only do so much.  They could tell you what to do, how to do it, but it is up to you to put in that extra effort, that extra time, and stuff.  You see that's what I have to do, even now, every morning I get up, I look into the mirror and I practice.  I get on my, my, my vowels and say my vowels, and I let a little air out, I start my vocal cords, vibrating, and I find a lot of time, a lot of time, a lot of days, a lot of days, I can go through the whole day with no blocks, no stuttering.  Then, a lot of times I would have blocks, but I know how to get out of those blocks, and, and, and I'm not afraid I'm not afraid to look people in the eye when I talk to them.  I, every, every time I have a presentation to make, I'm excited, I'm excited, it's almost like a, it's almost like I'm getting ready to play in the seventh game of the NBA championship.  Man I, I can't wait to get up there, I can't wait to get up there because I got a story to tell, a story to tell and the Lord told me, said "Robert Earl, now, you can, you can go out and tell it. " And boy, I go out and I tell it [laughs].
Story_ID: 70899
Speaker 1: What was in the heyday of the Civil Rights, activity and all like that, how did you position yourself against the social order of the day?
Speaker 2: Well in 1961, in 1961, they were doing a lot of marching at the colleges and stuff you know.  And my school, my school [Southern University, Louisiana] was one of the, one of the schools that, that marched, believe it or not, I was, I was a classmate of H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdulla Al-Amin].  H. Rap Brown, he, he wasn't, he wasn't, the militant guy that he was now, but he had a lot of political views, and he was always outspoken about different, you know about different things.  He was, he was always in a (unclear), Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], and, like anyone, anyone who had a different view about things and stuff.  And my sophomore year in 1962, he left school, he left school, and he got involved in the [Civil Rights] Movement.  But, 1961, my friend Stokely Carmichael came down to a, came down to Baton Rouge [Louisiana] to Southern University, and they mobilized all the students, all the students to march on the capitol of Baton Rouge [Louisiana], and I was one of the students that went down.  We went down on buses, it was about a seven mile ride, it was buses and buses of students.  We went down, and all of us, all of us, we got off the, we got off the, we got off the buses, and back in those days the trench coats were the little short coats, the little short ones, they didn't have too many long ones for guys.  And, and it was a rainy day that day, I'll never forget, it was a rainy day, looked like little, looked like a little haze had come down on the city of Baton Rouge [Louisiana] that night. We marched around the capital, and they had all these police men there with their ride helmets on, and they had these dogs.  And they had these German Shepard dogs, you know, they let us march around for a while, then the guy said, "All right students, we're going to ask you to break up now, you got to go back to school."  And, oh man, and when he said that, that's when they broke out, "We shall overcome, we shall overcome," while we kept, while we kept marching.  The guy say, "You got one more chance here, would you please disperse and go back to your campuses?"  Man, and we kept walking, we kept, we kept walking, and all of a sudden they shot that tear gas on them.  Boy they shot that tear gas, man and they turned the dogs loose, people ran everywhere, hundreds of students were, were caught, caught put in jail.  One of those dogs grabbed my coat, grabbed up my little trench coat, and I unbuttoned that coat and I let him have it, you know [laughs].  I kept going, I must have ran, I ran all the way back to campus, which was about seven miles back I guess and stuff, I ran all the way back to school, all the way back to school with no coat on [laughs].  I was, I was scared to death, but that was a great experience, to be part of and stuff, and, and, and that brought back, that brought about a lot of changes.  A lot of changes happened, a lot of changes happened, a lot of students got expelled from school, a lot of students quit, a lot of students quit, a lot of students joined different organizations and stuff, you know.  You know but-
Speaker 1: Did they have any more protests like-
Speaker 2: I stayed in school, I stayed in school, yeah I stayed in school.
Speaker 1: Did any more protests like that come back to the campus?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  We, we probably had two more, had to more protests, but what we did, we marched on the [university] president's house.  You know, the president's house was right there, was right there on the campus.  And we wanted him to be more outspoken against the racist strife that was going on, but, but little did we know, that behind the scenes, this guy was doing the best that he could do.  Black colleges back then were getting all the money that they needed, they had all the programs that they needed, that they needed and stuff because all of these, all these, presidents, were, weren't doing things, that they had to do.  Behind the scenes, you know to keep this going, and, and, and, I read, I read in the paper not too long ago that they're thinking about closing down a lot of black colleges now, and stuff.  In the old days, nothing like that even came about, because, because, because everybody was getting the education, they had money for different programs.  It just seemed like everything changed though.
Story_ID: 70900
Speaker 1: Life on the road today, for a professional, well of any of the sports areas, but especially basketball, it's really pretty rough, and you see so many of these young players are getting into drugs, or they got a whole different approach.
Speaker 2: Oh, let me tell you, life on the road is great.  Here's a person you're only going to work with two hours a day, you get to travel all over the country, and you get paid for it, you get paid for it.  Or they pay your hotel room, they give you bill money, you get a salary, and only two hours a day, two hours a day you work, you work and stuff.  And you fly. You fly everywhere you go, we didn't have the accommodations now that these guys, that these guys have now, see we played, like each team had four big ole guys, like seven one, seven two, or they had the, or they had to let them ride in first class.  But the rest of the team we rode in coach, and people would we be laying the seats back on you, [laughs], back on your knees and stuff, you know and you couldn't do anything about and stuff, you know.  But, but, but it was a great life, it was a great life, we really, really, we really, really enjoyed it.  These young men now, these young men now, they got their private planes, or they got people waiting on them hand and feet, they, they, they eat the best food, they stay at the best hotels, it's a great life, it's a great life.
Story_ID: 70901
Speaker 1: Well, how do so many of them go off the deep end, then?
Speaker 2: [Leans forward].
Speaker 1: You know, as far as, the behavior that you read and hear about, for present day athletes.
Speaker 2: Wait, I didn't, I didn't.
Speaker 1: Today, you find so many athletes, their attitude or their actions are so, so far from what you would consider gracious.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well one thing that contributes to that is the fact that, a lot of players are coming out of college at a young age, they're coming out 19, eighteen, twenty, years old.  And they really don't appreciate what a great life that they have, how lucky they are, how very, very lucky that they are, and, a lot of these guys they come from a different background.  A lot of, a lot of, a lot of them grew up in projects, projects, and all they know, is one way of life, all of their friends live in the projects, you know, and those guys, they never really change.  They, they have this idea that they'll make all this money, and they can do anything they want to do, nobody can touch them, but the absolutely wrong.  No one is over the law, no one is bigger than the law and stuff.  They, and they find that out, they find that out very, very, very quickly, I tell the young kids it's okay to play like how those guys play, how the Allen Iversons, the Kobe Bryants, and the Shaqs [Shaquille O'Neal]-- but those guys are not your role models.  Your role models are your parents, and school teachers, and always let them know that, Allen Iverson as well as he plays, he's not a very nice person.  And, and they should not pattern their lives after him.  If they do, if they do then they headed up a dead end road.  They, and, and, as you can see, I don't know if you keep up with sports, but at first, at first the NBA was basically all white.  All right, then the black guys came in, and stuff you know, it got to be almost all black.  And now, it's changing again, but these young black kids don't realize it, they're bringing in all these European players, and these European players are good.  These guys are playing, pro, pro basketball, they getting paid at age fifteen.  And they are taking up a lot of spots, a lot of spots, and they still don't realize, still don't realize that they, that if they keep acting the way the way that they're acting, getting in trouble, smoking pot, cocaine and stuff, they are killing the goose that laid the golden egg, and its slowly, slowly changes you, you see less and less black players coming into the league.  You see more and more European players coming to the league because number one these guys these guys they turn out to be better people, they can play just as well, just as well, and they don't cause any problems.  They don't cause any problems, see that's the main thing, all these guys running around and beating up their girlfriends, and smoking dope, like I said they don't want to be bothered with those kind of people anymore and stuff.  And, and I preach that to these young kids every day, that you got to be a good person, you have got to be a good person.
Story_ID: 70902
Speaker 1: Speaking of foreign players, the Asian guy, how is he playing now?
Speaker 2: Who now?
Speaker 1: The Asian, the seven footer, what is he-
Speaker 2: Oh, who you talking about, you mean Chow Mein [Yao Ming]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What's his name?
Speaker 1: Oh, is that his name?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  I don't have a, I can't remember his name.
Speaker 1: But-
Speaker 2: The big, the big Chinese guy, the big Chinese guy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  Have you been watching his game?
Speaker 2: I, I watched it when he came here to Chicago [Illinois], I think that he's gonna be a tremendous player, this guy is seven feet six inches tall.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, and he can play, he can play, he can play.
Speaker 1: But it was some question as to whether or not he was too big.
Speaker 2: [Laughs], well not enough for basketball I don't think [laughs], he's got a lot of skills, he's got a lot of skills, and he's gonna, he's gonna, make a lot of people change their shots when they come to, what's it called, there is gonna be no more easy lay ups.  These guys are getting, these guys are getting bigger and bigger, level of skill is getting better and better so, it's going to be an interesting year this year, this year, very interesting.
Story_ID: 72704
Speaker 1: --I'm going to re-ask you the question.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Who were your role models as you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, ready?  My role models were my high school teachers, and my coaches, they were, they were almost like your parents.  The preached to us about, sort of about life, for a lot of the time, a lot of the time, they would tell you what to expect and what you had to do.  And, and, they always, they always stressed the value of education to us, sports is fine, sports is fine, sports is something that you did on the side.  It wasn't life, it wasn't life like these guys now, like these, like these young boys now, they, they make it part of their lives, and it's not really a part of your life because you know, I played twelve years, and you know what, I can't remember the first basket I made or the last one.  I can't, because, it was it was all a dream, it all seemed like it just passed, just like that, I talked to Oscar Robertson not too long ago and Oscar said, "Bean," you know he said, "All those things I did," he said, he said, "It was like I was dreaming about them."  And before you know it, you come into the league at twenty-one, twenty-two years old, and, and before you know it, you're twenty-eight, you're twenty-nine, thirty.  He said, "Man, I'm thirty years old, and it's all gonna be like a dream," like I said, they, they, they won't remember the first one they made or the last one.
Story_ID: 72705
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: In addition to education, which you made is very clear that, that's a key value; what values do you consider most important and why?
Speaker 1: Wait-
Speaker 2: After, I know education is an important thing-
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What other values do you consider, very important, and why?
Speaker 1: Well, I think that one of the most important values that, that a younger person, anybody can have, is that, is that you have to have a higher power in your life.  You can have, you can have all the money in the world, all the money in the world, all the fame in the world.  I see it every day happening to people, all, all of that can be taken away in one wisp, one wisp.  One wisp, but one thing that cannot be taken, taken away is your faith, if you have faith, in the Lord, you can make it through any hard times, you can make it through a difficult situation, but if you don't have that higher power, in your life, the slightest thing that goes wrong, or you're gonna go down, or you're going to make a bad mistake.  You're gonna make a bad mistake, I had, I had, I had all of my money stolen from me by my second wife, she, she, she stole my All-Star rings, stole everything I had, money, money.  And all of my friends would always tell me, "Man, man if I was you I would do this, I would do that."  Hey, I tell the young kids that, that you can, you can, you can always recoup rings, chains, watches, cars, money, you can always recoup, you can always recoup that.  Once you lose your freedom and your dignity, you have lost it all, don't ever let those, don't ever let those, those, monetary things, get in the way of real life.  That's not, that's not even real life, all of us need it, all of us need it to, to make it through the day, but a, but like I said that can be taken away in one wisp.  You, you have got to have a higher power, in your life, and you can be, and you could turn out to be the richest man in the world.  At one period, at one period there, there in my life, I didn't have anything, I didn't even have, I didn't even have money to catch the bus.  I borrowed money to catch the bus, I caught the bus, I went to work on one job, I would get off that job, and I would go get on another job, I worked, I worked two, three jobs and I took care of my, of my kids, and I took care of my support obligations, and not one time, not one time did I think, did I think that I shouldn't do it.  That I shouldn't do this, I shouldn't do that, all I ever think about, hey if I keep moving, if I keep going, if I keep praying, things are gonna change, and you know what? It, it has changed, I came back to the Chicago Bulls, in, in 1992, I got five championship rings, I've had two books written about my life, I've signed a movie contract with a Hollywood producer, to, to do a movie about my life.  And, in two weeks, three weeks, two weeks now, I'm going to be making a, I'm going to be making, making a major announcement.  That I'm gonna be running for Alderman of one of the wards [Chicago, Illinois 15th Ward], actually I can't tell you what ward it is, but I'm gonna be, I'm gonna be running for Alderman of one of those wards.  And if, and if I had to follow the advice of my friends, said hey man, I would of did this, and I would have did that, see none of those things, would have, would have really happened to me.  As a matter of fact, as a matter of fact I also own my own construction company.  So, if I had got hung up over those little monetary things, you know, you know, the little rings, money, man I took pocket money out the bank.  I would have never, I would have never been in the position that I'm in now, I, I've got more money, I've got more money, I've got, more, well I've got more everything now that I've ever had in my life.  And, and I most important of all, I've got peace of mind.  I got piece of mind, because I never did anybody wrong; and I still pray [laughs].
Story_ID: 72706
VIDEOGRAPHER:  We're rolling again.
Speaker 2: Okay, you were called back to Chicago [Illinois], 1992 was it?
Speaker 1: 1992 I came back, yeah.
Speaker 2: What was that feeling, when you got that call to come back, what were you thinking?
Speaker 1: Well, in 1992, it was the greatest feeling in the world, the Chicago Bulls were on the verge of winning the first championship, they had, they had Michael Jordan there, Scottie [Pippen] was there, the whole town was alive, it was alive with Chicago Bulls basketball.  So, I had just got my, I had just got my speech together and stuff, just started speaking, speaking, and one day, one day I got a telephone call from, from Steve Schanwald, from Steve Schanwald, and mister Jerry Reinsdorf which is my boss of the Chicago Bulls.  They told me, they said "Bob, we've been reading good things about you son, and we'd like you to come back to the Chicago Bulls and work as the director of community relations," at that time, community relations.  And you know what, I, I could not believe it, just seemed like, just seemed like it was a, it was, it was a dream.  Like I was talking to somebody else [laughs], you know, and, and, and I, and I, that afternoon, that afternoon I didn't tell them yes or no, that afternoon I got all of my stuff there out of my desk, I put it in my briefcase, and I went home.  And I got on my knees, I got on my knees and I thanked the Lord for keeping me straight and strong on a long narrow road, you know it was a long, it was a long climb for me, but I stayed straight on the road.  And the next day I called them back, the next day I called him back and I accepted the position and I inform, I informed the people there at Nordstrom [Restaurants], Nordstrom that I, that I always wanted to give back to the sports teams, sports teams and then, and I should be involved in sports and stuff.  You know so, I came back here, and I, you would not believe the reception I got from the people in the city [Chicago, Illinois], I mean everybody was so happy that I came back to the city, and, and, and the team was winning, I was happy, and I was, I was winning all the championships.  It was just the, just my life, the life that started all over again, feel like, it started all over.  And ever since I came back in '92' [1992], like everything, like everything has just been, everything has just been just absolutely wonderful, wonderful.  People in Chicago [Illinois], have just been fantastic, it's the greatest city in the world, the greatest people in the world.
Story_ID: 72707
Speaker 1: I see, so in your, do you have any favorite stories of your spokesman period?
Speaker 2: Well, let me see, let me see, let me see I have one, I have one here, one kid said actually one time, he said, "Bob," he said, "Bob if you had to play with Michael Jordan, do you think that, do you think that you would have been the lead scorer for the, the Chicago Bulls and stuff for eight straight years?"  I said, "Son, let me tell you something," I said, "If I had to play, with the Chicago Bulls with Michael Jordan, the league would have never heard of Magic Johnson.  Because, Michael Jordan lead the league in assists, every year [laughter]."  Passing me the ball.
Speaker 1: It's good, it's good.
Story_ID: 72708
Speaker 1: --It's good, oh boy, it's good, it's very good.  What would you like to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered, as a good person.  That's all, when its all, when it's all said and done, all I want people to say is that Bob Love was a good guy.  He was, he was, he cared about the kids, he cared about the city [Chicago, Illinois], he cared about people.  Because, because, my greatest, man my greatest thrills in life is when I could, when I could help somebody, when I could help somebody with something; one dollar, two dollars, I could give advice to a young kid, young kid.  You know I, I, I get letters from kids all over the world, all over the world, I went to, I went to Japan and spoke.  I got a bag of letter from Japan, to go to schools, I got letters from schools, I got, I got personal letters from people all over the country who've, who've read about my story, they see me on T.V. or something like that, and, and, and those are the things that I remember, I remember most rather than me scoring on the dunk shot, or hitting the jumper, or, winning a game.  It's all about that I, that I helped this person or that I helped this young person get their lives on the right road.  You know, that just, that's just really all that matters.
Story_ID: 72709
Speaker 1: Have you been, in your earlier years, college, early career years, did you have a, an interest in politics, and who were some of your favorite political people?
Speaker 2: Yes and no, yes and no.  I've always been, I've always been involved in the community, and I've always been involved in helping people, helping people get things done.  And in the back of my mind, it was always a thought, it was, it was always a thought but I never, I never figured I would get the opportunity to do something like this, like this, but I stayed the course.  And, and, and opportunity just, just, the right opportunity just arose.
Speaker 1: What did, you were in Chicago [Illinois] doing, doing, [Mayor] Harold Washington years, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What did you think of, our first African American mayor, and the period and the challenge that he had with the council when he became mayor.
Speaker 2: Well, it was a big change for the city [Chicago, Illinois], it was a great day, it was a great day for the black community because, because, I believe at that time he was, he was, he may have been the first black major city in the country and stuff.  You know, and everyone, everyone was proud of him and stuff, he had also came, it also came where he came from a different background and stuff, you know.  He had pulled himself up from the bootstraps, and, and I was really, really proud, I was really proud to be associated with that, with that era, and stuff.  And I thought, and I thought it was really really great.
Speaker 1: What did you think of the pull, push and pull he had with the "[Edward] Vrdolyak 29"?
Speaker 2: Well, I really didn't, I really didn't get too involved in that, in that type of, in that type of situation as stuff, no matter who you are, no matter who are you are, you're going to have folds, you're going to have adversaries, but what you've got to do is if you enjoy it, if you enjoy it, you enjoy it.  You're in charge, you're in charge, and, and, and like even now Mayor [Richard M.] Daley had, Mayor [Richard M.] Daley has folds, and has adversaries and stuff, you know, you have to deal with those things, it doesn't matter if you're black or white, you just got to deal with them.  You've got to deal with them, you got your people on your side, they got their people on their side, so, so you just gotta move on.
Story_ID: 72710
Speaker 1: What concerns do you have for African Americans, in the general sense, you know life today, do you have any concerns about life for African Americans today?
Speaker 2: Wait, I didn't quite understand that.
Speaker 1: What concerns or do you have any concerns, about life for African Americans, or the African American community, today?
Speaker 2: Well the concerns I have, the concerns I have, one major concern, see I, I'm, I'm, I'm really for education; because, because you could talk about prejudice, and all that stuff.  You know it doesn't matter, it doesn't matter, it's, actually in real life there is only one color, and that is green.  That's, that's green, I believe that people who suffer the most prejudice, prejudice or whatever, are the people, are the people who are, uneducated.  That didn't want to take, that didn't want to take that, they didn't want to take that first step to correct whatever problem was holding them back.  See, nobody cares, nobody cares if you sit there and complain, all day, you can, you, you can complain about a million things, nobody cares.  But if you're green, yellow, purple, if you want to do something, white people, Mexican people, everybody would come out to help you, would help you make that second step, if you want to improve your life.  But if you're going to sit back and complain, nobody cares 'cause I don't care, I don't care.  You, you, you help people who want to help themselves, and people who want to make that first step.  And once they do it, the whole world opens up, the one major concern that, that I have I see less and less black kids going to college.  I see more whites, more Asians, more, more Hispanic kids and stuff, going to college, and they're getting those educations, and as a result, they get the jobs.  They, they get the jobs, and then, but the black kids can sit back, and complain.  Well, hey, you got to get that education, you got to, and it's all kind of, it's all kind of like grants out here, you can get loans here, you can only do that if you want to improve.  If you want to improve yourself, so that's my major concern, what I would like to see, I would just like to see every kid, every kid in America, have the opportunity to go, to go to college, to go college.  Because it's the greatest time of your life, it's the greatest time, most people meet their husbands there, they meet their wives there, you meet the people who are going to be your friends for life in college.
Story_ID: 72711
Speaker 1: So.
Speaker 2: Okay, and we're coming up on the last two questions, the first of the last two is what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 1: What do I want-
Speaker 2: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 1: I want my legacy to be, that I was, that I, I was a person that cared about people, and I wanted to, I want people to, I want people to put on their boots, and, as the old saying go, "You pull your boots up by the bootstrap."  I want, I want to be a person who, who helped thousands, millions of black kids, white kids, Hispanic kids, Asian kids, get an opportunity to, further their, further their, further their education.  Get a job, get, to get jobs and, really really improve, really really improve their lives, because, because I go to, I get an opportunity to go to a lot of correctional facilities, prisons and stuff, and I speak to those, those are young men in there, and I walk in the door, and who do I see?  I see people that look just like me, full of them, full of them, and nintey-nine percent of them are drop outs.  Drop-outs, I truly believe that if we want to change crime, we want to stop this crime in the country, it's all about education.  Because, because all of us smart, they'll get in there and they'll be the smartest people in the world, but they read these books and they turn into attorneys and stuff, but you got to catch them at an early age though, you gotta catch these kids at an early age, and you got to get something, that they're, that they're interested in doing.  And most kids, kids are not in love, but they love computers, they love fixing things, space, they're interested in space, rocket ship, airplanes and all that stuff.  You know I would like to see, I would just like to see kids, it's, just have the opportunity to get in things, and develop their minds and things that they'd like.  Or that they want to do, that they want to do, that's a hard role, but I want to be, I want to be the champion of young people, of young people. I would just like to, to, to draw a line out on this generation, and say none of you here will ever spend a day in prison, or jail.  Because, because I'm going to give you books to read, I'm going to give you computers to peck on, I'm going to give you a drawing board so you can be an artist, or whatever, or whatever.  I would just like to draw a line that said none of you will ever step over this line.
Story_ID: 72712
Speaker 1: And finally will you share with us your thoughts about The HistoryMakers project; what do you think of it generally, for the information you have about, as far as you know about it.
Speaker 2: Wait, again.
Speaker 1: What do you think of what The HistoryMakers project is trying to do? What do you think of this oral history?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that The HistoryMakers are trying to show that any person, all people, who have accomplished anything in their lives, have had a dream.  And, and, and that nothing that was ever given to them, everything that they've got, they've worked for it. Worked for it, worked for it, and, I think that once young people, once they see, once they see these type of programs, and then equate it to their lives an what's going on in their lives, are they going to stop playing the victim?  Are they going to stop playing the victim in their lives, or they could say well hey this person did it, I can do it.  If that person did it, I could it 'cause all they had was a dream all they had was a dream and they were motivated and they stayed the curse. They didn't waver, they didn't, they didn't, one last story I would like to tell, I went down to the University of Notre Dame [Indiana], and I spoke to a large group of students in a communication class, and as I was speaking there was one gentlemen, one young kid there in the back, he was really, really, paying attention, really caught my eye because he would look at me dead in the eye, and after the program was over, the young kid, the young kids, the young kid came up there and he gave me a note there, he gave me a note, he gave me a note, and he said, "Now don't read this note you know until you're on your way back to Chicago [Illinois] and stuff," so I put it in my pocket, matter of fact I got the note, it said, "Bob," it said, "Bob, let me tell you something," he said, it said, "I've been in school here, I've been in school here and stuff and, and I just broke up with my girlfriend, we've been going together for two years," two years and he sounded really, really depressed.  He said, "I was thinking about killing myself," he said, "I was thinking about dropping out of school, I was just thinking about, I was just thinking about giving up," he said, "Bob, you know hearing your story, and what you had to go through, you know," you know what he said, "I'm going to find me a new girlfriend, I'm going to finish college [laughs], oh and I'm never gonna look back, I'm never gonna look back again," he said, "I'm just gonna stay, I'm just gonna stay focused," and you know, you know this young kid, he gave me a hug, and I could tell he meant it because he squeezed me tight.  And, and that made me feel so good, so good, I'll never forget that.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that I didn't ask you that I should have?
Speaker 2: No, no that's about it, that's, that's about it.  I'm just, I'm just happy, I'm just happy I was able to do this interview because, because, I, it not only means a lot to me, it means a lot to the young men and young women out there who have speech problems, stutterer, they can't speak as well, this is just to let them know that if they can get therapy at a young age and stuff, they can, they can overcome these, they can overcome these problems.  Like my grandmother used to tell me, there was only one perfect person that ever walked this earth, and that was our Lord and savior Jesus Christ.  Everyone had a handicap, everyone has a disability; the young people got to have a dream.  That's all you got to have, and you can do anything in the world.
Speaker 1: That's great. Well thank you very--
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: --very, very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 72713
Speaker 1: ...
