Story_ID: 62154
Speaker 1: Jewel, what person influenced you the most in your life?
Speaker 2: I know this answer isn't, perhaps what is expected.  But the two people who influenced my life the most were my mother [Aida Arabella Stradford] and father [C. Francis Stradford] for different reasons.  My father was a very well-known lawyer and had saved his father from extradition to a certain Southern town back years ago, and it saved his life as a lawyer.  And as I grew up, I would hear the stories from my grandfather, would say, there are not many parents that can attribute their lives to their sons.  So I grew up thinking that law was the very best way to go, that you could bring about change.  And, of course, my dad had a lot of confidence in me.  But my mother influenced me in a very different way.  She was a very excellent, superb artist, and in those days, women didn't work after they got married.  And so, my father did not want her to work, although she was a proficient artist, had taught art in New York before she married him.  And I think she influenced me because she didn't like the idea that she couldn't use her talents.  And she would tell from the day I--the earliest days, get an education, become independent and do what you want to do, and you can do anything you wanna do.  And I think the combination encouraged me to go the route that I took.  I never had an idea that I couldn't be a lawyer, I couldn't be a success.  When they didn't want me--to admit me to the law school and it was suggested that I go into social work or something, and they weren't gonna admit me to the law school, well, I just took it for granted I was going to be lawyer.  And I was gonna get into that law school.  So all my life, I've had that kind of confidence, and I think it stems from both of my parents, for very different reasons.
Story_ID: 62155
Speaker 1: I'd asked you--I'm sorry, I was gonna ask this question.  What--because we're doing this online African American history, what black person would you--or persons, do you think influenced you the most?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say A. Philip Randolph has had the greatest influence in a way because my father [C. Francis Stradford] was his lawyer and helped found the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters Union.  And they both believed that the labor movement and the fight, the labor fight to get labor in the sun, a place in the sun, was really an act of intelligent discontent on the part of blacks.  And I never forgot their discussions and this kind of reasoning.  So I would say A. Philip Randolph in an indirect way, again, through my dad, influenced me a great deal.  Of course, I had a healthy respect for Martin Luther King [Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr.], whom I knew personally.  But I guess I would say it stems back to the beginning of the labor movement, A. Philip Randolph and all the fights that took place as a result of that.
Story_ID: 62156
Speaker 1: Can you comment about the--because you've made your career as, primarily in the legal area--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --the importance--(simultaneous) (laughter)--
Speaker 2: I would question that, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: But would you comment on the importance of law and its impact on black America?
Speaker 2: I think law is still the greatest vehicle through which to bring about justice and equality.  There are other means and, of course, we blacks have gotten accepted in so many areas of life, but I still feel that this country is founded on basic law principles, that being a lawyer and carrying through what you believe in, in the courts or in your writings or whatever, I just think the law is the greatest vehicle to bring about social change.  As I indicated earlier, when I spoke about the extradition proceedings that my father [C. Francis Stradford] won on behalf of his father, it was a result of the Tulsa riots [1921 Tulsa race riot], where my grandfather had a hotel called the Stradford Hotel, and a library called the Stradford Library in Tulsa, Oklahoma.  And he was a very rich man by standards.  And during the riots, his property was burned to the ground, and he had to flee Tulsa.  But through the law, my dad was able to fight his extradition proceedings and to save his life because if he had been extradited back to a Southern town in those days, he perhaps would have been killed.  That's an illustration, but also in the early days, we worked very closely with the NAACP.  And the great court victories we had, I think brought about great change.  And, of course, with the "Brown versus Board of Education" [1954] school case that Thurgood Marshall argued, that did away with desegregation in public schools.  So I still feel that the law is the way, the best way to bring about change.  And, of course, there are others.  I think our own performance in areas where we have finally found acceptance, our superior performance helps bring about equality.  And then, it's just a constant fight, and whatever you find that you're doing, just do it well, do it the very best you can, and by your own performance, I think you will find that you are accepted more so than you would be otherwise.
Story_ID: 62157
Speaker 1: What about the role of The Civil Rights Movement?  What in your viewpoint--how would you describe the significance or the importance of The Civil Rights Movement in this country?
Speaker 2: Extremely important.  But I disagree with many people when they define the Civil Rights Movement as to when it began.  Everyone seems to feel it began with [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  It began in the '60's [1960s].  But the Civil Rights Movement began years and years ago, with people like A. Philip Randolph, with the sit-ins that we had in Chicago [Illinois] in the early '40s [1940s].  I think the battle for equal justice and civil rights has been going on a very, very long time.  And, of course, it's important what's been done, and it came to a point in the '60s [1960s], and it's had nothing but beneficial effects for the rest of us.  It's opened up avenues that were completely closed.  I can remember in the '40s [1940s] just in Chicago, you couldn't be served in a restaurant downtown.  And, of course, you didn't think of going into a hotel.  But all that's been broken down mainly through perseverance through The Civil Rights Movement.  But The Civil Rights Movement didn't just begin with Martin Luther King or just begin in the '60s [1960s].  But every little bit that each person has done in his or her own way, every bit has helped.  All of us are not equipped to preach, a lot of us don't like to march to show our discontent.  We all have our own way of fighting against injustice.  But each person who finds his own way to do it, each person should be accepted for that.  And whatever inroads we have made, it's been because of a, an accumulation of persons just doing it their way.
Story_ID: 62158
Speaker 1: What has been most significant to you and your success as a black person in America?
Speaker 2: Well, it may sound trite, but what is success?  I don't feel that my success has stopped, that I've reached a pinnacle that I can say, "I am successful".  I think there's so much more to be done, and so much more that I can do, that I don't like to talk in terms of success.  But what has brought me as far as I've come, I think, first, is having a loving family that has nurtured me, encouraged me, a family that's felt I could be anything I wanted to be.  I think the ability to get rid of chips on your shoulder, going into a room and saying, "That person's not going to like me, so therefore, I'm going to sit back and wait."  I've never had that.  I can understand why it can develop with people because if you're rejected day-in and day-out, and if you don't have strong backing, a family or some other mentor, some other person who can shore you up, it's very easy to develop chips on your shoulder, so that you do not reach out.  I think the only way you can be truly successful is to have the ability to reach out and include others to help you and for you to help them.  It's a give and take situation.  I think as a result of being able to reach out, many opportunities come your way.  And then the problem is to determine and to recognize an opportunity and take advantage of it when it does appear.  I say that because when I first was invited to go on a corporate board back, I guess it was in '69 [1969] or '70 [1970], at that time, women and minorities were not being accepted on corporate boards.  And someone told me when I went on my first board and then my second, and all together, I've been on about eighteen over the last twenty years, they started out by saying, they've only asked you because you're a female and because you're black.  I never had to respond to that because I was able to recognize, here is an opportunity that I can make it into something real.  I gave up early looking into the minds of people as to why they do certain things or why--what is the motivation for asking me to do anything.  It's up to me or to you to look at an opportunity and decide to turn it into something real.  And I think because of that, one corporate business board attracted another and another and another so that over the years, as I said, I've been on about eighteen of them.  But the greatest satisfaction came a few years ago when after I had started out as what they call a "token" because you're black, you're female and people assumed you're just there as a figurehead, was for the president of one of the major corporations, when he invited me to come on the board, he said, we're inviting you on the board because of your expertise, Mrs. Lafontant, and your knowledge.  And to me that was one of the greatest days and moments I've had, to be recognized for your ability, to be recognized for what you can bring to a company, and that you can actually help a major, billion-dollar company.
Story_ID: 62159
Speaker 1: And I'm wondering if that has given you a different perspective of--has it given you a different perspective of what blacks should aspire to or where we fit in the world or (laughter)--maybe I'm grasping, but I guess I'm wondering, can you cull from anything that you've experienced over the last few years that has been more global and bring it back to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --When one speaks of globalization, even though I have been Ambassador at Large and U.S. Coordinator for Refugee Affairs for four years, which is required me to travel all over the world to visit refugee camps and to see how refugees are treated, my travels started much longer ago because being on the board of Trans-World Airlines, for instance, I had to travel to Egypt and to other foreign countries in the interests of the airline business.  Then when I was on the Mobile Corporation board, I had to go to places like Saudi Arabia, and I was beginning to learn about the different cultures of people around the world.  So when I took this job as Ambassador at Large, which required me to travel all over Asia, Africa, Middle East, Europe, of course, I found not only should--I regret that not more African Americans are not able to see what I saw because when you travel to other parts of the world, you find that three fourths of the rest of the world is, looks like African Americans.  I mean they're dark skinned.  They're non-white.  Let's put it that way.  They don't call 'em black 'cause they're not black.  You don't call 'em Negroes 'cause they're not Negroes or they're not African Americans.  But they're people that look more like me and that has been an eye-opening experience for me.  So that I would dare say that African Americans who have the ability to travel should not hesitate to do so.  It's a learning experience.  You learn about different people's cultures, you learn about what's happening in the rest of the world.  But then it tends to make you appreciate what you've left here in America.  Now, we, in America, I believe, I can honestly say that we are spoiled.  And, yes, we have problems in America, but when you travel to countries outside of the United States, you realize how blessed you are to be in America.  And it's not only because of the physical things that we have that the others don't have.  A lot of these countries have no rights, no freedom at all.  It's hard for us to imagine that, well, not only, it's--in a lot of these countries, you can't vote.  You talk about women in parts of the world, women are really worth half of a man.  There's so many things you learn, and I would feel that the best way, let us say an African American could take advantage of an opportunity to travel to see other lands and to learn from other cultures would be perhaps to join the Foreign Service, find out how to get into the Foreign Service, after you leave high school, how to take an exam, get into the Foreign Service and go around to help other people.  It's, it's such a widening experience to be able to see how other people live.  And it makes you much more appreciative of what you have when you see that.
Story_ID: 62160
Speaker 1: One last question.  What would you like to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: That's a good question, and I, I guess I haven't thought much about that because I'm so busy doing things.  I, I suppose answer of what I would wanna be remembered for would be that I was a caring person.  I did the best I could do, and I never gave up trying to be productive.  In other words, I don't ever intend to retire.
