Story_ID: 40125
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Jeffery Keith Lee, J-E-F-F-E-R-I, K-E-I-T-H, L-E-E.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind the spelling of Jefferi in your name?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, it's really connected to a story of all of my brothers and sisters.  We all have the same initials, JKL, and so my sister--well, we all, there's a little different spelling in it.  My sister's name is Jaie, but it's spelled, J-A-I-E.  Mine is Jefferi, J-E-F-F-E-R-I.  I have a brother who's J-E-R-I, that's Jeri, and then there's Juan, and he's just J-U-A-N.  But we all have "K" as our middle initial, and, of course, Lee is the last name.  But how the E-R-I got there, it was, as I've been told, my aunt who actually named me, just wanted to spell it differently.  And she spelled it differently.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born January 24th, 1957 in South Boston, Virginia, down in Halifax County, down in the southern part of the state.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I am currently the general manager of WHUT Television here.  It's a public television station owned by Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia].
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: That's a good question (laughter).  Today's date, I believe is October 24th, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Presently, we're in one of the studios at WHUT on the campus of Howard University.
Story_ID: 40126
Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as a warm up basically.  And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Ooh, a favorite food?  No, I don't think I have a favorite food.  I like a lot of foods, but I don't have one that just says, whoo, I've gotta have that.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Now, I know the answer to that one.  No, I do not have a favorite color (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I believe the fall is my favorite time of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I'm kind of partial to Lake Louise, right now in Canada.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Favorite phrase came from my youngest son, who was suffering from cancer at the time, and he said to me once, he said, "Daddy, even if I die, it doesn't mean that God didn't heal me."
Story_ID: 40127
Speaker 1: All right, now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side separately from your father's side and then we'll put 'em together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Nannie Jane, Carrington was her maiden name.  And, N-A-N-N-I-E, J-A-N--Jane, J-A-N-E--you know, I haven't looked at mother's name in a while.  And Carrington, C-A-R-R-I-N-G-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania on July the 20th, 1934.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what are the stories and what kind of occupations did they have?
Speaker 2: My mother's side is a little spotty because there was a lot of premature death in my mother's family.  My mother lost her parents, her mother [Adelaide Carrington] died when she was six years old.  And her father [Henry Carrington] died when she was eight years old.  And she then went to live with an uncle of hers in South Boston, Virginia.  The uncle, his name was Jewel Carrington, and he was in the insurance business in South Boston.  So my mother went to live with him when she was eight years old.  She had an older brother who was twenty years old, I believe, when their father died.  And he could not care for my mother so he sent her to live with their uncle.  Both my mother's parents, I believe died of cancer.  I don't know exactly what cancer it was, but her father and her mother both passed of cancer when she was young.  So like I said, she grew up in South Boston, Virginia with her uncle and aunt.  She went to school there.  She went to, matriculated into Virginia State [University] after high school.  She went to Virginia State.  She did not graduate there, but she did go to school there for a couple of years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was, so she was in the early '40s [1940s], she was going to Virginia State, I guess, mid-'40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, mid-'40s [1940s], yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 40128
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Nannie Jane Carrington] talk about growing up, what it was like for her?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother died when I was fourteen [years old].  So we didn't talk a lot about her growing up.  She died of breast cancer, complications from breast cancer when I was fourteen years old.  So we really never talked a lot about her growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was your mother like?
Speaker 2: My mother was a mother.  She was a lot of fun sometimes.  Sometimes she could be kind of scary sometimes, when she, when we made her upset.  But my mother was about family, and taking care of her kids.  My memory, I have good memories of my mother.  I have really good memories of my mother.  I don't have a lot of them, but the ones that I do have are really good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother was, over in Alexandria, there's a recreation center called the Nannie J. Lee Memorial Recreation Center.  And it was named after my mother because when we were young, growing up there, there were no facilities on our end of town for recreation for the kids.  So we would have to walk to other parts of the city for recreational facilities, and we would come home at night in the dark and the cold.  And she and some other neighbors started something they called the "Lee South Side Parents Club," and it was not named after us.  It was, the school we went to down there was Robert E. Lee Elementary School.  So it was the Lee South Side Parents Club.  And my mother was one of the first presidents of that club.  And they did a lot of civic work and partitioned the city and so forth to get facilities down on our end of town so that we wouldn't have to walk all over the city to get to facilities, especially in the wintertime when it got dark really early because I played football, basketball, baseball, all of the different sports in the city.  And so she didn't want us out in the streets at night or in the cold, and even practicing outside 'cause there were no indoor facilities.  So the Nannie J. Lee Memorial Center, which is over in Alexandria, Virginia was named after my mother.
Speaker 1: Was it named after her while she was still alive?
Speaker 2: No, it was not built, nor named after her until she had passed away.  The community petitioned the city for the name when they built the facility several years later.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well, that's something.  That's really--she made a mark on the community.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, did she have employment otherwise?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she, my mother was a clerk at a grocery store for a while.  She worked at the State Department in an administrative capacity for a while.  She also, she did a, she worked at another place where all I was ever told that she couldn't talk about what she was doing.  And it was, had something to do with the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], I believe, but she could never really talk about what she did there.
Story_ID: 40129
Speaker 1: I'm gonna go to our father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name was General Washington Lee.  That's his real name, G-E-N-E-R-A-L, Washington, W-A-S-H-I-N-G-T-O-N, Lee.
Speaker 1: Now, this is, there's gotta be a story behind that name?
Speaker 2: Well, (laughter) I don't know.  You know, my grandmother's, my father's mother's middle name, her name was Mary Grant.  Strange was her maiden name.  But Grant was in her name.  Washington was in my father's name, but they were the only ones in the family that had some kind of connection.  She had an uncle, I believe, that was, had "General" in his name or something, somewhere down the line.  So it was somewhere in the family.  That's why she named my father that, but General Washington Lee was his name, and every school I ever went to, when they asked me what my father's name was, I would have to repeat it again 'cause nobody could believe it the first time they heard it.
Speaker 1: Now, this is something that happens in black families.  You have these names.  There's a receiver that played for the [Cleveland] Browns named Lawyer Tillman.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, I remember.
Speaker 1: Different, you know, Majors.  I know some Majors, and--
Speaker 2: Majors, oh, yeah, there were, Majors, Lawyers, and Lieutenant, I mean they had all ranks.  I mean I've known people with a lot of names like that.  I remember once in junior high school, I was sent to the principal's office once because I told the teacher my name--my father's name was General Washington Lee.  So she sent me to the principal's office.  And my father knew the principal, or the principal knew my father, so he walked by and he saw me sitting in the office, and he was like, Jeff, why are you here?  And I said, they don't believe my father's name.  So he said, get up and go back to class, and I'll take care of that.  So, but it went through elementary school, junior high school.  I didn't have as big a problem in high school, but it did rear up once or twice.
Speaker 1: Okay, that probably was a liability on the basketball court and that sort of thing--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --if somebody found out, I would think--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --I know how kids would do.
Speaker 2: The kids, it really wasn't with the kids.  Kids always thought it was cool.  They said, they always thought, your father's name is General?  And they would always say, that's cool.  It was more the adults that wouldn't believe it.  They couldn't, they just didn't believe it.  They thought I was playing with them or making it up.  And I said, no, his real name is General.  That's not his title, that's his name.
Speaker 1: Now, what did he go by?
Speaker 2: Gen, all of his friends called him Gen, G-E-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or Lee, a lot of coworkers just called him Lee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40130
Speaker 1: And is there--now, with a name like that, you're tempted to ask, especially with Alexandria [Virginia], you know, being the place--now, was he [Lee's father, General Washington Lee] born in Alexandria?
Speaker 2: No, he was born in South Boston [Virginia] as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was born in February 12th, 1932 in South Boston, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, but I'm tempted to ask if there's a family relationship to the Lees, the Lee estates or the Washington estates?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) There's not one that we have been able, at least that I know of, that we can connect.  There was a family reunion once where they talked about it, and because if some people go back, and it--the family goes back toward where the Lee family plantation or farm was.  And I think then it got skewed because the discussion went--'cause there were some Lees, there were Lees at this family reunion.  And the names were L-E-I-G-H, and L-E-E.  And the joke around the room was, the ones that spelled it L-E-I-G-H were the house slaves and the ones out in the field couldn't spell, so they just shortened the name to L-E-E.  So ya'll [ph.] got the name so you could tell (laughter)--and it was very interesting.  Most of the L-E-I-G-Hs were light skinned, and all of the L-E-Es were dark skinned.  And so it, this little story that started going around to some people, made some sense, said all the dark-skinned people who worked out in the field got the L-E-E name, and all the light-skinned people who worked in the house were named L-E-I-G-H.  So, that died though in family lore, but it's nice--it pops up again, now and again.
Speaker 1: That's interesting because in my hometown, there are Leighs, L-E-I-G-H that are very light.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they--all of 'em are.
Speaker 2: It was interesting, the L-E-I-G-Hs were mainly light skinned, and then the L-E-Es were brown-skinned people.
Speaker 1: Well, it might be a clue to something.
Speaker 2: Might, might be (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, but so, but the Leighs, in Virginia, there's so many Leighs that own lots of property.
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't get in that line.  We weren't in the property-owning line.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm talking about the white Leighs--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --so I'm just thinking your ancestors may have been attached to one of those.
Speaker 2: Could have been.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they have lots of family members that own lots of property in Virginia.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, I think we, as far as I know, I can go back to my father's grandfather that people know about, but much--not any farther than that as far as I know.
Speaker 1: So was he a Lee as well?
Speaker 2: He was a Lee.  He was a Lee.  My grandfather was a Lee, and my father.  So, but that's as far back as we can go, around Meadville, Virginia, somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: All right, I was gonna ask you if South Boston was the--
Speaker 2: No, this, my grand--my father's grandfather, my great grandfather hailed from around Meadville.
Speaker 1: What was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: His name was Willie.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Willie Lee.
Speaker 1: This is interesting.  So he named his son General.
Speaker 2: Named his son, General, his only son.  He had four daughters and one son, and his son was named General.  And his name was Willie.  He was known around as Big Willie.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was a truck driver.
Story_ID: 40131
Speaker 1: And, now, did your father [General Washington Lee] have stories of growing up in South Boston [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  He had stories of growing up in South Boston.  South Boston was an agricultural community.  All of Halifax County agricultural community.  So he talked mainly about growing up as a child, working in the, you know, sometimes they worked in the fields, and there was corn, there was corn, tobacco.  It was a big tobacco area.  Actually, South Boston was a major distribution point in tobacco.  It had a train depot that went through there, and a big warehouse where tobacco was stored and then shipped out on the train.  Just growing up there, it was really a rural area.  And it was more about family.  Everybody's family was intertwined, you know, in terms of working together.  I don't know a lot about growing up there until he went to the [U.S.] Army.  I mean he went to join the Army and went to Korea.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did he get a chance to finish school in South Boston?
Speaker 2: No, he did not finish school.  He went to Korea and did not finish high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he actually served in Korea, during the Korean War?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And did he have stories about the war?
Speaker 2: The one story he tells about being in Korea is he was in a unit that shelled.  As he said, we would be behind the hill and we'd shoot shells over the hill at the enemy and so forth and so on.  The one story he would always tell that I remember was one day they were shelling and he turned, he and a buddy of his were there.  And he turned away for a moment, and a shell came in and exploded.  And his buddy was gone.  He just disappeared.  And he always told that story about Korea, and the fact that, you know, how dangerous war was, and how unforgiving that war was.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a, one of the first--well, there were black soldiers that saw combat in World War II--
Speaker 2: In World War II.
Speaker 1: --but for the most part they had 'em in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, towards the end of World War II, there were black soldiers that saw some combat, but it was all in Korea.  They saw frontline combat in Korea.
Speaker 1: Right, was he in an integrated unit that you know of, or--
Speaker 2: I think he was in an integrated unit.
Speaker 1: Those were the days when they were trying to do it, if--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were forcing it together, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, did your--was your father wounded or hurt in Korea?
Speaker 2: No, he was not wounded, came home okay.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Story_ID: 40132
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Nannie Jane Carrington and General Washington Lee] met and how they got together?
Speaker 2: If there is, I have never heard it, I don't think.  They lived--it's interesting.  They lived both in South Boston [Virginia], but they lived on opposite sides of the railroad track, so to speak.  And that's just a geographical thing.  My mother's family lived on one side of the track.  My father's family lived on the other side.  And they were different in that my mother's family, as I said earlier, my great uncle was in the insurance business, so he was a suit and tie guy.  And my [paternal] grandfather [Willie Lee] was a laborer, I mean truck driver, and handyman and farmer.  And my father's side of the family, my grandfather had hunting dogs, and he would go hunting and so forth and so on.  My mother's side, they would go to the store and buy everything they needed.  I remember as a kid, going down there when we would go.  We would go over my father's family's house 'cause there were more kids there.  And my aunts had their kids and everything.  We would all, me and my brothers and sisters, would play and do everything over there.  And then in the evening, my brother and sister would go back to my mother's side of the family, over on the other hill, so to speak and because life there was more like life was for us here.  They sat down at the table and eat dinner and so forth and so on.  And on my father's side, it was just, to me it was just more fun.  I stayed on my father's side of the hill and my brother and sister would go on the other side because they would actually go out to dinner.  My aunt, you know, great aunt and uncle would take my brothers and sister.  They would go out to a restaurant.  We never went out to a restaurant on my father's side of the family.  I remember asking my grandmother [Mary Lee], what are we having for dinner?  And she said, come here.  And we walked over to the window, and she looked out in the yard, and the chickens are running around in the yard.  And she said, that one right there.  And so we'd go out and the kids would chase chickens all over the yard and catch a chicken and we'd be trying to figure out, okay, now, what do you do with it, 'cause some of us lived in the quote, unquote "city," and some of us, some of my cousins were all from down there.  And they would be trying to tell us, okay, now, you gotta kill it.  And we're like, whoa, what do you mean kill it?  And so we'd be out there playing with the chicken trying to kill it, and, you know, my grandmother would come out and just grab the chicken by the head and snap his neck, throw it in the water, (laughter) hot water.  And we were like, okay!  But it was like going to a different world when I would go down to my grandmother's house.  In the fall, especially wintertime, when they would kill hogs, like they wouldn't do that on my mother's side.  But on my father's side, the whole community would get together, and they started killing hogs.  I remember the first time I actually saw how that happened, I was totally amazed, and the whole process.  And I remember my grandmother was sitting there--one of the most vivid memories I have of it, my grandmother was sitting there cleaning intestines.  And I was like, grandma, what are you doing?  What are you doing?  And she would go, well, you will see it again.  Don't worry about it, don't worry about it.  You will see it again (laughter).  And it was the whole process, everything from the actual killing of the hog, the cleaning of the hog, the whole process was an education for me.  I never looked at meat the same (laughter) after that.  But, and the original question, how my parents met, I don't know.  They just were--they lived together and worked together--I mean they went to school together.  They probably met in school.
Story_ID: 40133
Speaker 1: Now, your father's [General Washington Lee] a little younger than your mother [Nannie Jane Carrington]?
Speaker 2: No, the other way around.  My father's two years--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --older than my mother.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so he was born in--
Speaker 2: He was born in '32 [1932].  She was born in '34 [1934].
Speaker 1: Oh, '34 [1934], okay.  '32 [1932], okay.  So I had it down as--okay, '32 [1932].  She's '34 [1934], not '24 [1924].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right, that's what the problem was.  At any rate, well, so they, did they get married after he came back from Korea [Korean War] or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: They got married after he came back from Korea, and she got, I guess that's when my sister was born (laughter), first.  She was born in South Boston [Virginia], and I was born in South Boston.  Then my next brother was actually born right here on the campus at Freedman's Hospital, right next door.  The School of Communications here at Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] is the old Freedman's Hospital.  And so my brother that's right after me was born right there.
Speaker 1: Okay, I didn't realize that.  The old--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  The School of Communications, we were just there yesterday, and it says Freedman's--what's that on the top?  Freedman's Square or something like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Freedman's Square, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: But that is the old Freedman's Hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So is there a story as to why your parents moved to Alexandria [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a gentleman who lived in Alexandria by the name of Mr. Green.  His name was Charles Green.  And he had a big house over on Alfred Street in Alexandria, probably had six bedrooms in it.  And he was a single man.  He was, when I met him, he was an elderly gentleman, but a lot of people from South Boston, friends of my father's, when they came North, were looking for work, they would stop at his house.  And they would stay there until they got a job or got settled and then moved on.  It was sort of the Way Station for people from South Boston who came North, whether they were going on to New York or whether they were stopping in the Washington [D.C.] area, they would go to Mr. Green's house as sort of the place to get your legs under you, you go out and get day work and so forth.  And my father came up that route as well, and he came, worked at Mr. Green--I mean lived at Mr. Green's for a while.  And then my mother and my sister and I were in South Boston.  And then he came back and got us, and then we all came up here.  And we lived at Mr. Green's for a short period of time.  And then we moved to a house in the projects over in Alexandria.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let's see, what kind of work did your father do?
Speaker 2: He was a maintenance engineer in the D.C. public school system for a while.  He did labor work, road work so to speak for a while.  Then he became one of the, I think he was in the second class of African Americans to work in the transit system for D.C. Transit here.  So he drove bus for many years, and then transitioned into the--when they built Metro, he transitioned into the train system, a train operator.  But he drove bus for many years.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 40134
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents [Nannie Jane Carrington and General Washington Lee] personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, I take after my father.  I spent all my life up to this time saying I wasn't my father.  But I'm every bit of my father, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, what traits of your father's do you have?
Speaker 2: Sense of humor, focus, getting the job done, the sense, I mean that's tied into the focusing link.  It's, all important was to get the job done, really the whole thing of how you do it wasn't important as much as getting it done, but how you did it, I mean neatly.  His thing was, and there's a little difference in us though, that he was a stickler for neatness.  It was like, I'm more of let's get it done.  We'll worry about the frayed edges later.  He was not like that.  He would, very meticulous about how he did everything he did, but he got it done.  And so in certain ways, we're not alike.  But in a lot of ways, we're alike in terms of, like I said, the goal was to get the job done, to be focused when you're doing it, to--and always have a sense of humor about what's going on.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your mother, what was your--well, you talked about her.
Speaker 2: Well, my mother, like I said, she died when I was fourteen years old.  A lot of what I remember about my mother comes from her last year of life because it was rough.  Like I said, she had breast cancer, but she, so she spent that last year sick, and in bed a lot of the last six months or so.  So a lot of it was, a lot of what I remember is taking care of my mother.  A lot of it was talking to her, I mean her being in a lot of pain.  But even before that, I mean in looking back before that, it was, she was always about us doing the school work, you know, going to school and making sure we did the things that we were supposed to do because we went to, my parents put us in my--my oldest sister and I, we went to a Catholic school when everybody else and all of our friends would go to the public schools in the neighborhood.  They didn't send us there.  They sent us to a Catholic school.  And we went there through, I went there through third grade.  My sister was in fourth grade, I believe, when we left and we moved to the other end of town.  And we went to Robert E. Lee Elementary School, which was a public school.  But we started out in the Catholic school and went into the public school system.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40135
Speaker 1: Can you name your siblings, starting with the oldest and work your way towards you and can you tell us what they're doing now?
Speaker 2: My sister, Jaie, J-A-I-E, and Moon is her last name.  She's a housewife down in the Newport News, Norfolk area of Virginia right now.  Her husband is retired military, and she has three children.  She has one grandchild now, I think, yeah.  Then my brother that's next to me is Jeri, J-E-R-I, Lee, and he's in Arizona now.  He lives in Goodyear, Arizona outside of Phoenix [Arizona].  He's retired law enforcement.  He was deputy chief of metro police for many years here.  So he's retired and living out in Phoenix--Goodyear, Arizona, and then Juan is, J-U-A-N.  He is living in Maryland right now, in Southern Maryland, and he works for metro in their metro police department as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I also have a sister, or a stepsister.  My father [General Washington Lee] remarried later in life, and had, I have a stepsister.  Her name is Terrie, and she lives in New York City.  And she has, she's married and has a daughter.  Her name is Ava.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 40136
Speaker 1: So, now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: An earliest childhood memory.  I have, my favorite childhood memory.  I don't know if it's actually my earliest or not, but I remember once our family was on a picnic over at Hains Point here in Washington [District of Columbia].  And me, my sister [Jaie Moon] and my father [General Wahington Lee] got up and went for a walk around Hains Point.  And my, I think my brother, Jeri [Lee], was the only one--he was the baby then.  He was the youngest.  And he stayed on the blanket with my mother [Nannie Jane Carrington].  And so me and my sister and my father went walking.  And when we decided to go back, my father said, okay, I'll race you back.  And I was like, yeah, okay, right, right.  And he said, I'll give you a head start.  And so my sister and I took off running, and I mean we took off running.  And to me, at that time, we left him back in miles.  And he started running after us, and I just knew we were gonna beat him back.  But it was--he just kept running and running and we were running and laughing and having such a good time.  He caught us just before we got back to the blanket.  And he beat us back there.  But it was that laughter, that excitement that just, all of me, and everything that went along with that, of him, you know, just grabbing us at the end.  And all of us just laying down on the blanket laughing.  And that sort, if I had to pick one moment in my childhood that keeps coming back to me as a memory, it would be that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40137
Speaker 1: Now, did you live in the same neighborhood in Alexandria [Virginia] the whole time or did you move?
Speaker 2: We moved.  We lived on what was called the North Side of town when we were really young, when we first moved out of Mr. Green's house.  We lived on First Street, and I think it was 812 First Street, and we went to St. Joseph's Elementary School.  I remember being in school there the day President [John F.] Kennedy was assassinated.  And all of the nuns around the school were crying and everything, and we didn't know why they were crying because they hadn't told us yet.  And they finally told us, and they, excuse me, closed school that afternoon.  And all the parents came to pick us up and everything.  But, yeah, we lived up on the North Side of town in the projects up there, and then later we moved down, excuse me, the southern end of town on Payne Street in Alexandria, down on the South Side.
Speaker 1: How old were you then?
Speaker 2: At the end of the third grade, I guess I was eight, nine years old, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We moved into a newly integrated area of town.  I think we were maybe the third or fourth black family in that community.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what were the projects like in those days?  Were they anything like they are now?
Speaker 2: See, "projects" is an interesting concept because as a kid, you don't know you live in the projects.  That's your home.  I didn't know I lived in the projects till I was gone, till we were gone many years.  It was home.  There's no such thing as the projects to somebody who lives there, at least it was with me.  We had a ball.  I mean the kids, I mean running into each other's home and playing in the alleys, and running.  We just had a great time.  I remember my father [General Washington Lee], seeing my father on the weekends because he worked a couple of jobs.  And so he would be gone before we got up, and we'd be in bed when he got home.  So that cycle went on for years, that--and then on the weekend, we would see him.  But he constantly worked, and so we were home with my mother [Nannie Jane Carrington] a lot, and outside playing, more than anything else.
Story_ID: 40138
Speaker 1: What's Alexandria [Virginia] like in terms of the demographics?  I mean is there a black side of town or are they just in different places around town or--
Speaker 2: There is a--it's a much different city today than it was in the '60s [1960s] and the '70s [1970s] when I grew up there.  Back then, it was really a segregated--not by law, but just by where people lived.  Down in the, on the South Side of town or the Eastern part of the city was where--blacks lived in the northern, I mean on the North Side and some on the South Side, and the West Side up, was mainly all white because Alexandria in '71 [1971] I think was when they came up with is plan called the K6222 Plan for Education.  So they put you in the--that was their integration program.  And so you went to kindergarten through sixth grade at one school.  Then you went to another school for seventh and eighth grade, and you went to another school for ninth and tenth grade.  And high school was just eleventh and twelfth grade or senior high school was just eleventh and twelfth grade.  And so they bused our area.  We went up to the west end of town and went to a school called Frances C. Hammond, which was all the way up at the other end of town.  And so we went to school up there, and they would bus some of the kids who lived there downtown to George Washington, GW, which had been, along with, well, Parker Gray, which had been "the" black high school in Alexandria for many years.  Then they made GW a high school, I mean a middle--well, not a middle school.  I don't know what they called it.  Frances C. Hammond and GW were the two high schools in town at the time.  They made them ninth and tenth grade when they opened up T. C. Williams as the senior high school in town.  But the areas of town where people lived, most of the black people lived in the eastern part of the county, I mean the city.  Most of the whites lived in the western side, except there was this little enclave down in Old Town Alexandria, the official Old Town Alexandria, which was predominantly white.
Speaker 1: Okay, were black people a significant part of the population in Alexandria?
Speaker 2: Back then, I think Alexandria had less than 100,000 people in it.  It wasn't a significant part of the old, whole town, but it was a significant part of my experience in Alexandria.
Speaker 1: I just wondered what percentage of black folks were (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Don't hold me to this.  I think probably 20 percent.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 40139
Speaker 1: Now, in grade school, were there any--what did you like to do when you were in school?  Now, you were, you came up, considering what you're doing now, you were raised up during what they call the Golden Age of Television, and all that, you know.  Did you watch television?  Did you like it?
Speaker 2: I did.  I watched television.  I liked television.  I did not think of television as a career or as something that I might do later in life though.  It was television.  It was just that place where, that little box where things happened.  In school, early in school, I don't know.  What were favorites about school?  What did I like to do?  I spent the first two--I know the first two years I spent in school, in Catholic school, afraid.  I mean (laughter), it was (laughter)--those sisters were serious.  I mean in terms of everything, from homework to attitude to everything you did, you had to do right or there was a price to pay for it.  So the first two years of school--It was really interesting, my memories of that were I grew up Baptist, still am, but I went to a Catholic school, so I was in church, a Baptist church on Sunday and back then we went to mass every Monday in Catholic school.  And they still spoke Latin in the Catholic church at that time.  So Sunday morning, I'm in Baptist church.  Monday morning, I'm in the Catholic church where Latin is spoken and a whole different tradition of worship was going on.  And I vividly remember that to this day of sort of flicking that switch, which I never really did because I just sat there quietly and kneeled and sat down and kneeled and sat down when everybody else did, never really understanding the traditions of the Catholic church at that time, and not understanding them as a young child.  So those were the early years, first, second and part of the third grade.  Then I moved to Robert E. Lee [Elementary School] which was a different kind of environment.  I think when I first went to Robert E. Lee, I think I had thirteen kids in my class.  When I left there in the sixth grade and the demographics had changed, I think I had twenty-six kids in my class.  It was, it was that kind of transition from when we first moved in that neighborhood to later on when I left that school.  School then was really, it was about learning, period.  I mean it was a different kind of environment in that it was similar to Catholic school 'cause we had a lot of committed teachers.
Story_ID: 40140
Speaker 1: I remember that in elementary school, had something that was rare and I didn't see a lot of later on, 'cause I had a black, male teacher.  There were actually two when I was in elementary school.
Speaker 2: What was his name?
Speaker 1: One was Mr. Jordan, Jordan.  He taught history, I think, and he not only taught history, he taught how to be a black man in school.  It wasn't part of the official curriculum, but it was his official curriculum, that you would not be a disaster.  So you had to not only learn the material, but you had to learn how to learn the material.  I mean how to be, and there was another one, Mr. Fund, who taught science.  And he would actually make you go to the back of the room and comb your hair, brush your teeth, do all the things that you need to do to present yourself well.  So it was not just enough to come to class.  You had to come to class a certain way.  And so those were the, those examples that were present in school, in early elementary school that had an impact on me.  And I think going all the way through and even watching my kids go through school, one of the things that they missed, I think, was having black, male teachers.  It was very important to me growing up.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, were these two teachers in middle school or--
Speaker 1: They were in elementary school.
Speaker 2: Elementary school.
Speaker 1: We had some other ones in middle school or in high school.  I don't think I had any--the only black, male teacher I had in middle school was a gym teacher.  But what I also had in elementary school was the lady, I think her name was Mrs.--we just called her Miss Rose.  And she was a custodian in the school.  But Miss Rose was your grandmother also.  And she, I remember one time we were having a wet paper towel fight in the bathroom one day.  We were just wetting paper towels, throwing 'em at us.  And she walked right into the boys' bathroom.  And she didn't say anything.  She just looked at us, and then she said, line up.  And our teacher was out in the hall with all the girls in the class, in line, waiting to go back to the classroom.  I think we were coming back from lunch or something.  And Miss Rose came in and she just said, line up.  And as we walked past her, she spanked each one of us on the behind.  And we knew exactly why she was doing it.  One, she was embarrassed for us, but, two, she said, I mean she knew that, we knew that that was wrong, that what we were in there doing.  Not because she had to clean it up.  I never got the impression that she was angry because she had to clean up the mess we made.  She was angry because we were not acting the way we should have been acting.  And it was those kinds of models, role models and examples for us that really stuck with me over the years.
Story_ID: 40141
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Phys Ed [physical education] probably (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: History, history, yes, looking back on it, history was my favorite.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And growing up in Virginia, Virginia history, American history, just World History, I just got to like history, knowing about what was going on and why it was going on, what had happened before.
Speaker 1: So did you have a sense that the region was historical in terms of--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, just because of the curriculum.  They just drive it in you in Virginia anyway.  Virginia history is probably the most important thing you learn (laughter).  They teach you--you go on trips to Williamsburg, and, you know, Jamestown, and you do all those things.  But history, I just sort of liked history.
Story_ID: 40142
Speaker 1: Now, and you say you liked sports too.  Were you talented in any of the sports?
Speaker 2: I think I was (laughter).  We had a baseball team when I was growing up.  We played in a league in Alexandria [Virginia] where we were the, one of maybe only two black teams in the league.  And we would play all the other teams, and they would have uniforms and nice attire and everything.  All we had was a Kiwanis Club t-shirt that the City Recreation Department had provided to all the teams.  But we didn't have the spikes, the cleats, the pants, the long stocking, socks, any of that.  We had a team, and we called ourselves "The Raggedy Nine," and because that's all we had were these t-shirts and we had cut-off shorts and whatever we had, you know, tennis shoes or whatever else we had.  But we were the Raggedy Nine.  And our coach worked for a living, like everybody else did.  And he, we would all crowd into his one car sometimes and drive to a different part of the city and have games.  Sometimes he couldn't do that because he had to work so we had to walk to the game.  So we would be the Raggedy Nine, and we'd just show up at these parks, and we'd play.  And we had some great athletes on our team.  I remember we would play games and they would stop the game because we were ahead so far.  Or we would be out in the field, and we would say, okay, guys--or we'd be batting really, and we'd say, okay, the next three guys up, strike out so we can go out in the field.  I mean we would, this was a great team, I mean, but it was only nine of us.  And we had to show up every game, everybody, and we nicknamed ourselves the Raggedy Nine, and it was the most fun I ever had playing any sport.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What position did you play?
Speaker 2: I played center field and left field.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did you have a hero, 'cause I know the Senators weren't here.  They were gone by then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Senators were here for a little while, but they soon left.  Now, I was a Willie Mays fan, playing, when I was young, baseball.  I was a Willie Mays fan.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were never a fan of the Orioles over here?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't really get into the Orioles till much later.  I really wasn't even a Senators fan as much as I was an individual player fan.  I was a fan of individual players in the league, not so much a team.  We used to--I was a crossing guard, a patrol, when I was in elementary school.  And every year, there would be this big thing where all the patrols from the region would go to a game, at the, a Senators' game.  And so I think I went to one or two of those, but I was really never a Senators fan, other than the fact they were our hometown team.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40143
Speaker 1: All right, so as you're getting towards middle school, are you thinking about what you wanna be when you grow up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, not yet, not yet.  I'm not thinking about that yet.  Like I said, when I was thirteen [years old], I think, my mother [Nannie Jane Carrington] got sick.  And so that was toward the end of my eighth grade year, and she got progressively worse, and then in my ninth grade year, I mean all through the end of the eighth grade year and through the summer.  And in ninth grade year, my mother passed away.
Speaker 1: So this is 1971?
Speaker 2: '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In 1971, I--we had a, I was on the football team, and we had a game that day.  And I remember the night before getting all my stuff ready and everything for the game.  But then that morning when my father [General Washington Lee] came in and told me that my mother had passed away, I'll never forget, he says 'cause he never forgot, he said, the one thing he remembers is when he told me he, I said to him, he said, your mother passed away this morning.  And I said to him, "Who, my mom?"  And he said, yes.  So that time is really a blank.  I don't really remember a lot about what happened after that.  For that whole year, it really was not a whole lot that I can recall, other than I remember later that spring, it was sort of the first time that I had really allowed myself to accept that my mother was gone or really, really recognize it.  I guess I spent the first part of it saying, I intellectually know it, but emotionally, never dealt with it.  And so it took a while for that to happen.  But I don't really remember a lot about that time.  And so that year is really a blank.
Speaker 1: So did all of you stay at home, I know you were saying your father worked very hard and he was up, you know, first light and gone--
Speaker 2: Yeah, after my mother passed, there was a great coming together in our community where we got a lot of support from the community.  But my father then again, went to another level.  He was still driving bus, but they had a thing at the time where they had something called the swing shift, where you could go to work for a few hours, and you'd have a middle time off and then you'd come back and work the end, the other part of the day.  He would, he--when my mother passed, he started working these swing shifts where, excuse me, early in the morning, three, four o'clock in the morning, he would get up and go to work.  And then he would come back home around seven or eight o'clock to get us ready for school.  And then he'd go back to work again.  And we always used to joke about one day he was doing this, and he was coming home on his swing shift and the fire trucks were coming down the street.  So he pulled over to let the fire trucks go by.  Little did he know the fire truck was going to his house.  We had, I don't remember--my brothers and sisters, we all tell a different version of this story as to who actually set the fire, the stove on fire.  But needless to say, the stove was on fire, and the fire trucks came and didn't damage the house or anything, put, they just had these big fans and everything, blowing everything out.  But as my father got closer to the house, he kept seeing these fire trucks and these fire trucks and low and behold, when he got home, the fire trucks were at his house.  So we had a little discussion about that, but this process of him going to work early, coming back in the middle of the day or in the morning, and then him going back to work again, that's what we did for a couple of years.
Story_ID: 40144
Speaker 1: So, well, tell us about--now, you went to T.C. Williams--
Speaker 2: T.C. Williams.
Speaker 1: --High School?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And there's an interesting story about the name of the person who, I mean the person it's named after.
Speaker 2: As I understand the story, T.C. Williams was the superintendent of schools in Alexandria [Virginia].  And he had been one of the people who were adamant about not integrating schools in Alexandria when there was, I think Parker Gray, which was the black high school in Alexandria, and G.W. [George Washington], they wanted to play a game, and he was no, no, no, no.  That would not happen.  So some way the school got named after him.  I have no idea how that happened, but I know that, I think they changed the law in Alexandria that now they can only name schools after presidents or something (laughter) like that.  But, yeah, T.C. Williams was quite a guy to be having the school named after.
Speaker 1: And then he saw his dream collapse when they started integrating the schools.
Speaker 2: Dream collapsed, but he, his name lives on.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, I mean you're living proof 'cause you go to T.C. Williams--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: --which was built, you said in '65 [1965], so it's fairly new.
Speaker 2: I think it was '65 [1965] or '67 [1967].  I can't remember which was the first year there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the racial demographic, like was it--
Speaker 2: It was the same, what they had done by the time I got to T.C. Williams and which they did it in '71 [1971], they had broken the city up and so there were--G.W and Hammond were high schools.  But they made them secondary schools, and T.C. was really the only high school in the city.  So everybody in the city who was in the eleventh and twelfth grade went to T.C. Williams.  So that's all that was there by this time.  I think it has changed some now, but back then, it was just juniors and seniors at T.C. Williams.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the percentage of black folks would be about 20 percent--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: 20 percent, yeah.
Speaker 1: --like the city.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: About the same as the city.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you play high school sports there?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  I played football.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what position did you play in football?
Speaker 2: Play defensive back--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --on the football team.
Speaker 1: And did you gravitate to certain subjects in high school?
Speaker 2: I would say, again, history was my, the thing I liked the most.  School, again, by the time I got to high school, I had really--well, I had an interesting time in high school.  I would be, I had a physics class in high school.  And I struggled in physics.  And I wanted to get out of the physics class, but my guidance counselor wouldn't let me out of physics.  So she said, stay through the semester.  And so I struggled through physics for the semester, and then we got to the end of the semester.  There was an exam.  And the physics, in the entire physics department, there were only three As on the exam.  I got one of them.  And so they, the physics teacher called my guidance counselor, and said he can do this work if he wants to.  He just doesn't do it.  So they called my sister, who was also at the school, who was an outstanding student, they called her to the guidance counselor's office.  And they had the professor there, and then they called me.  They came and got me out of class, and they said, you proved that you can do this work if you want to do this work.  You just don't do the work.  Why don't you do the work?  And I never gave them a good answer to why I didn't do the work.  I don't think I had a good answer as to why I didn't do the work.  But I think it was, or I know it was in me.  I just wasn't doing it at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40145
Speaker 1: Now, when you were in high school [T.C. Williams High School], did they have television production at all?
Speaker 2: Yes, but I did not participate in that.  I was not in, a little bit but not to really say--I was more involved in high school in athletics.  Like I said, I played on the football team.  I was actually a manager on the basketball team.  But I did more in other areas like, I was part of a program called SEE.  It was for Social Environmental Education.  And what it did, it taught us how--skills, communication skills.  And what we would do, would partner up two high school students and go into junior high schools and work with students in junior high schools with their communication skills and things.  So I did that as sort of a extracurricular activity when I was in high school, along with, like I said, the football.  I played football and then worked with the basketball team in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was there any particular teacher or administrator that you would consider like a mentor in high school or someone who was a role model for you?
Speaker 2: Well, from the football team, there were a couple.  There was, you know, Coach Boone who was the head coach of the football team, sort of stuck with everybody who ever played for him.  You have Coach Boone stories.  But intertwined with all those stories, there's some real messages in what he was doing and what he was trying to say to us.  So he--
Speaker 1: Was he the role model for the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the--
Speaker 1: --the movie.
Speaker 2: --the movie, 'Remember the Titans'.
Speaker 1: 'Remember the Titans'.
Speaker 2: The role that Denzel Washington played, and that was Coach Herman Boone.  There were a lot of messages in, because he was more than a football coach.  He was teaching us life, life skills as well.  And a lot of things, having to do with race even at that time 'cause there were many times we'd have conversations about, I don't care what color you are.  I don't, you know, we're a team and so forth, would bring us all together.  So that was, Coach Boone, and there was Coach Hines also.  He was the offensive line coach.  He was the gregarious, strong personality there that just said, you know, whatever you do, you know, be committed to it, be strong.  And Coach Hines was there.  So those two were from the, on the sports side.  There was a teacher who taught the SEE program that I was involved with.  There were two teachers there.  One was a male teacher by the name of C.J., I think C.J. Reed was his name, and then Kathy Hintz (ph.) was her name, who was a teacher there.  And the way they taught this program was really something that has stayed with me throughout my life in terms of what I got out of that program, just communication skills and just the ability to see people differently and how you inter--social interacting with people.  It's a whole new way of just, introduced me to a whole new way of looking at my place in the world and other people's place in the world and how we communicate and how we go forward.
Story_ID: 40146
Speaker 1: And it also led to something else that was very valuable to me in life, was after I graduated from high school [T.C. Williams High School, Alexandria, Virginia], Kathy Hintz [Lee's teacher in high school] was moving to the West Coast to Ventura, California.  So we rented a Winnebago.  It was her and C.J. [Reed; Lee's teacher in high school], Kathy and myself and three other students.  We drove across country to deliver her to California and then drove back.  We took thirty-three days to drive across country and back.  And that was one of the memorable times in my life that I spent, you know, going across this country and meeting a whole lot of different people in a whole lot of different situations, seeing different things.
Speaker 2: So this is the summer after you graduated?  You spent like a month going across--
Speaker 1: The summer after I graduated.
Speaker 2: And coming back?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And you all lived in the Winnebago?
Speaker 1: Lived in the Winnebago, and sometimes we got, I think C.J. had some family in Nebraska so we'd get out and stay in a house a couple of days there, but most of the time was living in this Winnebago.
Speaker 2: So, did you get a chance to see the National Parks and that sort of thing?
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  We saw the National Parks, I mean I went, I got to see in the Dakotas, what is it?
Speaker 2: Black Hills?
Speaker 1: Black Hills in the Dakotas.  We saw Mount Rushmore, went to the Grand Canyon, I mean, you name it.  I mean saw the, what is it, the Cow Palace in South Dakota also, but a lot of different places, all across the country.  We sort of took a mid-Southern route across and then a Northern route back.  It was quite educational up in, I mean the Rockies, up in the mountains and the plains.  I mean it's really, it was really, to have been able to see all that firsthand and just read about it or hear about it or see it on TV or in the movies or something, to actually see the land, meet the people, to see that there's a vast difference in, not just the topography of the land, but the people who inhabit the land, all across the country.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, this is--had you been very, had your range very far from--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Hadn't done much traveling before that.  There was one other trip that we had taken.  One of the things that my mother [Nannie Jane Carrington] wanted us, wanted to do was to take, was to go to Canada.  She wanted to go to Canada, and she never got to go there.  So my father [General Washington Lee] made a point of, a couple of years after she died, he rented a Winnebago.  This was the first time I was ever in a Winnebago, and we took a trip, a family trip to Canada.  And it was sort of the trip that my mother never got the chance to take.  And--did that fall or something.  Anyway, but we got to go to Canada in a Winnebago, and that was the first trip I'd ever taken.  Other than that, I had been to, down to my grandmother's house in Virginia somewhere.  That was all we'd ever done.
Story_ID: 40147
Speaker 1: What kind of counseling did you have about college in high school [T.C. Williams High School, Alexandria, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: College in high school.  I had a guidance counselor who tried her best to get me to go to college.  My sister [Jaie Moon] was really good student, and she was going to college.  She was on her way to Bucknell [University] in college.  And she was a very good student, very on top of all of it.  I, on the other hand, was not a good student nor even looking at that.  I remember one day I was sitting in English class, and a note came to the teacher, said I had to go to my guidance counselor.  And I went down to the guidance counselor and there was a captain from the [U.S.] Army there.  And they were, and he said, we would like to offer you an opportunity to go to West Point [United States Military Academy].  And I'm like, excuse me.  He said, yes.  We understand you would be a good candidate for West Point, and we'd like to offer you an opportunity to go to West Point.  And I thought about it.  I said, I'll get back to you.  And (laughter), and I did not avail myself of that opportunity.  But my sister, on the other hand, had sent several applications to colleges for me, on my behalf, without my knowledge because I hadn't applied anywhere in my senior year.  And she applied to several schools, and I got this letter one day saying that I had been accepted to Missouri Valley College, and I'm like, where in the world is Missouri Valley College?  It's in Marshall, Missouri.
Speaker 1: So your sister's really, she's looking after you--
Speaker 2: My--
Speaker 1: --in the place of your mother [Nannie Jane Carrington].  She's trying to--
Speaker 2: She, my sister--
Speaker 1: --fill that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She stepped in when, well, let me--I'll tell you this story.  My sister wanted to, she had an opportunity to go to Europe to study her junior or senior year in high school.  And it would have caused in her mind and in my father's [General Washington Lee] mind, a hardship because she was really the one who was--I had a younger, my youngest brother was six years old when my mother died.  So there was a six-year old, a fourteen [year old], I was fourteen, and my--I had another brother who was twelve, and my sister, who was fifteen at the time.  So she took over as the one who came home from school and cooked and did some of the things, other things that a mother would do around the house.  So she did all that, and she had an opportunity to go to Europe to study.  But she couldn't do it.  She wanted to go badly.  But she and my father talked, and it wasn't the best time for the family for her to do it.  So she missed out on that opportunity.  And she really stepped up in a lot of ways that me and my brothers never, one, talked about, acknowledged or whatever.  But she was a large part of the glue that kept the family moving and kept it together when my mother passed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And all the way to the point where, like I said, she applied to college for me.  I never, I never applied to college.  My sister applied to all the colleges, except, later on when I sort of figured out I did wanna be in college, I transferred out.  But the initial application, she sent all the applications in.
Story_ID: 40148
Speaker 1: So, now, Missouri Valley College [Marshall, Missouri], now, had you ever heard of it before?
Speaker 2: Never heard of it, never heard of it.  Never heard of it.  I came, I went in the locker room one day, and the coach called me in the locker room and said, you wanna go to college?  And I said, sure.  And he said, look, I got an opportunity.  You can go to Saint Paul's College [Lawrenceville, Virginia].  He said, I can get you a scholarship to go to Saint Paul's College, to play football.  And then by this time, I did have an idea I wanted to do radio, TV and film.  So I said, do they have a radio, TV and film program?  I looked into it, and they did not have that kind of program.  And so I decided, I said, well, I wanna go do this.  I know I'm not going to the NFL [National Football League], so football would not be what I wanted to do.  So I decided not to take that opportunity, and I took this opportunity to go to Missouri Valley College.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't play any sports there at all?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.
Speaker 1: And did they offer you a scholarship or something?
Speaker 2: No, did not offer me a scholarship.  My parents [General Washington Lee] had to pay for that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 40149
Speaker 1: Now, well, tell us about Missouri Valley College [Marshall, Missouri].  What's it like and--
Speaker 2: Well, it was, first of all, it was the first time I had ever flown on an airplane, when I went to college, went to the airport, the whole family went to the airport, and I got on the plane and went to Missouri, went to--flew into Kansas City.  The school itself is in a city, a town called Marshall, Missouri.  It sort of sits halfway between St. Louis and Kansas City, and South.  And it's a rural town that had very few people, I think the school only had probably 2,000 students.  And the--if that many.  And the town was very small.  I mean it was so small they would not allow a McDonald's franchise because they thought it would take all the business away from Dairy Queen and the other little shops in town.  But I got there, and I worked, studied in the radio, TV and film department, had a radio show that I used to do.  I started in the, I had some classes in the drama department.  I, I played--I was in one play.  It was called 'Green Pastures'.  I played God (laughter) in 'Green Pastures'.
Speaker 1: To utilize that voice.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Actually, they had something called, in the awards, they had something called a Viky Award because the school mascot were the Vikings.  And they had a Viky Award, and that year I won Best Actor, Viky Award for my portrayal of God in 'Green Pastures'.  But that was fun, that was fun.
Speaker 1: Now, is this a predominantly black college?
Speaker 2: No.  It was a, it was a Methodist school.  It's still out there.  It was not a predominantly black college.  It, I think we had maybe 10 percent black population at the school.  It really wasn't a lot of blacks at all.  We all learned to play Bid Whist though.  We got that much out of it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so were there any particular teachers there that really were important?
Speaker 2: I had a philosophy teacher that I really liked.  I don't remember his name though.  I just remember his class and how open it was, and how free thinking it was, and I liked that.  You had to read the material, but once you knew the material, he would allow for this openness of discussion that was really interesting for me.  One thing I do remember about classes there, I remember one in a sociology class, teacher went around the classroom and was asking people about where they were from, their family was from and what generation they were.  And so he went around the class, and he went to every--people were saying, you know, fourth generation Italian, fifth generation Irish, and so forth and so on.  Then when he got to me, he skipped me, and he went to the next person.  And I said, whoa, whoa, wait a minute.  Why did you skip me?  And his answer was interesting.  He said, I didn't wanna embarrass you.  He said, most African Americans don't know their heritage.  And I'm like, really?  And I said, I said to him, I'm second generation Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.  I said, my mother [Nannie Jean Carrington] was from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.  That's enough for me.  You can't just skip me.  I said, but to have that approach to it, I mean it was interesting.  He just said, that he just assumed I had no knowledge of my history.  And really, he wasn't trying to help me to get any either.  So that's one of the things I remember about that school.  The rest of it, I mean at that school also was, the time I met a gentleman who was a preacher, a Baptist preacher in the town, a black guy who was a Baptist preacher in the town, who was taking courses at the college.  He was married and had a family.  And he would gather with some of the black guys, most of the black guys at the school, and we would go work at his church, I mean clean the church and so forth and so on.  But every now and then he'd invite us over, one or two of us, to the house and have dinner with his family.  And we'd get to talking and everything.  And he was a really good center point and hub for all of us there.  We used to just call him Rev, and he was a place where we could all go and get that centering.  And he was a mentor, and telling us about what we should be doing, should be thinking and so forth and so and so.  That was a point there where that was really important at that time in my life, and it was important to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40150
Speaker 1: So you had a radio show [at Missouri Valley College, Marshall, Missouri], and what did you show--what kind of show did you have?
Speaker 2: Oh, God, I don't even remember what I called the show.  I just know I did a radio show at night, just, I mean just R and B music.  I mean at the time, in the mid-'70s [1970s], everybody was playing disco.  I didn't like disco.  I just wanted to stick to the basic R and B [Rhythm and Blues genre] lineup.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you played older cuts?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Back in the time when we played albums.  I mean it was fun.  You'd put this big album on, and you put the needle, and you'd turn, ah, and you'd back it up, quarter turn so that when you clicked it on, it'd get up to speed by the time the, it hit the music.  Ah, it was fun, it was fun.  I had a good time doing that.
Story_ID: 40151
Speaker 1: Could you see like, you now, bright career opportunities, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, eventually, I thought this is what I wanted to do, television, radio and TV.  They didn't have, we had a small TV set up there, but it wasn't a broadcast station or anything.  But I got to work cameras and some of the other audio equipment and things and said, now, this is interesting, something I might wanna do.  And so I decided to transfer from there after my sophomore year, and I transferred to the University of Maryland at College Park.  And the reason I chose there was because it was close to home, number one, and it was a big TV market, I mean the Washington [District of Columbia] market was right here.  And I said, for internships and things of that nature, you get to work in the real world.  So I did that.  I transferred to University of Maryland, College Park, and I got internships at the CBS affiliate here in town, Channel 9.  And so that's when the TV bug sort of got going.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is WDVM.
Speaker 2: DVM, right.
Speaker 1: All right, now, what was the atmosphere of WDVM?  Did they have--now, by then, they had black on-air personalities, and all that.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they had, by this time, we've got black, I mean, J.C. Hayward and Max Robinson were the first African Americans on TV here in Washington at Channel 9.  And when I got there, they also had a black program--well, immediately he wasn't there, but Ed Jones came in as a program director.  And then we also had Ron Townsend, was the station manager who was an African American or from Trinidad.  I don't know where Ron was from (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, this is in the year '79 [1979]?
Speaker 2: '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, so I have notes here that you worked on a show called 'Morning Break'?
Speaker 2: 'Morning Break' with Carol Randolph was the host of the show.
Speaker 1: It was like a morning talk show?
Speaker 2: Like a morning talk show like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It would come on--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --like a 'Donohue'.
Speaker 1: --after the news or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, sort of like a 'Donohue', where she would interview different guests, and they'd have sometimes cooking shows and different activities like that.  So it was a variety--not a variety show, but a, your basic morning show that was on in the early '80s [1980s], late '70s [1970s].
Story_ID: 40152
Speaker 1: Now, was it, did you, did somebody at the University of Maryland [College Park] like, you know, help you get that job (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I had an internship at Channel 9 when I first came there, working at 'Morning Break' first.  And I did the internship there, and after the first, I think it was after my first internship ended, I got home, and I got a phone call from the production manager, and told me that there was a job open at the station and to get my behind back to the station and apply for that job that was in the mailroom.  And I said, mailroom, I wanna be in TV production.  And I was told, no, you wanna job in the station.  You get where you wanna be later, but right now, you want a job in the station.  So I came back and applied, and I got a job in the mailroom.  So I was working in there.  So, once again, I got great advice from people around me.  The guys in the mailroom, I would sit and talk with them, and they'd say, then they would tell me, we know everything that's going on in the station before anybody else.  He said, so, understand that we know everybody.  And I got to know from the people in the mailroom to the general manager's cook, all the people who were behind the scenes, but heard everything that was going on in the station and knew how things worked in the station.  So that was a great education for me to be in that environment, right, didn't have to be sitting in the executive suite all the time.  These are the people (laughter) who really under--who knew what was going on, really, whether they understood or not was another issue.  But they knew what was going on.  And so after I spent some time in the mailroom, there was another job open, film--I forget the actual title of the, the name of the job, but it was the person who put breaks in film.  The station ran movies in the afternoon, and somebody had to look at the movies and decide where the breaks went in the movie.  Now, because of union restrictions, I couldn't actually do the film editing, but I could look at the film, but the marks in the film where the breaks would be and everything.  So I did that for a while.  Also, in the station doing that and doing other kinds of things whatever I could find, the people who needed something done, I would volunteer to do that to be that person, to be with them.  And then the management trainee position opened up, and I was asked if I--I was, I'll never forget.  I was at a function one night.  The sales department was having a function at an ad agency somewhere downtown, and the general manager of the station was there.  And one of the people introduced me, one of the station employees introduced me to the general manager.  And he said to me, he said, what--so, after we were talking, he said, so what do you wanna do?  And I said, I want your job.  And he said, oh, really (laughter)?  He said, okay, we'll see about that.  And so from that day forward, so then I got into the management, the training--management trainee program.  And I got to go around the station and see all the different areas of the station, and how they worked from the programming side to the sales side to the news side, to the operations side, technical side, all of the different things that help put the station together and make it work.  So that was, again, a very good learning experience.
Story_ID: 40153
Speaker 1: Then when that [management trainee program at WDVM station, Washington, District of Columbia] ended, I got, there was a job opening for an associate producer in 'PM Magazine'.  So for a while, I was associate producer on 'PM Magazine'.
Speaker 2: So this is like an "after-the-news," you know, magazine type of--
Speaker 1: This was a magazine-type show that basically went all around the region.  We did features and what we call departments, little short stories and stuff on different--and it was a syndicated show, not a syndicated show, but it was a show that in a lot of different cities around the country had their own version of 'PM Magazine'.  And stories would bicycle from show to show, I mean city-to-city.  You could have a show that we produced here would go national, and then could be on other 'PM Magazine' shows across the country.  So I did that for a while, learned a lot in there from people who were actually very good at their crafts, from editing to storytelling, the writing of stories, learning all about the things that really go into making what you see on the screen happen.  Now--
Speaker 2: Now, you also helped out with 'Harambee' too, which is like a public affairs--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: One of the things was, I worked on Harambee as well.  That was a public affairs show that was done at the station.  I was doing that similar, at the same time I was doing, or after I stopped working on 'Morning Break', I went to Harambee.  Joyce Campbell, I think was producing that at the time.  But, again, that was an entree into cultural things in the Washington area.  It was very good too.  I enjoyed that.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you're getting, you know, you're really doing some production work, and--
Speaker 1: I'm getting a good, wide view of everything that goes on.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you were at CBS through 1981, I guess, right?
Speaker 1: '82 [1982] is when I left.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, were there any particular people there that you would consider to be like mentors or people that were essential for your development?
Speaker 1: Absolutely, there was, I consider myself extremely fortunate.  Like I said, there were probably only five or six black program directors in the country at that time, and one of them happened to be at Channel 9, Ed Jones.  Then there was Ron Townsend who was a black general manager, one of the few in the country, happened to be at Channel 9, executive producer, programming, Saundra Butler was there, a black female.  And I fell into an environment that was not only teaching, but nurturing.  And that was extremely important.  And because it was, it was Ed and Saundra and Ron who nurtured me in and taught me, but it was also Ed that said to me one day walking down the hall--I passed by him in the hallway, and he spoke, and then he went, [finger snap], I got somebody I think you should meet.  He's starting a black cable network, and you might wanna talk to him.  And I was like, do I need a job?  I thought I was doing okay.  He said, no, no, no, let me, come around to my office.  I'm gonna give you the number.  I want you to give him a call.
Story_ID: 40154
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're talking about Black Entertainment Television, BET.  So what happened?  Did you contact Robert Johnson or someone at BET?
Speaker 2: No, one day I was walking down the hall.  I was still working at WDVM.  And the program director passed me in the hall, and we spoke, and then he sort of snapped his finger and went, I got somebody I know you--I need you to talk to.  It's a guy named Bob Johnson.  He's starting a black cable network, and I was like, whoa, do I need a job?  I thought I was doing okay.  He said, no, come in my office, said, I wanna give you his number.  I want you to call him.  So I called him, I called Bob.  We set up a meeting.  I went to meet him down in Georgetown.  We had lunch, and I wanted to find out what he wanted to do because I was not interested if he just was gonna slap together a bunch exploitative films at the time and call that a (unclear).  That's not what I was interested in.  But he laid out a vision for a company that was much more than that.  And so after some back and forth and some things he asked me to do and so forth, he offered me a position.  And I accepted it, and I remember the day, my last day at Channel 9, I went in to see Ron Townsend, the station manager.  And I told him, I said, I think I'm gonna change my mind.  I'm not gonna go to BET.  I'm gonna stay here.  Now, the BET offer was paying me probably three times what I was making at Channel 9, but I was afraid.  And I didn't know--because there was no cable in Washington [District of Columbia].  And there was really no, I think I was the fifth or sixth person that was ever hired at BET.  And so I said to Ron, I think I'll stay here.  And he said to me, I'm gonna do you a favor.  You're fired.  You're not staying here.  You're going.  He said, we'll always be here for you.  But you need to go.  And once again, as I said earlier, the, not only the teaching but the nurturing that I got at Channel 9 with that group of people was once again evident, and they sent me on my way.  And I, I basically said, I said, hey, I was twenty-five years old, I think at that time.  I said, hey, if this doesn't work I'm still young enough to go get a real job.  So if this cable thing doesn't work out, but I went--
Story_ID: 40155
Speaker 1: So Washington [District of Columbia] didn't even have cable?
Speaker 2: Didn't even have cable.  There was no cable.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And Bob [Robert Johnson] had put a satellite antenna in his backyard, and he could see BET [Black Entertainment Television].  But when I went home at night, I could not see it.  I could not see the product at all.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any peers or any, were there any other African Americans doing this, a similar job at NBC or--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Nobody was doing a similar job because the job was everything.  I mean I was, when I first started at BET, I would be there in the morning when the UPS man came and delivered tapes.  I was the one that picked up the tapes and took 'em to the tape room and took 'em down to master control and did everything that you had to do.  I think my first desk at BET was an upside down trash can with my briefcase on top of it.  That was my desk.  So it was everything from trying to get new programming to trying to figure out how our distribution was working, where, everything.  So there was no real peer that I could call and say, okay, how are you doing this 'cause they were doing parts of it, but nobody was doing all of it.
Speaker 1: So, and you say that BET was already up and running on cable outlets--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --around the country?
Speaker 2: BET was on one night a week when I started.  It was on Friday night, I believe, only on from 11:00 pm to 2:00 am.  That was BET.  That was all it was, and what I came on to do is to get on seven nights a week, and we were expanding it to six hours a night, seven nights a week.
Speaker 1: What was the programming when you came on?
Speaker 2: The program would be a movie, a film.  There would be--Bob had gotten a hold of a lot of films that were in the public domain.  And so one night would be a movie.  He had even started doing some black college football games, so one night would be a black college football game.  But it, since the whole network was only a three-hour block, that's all that there was to it.  So when I came on, we talked, and he was wanting to move to a seven-night a week schedule, six hours a night, starting at 8:00 pm and going to 2:00 [am], I think it was, yeah, 8:00 to 2:00 is what we were going to.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what were your first projects, I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, we had three months to get this from a one-night a week, three-hour network, to a seven night, six hour network.  So it was, the first things were to just get the programming.  How would we get enough programming to fill that content?  And--
Speaker 1: Well, who else was on the production team.  You said it was only about six of you, right?  (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, those six--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Not everybody--
Speaker 2: --that's counting Bob.  And they all weren't in production.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They were in things like financial side and then sales.  I mean either--the sales force at that time was all freelance.  There was actually nobody who worked for the company who was actually in sales.  It was all farmed out.
Speaker 1: Who was that, Lewis Carr?
Speaker 2: James Ebron was first in the sales side.  Lewis came after James.  But there was a couple of people doing finance.  There were a couple of people doing, Bob and a couple of people doing just marketing and affiliate relations.  And that was it.  It wasn't no whole lot of--and when I came on, there was a partnership in the company with Taft Broadcasting.  And Taft owned the station here in Washington, which was Channel 20.  And so we did an agreement with Taft to do our distribution from there and a production agreement where we would use their production staff to do some programming for us.  And we would also purchase some programming from the local Taft station here that we would air on the show.  They did a show was coming, had a show coming out of there called 'Petey Greene's Washington'.
Story_ID: 40156
Speaker 1: Now, [Ralph Waldo] "Petey" Greene [radio and talk-show host], explain a little bit about Petey.  I know there's been a movie made about him.  It's not really accurate.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: But it was a, you know, a hit movie.  But--
Speaker 2: Petey was a Washington [District of Columbia] icon.  I mean he was a community organizer, par excellent.  He was just well known in the community of Washington, D.C. and beloved by everybody.  He had his own style, his own way of talking, his own everything.  He was non-apologetic to anyone about anything, would--Petey would be one of those people that you say speaks truth to power.  And everybody loved Petey Greene as far as I'm concerned.  And if you tell by when Petey passed, the outpouring that came to honor him at his service, but Petey was a guy who had been incarcerated, come out, I mean he could talk to the mayor and he could talk to the homeless and everywhere in between.  [Cough] Excuse me, but that's who Petey Greene was, and it was just called 'Petey Greene's Washington'.  And he would just sit in front of a camera and talk.  Sometimes he'd have a guest, sometime he wouldn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was Petey ever on BET [Black Entertainment Television]?
Speaker 2: Oh, we took Petey's show straight from WDCA [station] and put it on BET for a couple of years, yes, we did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40157
Speaker 1: So you're working with Taft [Broadcasting], and they already had Petey's [Greene] show.  So it came over to BET [Black Entertainment Television].  Then what else?
Speaker 2: Oh, God.  I eventually got the 'Morning Break' show from WDVM [station, Washington, District of Columbia] and put it on, but one of the staples of the channel was 'Bobby Jones Gospel'.  There was the 'Bobby Jones Gospel Show', and that was probably our most successful show during that time.  We bought a lot of pre-produced shows.  We didn't produce a lot until the music video things came along, and then we started to producing and playing more music videos after that started.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause 'Bobby Jones', that was produced--was that produced in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, 'Bobby Jones' was actually produced in Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The very first Video Soul program, however, was produced in Chicago.  There was, God, I can't recall his name right now.
Speaker 1: Not (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Virgil Hempfield, I think his name was.  He produced a video show for us out of Chicago called, I think it was Video Soul's predecessor.  I don't know if it was called Video Soul or not.  I can't remember that, but that was the first video show that was actually on the channel.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is, okay, so this is--yeah, the early days of music video.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: That's the Golden Age of music videos, actually.
Speaker 2: Golden Age of music video.  I mean music videos, from a programming standpoint, was important to the growth of BET in several ways.  One, it was, when videos came into play, it was--your programming came in the mail.  Music companies would send us the music videos, and we'd play the music videos.  And from a quality standpoint of what it was, it grew to be something much more than what it was when it started because a lot of the early videos were just performance videos.  Later on, they got to be much more elaborate and everything.  And so you got really high-quality products by just opening the mail and putting the program on.  But there were some things early on in terms of competition when MTV [Music Television] was starting to run, I mean came into play.  They started running music videos, but in the beginning they would not run videos for black artists.  And so when we started running videos, and then, I think Michael Jackson's 'Thriller' was the big thing that took the world by storm.  And then they started slowly wanting to air some of the black music videos as well.  And they did some things where they would do deals with the record companies for exclusivity where they would be able to run the videos and nobody else would run the videos.  And so we had some times where we had discussions with record labels about that whole practice of exclusivity of music videos.  I remember vividly, once we had a situation with Motown where I believe it was a 'Boyz II Men' video that MTV wanted on an exclusive basis.  And there was a lot of the Motown roster that MTV did not touch.  But we, at BET would run.  And so I was actually on my way to South Africa, and my office called and said that Motown was giving the 'Boyz II Men' video to MTV on an exclusive.  So I said, okay, call Motown back and tell them to give all of their lineup to MTV because we would not be running any of it anymore.  And then I got on the plane.  I think I got on the plane in Boston [Massachusetts]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now, this is going back to baseball days.  This is hardball (laughter).
Speaker 2: This is hardball.  I mean when I got to South Africa, there was a message at the desk for me from Jheryl Busby, who was the president of Motown at that time.  And I called Jheryl, and I said, I just told him, I said, Jheryl, I understand, I understand that they're gonna go exclusive.  I said, but you gotta make a decision.  Is the exclusive run on MTV worth your entire roster getting no run 'cause I'm not running any of it if you're gonna be pulling the best of what you have and giving it to MTV.  And he said, Jeff, they're--I said, I understand, Jheryl, but that's your decision to make.  So we ran the 'Boyz II Men' video and all of the other Motown videos.  But that was a thing that went on for a while in that, those early days.
Speaker 1: About what year is that when this took place?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: What year is this?
Speaker 2: This was probably, oh, oh, that particular incident probably happened later, but there were many more earlier ones.  That particular one was, that may have been in the early '90s [1990s] though.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 40158
Speaker 1: So I wanted to make the point that, like BET [Black Entertainment Television] turned its first profit in '85 [1985], I think.
Speaker 2: '85 [1985].  I still have the dollar.  Bob [Robert Johnson] gave everybody, every employee a dollar enclosed in Plexiglas.  And it says down at the bottom, "BET's first dollar."  And so everybody got a dollar in Plexiglas.  I have it somewhere at the house.
Speaker 1: And so, what got BET over the hump, you think?
Speaker 2: It was music videos.  It was the ability to run programming without exorbitant prices.  We came up with a programming schedule and lineup that was highly using music videos.  And that was the ability, that along with distribution expanding because we had to move from satellite to satellite to satellite in terms of, to have more cable operators able to carry our signal.  So we had more cable homes.  We had lower programming costs, and we had more advertising participation because of that.  And so those three things coming together helped BET to become profitable.
Speaker 1: Now, correct me if I'm wrong, but just observing it from the world here, looking at the cable station itself, BET, you know, especially, I guess after the Michael Jackson Thriller thing as you said, the "Billy Jean" in "Thriller" are like super popular on MTV [Music Television] and on BET.  You got Donny Simpson, "Video Soul".  He started, when did he start, and did you have a role in hiring him?
Speaker 2: Yes, Donny, oh, God, I believe Donny started in '83 [1983] or '84 [1984] when we started video, producing "Video Soul" here in Washington [District of Columbia].
Speaker 1: I think that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And Donny was at KYS then.  He was top radio here in the city, and everybody knew him.  And I remember having a conversation with Bob one day, and I said, you think we can get Donny Simpson to do this show?  And we'll never know unless we ask.  And we called and Donny agreed to do the show.
Speaker 1: He had a good rapport with the audience.  He was smooth, and it worked.  He was a local person here, but he sold all over the country.  Everybody--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Everybody, yeah.  The original show, Donny was with a co-host, Donny and a lady by the name of Sheila Banks, co-host the show in its very early years, yes.  And, but Donny knew, was well known in the music business long before that.  I mean he started in Detroit [Michigan] and his mother, I think owned a music store in Detroit.  And he was doing radio in Detroit before he even came to Washington.  So Donny was well known.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you, and when did--was it Bev Smith's Talk Show?
Speaker 2: Bev Smith.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: God, what was Bev Smith's show called?  Anyway, but, yes, Bev Smith did a talk show for us for a while.  We had, our first news show was done by Paul Berry, who was a local anchor here in Washington on WJLA.  We did a weekly news show with Paul Berry.  I mean eventually Ed Gordon did news for us, but Paul was the first to do it.
Speaker 1: Did the FCC [Federal Cable Commission] mandate that you do news in cable?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, there were no mandates that we do news.  We wanted to provide a round, more rounded programming opportunity or offering to the viewing audience that was not just music videos.  And so we started doing news and public affairs programming.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 40159
Speaker 1: I'm trying to think of the other features here of BET [Black Entertainment Television] in those days just from Washington [District of Columbia]?
Speaker 2: We did black, college sports for a long time.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, football and basketball games.  In the area of lost leaders from a financial standpoint, the games were not very lucrative, not very lucrative, not lucrative at all in terms of the cost of them versus what we got in the advertising.  But we did the Bayou Classic for many years, a game down in New Orleans.  So there was the CIAA [Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association] tournaments and the MEAC [Mid Eastern Athletic Conference] and the SWAC [Southwestern Athletic Conference], all of those, we did those throughout the '80s [1980s] and most of the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Something else was in my head, and I can't, let's see, but--so BET, so by '85' [1985], did you have a pretty dependable lineup of programs, and were you running twenty-four hours a day?
Speaker 2: Right, we were twenty-four hours a day by then.  I think in '86 [1986], we went twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the number of hours you stayed on the air had to do with developing the programming to keep--
Speaker 2: Well, we stayed on the air because, first of all, I mean that's what everybody was doing.  Everybody was on 24/7 by that time.  In the early days, early '80s [1980s], there were a couple of shared channels.  The channels were shared by different programmers, but by the late '80s [1980s], now everybody's on 24/7--well, mostly everybody's on 24/7.  And we had to be on 24/7 for distribution purposes and everything else, get the cable channels means you wanted to have a twenty-four hour offering.  So when we went to that, we expanded more on the music video because the model worked, and it was just a good model for us to grow with.  We then expanded, did more news and public affairs programming.  We continued with the sports programming.  So we were going along pretty good then.
Speaker 1: And the youth program on Saturday afternoons, I remember--
Speaker 2: Youth programming, Sheila Johnson at that time wanted us to get into doing more things, targeted to the youth, 'Teen Summit' was a program that we did that was initiated by Sheila.  Then started to come along, the other things like 'YSB Magazine', when we got into the magazine business.  We had gotten into the restaurant business there for a while.  These were all things that happened much later on, but because of the desire to serve different parts of that African American audience.
Story_ID: 40160
Speaker 1: I know Lewis Carr was telling us that when he went to advertisers, he would often talk about how the community, the black community was more loyal to BET [Black Entertainment Television] than say, you know, the community watching some other stations.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  We had a lot of brand loyalty, and it displayed itself in many ways, I mean just in terms of, just viewers, one, but I mean I recall several times, one time in particular, I was in San Francisco [California].  And I was checking into a hotel late one night.  And I was at the counter, and I was checking in.  And I gave the lady my credit card, and it had BET on the credit card.  And she just went berserk.  She said, "Are you with BET?"  She said, wow, we love BET at my house.  We, and it was that kind of feeling that you would get traveling all over the country when we would meet black people who'd seen BET.  It was a sense of, we were caretakers of a, you know, a national monument to some extent, that BET was ours.  And the public felt like that.  I remember another time when we went public.  This was back in '91 [1991], I think it was when we first went, New York Stock Exchange, when BET went public.  The night before we went public, Bob [Robert Johnson] wanted all the senior staff to go up to New York and spend the night and be there for in the morning.  Well, Curtis Simmons and I, our kids had games that night.  So we wanted to be here for our kids' games.  So we told Bob, we'll get there first thing in the morning.  So we stayed, went to the game, that morning, got up, rushed up to New York.  And we got in a cab from the airport and we told the guy we wanted to go to the Stock Exchange on Wall Street.  And he said, what's the address?  I'm like, you don't know where Wall Street is?  Anyway, we finally get there.  The traffic was so bad.  We were running late.  So we jumped out of the cab, Curtis and I, and went running up the street.  And we got to the building, it was the employee entrance to the Stock Exchange.  And we went in the building, and this, the guy said, I'm sorry, you have to go out and go around and go in the main entrance.  And there were two gentlemen back behind the desk that were in the maintenance crew.  They were African Americans.  And they said, they spoke up and said, are you with BET, 'cause everybody at the New York Stock Exchange knew that BET was going public, everybody black anyway, knew that BET was going public today.  They said, are you with BET?  And we said, yes.  They said, come on.  We'll take you in there.  We'll take you in.  And they marshaled us in.  I mean they escorted us in all the way up to the chairman's office.  And the pride that was in these guys' faces and in their voice, of something that they had nothing to do with.  They weren't stockholders in BET, weren't going to be stockholders in BET.  But the pride on their face, the excitement that they had, just by, it was like, it's still ours.  This is ours going public today.  And I always remember that about BET and my time at BET in that, it made me feel like I was the caretaker of some real property that black America said was ours.  And that was really touching.
Speaker 1: This was almost like being an ambassador for a country.
Speaker 2: In a lot of ways, in a lot of ways.  I remember traveling in, I was in South Africa once, and I was at a reception.  And a guy came up to me, he said, well, first of all, he said, how does it feel from being--being from the greatest country in the world?  I said, ah, (laughter), "Don't believe the hype all the time."  (Laughter) And I said, it's not all paved in gold.  I said, that's not really what it's like.  And he said, well, how does it feel, you know, BET, being this great entity?  And I told him, I said, you know, it's hard work.  I mean I told him, because for so long, I was just at work.  I didn't have the idea or the sense of how the rest of the--not just the country, but the world saw us.  And it was really eye opening several times to go to different places and see that the brand itself had gone beyond just a television channel.  It spoke to something of black America.
Speaker 1: So this is the first black television cable network, first black company to go to the New York--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Public, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Stock Exchange, go public.  So this is, you know, people felt like it was theirs, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Which sets us up for (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: No, we won't get there yet.  We're--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) (whew).
Speaker 1: We move along, you know--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 40161
Speaker 1: But, so, well, tell me more about program development, 'cause you [Black Entertainment Television; BET] went into the jazz programming--
Speaker 2: We lost the jazz channel, I think it was in '96 [1996], '95 [1995] or '96 [1996], we--
Speaker 1: 'Cause this, well, let's kind of just set this up in some ways because I guess as--now, 'Video Soul' in the video era, it's golden age was through the early '90s [1990s], right?
Speaker 2: Through the '80s [1980s], up through the early '90's [1990s], yeah.
Speaker 1: And then what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things we started doing was to look beyond just cable for distribution, and we did some things overseas and put the BET brand out overseas.  But we also developed a jazz channel that could--jazz was a music form that was already known worldwide.  So we felt we could develop that and distribute that, and for a while, that was a lot of time spent with the jazz community and the music community in the United States were very receptive to us and were giving us access and opportunity to a lot of things.  We worked with Ramsey Lewis at the time.  Ramsey came in as sort of an unofficial, official advisor to the jazz channel.  And we hosted some--Ramsey hosted some shows that we did.  And everybody in the jazz world really opened up to us, to allow us to participate with them and to showcase their talents.  So that went on from the programming standpoint.  Through the, again, through the mid-'90s [1990s], we were doing news and public affairs programs.  We started things like 'A Conversation with Ed Gordon'.  We actually were the first network to get an interview with O.J. Simpson after he was acquitted on the murder charges.
Speaker 1: You scooped NBC, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we got everybody on that one (laughter).  That was an interesting time as well.  That interview actually happened on my birthday (laughter), and I had not planned to go to that interview.
Story_ID: 40162
Speaker 1: This is Mary Lee, my paternal grandmother.  This picture was taken in the '70s [1970s], I believe.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my wife, Tina and I.  I believe this was in Greece, somewhere in Greece.  I don't know exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay, good.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my son, Jefferi, my wife, Tina and myself in Vancouver [Canada].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my wife, Tina, and I in Croatia.
Speaker 1: About what year is that?
Speaker 2: That was probably 2006.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my brother, Jeri and I.  He is asleep on my shoulder.
Speaker 2: Hang on one second, Larry [Crowe; The HistoryMakers' interviewer].
Speaker 1: That was probably '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's just a picture of me being me.
Speaker 2: Okay, very good.
Speaker 1: That's a, this is a picture of my wife, Tina, and I.
Speaker 2: Okay, got it.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION:
Speaker 2: And this is a picture of Brandon, my son that passed away.
Speaker 1: Okay, got it.
Speaker 2: And this is also a picture of Brandon.
Speaker 1: Okay, good.
Speaker 2: This is my father, General Washington Lee.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION:
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother [Nannie Jane Carrington] and father.
Speaker 1: And what's your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Nannie, Nannie Jane Carrington and General Washington Lee.
Speaker 1: That's me on the bench, and I broke my leg, my last game at T.C. Williams [High School, Alexandria, Virginia] (laughter).  That was out at W. T. Woodson.
Speaker 2: In case this is ever found, this is my lovely wife, Tina (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is my mother, Nannie Jane Carrington.
Speaker 2: Hold on one second.  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my wife, Tina and myself.
Speaker 2: Good.
Speaker 1: This is Jefferi Keith Lee II.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of former Vice President's [Al Gore] wife, Tipper Gore and my wife, Tina and myself.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother's high school--in her high school graduation cap and gown, Nannie J. Lee or Carrington.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my wife and I and a fellow at Georgetown University, who our foundation supports in cancer research.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my family, me, Tina, Jefferi and Brandon out in Arizona.
Speaker 2: Okay, good, next.
Speaker 1: This is a wedding picture of Tina and me.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of former President Bill Clinton and myself at the White House in the Green room.
Speaker 2: They call him the first black president.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so me and the first black president, Bill Clinton.  I actually got a picture of me and [President] Barack Obama somewhere.
Speaker 2: Oh, did you wanna get that.
Speaker 1: This also is a picture of my wife, Tina.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION:
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my father seated with my younger brother, Jeri, on his lap and my sister, Jaie to the right of him, and me standing tall to the left (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me probably in the second grade.
Speaker 2: Okay, good.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Is that it?
Speaker 1: It looks like we got it.
