Story_ID: 644245
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is William H. Lee [HistoryMaker William Lee].  The H stands for Hanford, H-A-N-F-O-R-D; and, of course, William is W-I-L-L-I-A-M; Lee, L-E-E.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born May the 29th, 1936.
Speaker 1: And where?
Speaker 2: In Austin, Texas, the capital, similar to what Sacramento is (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now and sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm publisher and chairman of the board of Lee Publishing Company [Sacramento, California], publisher of the Observer newspapers, currently consisting of primarily just The Sacramento Observer as our primary masthead.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So at one time there were several papers, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  At one time we had six publications located--and they all were distinct newspapers located in six different locations: San Francisco [California]; Los Angeles [California]; Stockton [California]; Los Angeles; Reno, Nevada; and of course here in Sacramento.  The paper in Los Angeles was an entertainment publication--we called it The Happenings.  It literally--we called it really the black Rolling Stone because we, for fifteen years, published entertainment information and news in that publication.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is November the 5th, I believe, 2013.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're located in the headquarters of the Observer here in Sacramento, California, and we are at 2330 Alhambra Boulevard here in, literally in the Midtown of this City of Sacramento.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 644246
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And what is it?
Speaker 2: I love fried chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's no denying it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, green.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Normally, spring is my favorite time.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, being a newspaper publisher, I haven't had many of those since my--and definitely not since my wife [Kathryn Charles Lee] passed on, but I love to go to Hawaii, and we spent--have spent a number of vacation days there in Hawaii.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Being a preacher's [Charles R. Lee] son, I have--usually my favorite sayings come from the Bible, and I guess my favorite scripture is, is primarily: "I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me" [Philippians 4:13].
Story_ID: 644247
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Charles R. Lee] side.  We'll start with your mother.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Carrie Woods Lee: C-A-R-R-I-E, W-O-O-D-S, L-E-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was a--December the 23rd, 1914.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Austin, Texas.
Speaker 1: Now, how much can you tell us about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, not very far.  I'm not that knowledgeable, and we have done all we--we have not done as much as we should have done in looking back on Mom's history.  I know of course my grand- on her side of the family, I know my grandparents.  And her mom was Rhoda Atkinson [ph.] and her dad was Wilma.  And they--I think that was a kind of a nickname that he had, Wilma Woods [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: My grandparents?  My grandparents were essentially farmers; and my grandfather, Mr. Woods, was--essentially did his farming in Muskogee, Oklahoma.  So my brother [James Lee] and I spent some time with them as youngsters, but didn't know very much about him at the time.  And Grandma, Mama Rhodi, as we called her, Rhoda Atkinson, she married again after he passed on and became an Atkinson.  And after Mr. Atkinson died, she moved to California, here in Sacramento, and resided for her last years here with, with Mom and our family, here in Sacramento.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 644248
Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories that go back to the 19th century to slavery or Reconstruction or any of that?
Speaker 2: No we don't--I don't have many in that regard, I really don't.  Other than things that we ourselves have read about, but nothing essentially that touched my father who was a strong reli- strongly religious man and/or--and he was born in 1904, so he touched a little bit in the early 1900s of course.  But Dad was himself very active in the church and in quartet singing.
Speaker 1: Now your father's name is?
Speaker 2: His full name is Charles Robert Lee [Charles R. Lee].  And as I mentioned, he became an ordained minister after we moved to California.  But he was born in Bastrop, Texas, a little town not too far from Austin [Texas]; and he moved to or migrated to Austin to find a way of life and eventually met my mom [Carrie Woods Lee] and they got married there in Austin.
Speaker 1: Okay, now he was born in 1904?
Speaker 2: Nineteen oh four [1904], yeah in August the 4th, 1904.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And how far back can you trace his side of the family?
Speaker 2: Again, not too far.  I did know, of course, all of that generation, my father's generation of sisters and brothers.  He had two brothers and four sisters.  And we were very acquainted with my aunts and uncles, of course, but once removed from that generation, very limited knowledge on our history.
Speaker 1: Were your father's parents farmers as well, or?
Speaker 2: Dad's father and my grandfather on that side of the house was not--they worked--he was a, just a general laborer.  He worked there in Bastrop, as I understand it.  And we didn't have much time, I didn't spend much time with him, but as I understand his livelihood was primarily just a general mechanic, automobile mechanic.
Speaker 1: And now, did he pass that skill onto his son, because I know your father (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To some degree he did, yes, Dad loved cars.  He really--and he's fantastic working with his hands, my father was; and so he spent some times--some time in that craft along with eventually becoming, as I mentioned, a full time minister.  But Dad was a great painter, a maintenance painter.  His livelihood became essentially where he found a painter and a mechanic in--first in San Francisco [California] when we moved there in the early years, and then later here in Sacramento [California] as well.
Story_ID: 644249
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Carrie Woods Lee] have a chance to finish high school or go to college?
Speaker 2: Mother did.  Mother went to Anderson High School [L.C. Anderson High School] in Austin, Texas.  And she was a domestic worker, primarily working in the homes of many of the white leaders and--there in Austin, Texas, and then once she, we moved here to California, essentially doing a little bit of the same thing, and so she was--and she enjoyed that because she loved people and she was very comfortable doing it and she did not mind that kind of thing.  But she did finish high school there in Austin; and was a strong believer in our education, but didn't herself pursue education any further than just high school.
Speaker 1: Did she have any aspirations she ever shared with you about what she would have liked--about going to college or acquiring another profession?
Speaker 2: Once Dad [Charles R. Lee] be- got into the ministry, she was just primarily a mother of the church.  She loved working in that area, but her mind--mainly, she was, she loved to serve.  She was just a very passive, very calm, very gentle woman, and she enjoyed doing that type of--but no aspirations of furthering any kind of profession in that, in her life, in her livelihood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what about your dad, was he able to finish school at all?
Speaker 2: Dad had, again, very limited education.  He, he went to school primarily after he got into Austin.  They had different arrangements there, but Dad was doing--in Huston-Tillotson College [Huston-Tillotson University] that was located there in Austin, Dad had gotten high school exposure; and then later picked up skilled training that was offered through vocational schools at Huston-Tillotson. But that was his primary--he didn't pursue any further academics, or any efforts to further his own education either.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now Huston-Tillotson is an African American school [HBCU], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, in Austin, Texas.  And it offered at the time different types of vocational training and opportunities as opp- in addition to, obviously the, the, the, the run of the mill academic subjects that it was offering at the time.
Story_ID: 644250
Speaker 1: He became a reverend, so--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --what denomination was he; and what was he--when was he called to the ministry?
Speaker 2: Well, after we moved to California, and we moved there after my brother [James Lee] and I were just small children, small youngsters.  And Dad [Charles R. Lee] had come to California in search of a better opportunity for the family; and he ended up, excuse me, going to work at Bethlehem Steel [Bethlehem Steel Corporation], the steel company that was active in San Francisco [California] at the time.  While there, Dad continued his extreme love for quartet singing, gospel music; and he helped to form several quartet groups, gospel groups, many of which became nationally well known and all.  And while in that pursuit, Dad became closer to Christ and eventually became a minister during that time.  He was ordained, however, later, a little bit later, formally here in Sacramento [California].  We stayed in San Francisco a few years, and then later moved to Sacramento.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, who were the names of some of his groups?
Speaker 2: Well, he sung with the Gospel Harmoneers [ph.].  He was very close to the Pilgrim Travelers--that was well, pretty well known nationally.  I can recall the concerts he's had with--he had with The Soul Stirrers--
Speaker 1: Did he sing as a member of The Soul Stirrers?
Speaker 2: He, we, he hosted them on number of occasions.  And with their frequent traveling, he would be the host gospel singers in those respective cities--that's San Francisco, Oakland [California] and here in Sacramento, eventually.  I can recall a number of concerts at the Golden Gate Theatre there in San Francisco; and here in Sacramento, a number of concerts here, gospel concerts, where those types of singers, those national singers were the key and featured artists that were appearing.  And Dad was with his groups, the Gospel Harmoneers and several others he was part of, and he enjoyed that.  That was a real--that was his love, gospel singing.  And like I said, he was borderline minister at the time.  And then once we moved here to Sacramento and continued that, Dad was, became an ordained minister, founded his own church here in this city, in Sacramento, and the church continues too: the Unity--Unity Fellowship Baptist Church [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was Baptist denomination.
Story_ID: 644251
Speaker 1: --Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: You, know it's, it's, it's--Mom [Carrie Woods Lee] was such a sweet woman and very, as I said, very passive and giving; and it was often very difficult for her and somewhat embarrassing for her to share any of the kinds of things like that.  So we were--we had a tough time.  Often we would tease her about it because when we start courting, we wanted to make it similar to the experiences that Dad [Charles R. Lee] and Mom had had.  But Mother was very closed mouth with telling us some of the ways that they had met.  But I think it was probably in a loving way, maybe even through the church and all, there in Austin before we departed for California.  But they did get married there in Austin--Austin, Texas, before we got--they got away.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what--now your father was already living in Austin as a?
Speaker 2: Yes.  When Dad--when he left Bastrop [Texas] to come in search of employment and opportunity, he came--and he moved into Austin and no   doubt they met there in that city, but Dad was there and Mom, of course, was just a young--literally, a young woman when they were, when they eventually got married and all, but their acquaintance was there in that City of Austin.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 644252
Speaker 1: And you were born in Austin, and, and--?
Speaker 2: My brother [James Lee] and I both were born in Austin, Texas, there, and I was about four years old when we moved to California.  When Dad [Charles L. Lee] came--my father came to California in search of employment with the--at that time the war had started, it was the early '40s [1940s].  And when he left there, he left us with my mother's mother, my grandmother--we called her Mama Rhodi [Rhoda Atkinson (ph.)].  And my brother and I were in her care and Mother [Carrie Woods Lee] decided to join Dad and they--she came on to California and stayed for a few months and then eventually invited my grandmother to join us; and she didn't care to at the time because she was still there in Austin with her own way of life.  But she did--gave us the experience of traveling to California by train in the '40s [1940s].  For my brother who was seven and I was five, it was quite an experience for us.  First time to ride on a train, and she put us in the care of some person we actually just met at the train station.  And we safely came to California that way and joined my folks there in San Francisco [California] at that time.  Again, that was in 1940, about 1944 and all.  So it was quite an experience for us to travel that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you would have been--in '44 [1944] you would have been, you were born (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was about--
Speaker 1: --you would have been eight?
Speaker 2: --yeah, I was about seven or--at that time, seven or eight.
Speaker 1: Eight, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we ended up living there in San Francisco in the Hunters Point area [Bayview-Hunters Point]--that's where we were--we eventually landed.  Dad had acquired a residence there in the naval shipyard complex [San Francisco Naval Shipyard] that was there at Hunters Point.
Speaker 1: Okay, now these, because it was a war, now your father was born at a time that made him like too old to be drafted for the war?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He would have been too young to serve in World War I [WWI]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and too old for World War II [WWII]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in terms of--yeah.  So he was--so but labor was needed?
Speaker 2: Very much needed in our shipyards like Bethlehem Steel [Bethlehem Steel Corporation] and Hunters Point and all those were--Mare Island [Mare Island Naval Shipyard, Vallejo, California], they were all hotbeds for army surplus and all kinds of products that came out of those efforts.  And then Dad--eventually Dad ended up getting a year's contract in Okinawa [Japan].  He decided to further employment and he got that close to the war efforts by taking employment there where he was doing simply mechanic work on airplanes, and things of that sort.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he actually went to Okinawa?
Speaker 2: He went to Okinawa, yes he did.  He spent about a year, almost two years.  And Mom and I and my brother, we stayed there in, in San Francisco at the time.
Story_ID: 644253
Speaker 1: Now is your brother your only sibling?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We have just my brother and I.  My brother is just the two years older than I am, James R. Lee [James Lee], and he here--he's too, he too is here in Sacramento [California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what does he do now?
Speaker 2: He's retired from McClellan Air Force Base [California] where he worked for about thirty years.  And he retired just a few years ago, and he and his wife [Betty Y. Lee] reside here. And his work primarily was in administration there at McClellan Air Force Base here in Sacramento [California].  While, when it was very active, he was as well.  He became a sort of a placement officer for them at McClellan; and his wife is a nurse--my sister-in-law, she's a nurse here, and--retired, she too is retired here from Kaiser, from the Kaiser Permanente chain.
Story_ID: 644254
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their disposition, their sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably a little bit of Dad.  Dad had--Dad was a people man.  He loved people, he loved to be in front of the audiences when he sung or when he preached; he was very comfortable in meeting people and I enjoy people as well.  You know in terms of personality, I think I'm more close to him.  As I said, Mother [Carrie Woods Lee] was more of a passive, very sweet, very humble lady.  Dad, you know, he felt he was on a mission and I somewhat like that, I feel I am as well.  He loved God, he loved his Jesus, as he said, "Yes, God loves me."  I can't--I never will forget him singing those kinds of songs, "Because the Bible told me--tells me so" ['Jesus Loves Me'].  And so Dad was--he was an outreach person, and I am as well.  And to the extent that he loved people, he would do everything he could--anything he could to reach out to people.  I can recall him getting up in the middle of the night going and helping people in distressed moments, and moments of need and things of this sort.  And never Mom mentioned about it as being a chore or anything of that nature.  He would host--Mom, and Mom would easily acquiesce to the point of inviting guests to the home and all of that.  So, again, Dad was that type of person, and I think that's the same personality I have.  And I attribute him as being one of my main mentors of life, of course.  Very close to him, and of course, my mom in a different sort of way, but Dad was--he was the guy.  He was our main man.  Many of the ministers in this area attribute many of their mentoring also to my father.  He was a leader in that regard.  Like I said, he reached out to other ministers, in this city [Sacramento, California], particularly, many, even the prominent ministers will tell you that Reverend Lee [Charles R. Lee] was the reason I'm currently in the ministry and all that, so I hear a lot of that, and all.  So, we're very fortunate, I'm very fortunate to have had the experience of him in my life as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 644255
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now I didn't ask you, like what, what part did he sing, I mean, was he a bass, a (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  He was a leader, a lead singer.  Where else would Dad [Charles R. Lee] be but there.  And it's interesting when I say that as well as in the pulpit, Dad was--he, he had, initially, he had his first stroke--he had a stroke while he was in the pulpit.  He loved to preach, he loved to sing.  And when he had that first setback, that first health problem, we warned him that he should probably step down, retire and so forth as he became--and he was only seventy, that's not very old, you know, in this day and age, it certainly isn't and all.  But he would not, and then he had another stroke that he never recovered from.  So he loved to be in front of the people and he said, "No I'll die preaching, I'd love to go--where else better can I go but in the pulpit?"  And he, in fact, did.  But that's his experience and he enjoyed that as well.
Speaker 1: So did he have another stroke in the pulpit?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had a second stroke, and ultimately, that was--as I mentioned, that was the one that was fatal for him and all.
Speaker 1: How old was he at that time?
Speaker 2: He was only seventy.
Speaker 1: Only seventy years old?
Speaker 2: Just seventy years of age.  He would have been seventy-one in a few months, or in a few weeks, I should say, because he died in July of 1975, being an '04 [1904] baby as you can see, he, he was--just turned seventy, would have been seventy-one the next month or so, in August.
Story_ID: 644256
Speaker 1: You lived in San Francisco [California] for how long?
Speaker 2: We were in San Francisco from--Dad [Charles R. Lee], as I mentioned, was there initially a year or so--sometime before we got there.  But we were there--we moved to Sacramento [California] in 1949.  So while in San Francisco, Dad was working at Bethlehem Steel [Bethlehem Steel Corporation]; and, and then later he, he took the contract to go to Okinawa [Japan].  And then when he returned from Okinawa, he had a little purse string, so we decided to go into the restaurant business.  We opened a barbecue restaurant in the Fillmore District of San Francisco [California] and this still is, you can imagine, this still in the wartime [World War II, WWII], so it was pretty active in that district.  My brother [James Lee] and I--my brother--I had gone on--I completed elementary school and gone to middle school, they called it junior high school in those days.  I went to school there at Raphael Weill Elementary School; and then later to Roosevelt Junior High School [Roosevelt Middle School, San Francisco, California].
Speaker 1: What was the name of the first one?
Speaker 2: Raphael Weill.
Speaker 1: Raphael Weill, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Raphael Weill, it's R--and you would ask me that, R-A-F-E-A-F-A-E-L, W-E-L-L [sic.], Raphael Weill.  And that was--that was too located in the Fillmore District of San Francisco.  And then I went to Roosevelt Junior High School, my brother went to Commerce [High School of Commerce, San Francisco, California].  While I was in school with people like Johnny Mathis, I don't know if you know the singer, Johnny Mathis?  Yeah, he was in my class in San Francisco and then my--
Speaker 1: That's at Roosevelt?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at Roosevelt.  And then my brother was--he went to Commerce and they later closed that as a high school, Commerce high school.  And he was in school with people like K.C. Jones and--
Speaker 1: I know--yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: K.C. Jones who was coach of the Celtics [Boston Celtics]?
Speaker 2: Coach, yeah, yeah, the Celtics--
Speaker 1: Basketball player (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and basketball--sure is.  That's him, no doubt and all.  And so we moved--we stayed, we ran our restaurant there in the Fillmore District on Steiner Street, between Ellis [Street] and Eddy [Street], and we ran it for a few years; and then eventually moved here to Sacramento.  And when Dad came to Sacramento, he came too somewhat like he was--had gotten an offer to go to work for--here in Sacramento in 1949 with the--what we call the north area waste removal owner, and wha- happened to be an African American.  So north of Sacramento River was an African American who was running the waste removal services, and is quite wealthy, and he wanted Dad to manage his fleet of trucks--that fleet of trucks that he had, and he was very kind to Dad.  And when Dad came to Sacramento that's that was on the invitation that he came, and that was again in 1949.  I was just in the ninth grade, my brother was in the tenth grade of high school; and we both ended up going to Grant Union High School here in Sacramento.
Story_ID: 644257
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just want to go back and talk about a children's book that you were--that your family modeled for--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and--for photos to illustrate life of growing up in Arkansas, or?
Speaker 2: Well, the South.
Speaker 1: The South.
Speaker 2: They had featured that--that was 'Billy Bates' [ph.], and it was used really as a reading publication for fourth graders, and my family, we were the key models that they used for that publication.  It was really--it was really a labor of love that we did that, and it was 90 percent accurate even describing our own realistic lives as well.
Speaker 1: Now, what--whose project was that, I mean, who came up with the money for that?
Speaker 2: It was a grant that was given to a minister who was in the projects, and I have to--his name escapes me, I have to re- I--but he was a very well liked, very nice minister.  And he was active anyway in the projects here in Hunters Point.  And believe it or not, I read recently that he--recently, when I say recently, a few years ago, that he passed away, he moved, he had moved out of San- out of the area as well.  But that project allowed us to begin to know a little bit more about Hunters Point of San Francisco [Bayview-Hunters Point, San Francisco, California].  We had--we were pretty active anyway, I was in the youth area there in the community center there in Hunters Point; and so it showed--it simply showed a young man who had, with family, had moved us to the big city called San Francisco and discovered what it was like living in such a big city in the projects, and the kind of life we had--social, cultural, recreational life we had in the projects at the time.  It truly was, as I said, 90 percent accurate because we didn't have to do very much acting in order to make it, make the ro- fulfill the role that we had.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Billy Bates continues to be a marketable--marketable product, because it's--it's, still is available in some markets, even as we speak now.  And that was again back in, as I mentioned, the mid-'40s [1940s], so that.
Speaker 1: And the book is, it's a children's reader--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --using photographs to illustrate the story of Billy Bates?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you're featured there, you were about what nine, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was about nine and ten, it showed my quote gang in the book; and the gang was culturally diverse, was made up of African Americans and Latinos and Asians and so it showed the activity we were involved in.  It showed the life of the minister and his very small baby and the nurturing of the baby and that type of thing.  But it was--it was meant for that kind of educational tool that you've described, just essentially something that allowed--it was easy reading, and, but great exposure for youngsters who truly were at that time experiencing moving to the big city.
Story_ID: 644258
Speaker 1: You mentioned a recreation center, and now you were a basketball player, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In high school I enjoyed--that's my sport and all, I enjoyed playing basketball, and we were pretty good.  You know we--at Grant [Grant Union High School, Sacramento, California], in my high school years we went to what we called the California Gridley tournament [Gridley Invitational Basketball Tournament], which was essentially the high school tournament of the day.  And a couple of my fellow classmates went on to be All-Americans, Walter Torrence, and he died at a young age and all, and he was under Coach Wooden [John Wooden], the very famous coach out of UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay, uh-huh.  So did he play at UCLA?
Speaker 2: He played at UCLA, Walter Torrence, yeah, he did.  And I went out, interesting--I went, when I got out of high school, I went out to play basketball at UC at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].  I'd gone down to Berkeley out of high school and I decided after the first day of scrimmaging that basketball wasn't for me in college, so I ended up going to the academi- on the academic route.
Speaker 1: So was it too tough, or you think (unclear)?
Speaker 2: It was a little bit of--it was a challenge, and I was a very, very young, young, young, young, young man, and I--I hadn't experienced some of the kinds of things that--essentially, that I was set to be, to experience at Cal at the time.  And I wanted to play ball, and I sensed that I wouldn't have that great opportunity.  I might be a bench warmer, but not a player; so I opted not to go out--after my first week or so of scrimmaging and working with the young team.  When I got to Berkeley, I decided that I didn't want to play any basketball.  But in high school we were very active and enjoyed, like I said, some great days of--we came in second in the Gridley tournament which was, made us the second best team at that time in the state.
Story_ID: 644259
Speaker 1: You all moved into a home on Cypress Street in Del Paso Heights [Sacramento, California], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: That was--you know that was quite an experience.  It was a--my brother [James Lee] and I and my father [Charles R. Lee] and mom [Carrie Woods Lee] were in literally a one bedroom home when we moved on Cypress.  It had at the time no sidewalks in Del Paso Heights, which was just a few blocks away from the high school, from Grant [Grant Union High School, Sacramento, California]; and we were on a foundation that was essentially made of just the pillars and, as opposed to it being a full foundation home.  So really it introduced us to a new way of life.  We had to get used to, what I call, living in very squalor type of arrangements.  Del Paso was still growing, as I mentioned, no sidewalks, very poor gutter system and all; but we were happy, we were just among friends and enjoying ourselves.  Being young as we were, we, my brother and I both being in high school, we never witnessed that kind of living at the time, but at the same time, it was--it was, as we reflected later in life, we were really, obviously poor and un- trying to struggle with that way of life without having a full understanding what we were going through at the time.  And so we would walk to the, walk high school, walk to our school, and the experiences that we had in that poor neighbor- in the poor neighborhood we were living in was all warm and friendly, but very challenging in the sense of it not being as smooth and slick as we'd like to have seen it at the time.  Cypress and Del Paso was going through--it had not been admitted into the city, it still was considered kind of a country life.  So to go from San Francisco [California] life to that life was a full experience, new experience for us.
Story_ID: 644260
Speaker 1: Grant High School [Grant Union High School] was in Sacramento [California], right, in the city?
Speaker 2: Grant, Grant was in Del Paso Heights [Sacramento, California]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and considered, as I said, one of the county schools and--but it was a good school.  It--we admit that we had fine teachers.  My class, to give you an idea, my class, when I graduated was about 350 students, and there were three African Americans in the class; so it's a very limited, very small in terms of experiences in that regard.  I had--the warm experience that I remember, more than anything else, is I had a mathematics teacher who was--was very, very kindly to me.  He sort of nurtured my interests in studying and academics and mathematics, and I was a straight A student in high school; and as a result, he made sure that I got an opportunity to apply for scholarships and really being awarded scholarships.  I received a scholarship to the University of California at Berkeley at the time.  It was a Bank of America scholarship, I never will forget it.  But it was essentially because of a fellow name Frank Johnson, who was a teacher that I will never forget in all my life because of his nurturing and his careful concern for me in--while I was there at Grant.
Speaker 1: So, now, I take it he was a white teacher?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.  He was a white teacher.  We had just a couple of African American and Latino teachers at the time at Grant.  But Mr. Johnson was a precious jewel in making sure that we followed through on our studies and doing the things that we should do.
Speaker 1: Now, had you always been a straight A student throughout school?
Speaker 2: I was a real good student throughout school and a leader from Raphael Weill [Raphael Weill Elementary School, San Francisco, California] days to our days at Roosevelt [Roosevelt Junior High School; Roosevelt Middle School, San Francisco, California] through Grant; and I don't think I knew the--I ever saw a C prior to college.  Of course I got used to living with them at University of California, Berkeley [Berkeley, California], but (laughter), but prior to that--
Speaker 1: Well let's--now, what year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: High school in '53 [1953], in 1953 and--
Speaker 1: So were you involved in any other activities other than basketball and mathematics?
Speaker 2: Well, I was in the Spanish club, things of this sort, primarily basketball.  I loved basketball, and I played during that time; did run track, and I was a broad jumper in track.  So I was inclined--I was athletically inclined in high school and was active with--in student government; but essentially, those were the primary activities in high school, and all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 644261
Speaker 1: You graduate in '53 [1953], you go to UC Berkeley?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And now does--okay.  And, and what did you major in?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, in--that's an interesting experience.  So when I graduated from Grant [Grant Union High School, Sacramento, California], I decided to go on down to Berkeley.  So I went down--when I went to Berkeley down in the '53 [1953], I had just in May turned seventeen.  I was a youngs- real young, just--never been away from home, been close to Dad [Charles R. Lee], Mom [Carrie Woods Lee] all those years, so I wasn't ready for the culture shock of the hippie age of going to the University of California at Berkeley--
Speaker 1: Now, this is '53 [1953] though--
Speaker 2: And that was--
Speaker 1: --this is--was more or less the beatnik age at that point?
Speaker 2: The beatnik age, yeah, yeah, that was the beatnik age--
Speaker 1: Pre-hippie?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the pre-hippie.  And you're absolutely right.  And so the experiences--when I got there, I had a challenge finding living quarters, so I ended up staying with a private family there in Berkeley [California].
Speaker 1: Now, explain this to people who don't understand this, because I think I can see through it, but why didn't you stay on campus in the dorm with?
Speaker 2: Very challenging, very difficult, and in most of our cases there, you know, just the procedures--we didn't comply with most of the procedures in getting on, into the dorms at that time according to what we experienced it.
Speaker 1: I mean were the dorms segregated?
Speaker 2: The dorms were, for all intents and purposes, were segregated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Picture, if you will, University of California, Berkeley [Berkeley, California] at that time had about twenty-six, twenty-seven thousand students, and we had three hundred African Americans on the full campus; so a little more than 1 percent, as you can see, a very small student body of African Americans at the time.  So I ended up looking for housing and others throughout the area and ended up staying with a private family not too far from it.  My dad being a mechanic, he irked out enough money to buy me a--a kind of a--a '39 [1939] Plymouth.  I never will forget driving that Plymouth to school, and many times that I broke down trying to get to the campus.  But living there with a private family and driving to the school, I experienced a number of different experiences that I never was--I wasn't prepared for, and this varied everything--it varied from everything from the rush from the fraternities, which I hadn't experienced, the re-acquaintances, the interrelationships, the difficulty of finding African Americans and others to find out what studies were like.  So I spent about two or three weeks during the early ti- portion of the semester just trying to get acquainted, trying to find out what was going on around the university.  And like I said, it was very challenging getting books, finding out how to go through that experience.  So one day I just woke up and I felt so lonely and disappointed, I decided to call my mom and my dad and tell them that I really am not comfortable here, I feel almost like, you know, I'm all alone on campus, it's so difficult.  When you approach people it's essentially a rush, and I wasn't used to that.  So they said, "What do you want to do?" So I said, "I think I want to come home."
Story_ID: 644262
Speaker 1: So I decided to, to make that step to come back to Sacramento [California], and I said I think I can get in at Sac State.  So in--here we are in the fall of the semester of '53 [1953].  Sac State had just moved to its new campus, where it currently is located from its earlier campus at the community college.  And so when I went out there, the semester had started about a few days, but my transcript and my grades were so good, they accepted me.  So I went on--decided to go to school there at Sac State.  So in my freshman and sophomore years, I spent at Sacramento State College there [California State University, Sacramento]; and then I transferred back to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] in '55 [1955], two years later, and of course, was accepted, and ended up finishing there.  By that time I felt I had grown up--and that was  my, my experience I mentioned about going out for basketball was all part of the negative response and feeling that I had gotten from the campus and all.  It was just seemingly to have been very intense, very difficult, very challenging for me at the time, mainly people adjustments, and I had that because I was very young and very inexperienced with a lot of that.  And so I ended up coming on to this campus here in Sacramento, Sac State, and all, and I transferred down and later finished, of course, my A.B. degree there at Berkeley in '57 [1957].
Story_ID: 644263
Speaker 1: Now are there any--along the way in, at Sacramento State [Sacramento State College; California State University, Sacramento, California] or at UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], were there any special teachers or mentors at school or in the community that you--
Speaker 2: Well, you know at Sac State, I decided to major in accounting.  I was good at figures and mathematics and in business.  I wanted to go into business eventually, and I saw a--I put an emphasis on accounting and there was a Dr. Skills [ph.], Dr. Skills at Sac State who was an accountant, who's deceased now, who was very, very helpful in--he was an accountant himself, and he was very helpful in that area.  So I remember his tutelage; and after I finished Berkeley, I came back here and did some graduate work at Sac State again, and he was still there and very helpful in that regard.  So I remember his, his assistance, his insight and his direction as well.
Story_ID: 644264
Speaker 1: There were several experiences later at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] that, you know, we went through; and like I said, it was a different day, it was a day of challenge.  You mentioned the beatniks that were plentiful there, the Free Speech Movement was going on on campus; there was a lot of activity as typical with universities at the time.
Speaker 2: Now, what was the essence of the Free Speech Movement?
Speaker 1: Well, essentially the desire for students to be self--to use self expressions.  There was the war activity that they wanted to have input into; there was the typical generational gaps between understanding the different generations, intergenerational communications was very difficult, very challenging and so--and there were some leaders, some individuals, who were, you know, who were promoting activities of that nature and just enough supporters to keep the noise going in, at that high pitch in that area.  These were all experiences all new and different to me.  And like I said it was the types of movement that--and that I didn't understand them, didn't involve ourselves--myself, with a lot of that activities.  Again, we were struggling for survival just simply to exist.  So as a result, African Americans and others were, would gather with their own problems, their own challenges and all.  And the problems are very real in discrimination in finding books, in finding housing, in finding of many of the other things as well.
Speaker 2: Now, did the African American students form any kind of an organization then?
Speaker 1: There was nothing formal, nothing formal.  It was informally all done where there was a gathering usually around the library that we sat in on campus under the (unclear) cloth and--but nothing formal in that regard.  There was fraternity organization going on.  But it's interesting the fraternities at Berkeley, they merged with and coalesced with fraternities in San Francisco [California] with San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University], where there was more activity.  It was far more African American activity and activity in San Francisco State than it was even in our university at the time.  And that was very active--there was a very active student body there, and the fraternities, like I said, had joined houses and that type of thing.  So there was no, at that time, no fraternity houses on campus for Berkeley.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So what frats and sororities were on--I mean--
Speaker 1: Informally, like the merger was in San Francisco was the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] and they were active; Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] were beginning to be active, just one or two and three members.  But it was nothing like you would expect, or you would li- you would expect from a huge university of that size.  But remember we only had a certain number of African Americans--could have been in the middle of a hundred thousand people, but there were only three hundred African Americans at the time.
Story_ID: 644265
Speaker 1: Now, well one thing that I--just occurred to me, and I haven't asked it of anyone before, I hadn't thought about it, but I know in the, around '66 [1966], '67 [1967], '68 [1968], '69 [1969], black student organizations were formed on campuses--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and I know even on the campus that I attended [Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio] in '68 [1968], we formed a Negro association, that's before people start calling folks (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, blacks, yeah, right, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know, so we had the Negro--I mean the Committee for the Advancement of Negro Education--
Speaker 2: --Okay.
Speaker 1: --which was a black student organization.  Did--why wouldn't, you know, three hundred black students form an organization for their, you know, betterment on a campus like UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]?
Speaker 2: Very limited--very limited insight.  I think in that regard and seeing the wisdom of such an effort as well as the benefits that have gained from that had there been some coalition--coalition of efforts in that regard.  But later on that same campus, they did organize, they became the black faculty organizers, an example, and they too became active.  I think it was stimulated primarily by, however, graduates--former graduates, who were--the alumni association.  They created the black alumni association [University of California, Berkeley Black Alumni Club], it became somewhat active.  It activated the students because it was awarding outstanding students, recognizing students, student leadership on its--on the old campus.  This is all being done by black faculty alumni associations as well.  It's interesting, and I became an alumnus of the year of that association in '93 [1993].  Later I had obviously in the activity and that based essentially on activity around my later life, my profession with the newspaper [The Sacramento Observer] and that type of thing.  But those organizations were not in existence when I was there at Berkeley at the time.  So there was no reassurance.  It made it difficult for me to find a consoling person other than Mom [Carrie Woods Lee] and Dad [Charles R. Lee], and that's why I ran away from it initially.  And there was the gay movement starting, you know, in that era, and all that was new and different for an inexperienced young person like myself.  And like I said there was just a lot of clamor around the war, a lot of activity around the war, which we didn't understand.
Speaker 1: Now, in those days, you're there from '55 [1955] to '57 [1957]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I mean (unclear).  Were they--the U.S. really wasn't--I mean what war were they talking about?
Speaker 2: Well, you know the Korean War activity (unclear) was coming up to--yeah--to its head and that type of thing.  So it was essentially around that type of activity and just anything--it was based essentially on dissension, and like I said, intergenerational gaps that existed.
Speaker 1: Were there--I know in Hollywood and in the world of the literature there was a lot of clamor around--and education too, around who was a Communist and who wasn't and who was a Socialist and who wasn't.  And people were losing jobs and careers based on their political affiliations.  Were you, did you see that sort of thing, or?
Speaker 2: You see a lot of that.  There was some movement at the time with black studies movement, the idea of how to approach the black community, black--.  It was essentially at that time just a black and white society, not necessarily a lot of anything in between, but essentially that's the activity that we had at the time.  And so in athletics, African Americans were just not as--just few and far between, there were not that many students that were outstanding student body.  We--I don't know if you remember the coach, Joe Kapp?  Joe Kapp was on campus and he was in the '53 [1953], '55 [1955] class, I think somewhere in that class.  He was active and he was in a class or two of mine as well when I returned to Berkeley as well.
Speaker 1: This is the quarterback--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --from Minnesota [Minnesota Vikings], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then later the coach and all, so he was very active.  But it was not--we did not have as many outlets.  We did not--didn't have, like I said, the houses, the support elements that certainly we experienced--we see now in existence with many of the campuses and that you want to make sure exists for students who are struggling like I sense I was at the time when I first went down there.
Speaker 1: It takes a while for these things to, I guess, simmer and then boil into some kind of a--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --idea.
Story_ID: 644266
Speaker 1: I was asking you about mentors there at, at UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].  Were there any black professors at all at UC Berkeley that you had?
Speaker 2: There were a few.  There were a couple, there was one in mathematics at the time, and I forget his name and--but not many.  I didn't experience any.  I had none in my classes or head of any of the classes at--teaching any of the classes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, was the great Robert Black [sic. David Blackwell], the mathematician, was he there?  Is that his name?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, I don't think that was his name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know he was out in California somewhere, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but that wasn't his--this gentleman I'm thinking of was essentially that.  He was a great statistician, mathematics--
Speaker 1: The dean of mathematicians in a lot of ways.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were--he was extremely good and very well known at the time.  And but no, we--and that would have been an absolute savior had we had leaders that we could turn to at the time.  And I think--I think we lost a few students--a number of students because the support units were not there.  That's typical of what happens at universities, you know especially in the first and second year.
Speaker 1: Was racism blatant there at UC Berkeley?
Speaker 2: I would call it--I would call it blind sighted.  You would have professors of history who would have one afr- like and then we had--I had friends and others to tell us his experience.  And they would--they would ask stu- African American students if they had--if they mind them discussing slavery as an example, as if that's not part of history.  Just completely--they were not knowledgeable about how to treat African American students, just wasn't knowledgeable about it, did not have that.  So you had to adjust to whatever existed at the time; and like I said, there was that reinsurance of those gatherings, those collective meetings that we used to have to reassure ourselves and each other, and studying together when you had those opportunities and chances to join with each other.
Speaker 1: So there were more clumsy and inexperienced in dealing with black people than anything else, more than actually, you know, blatantly racist?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was.  It's just--and even the elements like they had the--the Wesley Chapel's [ph.]--the church groups that were near the campus who was offering primarily lunches for cheap--very inex- for families who couldn't afford--for students who couldn't afford them and things of this sort, but even that was--the experiences in working with them was very limited and not understanding.  They simply were very sympathetic and in that sense reassuring, but not supportive to the extent where you needed to know about what should I do about this relationship; I have tough time buying my books, what do I do; how can I find sources or whatnot when my folks can't afford it, or I can't afford it.  You know, just the support was not there to say that, hey, have you looked at the things that my high school teacher was telling me about, "Billy [HistoryMaker William Lee], if this avenue closes up, try another avenue," so you needed those kinds of reve- those kinds of support units and that they weren't there.
Story_ID: 644267
Speaker 1: But you graduated you know in '57 [1957]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --with a degree in accounting?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you're a good student from what I've read--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and you, and you were good at what you did?
Speaker 2: That was an experience in itself.  It's interesting I--so when I graduated [from the University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], I and two of my fellow classmates who were both whites, went to apply for an accounting opportunity that was being offered by an accounting firm, and they were looking for graduates in accounting to go work for them.  And when we went in, we went in individually, and I went in initially and they did not hire me.  The firm--I tried to reassure the firm that I was a good student and I brought my transcripts and everything else.  And the other two students, when they went in, they hired both of them.  Now, when I--when I was being interviewed, I asked the interviewer why I was not being hired, they said, "Well, I don't think my staff, my organization is ready to accept an African American--," at that time "a Negro to join our organization."  So I was being denied.  I was introduced to racism in a real absolute way in that experience; and it really hit me in the gut, because I'd never had it so vividly shown and experienced to me.  When I got back to the car and my buddies got back, they had been accepted, and they got so upset and both of these friends of mine and these fellow students--and I was a better student than they were, both of them, and they knew it.  But it was all about--I told them the fact that they just did not hire me, and they wanted to go in and turn in and resign just from being accepted or take that--refuse the job to be accepted.  That too was an experience for me as well.  So again, I called Mom [Carrie Woods Lee] and Dad [Charles R. Lee] and I said I wanted to come home.  And I moved in--I came to Sacramento [California].  I was thinking about then joining with the [U.S.] Air Force, going to the effort that was going on; and I called a friend of mine who was working at the time at Aerojet [Aerojet Rocketdyne] here as a space industry--the aerospace industry was booming, and Aerojet was flourishing and growing and hiring people.  And it was through that friend's effort, and I asked him very vividly, I said, "Now look, I don't want to go out there and experience what I just experienced in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California], Sacramento."  He said, "No, you need to see this person," and he gave me a name of a person that I interviewed with.  He hired me on the spot.  And I went to work at Aerojet as a statistician right out--shortly after that.  But that experience was something I'll never forget, because it was--it was a--it was the true racism that reflected even when you're qualified, even when you're knowledgeable about your skill and your art and your profession.  So I was very, very let down from going--trying for other employment in the Bay Area.  I think that my warmth and growth at Aerojet gave me the reassurance that I needed to eventually to move forward, and to set my sights on what I felt were some earlier and eas- and dreams and plans and hopes that I had for my career and my life and all.
Story_ID: 644268
Speaker 1: Did you formulate at that time a plan to start your own business, or?
Speaker 2: I did.  And I began to look at going into the real estate.  Real estate was--Sacramento [California] was growing--was beginning to grow with African Americans.  Many of the bases were flourishing, certainly here at McClellan [McClellan Air Force Base, California].  There was a growth coming here, so I decided that I would look at going into real estate.  And so eventually, I opened my own firm, Lee Realty Company [Sacramento, California]; and I left Aerojet [Aerojet Rocketdyne] with the plans of making it the best real estate company I could possibly do it.
Speaker 1: So you had to go get a real estate license?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean study--you had to study for the real estate license?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I studied while I was even at Aerojet.  And I did quite well at Aerojet.  This was before I got married, this was before some of the activities occurred in my life earlier.  But in fact, if you look at Ebony magazine, at the time I was at Aerojet and the activities when I started, activities around the community, I was one of their bachelors of the year, you remember how they used to do those?  I don't know if they--I think they still do them.  Yeah, and I was in there with, that year, with Wilt Chamberlain.  His picture was on--right above mine on their main--I was one of the main subjects at the time.  He was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what--answer--I often wondered what life is like for a young man whose picture appears as bachelor of the year?
Speaker 2: You--it's--you don't want to have an interested girlfriend or mate when you get that because you are just absolutely swamped.  And I mean that very honestly.  They run your picture and we got--I got mail from all over the world in that regard.  I--it really did and it's amazing that that happened; and it led me closer to marriage and faster to marry than I had expected to make it happen.  So it was quite an experience for that exposure as well.
Speaker 1: So, tell us how you met your wife, and you know where did you meet?
Speaker 2: Well, I met my wife just casually.  I--as I said being from Austin [Texas], my dad [Charles R. Lee] still had his sisters living in Houston, Texas.  So during the summer we would go and visit our relatives in Austin and Houston, and even in high school [Grant Union High School, Sacramento, California], even in earlier days.  So we would do that almost every year and just for the summer.  And then I spent some time in Houston and I felt I met the young lady of my dreams one time when I was down there and so it was during this period of time that I met my wife.  I was shopping to go to Austin at one of the department stores here in Sacramento.  And I was with a buddy of mine, and I said, "My god, look at that young lady over across the department store floor," and it turned out it was my wife and to me she was a beautiful lady--
Speaker 1: Was she the someone--the same person from Houston?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I was shopping for the lady in Houston because we were getting ready to leave Sacramento to take a gift to her in Houston.  So I went over and approached this young lady, and my friend happened to know her casually, and he introduced me to Kathy [Kathryn Charles Lee], my wife, my ultimate wife.  And I told her, I said, "You--maybe you can help me find a gift for a friend of mine I'm going to see in Texas."  And she said, "Oh, I'll do what I can."  And she was very nice, very gracious and very sweet.  And so that was my introduction to her; and I couldn't get her out of my mind even though I was leaving in the car going on to Houston, Texas.  When I got to Houston, that didn't work out too well.  So when I got back I told my friend I wanted to start dating this--or see if this young lady would go out with me on a date.  She was working at the County of Sacramento [Sacramento County, California] at the time, my wife was, my wife to be, was.  And so she accepted a date or two and we just started having lunch and meeting one another; and that's how I got acquainted with my wife.  And we enjoyed each other's company and, and probably courted for about three--about two or three years and before we ultimately got married.
Story_ID: 644269
Speaker 1: But the experience of--that we were going through during that time where I was seeking to make my real estate--to develop the real estate company; and my company, Lee Realty Company [Sacramento, California], became one of the largest here in this city.  We became very active in home selling.  There was, as I said, just a active movement of migration of African Americans and others from other bases coming to here, to Sacramento [California] and we benefitted from that migration.
Speaker 2: So was--now Sacramento was the capital of California, then it was too?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But was it--what was the population like then as opposed to now?
Speaker 1: Well, at that time, you know, we had moved into the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s], and it was about twenty thousand African Americans here in Sacramento here at the time--in the Sacramento County [California].  Envision if you will, today it's about 160,000 African Americans in the County of Sacramento.  So it was still a young city, very limited number of visible professionals.  Most of the professionals were working, and I mean that very sincerely, were working at Aerojet [Aerojet Rocketdyne].  Aerojet had about twenty thousand people working there at that time, during that period of time.  So the aerospace, as you can see, the aerospace industry and between McClellan [McClellan Air Force Base, California] and Sacramento, you'd find African American engineers, African American scientists, African American professionals, retired [U.S.] military; you'd find a high degree of professional African Americans who were living here in Sacramento during that period of time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So it wasn't like a lot of places where the black community is basically a labor based--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: A high degree of professionals, between the civil service and the opportunities with state government and the federal government through the war effort and through the aerospace growth, African American professionals were beginning to move into our city.  We made a comparison at one time and even said that there were more professional African Americans living here in Sacramento than it was even in Washington, D.C., in the D.C. area, which is hard to believe, but most of them were--obviously in D.C., were strictly federal government professionals.  But here we have the military effort and the aerospace effort and so there was a real growth in our professional ranks at the time.  So we saw that and companies that were in business to service that, those elements, like real estate and real estate--selling of retail home--I mean, residential homes and businesses of that sort benefitted greatly from that migration, from that growth, again, starting with, at that time, about twenty thousand African Americans.
Speaker 2: So these are startling statistics, and--now I never would have guessed that.
Story_ID: 644270
Speaker 1: In '59 [1959] now, you and your future wife [Kathryn Charles Lee], she wasn't--you weren't married yet (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --started--well you, she helped you start the Men's Civic League?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My wife and I, I never will forget that experience.  That was quite an experience in that we sensed that this growth kin- happening and there was few organizations, truly, professional organizations that were in existence at the time that were dealing with African Americans' concerns and seeing this growth and this migration of that felt it was right for a kind of a professional organization.  We conceived an organization that ultimately became known as the Men's Civic League of Sacramento [California].  It was made up of, and there's pictures around the walls here in the Observer office, of several of those meetings with those men.  But it was made up of lawyers, professional lawyers, professional engineers, professional doctors that existed in Sacramento.  And it was easy for them to join, because again, there was nothing like this.  So we--my wife helped us to organize this effort.  She helped preparing all the bylaws and the constitution and efforts for this--for the meeting of that; and when we or- when we called the meeting, there was just an overwhelming response.  And we ultimately became organized, and invited a number of white leaders who were, I won't say sympathetic, but knowledgeable about the needs that existed at the time.  We had some political leaders, we had some of the governmental leaders, some law enforcement leaders in Sacramento who supported the effort for the Men's Civic League.  And that organization saw a need for communications.  We had no--very limited communications opportunities.  Tough to get in the press; you could not hardly get anything on TV at the time, very limited amount of exposure in the daily newspapers--at the time there were a couple in Sacramento.  So we decided to create our own and develop our own newspaper.  There was a minister in town, Reverend J.T. Muse who had a publication called the Sacramento Outlook.  And I was elected founding president of that org- of the Men's Civic League, and we approached Reverend Muse on selling his paper, not really knowing what we were doing, but we just felt we needed a newspaper; we needed a voice.  So we bought his newspaper for, I believe something like twenty-five hundred dollars.  We pooled our money and were able to offer him that; and once we bought him out, he had a kind of a religious following of just a few hundred subscribers and supporters for his newspaper, the Sacramento Outlook.  And so once we bought him out, we printed our first publication and it was full community news and sports and other--we tried to make it as universal as we could in our exposure.  Well, his two or three hundred people didn't see the fit, because they wanted to get the religious news and all, so we decided to eventually just change the name and start another newspaper, which we ultimately did with a few people and we called The Sacramento Observer.  That's how that paper got started--our paper got started.
Story_ID: 644271
Speaker 1: Now, the paper gets started--well just a word on the Men's Civic League?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It eventually became the 100 Black Professionals [sic.], is that right?
Speaker 2: No.  It--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: --the Men's Civic League evolved with--many, much of it evolved in the different directions, one direction it went into was the creation and development of the Urban League in Sacramento [Greater Sacramento Urban League].  So that group, several of their leaders and members of the Men's Civic League spun off and cre- helped to create the Urban League chapter here in Sacramento [California].  And another group of them went off and created an organization it called the Sacramento black caucus [Sacramento Area Black Caucus], and the black caucus was more of a civil rights organization.  Many of them helped to put a little life in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] that was in existence here in Sacramento, but not as active as it later became during that era.  So there are several different organizations were activated and reinvigorated during that period of time mainly because that Men's Civic League existed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well thank you.  And, so was--was there any asso- what about 100 Black Professionals, did it have anything to do with--
Speaker 2: The 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of Sacramento], I think that's--if that's the one.  You know that's a new--that's relatively new.  The 100 Black Men is a kind of a--in Sacramento, is maybe a generational organization--
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I was just asking about what's going on then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, at that time, yeah.
Speaker 1: --okay, since I had a note that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you put the 100 Black Men in there, but it's not in this part--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --but--
Story_ID: 644272
Speaker 1: The purchasers of--they were like--I saw a photo, had to be about seven men came together to buy the Sacramento Outlook, to--
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: --and, but by the time it came out as the Observer, there were only three left, or?  Is that it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  By the time we changed the format and did what many of those earlier supporters of the Outlook wanted to see, it ended up with just three of us who ultimately decided to change the name and create The Sacramento Observer.  The two other individuals were Gino Gladden [Eugene Gladden], who was a radio person; and then Mr. John Cole [John W. Cole], a local businessman who was one of the found- co-founders as well of the Observer newspaper.  So the three of us founded and started the Observer.  Gino Gladden, if I might continue on that area, Gino Gladden, later in a very short time after we started the paper, he died of rheumatic fever of all things, as a young age, he was, I think thirty-three [years old], very young man, and that was shortly after we started the Observer.  And Mr. John Cole decided too that he wanted to go into the record business, so he sold us his interest.  Part of the motivation for him selling, however, was that the year of 1964, I believe it was, the newspaper business we lost--we, we were--I had managers running it and I was still in my real estate operation [Lee Realty Company, Sacramento, California], we lost sixty odd thousand dollars--that was our loss during that year.  Econom- we had a tough time getting advertising and we were trying to pay staff and it just, just was not working out.  So Mr. Cole said, you know, he wanted to essentially go into another line of business; and he went into the record store business.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My wife [Kathryn Charles Lee] and I continued however to run the, the paper.
Story_ID: 644273
Speaker 1: Now, this is--the time that you start the Observer [The Sacramento Observer]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I saw the first edition out there--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and there's an article--I mean there's a, there's--John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] is the president of the United States--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Edmund G. Brown [Pat Brown] is the governor--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of California; the, and this is the end of '62 [1962], November 22nd--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --just a year, exactly before John Kennedy is assassinated (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Assassinated, yes.
Speaker 1: There's an article you know anticipating the celebration of the Emancipation Proclamation?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, this--you know so this you know this is a critical time in the history of African Americans--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I guess, (unclear) thinking about what happened 100 years before.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what--and the civil rights struggle was heating up, so.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well that's the stage for it, and, so.
Speaker 2: Well we--the needs that existed here in this community [Sacramento, California], which we saw more vividly than anywhere else were so critical and in need of servicing.  You know, we were dealing with housing covenants that denied African Americans opportunities to buy houses in certain districts and certain neighborhoods.
Speaker 1: Now explain that for people who are watching this and have no idea what that is.  Where does the housing (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, essentially, there are deeds that were written in neighborhoods as they were being developed that said if you buy any of this property and sell it to any person of color, as an example, that you would be violating this covenant; and therefore you needed to--you would be challenged by law to either sell your property, or to divest yourself of it.  In most cases it just was no opportunities for you to get into those tracks, those housing developments.  So housing covenants essentially were just a requirement that you do not sell any of these properties, any of these tracks, any of these houses to any person of color, as an example.  And so those were, at that time, written in law.
Speaker 1: And so that was legal?
Speaker 2: That was legal.  It was legal at that time.  Now again, we're in this period of time we're talking the '57 [1957], '58 [1958], '59 [1959], '60s [1960s] and '61 [1961].  So you had to--you had to look very carefully to make sure you would not try to get in the neigh- because you just could not do it, unless challenged by law and therefore you had to have the legal--the legal ability, obviously, to challenge that law.  We had one outstanding lawyer, we called him Mr. Civil Rights in our area, and he--Nat Colley [Nathaniel S. Colley] was one of our principal legal giants in this area.  And Nat Colley was very good on this and ultimately, what came out of this was the fair housing law [California Fair Housing Act of 1963] that Byron Rumford [William Byron Rumford] in the state legislature [California State Assembly] had to initiate and Nat Colley had to reinforce in terms of challenging and, and defending that--the efforts to get into these housing tracks.
Story_ID: 644274
Speaker 1: Byron Rumford [William Byron Rumford], now was he the first African American elected to (unclear) assembly (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he was not.  Actually, there was--he was perhaps the third African American ever elected to the state legislature in the assembly [California State Assembly] here in Sacramento [California].  Gus Hawkins [Augustus F. Hawkins] was the second; and there was one who was much earlier than Gus Hawkins as well [Frederick M. Roberts].  So but Byron was one of our champions because he authored some legislation that was--was monumental in the changes of this state, certainly the fair housing law [California Fair Housing Act of 1963] is one.  But Byron, I believe, was also the author of the inoculations of kids--that kids had to be vaccinated in order to go to school, and he was the author of that type of legislation; and he helped to open the door for many who followed after him.  His district [17th Congressional District of California] has evolved to the point where it went from Rumford to a guy name Miller [John J. Miller] to the predecessor of Congresswoman Barbara Lee [sic.], and all.  So he's--he's very well respected and highly well, well liked; but very fruitful, very productive in some of the insight that he had in legislation.
Story_ID: 644275
Speaker 1: Now he [William Byron Rumford] was there during this early period of the, of the '60s [1960s].  And the door began to open in the early '60s [1960s] because then there was four--three or four other legislators who came to the legislature [California State Assembly] during that period of time.  There was Merv Dymally [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally]; there was Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown, Jr.]; and there was Doug Ferrell [F. Douglas Ferrell], Reverend Ferrell; and they all came about the same time, in I believe it was 1962, and--it's either 1962 or 1964.  But they came essentially the same time, and they began to also look for staff and look for employment.  And my wife [Kathryn Charles Lee], we were so close here in Sacramento [California], knowledgeable about the pool of outstanding workers and committed leaders in the area, the talent that existed here, we were very knowledgeable about that, and so many of these leaders conferred with us on who to hire--staff, qualified staff.  And my wife went to work for Doug Ferrell, Reverend Ferrell, he was a minister, very powerful minister out of Compton, California in the south, he preceded people like Leon Ralph [Leon D. Ralph], and he preceded [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters, who's there now, and that type of thing.  But Doug Ferrell, my wife went to work for him and was helpful and instrumental in finding--in helping to find staff for Willie Brown.  My sister-in-law [Betty Y. Lee] went to work for Willie Brown as his executive secretary and stayed with him about twenty years and all, while he was here.  And then Merv Dymally, he was just an amazing leader, as well.  So we had some real outstanding talent coming to our legislature during that period of time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's a great group of people, it sounds like.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Very talented.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, so out of this rich talent pool here in Sacramento, all these black professionals here working in these diverse fields--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --were able to draw talent for the legislature.
Speaker 1: For the legislature.  And many--Sacramento was beginning to flourish in the field of education.  We were able to begin to hire teachers of all different suasions, diversity was real; the children's population was growing and increasing in Sacramento city; we were able to get superintendents, some of our leaders in education in the local district were African American and all our leaders were beginning to come to the surface.  So we were beginning to experience really a warm black growth.  The paper [The Sacramento Observer] began to--played a major role in this, mainly because it provided the information, it provided the places to go, it also served as a--somewhat of a nurturing ground, itself, for the cultivation of leaders.  We offered opportunities to many writers and many others who were looking for opportunities as well.
Story_ID: 644276
Speaker 1: Did you attend the March on Washington in '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: I didn't go, but--and we were just beginning to move forward with the paper [The Sacramento Observer] at that time.  But many of our friends went.  From Sacramento [California], my good friend who was very active, he was vice president when I was president of Men's Civic League [Sacramento, California], Marion Woods [Marion J. Woods], he went; he was very active at the time.  He was a good friend of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], he too went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and he was a product of that development and that suasion, and he was a very active leader here in Sacramento, Marion Woods was; so he attended.  And we, to this day, remain very close friends as well.  He headed our poverty program.  I know you heard the War on Poverty, Marion Woods headed that in this district, in this area.  And we were very helpful with that effort at well.  The Men's Civic League helped to fund his efforts of leadership as well.  So Sacramento became, I think, a growing community of African American leaders during that early '60 [1960] periods.  And our schools opened up, like I said, with employment opportunities, we gained a few professors who were active and vocal at Sacramento State University [Sacramento State College; California State University, Sacramento, Sacramento, California], people like Dr. David Coven [ph.].  Pe- the Sac State had a university president, Dr., believe it or not, James Bond [James G. Bond], and he became university president during this period of time, so there was some exciting, exciting moments going on in our area (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now these are--these are not--are these African Americans?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Dr. James Bond?
Speaker 2: James Bond of all--(laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  Dr. David Coven and Dr. James Bond?
Speaker 2: Yes, James Bond, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, all right.  And--okay.  So Sacramento State was going from college status to university status, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It moved--when it moved to its present location on--from the community college setting where it was founded--it started its academic exposure on the community college level.  In '53 [1953] it moved to its setting now--where it is now; and it began to evolve, as you said, from a college to begin to offer expanded disciplines and different degrees, expanded degrees and opportunities and all.  And it--it saw some very concerned leaders, its president--it fluctuated for a while, but they had some stability during this period of time.  Some outstanding leaders began to go over to that campus (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 644277
Speaker 1: Now your son [Larry Lee], in the article, said that when you started the paper [The Sacramento Observer], there were twelve thousand black people in Sacramento [California]; and nowadays, roughly, there are 150,000?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Actually it's about 160,000 in our county in Sacramento [Sacramento County, California] now and continues to grow.  Of all things to say in the city--in a state in which there's declining numbers, but in terms of the African American community.  The legislature did a State of Black California Report a few years back and it discovered that there were just a couple of communities throughout the state that had continued growth in its African American population, Riverside area [Riverside, California], San Bernardino area [San Bernardino, California] happened to be one; and Sacramento was a principal growth community at that time of African Americans.  And we still get a few families--we call it a few families, and we measure this very vividly and very carefully, a few families, we feel, a week that are moving to our community.  We have a net gain each week, and we have to get that finite in our research, because we're very much concerned with making sure we, our paper is read and, and we reach new audiences and growing audiences throughout our community.
Story_ID: 644278
Speaker 1: Let's go to 1965, where you said, already in '64 [1964], you had a loss of some sixty thousand dollars, which prompted one of your partners, Mr. Cole [John W. Cole], to leave--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and went to the record business.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you decided to take on the whole thing, you and your wife [Kathryn Charles Lee]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so, what was your revenue stream, and were you still in the real estate business at that time, too?
Speaker 2: I was still in real estate and when we continued to hire managers to try to see if we could find the answer to why we were not making any money, and what was so difficult about running a simple thing like a newspaper, an African American newspaper, when in reality, of course, the newness of this product and the idea of having a publication to advertisers, there was always a reason not to put business--to give you any business; and if they could get to your community or your audiences--your proclaimed audiences without having to spend any money, they'd just assume to do that.  Was it a growing community?  We had to define that; we had to determine and show those who really had a need to reach people that they are overlooking a major community, a major audience if they did not advertise through this messenger that was reaching this audience.  And so our answer was simply to become very proficient, very outstanding in what we did.  And so we began to create products that we think had value for those that we were trying to reach: our audience as well as--advertisers as well.  We developed special editions.  We began to look at finding subjects that would matter to a lot of people and certainly employment always does.  And so we created what we call career editions.  In education we created what we call the educational opportunities, where they existed, the types of opportunities that were and that type of thing.  Combined, we created what we call the school and career guide.  We published this special edition for fifteen years, beginning in the late '60s [1960s].  I came over in '68 [1968] to run the paper [The Sacramento Observer] full time.  I decided that, you know, with these new ideas and the new approaches, that I needed to get--to become active with this publication myself to save having to spend--continually spend money with managers who were not being ab- not seeing the paper grow and that type of thing.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, at this time was the paper making money or breaking even?
Speaker 2: No.  We were still struggling during this period of time through '68 [1968].  And again, you'll see on the walls some of the managers we had, some of the people who were helping to run the paper prior to my decision to come over.  I put my real estate license on ice, had one of the fellows who was in my office to buy essentially the company that I was running, my real estate company [Lee Realty Company, Sacramento, California], and he ran it for several years.  And I came over.  My wife convinced me that I needed to give this thing a shot and see if we could make it go.
Story_ID: 644279
Speaker 1: One of the motivations that I had is that I decided to attend a conference of the National Newspaper Publishers Association, its annual convention in 1968.  And it was in New York City [New York, New York] of all places.  And so I attended that, my wife [Kathryn Charles Lee] and I, and to gain insight, I'd never been to anything like this before.  And sure enough, there I was able to meet several news- African American newspaper publishers from throughout the country, in major cities and other places.  And on the evening of the awards, they gave some outstanding recognition to those newspapers who were doing a great job in their respective communities.  We were able to meet people like Jackie Robinson, Nelson Rockefeller, Hubert Humphrey, you know.  They had attracted a number of key national leaders throughout the country to the convention--to the conference.
Speaker 2: Now, is this prior to Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.  He was assassinated in April, as I recall, and--of that same year.  So when my wife and I left there, we were highly incensed, we were highly motivated.  We felt that we gotta make this thing work.  How excited--we were excited about seeing that quality of leaders that, and some of the messages they left with us at the time.  So we left there full of motivation, full of desire and interest to make our paper go.  And can you imagine our idea of our school and career guide, and the special editions that we began to create and develop.  They became as large as three hundred pages.  We were creating annual editions as big as the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times], huge publications for a small newspaper like Sacramento [California]--in fact, when we were at the convention, when we used to tell people where we were from, their second question was, "How far is that from Los Angeles [California]?"  (Laughter) They never did know where Sacramento even was located.  So we were hardly even on the map.  But our motivation was so high that we came back full of energy and desire, and felt we had some ideas to make our publication grow and create value in it; and sure enough in just five years later, 1973, believe it or not, we received the highest award given to any black newspaper in the country.  We were named to the surprise of darn near everybody this country's leading African American newspaper.  That--
Speaker 2: Now, who gave--who gave that?
Speaker 1: --that is the--it's symbolic--receiving the John B. Russwurm Trophy, which symbolizes the number one black paper in the country.  So we received the John B. Russwurm Trophy, and you may see it around the walls--
Speaker 2: I saw it, now who is this from?
Speaker 1: It's from NNPA--
Speaker 2: Oh, NNPA, okay.
Speaker 1: --the National Newspaper Publishers Association.
Speaker 2: And John Russwurm is--?
Speaker 1: John B. Russwurm was the founder of the black press back in 1823, he was the founder, African American.  He founded, he and--John B. Russwurm and--
Speaker 2: Cornish.
Speaker 1: --Sam Cornish [Samuel Cornish], yeah, founded the first, as you know, the first--Freedom's Journal, the first African American newspaper in this country.  So it was named after him, John B. Russwurm.  We received that trophy and that recognition and boy that did it.  We then became very active in continuing the growth of our newspaper and--to the point where that being in '73 [1973], to give you an idea, two years later in '75 [1975], they had this same convention in San Francisco [California], hosted by the Sun Reporter [San Francisco Sun Reporter], Dr. Goodlett's paper at the time Dr. Goodlett [Carlton Benjamin Goodlett] was alive.  And Amelia [HistoryMaker Amelia Ashley-Ward] was one his staffers, I'm not sure if she was working for him then.  But they hosted it in San Francisco.  They have seventeen categories of judging.  And the judgings usually are done by--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: The judging is done by those in academia, professors of journalism, and so forth and so on, and then the awards are given by NNPA.  Out of seventeen categories the Observer [The Sacramento Observer] won fourteen awards.  We just swept the whole industry.  And people like Johnny Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] from Ebony and major black journalists were all there, a lot of major leaders as well.  So we literally got on the map at that time--at that convention.  So we were very, very pleased; and we then created, as you heard me say earlier, several other cities where we had models of our newspaper.
Story_ID: 644280
Speaker 1: Did you model, in terms of managing the paper [The Sacramento Observer], did you--was there any other publication, African American or, or white that you modeled after?
Speaker 2: After?
Speaker 1: Yeah in terms of presentation and content and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't.  We really didn't.  We've had our own sense of mission, our sense of purpose and the sense of direction in terms of what we wanted to do in publishing our newspaper.  We minimized, not to the extent that it became faulty information, but we minimized all the negativity that existed in our community [in Sacramento, California], which we felt was marginal compared to the outstanding achievements and the accomplishments of the community.
Speaker 1: Now, I've heard that before.  I know the--I know one of the papers that's--was accused of egregiously using, you know, murders and that sort of thing I think was the St. Louis American.  At one time they were considered a murder sheet.  A lot of black papers, the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier], the Defender [Chicago Defender] opened with a violent scene.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And was this the history of the old--well not the reverend's [J.T. Muse] paper [Sacramento Outlook], right, he didn't do that?
Speaker 2: No.  There were some and many of those cases that built their reputation or their formats based upon the crime, as you say crime sheets of the negative cri- negative things that are going on in the community.  But again, we felt realistically that that was not truly a description of our community.  We wanted to be representative of the community.  And if there's only 2 percent crime, we wanted 2 percent news that reflected that, not 98 percent and the other way around, so that's--that is always--.  So we sort of focused on the issues, on the needs that existed, education, employment opportunities, the whole desire to own property, the building of wealth; a variety of different positive motives and missions that are so important to our community.  And we built our paper on that format, and we continue to have it even today as we move through the wavelength.  And I think it's been very successful, very helpful to us.  We see, you know, there's movement going on and--in the newspaper industry and all that tells you that, you know, even with print in mainstream is somewhat dying, it's losing much revenue and that type of thing, but if you can focus on satisfying our community or satisfying a community need building value within those communities, which is what our motto was.  So we went on to win from those days, we went on to win the Russwurm [John B. Russwurm Trophy], this top trophy awards, six times, and we--it became almost like our pri- our awards.  So we stopped entering the contest, because we were just winning too many awards in that sense.  We didn't want it seemed like it was being set or anything else.  And then we stayed away a few years and went back and we won that year that we went back to in the '90s [1990s].  So a number of times that we just have backed away, and we have not re-entered in several years.  But I think, you know, that even today, as I said, you see many of the products suffering, but there's a resurgence, I sense, that's going to go on and will be going on for the press.  I see print becoming again an element that we'll have to deal with, and I think the ones that will be successful in that effort, will be the ones who have that, that concentration of community building, support of communities, recognition that their communities have values and building on that.
Story_ID: 644281
Speaker 1: Kind of tell us about the growth of the paper [The Sacramento Observer]?  You've--people watching this can't see the building that--as I saw it when I came in.  This is the most orderly and artistic looking, you know, business place I've seen in a long time.  I mean, it's really--it's impressive when you see it--
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: --when you walk in, and it's not like over imposing, but it's really--it looks like you know a place where things are in order.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And we live that.  We feel that that's so important, you know.  And many times as we've been in this building here, since we've been here and even earlier times though, every governor of our state has been in here, interviewed, we have had the privilege of meeting and then talking with them.  We get leaders in here from all over the country.  We have journalists from all over the world who come here and say almost the same thing you've said.  They've left the daily newspaper [The Sacramento Bee] and came here and they just are amazed that an African American independent newspaper can exists and exemplify themselves as we've done that.  We recently just a week or so ago had about seven journalists from Pakistan, and they were so impressed with the operation here and the effort that we've made.  And we've had them from Africa and other ci- and other countries as well.  And we've received some products where we've done some pro- interrelationships with each other from other countries as well.  So, again, we're proud of that and feel that that's part of what we feel is the reason we can answer that phone: "America's number one, the Observer newspapers," and all, and we're proud of that fact.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now what was the staff--how many people are on staff when you started and where is it today?
Speaker 2: Today we have about, and we've gone done down in staff because of the new technology that exists and allows us to do some other things, many of--much of which is done in part time help.  Our photographers, we have three full time photographers working with us and all that, but we're at--at our highest peak, we've had as many as fifty people working for us in our earlier--when we had other outlets as well; and a number of freelancers that also we utilize.  Today we have about--almost twenty and several of those--and several of the people we have are part time and freelancers that we use as well.  Larry [Larry Lee], my son, who currently runs the operational side of the paper, he's president and CEO, and he's essentially moving more into the digital side of the house and he's using a number right now--he's creating new models in that area, in the high tech area, he's developed the digital side of the house.  We're creating a digital archives of our newspaper, so digit- digital operation is very real for us; and the experience that we're having is, I think, gonna be enlightening.  We're yet to announce some new directions for the paper, which we hope to announce next--very shortly, in fact, it'll be next year, because of our fiftieth anniversary time.
Story_ID: 644282
Speaker 1: What's your biggest advertiser [at The Sacramento Observer]?
Speaker 2: We have a number, we feel a number of outstanding advertisers who take contracts with us and doing quite well, people like Wells Fargo bank [Wells Fargo and Company]; Comcast [Comcast Corporation]; we have Safeway [Safeway Inc.]; some of the grocery chains; Macy's [Macy's, Inc.] is still a good advertiser with us in print.  And so we have--we don't have as many automobile dealers as we used to, we've lost in that area and are developing a creative way to get them back to us as well.  But we are fortunate to have a few of these types of national advertisers that really undergird much of the effort that we make here.
Speaker 1: One change I noticed, looking at, through the issues of your paper, is that maybe ten years ago most black newspapers would have like liquor ads and cigarette ads--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as their major--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know advertisers.
Speaker 2: And you're absolutely right.  I can recall making a call to Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.] in the earlier days--in the old days as they say, and trying to get them to call to give us advertising in our newspapers, this would be the nationwide effort and trying to get the Marlboro ad or--brand into our newspaper.  And while they wouldn't buy that, they would buy Benson Hedges [Benson and Hedges] or something of that sort, so they definitely were very active in the early days, the cigarette companies. In fact they used to kind of compete with one another as to who could spend the most money with African American newspapers in the earlier days.  And that was true also with General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company].  It's so interesting that many times the--much of that was stimulated by African Americans who were in these companies.  Like Reverend Leon Sullivan was with General Motors on their board of directors, and he was very helpful in directing them to make sure they put place advertisements from General Motors into African American newspapers.  Stan Scott [Stanley S. Scott] with Philip Morris, he was equally as active and productive in pushing companies like Philip Morris to advertise with our newspapers as well.  Now, you know, so there's been--much of the effort has been because somebody is helping or pushing or pulling and--to, to make these companies--many of these companies advertise, as they should be, in many cases.
Story_ID: 644283
Speaker 1: Now these are invisible threads to the general public.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: People don't, people don't see that kind of interaction, but this is something that's very important to the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's very real, and we have to, we have to deal with it.  You know, it's hard for us to believe that there's no Fortune 500 company not advertising with African American newspapers.  It's hard for us to believe that that wouldn't be a consideration of a top executive, especially where you're reaching universal markets, and markets that can be of service to your company.  I've been on the board of companies like, again, Blue Cross of California [Blue Shield of California], and we've experienced--we experienced that too until my presence, many cases, and you bring enlightenment and understanding and really productivity and service to these companies as you move your product--that is, if you have newspapers of quality and of value, and that's what I encourage more than anything else among my industries is to make sure we put out good products.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in terms of the African American businesses, do they--what percentage of the advertising revenue do they provide?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, that's a very interesting question, especially here in Sacramento [California].  Even with that number of African Americans that exist here and live in the city, we're limited--we're very limited and very productive, outstanding African American businesses.  We're not the Chicago's of the West or anything like that.  So we--we have a few who own restaurants, who own and operate restaurants, and they--those few will take ads but we cannot overly depend on just that area, so we have more than just African Americans, we have no African Americans at this current time, although history--we've had some in the past, who own dealerships, auto dealerships as an example, in this area.  So w- so in order for us to convince a dealer to run with us, we have to convince a white dealer that African American market is important to you based upon certain research we've done, or that he knows--or he or she knows about.  So it's very challenging for us to do that.  We have to do an enormous amount of research, which we don't mind doing it.  So to answer your question, we have just about every major church in this city, in this community, to advertise with us.  We have church support throughout our newspaper [The Sacramento Observer], and they've been--they're very supportive of the paper and all.  But in Sacramento we have no Fortune--currently, no Fortune 500 companies located in our area here.  We have absolutely none.  And so as a result, we don't have the major companies, the, their branch offices or, or spinoffs of state gov- of the state government in some way through the lobbying, consulting kinds of operations that exist here.
Story_ID: 644284
Speaker 1: In terms of editorial policy, what is your editorial policy?
Speaker 2: Essentially, to print the news as accurately and fairly as we can possibly do so.  To make sure we reflect the--in our coverage, in our informing the community, in our enlightening community do so in a fair and open way to do well with our own research and understanding that we have to glean from the community before we editorialize or direct our energies on the pages of the paper [The Sacramento Observer].  So essentially, you know, we're fair in that outlet.  We are a African American newspaper, so our emphasis is totally committed to that area.  But it's so interesting, about 30 percent of our readers are non-African American.  So we do have a growing and respectful nonblack readership, and they are supportive in most cases of the community because it's somewhat enlightening to read our newspaper as well.  For instance, just last week Martin Luther King III was in the City of Sacramento [California], and we had him on our front page and covered his presentation and speech here.  There was not one inch of coverage in the daily newspaper [The Sacramento Bee] of his presence.  To us he's a key leader in our country because of who he is and that type of thing.  But--so we still say that there's much news goes unspoken in the general press, and our newspaper's there to fill the gap.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I saw an article about a woman who, I think her first name was Maria [ph.], but she had, she was--she was in the Tulsa [Oklahoma] riot of 1921, and there was an article about her passing away at age a hundred and--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) two.  Now I can't recall seeing that anywhere else?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, see that still exists in our community as you--as mainstream newspapers, and frequently, we work closely with them in a sense--we're not--feel like we're not competing for the same audiences.  We have our audience and we really don't mind them doing what they have to do to try to cover the news in a complete way at all, and we ask them of the same courtesy as well.  But there is much that they miss that we feel we can fill the gap and are filling the gap with.  So there's an audience here.  Again, I say that community newspapers are here to stay; and I think that if you do it well, if you serve your communities well and as completely as you can, I think you'll have a--you'll be successful.  You can still grow and find those audiences as well as find advertisers who recognize those audience.
Story_ID: 644285
Speaker 1: You mentioned the quality of the office here.  One of the things by bringing--many times--to bringing our advertisers here, they too are amazed.  You know, they're thinking, I think in many cases, they stereotype us in thinking that we're still in some garage trying to perhaps run a press or whatever; and then they're amazed and we see that frequently, and they--in fact they express that as well.  So we're very fortunate in that sense, and our editorial policy just this past weekend on Saturday, as an example, our photographer had a man--'Man Behind the Lens' show ['The Man Behind the Lens'] and he had pictures that really blew the minds of many of the--his audience, and his show was really an exhibit of some of the pictures that he's taken of leaders who been through our paper and through the operation and he credits all this to the Observer [The Sacramento Observer], of course, but the idea was to show the artistry, artistry of photography and show how great some of the photography work that he's been a part of.
Speaker 2: Now this is Larry--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Larry Dalton.
Speaker 2: --Dalton, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  I don't know if he shared with you, but well received and--but people were amazed at here he's got pictures with one of our leaders, with Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] or whoever else that has come through our town and through our city, and many cases, through our office as well.
Speaker 2: Now the 30 percent non African American readers, how would you typify them?  Is there a profile of who they--?
Speaker 1: Essentially, academicians, these would be some of the makeup there; a lot of the progressive groups that exists and share some of the mission and direction; just generally supporters of diverse causes, of efforts within the community.  So it's a more of a--higher income families that would be a part of that 30 percent because they're comfortable with who they are; they're not threatened by competition of--they feel African Americans or anybody else in that nature; and just many curious readers, people who like to read a lot, who enjoy reading and that type of thing.  Yeah, we see them as that type of profile.  I see them in mixed groups.  They come up to us and said--and say things like, "Appreciate reading about the breast cancer problem that exists within the community, or the infant mortality rate.  I want to be active in some areas, can you help me to find this or the other?"  And so we see a lot of that.  And probably next week I'll see three or four executives of--frequently hospitals and other places that we'll meet with and talk with and ask them for support for groups.  And many groups use us frankly as the, I think, the catalyst to make things happen, make some changes occur in our community by bringing leaders together; and we do, we'll bring faith based leaders and so forth to meet with, for instance, bank executives to talk about how they can streamline or modernize their giving procedures or products or whatever.  So it's a lot going on.
Story_ID: 644286
Speaker 1: This is one of the most exciting industries right now for us that I've seen in my fifty years, even though we've had the kind of growth and ex- and efforts that you heard us speak about over this meeting.  And so--but I'm finding it equally as exciting because we're challenged by new technology and new systems, and really some opportunities that we didn't have earlier to utilize different technology and other things.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know earlier this week when we were talking to people at the Sun Reporter [San Francisco Sun Reporter]--I mean the editor of the Sun Reporter [HistoryMaker Amelia Ashley-Ward], the publisher, she was expressing her concern that, or her belief that digitizing--I mean the digital--
Speaker 1: Era.
Speaker 2: --paper, yeah, era is coming to a close in terms of--I mean that people are really going back to reading the newspaper.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: It's more convenient for people--
Speaker 1: Well, I don't think it's coming to a close.  In fact, I think it's doing quite the opposite.  It's going in a massive way.  However, that does not take from our industry either.  It's just like television did not take from radio that much and--nor movies and so forth.  I think again that we can't deny the digital onrush, and it'll be here, you know, because that's just the way the industry--the general industry is going.  We just have to be smart enough to use it wisely as well.  But that does not mean that everybody's going to be hooked up to--no more than everybody had a telephone, everybody is not going to have a digital process--a digital platform either in that effort.  So I think your--she's right in saying newspapers are here--.  When you see people like Warren Buffett buying newspapers and you know papers--I know the Orange County paper [Orange County Register] down in Southern California has gotten very progressive with that.  The thing they need to get wiser with is how to use that, or you know, we look at our daily newspaper here [The Sacramento Bee] in this town [Sacramento, California] and two or three days a week, our paper is sometimes twice the size of that paper, it's so small.  And you say to yourself, you know that they're not making money on those days.  So they've got to get smarter on how to utilize this new technology if they're going to survive; and many times they've cut their staffs back to the point where the quality--many times the quality of their papers are suffering as well.
Story_ID: 644287
Speaker 1: You're an accountant by training, and your wife [Kathryn Charles Lee] has business acumen.  Who on--I mean how do you--or who have you hired in terms of professional journalists to really you know make it a viable newspaper?
Speaker 2: Well, we have currently almost a full time consultant in the marketing side of the house.  Who's--essentially his own company, and he's here working with us, helping to design our future in the marketing side of the house.  Larry [Lee's son, Larry Lee] is working with a number of companies, individuals whose names I don't know, but companies that can help us to modernize some of our approaches and--editorially in the direction we're going.  But the thing is, the very key, honestly, in this regard is that there are not many African American experts in editorial design--there really are not.  You literally--we're the experts, unfortunately, it's a kind of experiment yourself, if you're progressive enough to do so and have the capital to do so, but move in a direction that puts value to the paper [The Sacramento Observer].  So whether you design a new mask head, change a mask head and look at design, you might consult some kind of graphics person, but they're not experts.  Will African Americans respond to this?  I don't know.  What colors are more receptive to these audiences; you have to know that, you have to look for that and research that.  So you might experiment yourself, but essentially, we don't have the benefit of the experts that many times the mainstream newspapers have, but many cases don't know how to use either.
Speaker 1: Now, do you look for journalists--I mean people with journalism degrees to hire, or do you look--I mean or does it make much difference to you one way if they're professional journalists or not?
Speaker 2: Well, at this point, you know, we're not as challenged by you know the editorial direction and policy.  We don't see any kind of a perk that we should see by changing a editorial direction for the newspaper; and by that I mean, our concern would be mostly is that: are we reaching the residents of a certain neighborhood.  And so we would design the paper mostly, what does that neighborhood need, what does that neighborhood--what will it respond to?  So we might design it to help address, for instance, a flood policy that could help that neighborhood that's low or some issues of that--issue of that nature, editorial issue of that nature.  But we would design it more to the neighborhood; as opposed to saying let's get more progressive, or more aggressive with--in our coverage of our community, or the general community as well.
Story_ID: 644288
Speaker 1: You remember now, we're sitting here in Sacramento [California], the capital of, of a great state; the capital, if you will, of the what, eighth largest economy in the world.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: We're sitting in a community that has nine city councilpersons [on the Sacramento City Council]; and only about 15 percent of our city's population is African American--
Speaker 2: They're--are there nine black city councilmen?
Speaker 1: No, there're nine councilpersons.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: But our city has only about 15 percent African Americans, and four of the nine are African Americans.  Somehow or another the visibility of these leaders, the exposure of these leaders, the birth and growth and response to these leaders have come from somewhere and whether you talk to our mayor who is African American, and you may have--know who it is--
Speaker 2: Kevin Johnson.
Speaker 1: --Kevin Johnson.  He would credit: "Much of my earlier growth has been because of the Observer [The Sacramento Observer]."  His exposure here, not necessarily the general exposure, but his exposure here as a leader, not just necessarily a basketball leader, but also a leader in other rights, an educator, who created the charter--St. HOPE Academy [St. HOPE Public Schools, Sacramento, California] here in this area; and a variety of things.  Much of it comes from here.  He consults us just like he should any major newspaper, because of what we stand for and the direction we've led him.  But the second--our city is that progressive that we have gone from literally no representative in the last forty or fifty years to the point now where the majority of the leaders in our city is African American.  And so we feel that a lot of that has to be--is because of the leadership we've shown here and the exposure we've given the community, and the value we built in the accomplishments of many of these leaders.
Story_ID: 644289
Speaker 1: I was going to ask, and I usually ask people who have newspapers what was the biggest story that you've covered, or the biggest--but I get the sense, I have another question now after talking with you, and that is: are you, it seems to me that you're more concerned, and correct me if I'm wrong, with galvanizing the community leadership than you are with covering a big story necessarily?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--we feel there are big stories and many times, the galvanizing of the lea- of many of the lead- of the community as an example.  We don't have the Martin [Trayvon Martin] stories here in Sacramento [California] that much.  You know, we have issues that--dealing with driving while black and issues of that nature.  We don't have a heavy gang community here.  We have a gang community, certainly, and I'll never deny that, but it's not like Chicago [Illinois]; and it's not as close as even our Stockton area [Stockton, California], if you go right down the central highway here [Interstate 5].  So it's more of a progressive town, in that sense, we don't have a lot of the big stories.  What's occurring and appear right now is--everything in this city would be--or the big stories in this city would be primarily governmental stories.  You know, they would be built around as--right now one of the big stories would be--is the investigation of the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] into some problems there in the state capital; right now that's going on.  We've had that, maybe, in our fifty years, maybe a half a dozen times where this type of investigation is going on, some of which have involved Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown, Jr.] and others.  Now when that wasn't there, we were doing those stories.  But our other big story, and if you go back the last ten papers of the daily newspaper in the city [The Sacramento Bee], the big story, you know what it has been?  The appearance of the Sacramento Kings.  That's not a big story; that's just a story.  And so there's nothing--but the building of a arena [Golden 1 Center, Sacramento, California] is a big story for our city in the sense of its value, building this city into a world class.  And you'll find our paper [The Sacramento Observer] with coverage of that kind of thing, that kind of story; but not to the detriment, frankly, of the neighborhood stories that I described that, where there might be a school problem or transportation problem, or some other issue of that nature.
Story_ID: 644290
Speaker 1: Now in terms of the Kings [Sacramento Kings], correct me if I'm wrong, but I believe the Kings were in jeopardy of being snatched by Seattle [Washington], or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --or another city, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: To--right out of the area here, and so.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And they were in very much in jeopardy of that happening and thanks, again, the aggressive and wise leadership of our mayor [Kevin Johnson], joined with him being wise enough to create an activated community, and a following that frankly prior to his leadership was just really nonexistent.  It's hard to believe anybody else could have done it other than our mayor, our current mayor.  It really isn't--he put a lot of energy and thought and effort and his reputation and style, really, to work, and it worked for him, and it's been very successful.  And the whole feeling of this mayor has changed during that period of time.   But--so that didn't happen; and the arena's [Golden 1 Center, Sacramento, California] moving forward, and if that happens, this will become literally a world class city, if you can envision that happening, and we can.  And once they capture the fact that this is a capital city of that, this major state and begin to build on that, we have some of the largest undeveloped city land and community in any city and major city in this country.  And so we've got some great opportunities that rests with us here in the city, and in Sacramento [California].  So the story is yet to be told, and I think we're very fortunate to be here, and very fortunate to have, you know, the quality of--you mentioned our writers, the quality of our writers, they're all journalistic--journalism trained with degrees from state universities; our principal staff writer is a young- is a woman, young woman who went to school with my son, Larry [Larry Lee], at San Jose State [San Jose State University, San Jose, California].  Both of them, they majored in journalism, and he snatched her because he saw what she was doing while he was in college, and she's been with us all this period of time as well.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Genoa Barrow.  Genoa Barrow.  And I don't know if you met--you may have met Anthony Harvey [Antonio Ray Harvey].  I don't know if you met--he, he, I just saw him walking down the hall, but he's another one of our principal writers; Mardeio Cannon; and so we have a number of good writers that I think are well respected in the community.  As I mentioned our photojournalists, our photographers as well.
Story_ID: 644291
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about something that--well, sports coverage.  Now this is something that some of the smaller black papers don't do so well, and you [at The Sacramento Observer] seem to be focused on it to the extent that you're on top of you know the current--what the Kings are doing and maybe the local high schools are doing and have somebody that's really working hard on it.  There's a, I saw a whole room dedicated to it, with a monitor--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --a good sized meeting room?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We're very excited about that because we're truly working with leadership of our city to build this into a world class sports area.  Sacramento [California] in the past has been known for some of the [U.S.] Olympic Trials that have occurred here.  We've had a number of swimmers and have done quite well in national and international competition, and of course, now our big thing is to build our pro team, the Sacramento Kings, into what we hope to be a championship team as well.  So there's a lot of efforts going into developing this city to become, really, a kind of a sports center.  We feel we'd be absolutely negligent if we didn't put--devote some time and energy and editorial support for the development of that.  Our sports writers and editors are devoted to making that happen.  You will not go to a pro team game and not see our sports writers there and our photographers there.  We feel we must cover those events, and we're there.  We have been very fortunate to have had many of the sports, the athletes and some of the leaders, the coaches and others into the office here, interviewing them and talking with them about their directions and so forth.  People like Dusty Baker and Lee Manuel [sic. Jerry Manuel] and so forth have come from this area.  So we've had--we have been a very fruitful and productive producer of outstanding sports leaders.
Story_ID: 644292
Speaker 1: Your son is basically--Larry [Larry Lee] has, he's basically the future leader of this paper [The Sacramento Observer], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As we sit here now I've been told that I'm kind of the dean of publishers that I--in California, at least in California, that I have been publisher and leader of a newspaper longer than anybody--African American that is, African American newspaper, longer than anybody in the history of this state.  There have been several who've been in some of the other cities, but there's--none has been leader of a African American newspaper in California fifty years.  So I continue to, and my colleagues have honored me in that regard, as being currently the dean of African American newspaper publishers in the State of California.  And Larry is the heir apparent, and while I have one other son who's William Lee, Jr., who's in the entertainment industry, based now in Atlanta [Georgia]; but Larry is taken to journalism with just a vigor that you have to enjoy.  He enjoys it, he's mixing with and building his own following, he's sensitive to some of the industry changes that are required; he's technically oriented and knowledgeable about some of the changes that are occurring in the industry as well.  So I'm very proud of his effort, his support, he has a very beautiful family, and he's given my wife [Kathryn Charles Lee] and I a couple of granddaughters, as has Billy as well, so I can't say that I'm favoring one or the other; but Larry's here and he's definitely directing the future of this operation.  And I think it's going to be bright.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Now, you're one of two sons, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Of your parents [Carrie Woods Lee and Charles R. Lee], and you've got two sons?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then they--both of them produced girls so, somehow or another, we missed the boat.  I was trying to get a boy in that mixture because I told him that something happens to him, it's going to end up in, in the direction that--where they may be a gender, gender, gender change on this thing.  So we'll see what happens on that.
Story_ID: 644293
Speaker 1: We always ask this question: when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would do it differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  I have to say very, very honestly, we've been blessed.  And we've been very fortunate to have landed in Sacramento [California], to have built a base and a following here from this launch and from this city; and God has been good to us.  Needless to say, we have had problems, but we don't mind being knocked down, because we're going to get back up.  We're strong fighters, we appear to be one way and we want to be that way, and that is humble and serviceable and thankful and blessed, but we're fighters.  We really feel we know what the road has in store for us, and what it is prepared for us.  But we feel, as I said, blessed and godly in that sense.  So we don't mind, you know, doing what is necessary in order to bring about the change.  We have seen major change.  We know what that's about.  We have made change happen, and we're fortunate to be a part of much of that.  So to say anything differently would not be fair to all of those who've given their energy and their efforts and their wisdom and their direction to this enterprise and to the efforts that we put forth here through the Observer [The Sacramento Observer], and through all of its products.
Story_ID: 644294
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I--we see the growing changes.  We hope that we can begin to eliminate some of the challenges that we have.  We are very aware of the disparities that exist in many areas in health and wealth.  We're very much aware of that.  We know that in order to make these changes that it builds, something must happen in society.  But society is changing so rapidly in other areas that frequently, this problem, this issue, the issue of diversity, the issue of differentness is not addressed.  But we're here to call it to everybody's attention as much as we can, and in the best way we can.  So I'm in hopes that we have the opportunity to continue to move forward, and I feel we will; and that the more exposure, enterprises like yours, The HistoryMakers, gives to many of our leaders to show the world that there're some outstanding leaders here in these communities, the African American communities, and all that have made major contributions to their cities, their communities, this country and even the world.  We need that.  And the more we do that, I think, eventually our, our races, our cultures will be closer together; and all of us will benefit from, I think, a more fruitful future.
Story_ID: 644295
Speaker 1: When you look back on your career, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you used the right word.  I hope it will be a legacy and we feel that that's so important.  I say that more than anything else that if someone says, "There goes Bill Lee [HistoryMaker William Lee]," that they remember that I said that it all happened because of the Almighty and like I said earlier, when we first began, I gained my strength through the Almighty.  And I give Him all the credit and all the glory and I'm excited about that.  Dad [Charles R. Lee] said, "Remember where you came from, son," he always used to tell us that, my brother [James Lee] and I both; and we, in fact, do that.  So from our beginning to where we are now and hopefully for the bright future that we have in store for us, I hope our legacy will be one of remembrance that we made a contribution as well.
Speaker 1: And your father did get a chance to see the paper [The Sacramento Observer] make a profit and--?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And grow to the extent where it is.  And you know we, we're in our own home here, our own building [in Sacramento, California]; and we have so many resources that we are hopefully protecting and all, so we're, we're very excited about, about that fact.  You need, you need that revenue in order to keep it going.  And that's--we're building on that as well.
Story_ID: 644296
Speaker 1: Is it this year that your wife [Kathryn Charles Lee] passed, this year?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.  She passed in, on March the 25th, and we buried her on April the 1st of this year.  And what a loss, she had been sick, bedridden for so long.  Full--and it's a joy in one way because she had suffered bed wise so long and knowing she's at rest from that suffering, but it's obviously a big loss; and she was so warmly respected by this community and they gave her a home going that we will long remember, always remember, and all.  And we're very fortunate to have had her with us for that period of time.
Story_ID: 644297
Speaker 1: Now does the paper [The Sacramento Observer], or you personally, do you engage in mentoring of young people; are there internships here and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: We have a nonprofit, and we didn't talk much about that arm, but we have a nonprofit arm connected to the paper, and it's the Observer Media Institute [Sacramento, California].  And we have--there we have a program we call the Gems [ph.] and the Gems is the training and the development of young journalists, mainly high school and first year community college students who might be interested in journalism; and we try to do five a year and we give them the opportunity to hear about all journalism, to know about the black press and to cultivate their own writing skills and exposure to, not only writing, but photography and graphics and advertising and the other avenues that are part of the departments in a newspaper.  So, yes, we do train, and we're sensitive to that area as well.   And our people volunteer a lot of time with organizations, with schools, lecturing and talking and sharing insight.  There is a charter school named after me here in Sacramento [California], it's the William Lee College Prep, it's a charter school right down the street, elementary school, K through sixth [kindergarten through sixth grade], and I'm very fortunate to have had them to recognize us as well.  It's so interesting when I go over to that school the youngsters are so, so sharp; I mean we're dealing with some real true scholars.  These young scholars are coming bright with questions and insights and all of that, and they, they treat us so royally and thankfully about the efforts and support we've given at least that charter school as well.
Story_ID: 644298
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Uh oh, you, you've got me.  No, I--you brought me from (laughter) (unclear) to say a mighty long way from the early days in my--and I stumbled through some of the thoughts because some of the questions are--pricked the memory in old--as best I can, I hope I answered those.  But no, I can't think of anything, Larry [Larry Crowe], that you might have missed.  I appreciate you letting me say that about our school [William Lee College Prep, Sacramento, California] though because I do want to make sure our charter school get recognized; it's so important.  And I don't think so, we have, as I said, visitors who come through here.  They treat us almost like a museum occasionally because of some of the exposure we have.  Now do you have, on a process side, on an operational side, what are you going to need from us?  You're going to need some pictures.  And maybe I shouldn't ask this until after you're through but--?
Speaker 1: Yes, that's probably right (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Larry [Lee's son, Larry Lee] said something about some pictures.
Speaker 1: Some photos that illustrate your life from the beginning, I mean your, pictures of your parents [Carrie Woods Lee and Charles R. Lee]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --ancestors, all the way up through--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --major milestones of your life.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he's going to digitize those and send them.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But if that's--if I haven't missed anything else that's obvious, I'll ask my last question.  And it's very similar to legacy.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, it's very--as you said, it's very similar to the legacy side of the house, and you know, it's very simple to say, and it is in reality in my case, is as someone who really committed to serve.  And that word service and serve is very meaningful to my father's generation and what he instilled in us, my brother [James Lee] and myself, and what I'd like to instill in Larry.  And he said--my dad, if he could ever, and those who have any regard or respect for the efforts we've made would say simply that Dr. Lee [HistoryMaker William Lee], he really was committed to serve.  And that's really about it.  I think that more than anything else, I don't have any desires to have buildings or streets or anything named after me, but it's just a matter of service and that's the way I'd like to be remembered in that regard.  And hopefully it might happen, and I know that's the case with my wife, even as I said, with her passing, we just this week had a group call, said they want to do some things for Mrs. Lee [Lee's wife, Kathryn Charles Lee] and remember her because she too was a servant; and she worked in the capitol [California State Capitol, Sacramento, California] and other places; and her work here at the paper [The Sacramento Observer] as well.  That's about it and all, so.  As you've gone around and seen African American newspapers, especially, you know what's out there and you know where we stack up in this, in that regard and know full well, you know, that we are committed to continue to be as much as we can the champions of the industry as best we can, because we think that we can lead by example and much of the work that we try to do here--over here at the paper as well.
