Story_ID: 9982
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Edgar, Edgar Carey Lane.  Sir, could you give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: LaSalle Doheny Leffall, Jr., L-A, capital S-A-L-L-E, D-O-H-E-NY, L-E-F-F, two small f's,-A-L-L, JR.
Speaker 1: And, sir, is there a particular significance or story behind your name, cause the LaSalle and the Leffall and the Doheny are--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --are singular-type names, you know, that you don't find a lot.
Speaker 2: Well, Leffall is a French name.  And my father stated that his forbears were owned as slaves by someone from a region of Nice, France, and that's why the name Leffall.  And his father thought that since Leffall was a French name, there was a French explorer [René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle] that his father had heard about, we all studied in school, who had gone up and down the Mississippi looking for areas for trade and commerce for France.  And so that's why--his name was LaSalle Leffall, and mine is LaSalle Leffall.
Speaker 1: Okay, sir, can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born May 22, 1930 in Tallahassee, Florida.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a surgeon and professor of surgery at Howard University Hospital [Washington, D.C.]
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June 7, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Suite 4000, Towers Building, Howard University Hospital.
Story_ID: 9983
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, I believe would be a fish dish and it's usually a sole.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue, blue is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like the spring best of all.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Usually for vacation, either to my sister-in-law's and her--and my brother-in-law in Puerto Rico or in Maine--Franklin, Maine.
Speaker 1: And finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, "Equanimity under duress", which means calmness under fire, grace under pressure, "equanimity under duress" is my favorite saying.
Speaker 1: That's something that useful for a surgeon, I would suppose.
Speaker 2: Very definitely useful.
Story_ID: 9984
Speaker 1: Can you tell me something about your family background?  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother was Martha Lula Jordan, and it was pronounced "Jerden."  It's spelled J-O-R-D-A-N, Martha, L-U-L-U--, L-U-L-A, I think she spelled it L-U-L-A, Martha Lula Jordan, but she spelled it Jordan, J-O-R-D-A-N.  She was born in Gurley, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know her date or birth?
Speaker 2: Yes, April 17, 1909.
Speaker 1: Okay, how do you spell Gurley?
Speaker 2: G-U-R-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, and can you tell us much about her?  You know, can you tell us about her?
Speaker 2: Sure, my mother was one of eight children.  There were two boys and, and six girls.  And she grew up on a farm.  And she met my father when my father when my father came to teach at the local college near Gurley, Alabama, in Huntsville, Alabama, called Alabama Normal [sic, Huntsville Normal School]  And my mother met him, and they subsequently got married.  And she then went on to college and got her degree and so forth.  But she grew up on a farm and only went to the sixth grade on the farm.  Her father was the principal and the lone teacher of the school so he was principal and teacher of the single-room school and single-teacher school my mother attended.  But she was one of his best students, and after she finished sixth grade, she went out to help him teach in one of the local rural schools in the area.
Speaker 1: Is that as far as they went, is sixth grade?
Speaker 2: At that, that's, that's as far as they went then.  My mother went on to high school.  After she married my father, high school, college, got a college degree, and then did studies toward her masters.  But that was after she had married my father.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do--do you know much about your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Yes, quite a bit.
Speaker 1: All right, well, tell us something about--how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well, I think we can go back roughly around 1820s.  They were slaves, and I'm in the process now of writing my memoirs, and so I've had to get as much information as I could so I can go back to my great-grand parents who grew up in the region of Gurley, Alabama.  And that's where my mother grew up.  So they were, they were farmers there.  And my mother was on the farm until she married my father in 1928.
Speaker 1: Okay, do they tell any stories about slavery or about the Civil War or Reconstruction or any of that?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.  The things that I hear and heard most when I was growing up, because I used to spend every summer in Alabama with my mother's people.  I knew my mother's people much better than I knew my father's.  So I used to hear them talk about growing up on the farm, but very little about tales of, of slavery except that their forbearers were slaves.
Speaker 1: Okay, any interesting stories at all from that side of the family that you remember coming up?
Speaker 2: Well, the interesting stories is that the person who was the teacher was my mother's father.  There was a school, the Flint River School.  And my mother's father was a teacher there.  And his name was Jeremiah Jordan, like I say, it's spelled Jordan, J-O-R-D-A-N, but it's pronounced Jerden (ph.).  And he used to emphasize to all of them the great value of an education.  And I have often heard from my folks that even though they didn't have much formal education, they emphasized education, and they were a family of, really, I think marked intelligence and knew what to do in terms of what were the important things in life, like integrity, civility, those kinds of things.
Story_ID: 9985
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is LaSalle Doheny Leffall, Sr., L-A-capital-S-A-L-L-E, D-O-H-E-N-Y, L-E-F-F, two small f's, -A-L-L, Sr.  I'm named for my father, and my son is named for me.  He's the third, so you have it all there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I should say something about the Doheny.  I told you about LaSalle, the French explorer [René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle].  The people who owned my forbears were Leffalls.  That's where the Leffall came from.  When my father was in college, he went to Prairie View [State Normal and Industrial College, later Prairie View A & M] in Texas.  And that was during the 1920s, during the Warren Harding administration.  And there was a man who was involved in that administration scandal--in a scandal that occurred during the Warren Harding administration, the Teapot Dome scandal.  And this man's name was Edward L. Doheny, and he was a big entrepreneur, a wealthy man from California.  And my father happened to see his name in the paper, and he thought that, since my father had no middle name, my father thought that Doheny sounded just right as a middle name.  So he, he started calling himself LaSalle Doheny Leffall.  He had no original middle name, but later picked up that middle name, and so that's why my name is LaSalle Doheny Leffall, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay, did he find out what happened to Doheny?  Did he get, was Doheny--?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was convicted of a crime, and something about oil leases, and whether they bought some illegal oil leases.  I don't think he ever went to jail.  I think there was some legal technicality.  He did not go to jail, but he was certainly involved, and his guilt, I think, was readily apparent, apparently, from all the data that came out.  So, but my father just liked the name, and that's why he chose that name of Doheny.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about--can you tell us about your father's personality?  What was he like and what did he do?
Speaker 2: Well, my father was the only one in his family who went to college.  He was one of eleven children.  There were ten boys and one girl.  And my father's the only one who went to college until later.  His youngest brother, later on went to night school and, and finished college.  But early on, my father was the only one who went to Prairie View in Texas.  My father grew up in Marshall, Texas.  He was born just outside of Marshall, Texas.  That's in East Texas.  He grew up there, and then went to Prairie View, which is about a hundred and thirty miles away.  And it was there that he got his college education, left there and got some post-graduate education at Iowa State [University] in Ames, Iowa, A-M-E-S, Iowa.  In Ames, Iowa then, as it has today, perhaps the best post-graduate study in agriculture, in vocational agriculture.  So my father went there.  Then he got a job at Alabama Normal [sic, Huntsvile, Normal] teaching at in, at the college at Alabama Normal [sic] which is in Huntsville, and that's where he met my mother.  My mother's sister was going to school at Alabama Normal [sic], and my mother was visiting her one day.  And my father saw my mother, and he said, "Who is this lovely young lady?"  And so they started dating, and they got married at, in April of 1928.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm sorry, they got married in May, I'm sorry.  They got--my mother's birthday is April 17, but they got married in May, May 28, 1928.
Speaker 1: Okay, I think I forgot to ask you your father's birth date?
Speaker 2: My father was born December 5, 1899.
Speaker 1: Now, there's a interesting--your father went to the University of--I mean to Iowa State [University] and then taught in Alabama.  I know that George Washington Carver, you know, went to school--.
Speaker 2: He's the--George Washington [Carver] is the best-known, black graduate of Iowa State.  And I think that might have been one of the reasons that my father had gone there.  But I asked him about that once.  He said, but Iowa State was known for the work that, that it did in agriculture.  And he knew about George Washington Carver, but the school was known then, as it is now, for training in vocational agriculture.
Speaker 1: Did your father ever meet George Washington Carver or have any kind of relationship with him?
Speaker 2: Well, my father said he never met him.  He knew about him about he had gone--left Iowa State and went to Tuskegee, Alabama, but did not meet him.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right cause he went there way before your father did, but I wondering--.
Speaker 2: That, that is correct.
Speaker 1: I thought he might have met him in Alabama when he was--.
Speaker 2: No, he, he did not know him.  He did not meet him.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, are there any stories from your father's side of the family that you remember that have passed down, that would be of interest to us?
Speaker 2: Well, my father, as I said, I know my mother's family much better than my father's family.  My father's family lived in Marshall, and I used to spend--my sister and I would spend every summer in Alabama with my mother's people.  We only went to Texas twice.  We went in 1936 and went in 1941.  I always remember.  Whenever we got a new car, my father would drive out there, and that's how we would get there.  We would drive.  And I just knew that they grew up on a farm, and my father often told the story that when he left home--he left home after the eighth grade to go to Prairie View--he went to the demonstration high school and to the college, his father gave him thirty dollars.  That was the total amount of money that he received for all the while and all the time that he was away at Prairie View.  But he said that, not complaining that he only got thirty dollars because that was a big family.  There were eleven children in the family, ten boys, one girl.  And my father said he was lucky to get anything.  So my father worked his way through high school, through college and worked even when he went to Iowa State in Ames, Iowa.  So the thing that I remember about my father is that his father was an industrious man.  And his father owned his farm.  He had a 230 acre farm that he, through his hard work and skill had save up enough money to buy.  So he grew up--my father grew up on a farm that his father owned, did not lease from anybody, did not rent, but owned.
Speaker 1: That's something.  Any other stories about your father that you remember, that you can tell us about?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember my father as growing up.  Sure, I have a lot of stories.  And if you talk about heroes, my father was my greatest hero.  And my father had a favorite statement that he would make to my sister and me.  And it was this:  He says with a good education and hard work, combined with honesty and integrity, there are no boundaries.  In other words, he was saying if you work hard, and you have some character--you got to have an education.  He says, you got to have something, but if you don't have an education, he said, there's little you can do.  So you have to have a good education, but with that good education, you got to work hard, but with that, there must be some character.  So he said, with a good education and hard work, combined with honesty and integrity, there are no boundaries.
Story_ID: 9986
Speaker 1: Do you have any siblings, brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I have a sister.  Yes, my sister is a year and a half younger than I am.  And she's a librarian.  My sister went to Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] as I did, and she later went to Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey] and then to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], and has her PhD in library science.  So she is a librarian with a PhD in library science.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so it's just the two of you?
Speaker 2: Just the two of us, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, what was it like growing up?  Can you give us--you were born in Florida, in Tallahassee, but grew up in Quin--?
Speaker 2: Quincy.
Speaker 1: Quincy, Florida, right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What was it like growing up?
Speaker 2: All right, I was born in Tallahassee because my father, after he spent two years at Alabama Normal [sic, Huntsville Normal School, Huntsville Alabama]--that's where he met my mother.  They got married.  Then he went back to Ames, Iowa for another year to study.  And then he got an offer of a job at Florida A&M College.  It was called FAM-C then, Florida A&M College.  It's now FAM-U, Florida A&M University, Florida Agriculture and Mechanical College.  And my father taught there from 1929 to 1930, July 1st, 1929 to June 30th of 1930.  I was born May 22, 1930.  So I was born at the college hospital in Tallahassee toward the end of the one year that my father taught at Florida A&M.  And I was born there.  And then my father got a job as principal of a high school in Eustis, Florida, E-U-S-T-I-S, in Lake County, Florida, which is in central Florida; went there for a year.  And in 1932, my father was offered the principalship of the high school, obviously, at the black high school in Quincy, Florida in 1932.  And so I grew up in Quincy, Florida.  It was the segregated South.  It was a segregated town.  And when I think about it, even though we knew things were separate and unequal, I guess growing up there, it wasn't really bad when I think about it.  We did the usual things you did in school, had school-room plays, jinx and threw spit balls and these kinds of things.  But we had sports and plays and we were taught, but we were taught by our parents and our teachers that we had to do things very well.  We couldn't just be satisfied with being average.  We had to always strive for excellence.  And I remember that from the time as a little boy, from the first grade on, from my teachers and my parents.
Speaker 1: Now, where is Quincy in relationship to the--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay, let me--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)  --rest of Florida?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Let me tell you--Quincy is in the northwestern part of the state in the panhandle.  Quincy is in the northwestern part of the state, and very often people say, when I tell them I'm from northwest Florida, they say, no, you're really from southern Georgia, south Alabama or south Georgia, because it's really right close to the Georgia and Alabama lines, state lines.  So it's in the panhandle.  And Quincy is located twenty miles from the state capital.  The state capital is Tallahassee, and Quincy is twenty miles from Tallahassee.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, you grew up in a segregated South, so you knew that you were always having something that was not quite as good as what the white students had or white people--for example, you went downtown, there was a water fountain--one said 'White' and one said 'Colored'.  And the 'Colored' one always was, looked older, it was cracked, never looked quite as good.  The books that we had, we were sure were usually used.  Seldom did we get new books.  The school that we had did not look nearly as good from just a structural point of view as the white school did.  So those were the sounds and you heard the, the word "nigger" more often than you would like to say that you heard it.  And black people were never called 'Mr.' or 'Mrs.' or 'Miss.'  It was always by their first name or 'Uncle' or 'Auntie' or 'Preacher,' something like that, which was what was done in the South then.  It's something that we didn't like.  But it's one thing our teachers and parents always told us though.  You could do things just as well or better than anyone else.  So don't ever think just because we happen to live now in the segregated South, in a segregated environment, that you are second class in any way.  And that was repeated to my classmates and me, my sister and me over and over.  And we never forgot it.
Story_ID: 9987
Speaker 1: What kind of a little boy were you growing up?  What were you interested in and-?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I was always a bookworm.  I, I loved studies, but I liked being one of the fellows also.  So I, I think I had a good relationship with my classmates.  I was never good in sports.  I just was not good in sports.  And I'd like to say that I was, but I wasn't.  For example, when we had the basketball team, I was on the basketball team, but I was the last person.  In other words, whenever we had a game out of town, I would go, but I knew I wasn't gonna get in the game unless we were winning by a large margin or losing.  And I think we tended to lose a little bit more often than we won.  So I was not good in sports.  I wanted to be an Eagle Scout, but I could not pass the swimming requirements.  You had to swim I think fifty yards back and forth.  I think it's a total of a hundred yards.  And I only became a second-class scout because I could not pass that swimming requirement.  I couldn't make a good crip shot coming down the, the court.  I was just not good in sports.  I liked athletics.  I liked looking at them.  I liked participating, but I was not good at it.  So I spent my time mostly reading.  But I participated in sports, and I said, I was not a loner.  I wanted to be part of the group and the crowd.  And on Saturdays I had my house chores to do, and after that my buddies would stop by.  And we'd go downtown [Quincy, Florida] and go to the movie, go to the--usually there were westerns on Saturday.  We had a white movie theater, the Shaw Theater, where blacks had to sit in the balcony.  And then we had a black movie theater, the Roxie, where you could go and be--see people like Paul Robeson and Lena Horne and Cab Calloway and other black stars of the day, we would see.  But if you went to the white theater, the Shaw Theater, we sat in the balcony and you saw Buck Jones, Roy Rogers, Shirley Temple, those people.
Story_ID: 9988
Speaker 1: Tell me about school.  What was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: Well, it was all called Stevens High School [Quincy, Florida].  And Stevens High School went from the first grade to the twelfth grade, Stevens High.
Speaker 1: Is that with a "ph" or a "v"?
Speaker 2: A "v", S-T-E-V-E-N-S, and it was named for the one black physician in Quincy, Dr. W. S. Stevens, Dr. Wallace S. Stevens, W. S. Stevens.  And the school was named for him, first through the twelfth grades.  And when I found out that I was interested in medicine, I used to chat with him, and he would chat with me because he wanted me to go to his school.  He had gone to Meharry [Medical College] in Nashville, Tennessee.  And that's the one school I heard most about because the one black physician in my town had gone to, to Nashville, to Meharry in Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: So, he was, he was--he shared his idea, you know, his life in medicine?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, he did.  I mean he did.  And when I was very--I, I think I was around, I look back, I think I was around nine years old when I figured I really wanted to become a physician.  I was coming home one day, and there was a robin that was, had been injured.  I don't know how.  And the little robin couldn't fly.  Something was wrong with its wings.  So I picked the little robin up and brought it home.  And my father saw me with the robin.  He said, "What are you gonna do?"  I said, "Well, he can't fly."  And my father had a sprain of his forearm the year before so he'd used some splints on it.  And he said, "Well, why don't you get some splints?" So we got some tongue depressors.  And I splinted the bird's wings--wing.  It was this long, the wing.  And in a few days, he was able to fly away.  That did something to me.  I said, "Well, you mean I could help cure someone or something and this, this bird--."  So I went around telling people I was gonna become a doctor.  "I'm going to be a doctor.  You'll be calling me Dr. Leffall one day."  Because I had splinted this bird's wing.  And the bird, a few days later, was able to fly away.  And then after that, my father wanted me to talk to Dr. Stevens, but it just so happened that Dr. Stevens' wife, Mrs. Annie Kent Stevens, was my godmother.  So here, the one black physician in town had gone to Meharry, and he knows I'm interested in medicine.  And he would talk to me.  His wife, who is my godmother, would talk to me.  So after that bird experience and those experiences with Dr. and Mrs. Stevens, I became even more interested in becoming a physician.  And, plus, my father, who was a high school principal, who was a teacher, used to tell me,"Just think, if you become a physician, you can really help people."  He used to emphasize that.  He said, "Medicine is a great profession.  It's an honorable profession.  It's a noble profession.  And just think, you can help people."  And I thought about that over and over, and I think from the time I was nine, I wanted to become a physician.  And that was my life's goal, after I had decided it's what I wanted to become.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, at Stevens High School, can you--are there any other--well, other than your father, any other teachers that a influence on you that--?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I look back at that, and in high school there were one or two teachers that I remember fondly.  But most of the teachers I remember with great fondness, other than for medical school, were when I went to college.  And I can mention them to you later.  But there was a man named Mr. Ransom [ph.] who taught mathematics who was good.  And he emphasized excellence.  There was a Mrs. Joyner [ph.], who taught history and geography who emphasized excellence.  But coming along all the time I was in school, in Stevens High School, from the first grade until the eleventh grade, the teachers emphasized to us, you must do very well.  You can't be average.  You've got to be above average.  Remember, you can't do it just as well as white students.  You've got to do it better because you're gonna held to a higher standard.  By the time I got to eleventh grade, my father noticed that all I needed to finish high school was one half unit of English.  So rather than go back to Stevens High School for my senior year, I went to the Florida A&M High School, Demonstration High School in Tallahassee, Florida, took English, and got my English requirements and entered Florida A&M College in September of 1945.  So I went to college when I was fifteen years old in 1945.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, well, how was it?  Now, you were young for--, but, but there were other students that were young in those days too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, if you were in the South--if you grew up in the South, and you were a fairly good student, it was not uncommon to go to school when you were sixteen or seventeen.  Now, fifteen may be a little young.  I believe I was the youngest in my class.  There might have been someone else who was fifteen.  When I entered college, I was fifteen.  I know there were two or three who were sixteen, and there might have been someone fifteen, but I don't recall who that was, if it was.  But there was nobody younger than I was.  I don't know, there might have been somebody else who was fifteen.  I started school, Stevens High School, and which was obviously, elementary school, I started when I was five.  I skipped second grade, and I finished high school in three years.  So that's how I was able to enter college when I was fifteen.
Story_ID: 9989
Speaker 1: What was it like for you?  You said there were a lot of teachers there that you remember now, fondly, that--?
Speaker 2: Well, there's two or three things.  First, when you go to school [Florida A&M College, Talahassee, Florida] that young, the fellows would kid you.  Now, fellows just getting out of the army now; this is 1945.  The war is over.  What?  Germany surrendered in May of 1945.  Japan in August.  So, now, a lot of young people are getting out of the army, coming back to college and so many of them now on the GI Bill, and they're taking pre-med courses so--because they wanted to go to medical school also.  So since they wanted to go to medical school also, you can see the competition is, is very keen.  But when you're fifteen, and they're coming back and some of them have been to Germany.  And so they'd say, "Young blood, well, you wouldn't know what we're talking about."  And they'd talk about their romantic exploits, and they would talk about all the things they had seen in Germany.  And it was interesting.  And I used to get upset at first.  But then I found out if you got upset, they would really kid you more.  And when I learned to laugh along with them, then things got much better.  But also, I was a good student.  And when they were having trouble with French or chemistry or zoology, and asked me for help, and I gave that help, then they became friends, and I became their friends.  So all that kidding stopped, but I think the main thing is when I stopped getting upset.  But it didn't hurt that I was a good student, and I would help them with their lessons also.
Speaker 1: That's something because a lot of those guys were older guys, you know--?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --they were much older guys.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, sure.  Here I'm fifteen, and a lot of them were in their--most of them who came back were in their twenties, and there were a few in their early thirties.  Oh, yes, so I was really young.  When they'd say, "young blood," that's--I was young.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  What was your social life at age fifteen at--?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I had a good social life.  You would go around, and you would talk with the girls.  You would date the girls, but my primary goal then was to study.  I said, if I'm going to medical school, everybody said you have got to be a good student; you've got to have good grades.  If you don't have good grades, you can't get in medical school.  So I really wanted to study hard, but I joined the fraternity.  I went to the dances.  I went to the basketball games.  I went to the football games.  I went to the concerts.  I went to the recitals.  I can recall going to hear Marian Anderson, Roland Hayes, Philippa Schuyler.  Philippa Schuyler was a piano prodigy.  And I recall hearing her.  Dorothy Maynor, all these people I remember.  And so, so, in addition to going to all that, I, I was studying.  And I'd go to the student union building and sit down with the fellows.  They'd shoot the breeze, and, and the, the fraternity life was a good life.  I became a member of Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity.  There was a lawyer from Washington, D.C. by the name of Belford Lawson who was national president at the time.  He came down to speak, and I'd never heard anybody speak like that.  He had this stentorian tone, Belford V. Lawson.  And he was the national president of Alpha, and he talked about this call to scholarship and leadership and service to others.  I always remember those three things, scholarship, Alpha stands for scholarship and leadership and service to others.  And even though some of the other fraternities tried to recruit me, like the Omega's, particularly, and they used to talk about the fact that Dr. Charles Drew was an Omega [Psi Phi], Dr. [William] Montague Cobb was an Omega, but after Belford Lawson came and I heard him, I became an Alpha.  And I went on the line in 1946, the spring of '46 [1946], went over in, in forty, in '46 [1946] or became an, an Alpha man in 1946, "across the burning sands", as they said.
Story_ID: 9990
Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers that you--?
Speaker 2: Okay, I can mention--let me say this.  The president, when I went there [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College, later Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] was Dr. William H. Gray, Jr.  His son just stepped down as president of the United Negro College Fund.  So Dr. William H. Gray was my college president.  And I will say something else about him because he helped me get in medical school.  There were four teachers that I think about when I think Florida A&M.  Perhaps my best was my professor or English, professor of grammar, Mr. Crawford B. Lindsay, L-I-N-D-S-A-Y.  And he used to have us diagram sentences.  And people, young students don't have to do that today.  And I think that's why maybe so many mistakes are made in grammar.  But he used to ask us this question.  I always remember.  "What's the most common mistake in grammar made by educated people?"  And we didn't know what it was.  And he said, "It's the improper use of the nominative for the objective case following a preposition or it's a direct object following a transitive verb.  Then he would say "This, now, this is an example I want to give you now.  Just remember, class, this is between you and--", pointed to himself, and we all said "I".  He said, "No, 'me'.  And most people would say 'I'.  He said, this is between you and me.  So, again, the most common mistake in grammar made by educat-educated people is the improper use of the nominative of the objective case, following a preposition or it's a direct object following a transitive verb."  So you can imagine, I'm fifteen.  So I'm really impressed.  He used to tell us that the subject of a gerund was in the possessive case.  "I did not recall his going there."  Not "I didn't recall him going there."  "Him" is objective, "his" is possessive and the gerund is going.  He said, so, "I didn't recall his going there".  And we diagramed sentences.  So you can see why I really was in such great admiration for this man, had such great admiration for this man.  And he told us, "Don't forget what Mark Twain said.  Mark Twain said the difference between the perfect word and the almost perfect word was like the difference between lightning and the lightning bug.  He says, if somebody uses the right word, it's like lightning--Well, if you hear somebody use the word, and you say there's no other word in the English language that can do what that word did in the context of what he was talking about, then you hear them use another word.  They pause, they search for a word and use the word, and you say to yourself, "Now, that word is okay, but, but that's not, that's not the best word.  Maybe I don't know what that word is, but that's not the best word that he could use in that situation."  So, diagramming sentences, using the correct word and the most common mistake in grammar made by educated people.  So you can see why Crawford Bernard [ph.] Lindsay, who later got his Ph.D. and was Dr. Lindsay, made such an impression on me.  In science, there were two people, Mr. Ethan Earl Ware [ph.], who taught zoology, though biology was his big area.  And he was head of the science department.  He was the pre-medical advisor also.  And he emphasized memorization, attention to detail, and what I like to call "critical and integrated thinking".  He was soft spoken, but he gave what I call masterly presentations.  And so, he said, "There's a certain of material you've got to have.  You got to memorize it.  So, you have to--and once you memorize it, you have to use it properly.  You have to integrate it properly.  You have synthesize it."  And so he was one.  Another man was a person who had his Ph.D. and MD; Ph.D. from the University of Pittsburgh and his M.D. from Howard, Dr. Russell Anderson.  And he came to Florida A&M when I was in my third year.  And I took courses from him, but he used to tell us that you've got to know science in order to do well in medical school.  And one of the questions on an exam he would give was this:  "Digest a buttered ham sandwich".  If you digest a buttered ham sandwich, that means you had to know about fat metabolism, that's the butter.  You had to know about protein metabolism, that's the ham.  And you had to know about carbohydrate metabolism, that was the bread.  So it--and that was one question.  That was the whole exam, digest a buttered ham sandwich.  So he was very impressive.  The last person was a lady, Charity Mance [ph.], who taught psychology.  A couple of things I remember about her.  She used to tell us that the prime virtue is courage because it made all the other virtues possible, "the prime virtue is courage because it makes all the other virtues possible".  And then she would hold her hand up, and she used to tell us about giving back.  You've got to be able to give back.  And she'd hold her hand up, and she'd say, if you go through life with a fist, closed fist, y' know--a clinched fist, nothing goes out, but nothing comes in."  I always remembered that.  So she was saying, "You've got to be willing to give something.  You must be willing to give something.  Nothing goes out, but nothing comes in."  And so those four people made a real impression on me.
Story_ID: 9991
Speaker 1: I was in college for three years.  I'd gone to college for two summers, two summers.  I went to college in 1945.  I worked as an elevator operator in Chicago [Illinois] in the summer of '46 [1946].  But the summer of '47 [1947] and '48 [1948], I went to summer school. So rather than graduate in four years, I graduated in three years.  I went in 1945, and I graduated in August of 1948.  By commencement of that year, commencement end of May, I still hadn't heard from medical school.  I could only think about applying to two schools.  See, there's no white school in the South that's gonna accept a black.  And practically all the northern schools would accept a few blacks, but they were usually blacks who had gone to their undergraduate schools.  So I applied to Howard [University Medical School, Washington, D.C.] and Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], didn't get in Meharry, was rejected.  I was just downcast.  One day--and my father came over, and I'll never forget, he put a, something on the desk.  He said, "Sign this."  I said, "Well, Daddy, what is it?"  He said, "Just sign it."  It was a letter dated July 13--I remember it very vivid, July 13, 1948.  So it must have been July 15th or 16th.  But the letter was dated July 13, 1948.  "We are pleased to inform you, you have been accepted to the Howard University College of Medicine for September 1948--I, I can't tell you how happy I was.  It, words cannot adequately describe how happy I was.  I've done all this hard work, and here I just had graduated, summa cum laude, with greatest distinction--at that time, in, in black school, they didn't have much cum laude, magna cum laude and summa cum laude.  But we had "with distinction", "with greater distinction", "with greatest distinction".  So they told us I graduated with "greatest distinction".  They said, that's the same as summa cum laude.  And so I graduated in, in August of 1948, but I found out after we--George Rawls, who's a good friend of mine, we both were there together.  And he had graduated that spring, neither of us had heard from Howard.  Both of us had heard from Meharry, and we had been turned down.  So [President of Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College, later Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] Dr. William [H.] Gray [Jr.] , and I'll hold him in, in high regard and with great fondness, got on the train, came up to Washington, D.C., to Howard University, went to see Mordechai Johnson, the president, told him, "Here we have two of the best students on the campus".  And nobody has better grades than we have, both graduated summa cum laude from Florida A&M, "They haven't heard from your medical school.  Why is it they haven't heard?" So Dr. Johnson sent him down to speak to the Dean Joseph L. Johnson [Dean of Medicine, Howard University].  And it was shortly after that--I didn't know this until later, mind you.  But it was after that, shortly after that, that I got this letter, and George Rawls got the letter saying we had been into--been admitted to the Howard University College of Medicine.  It was shortly after Dr. Gray had come to visit Dr. Mordechai Johnson and Dr. Joseph L. Johnson, the dean, that we received letters stating that we had been admitted to the Howard University College of Medicine for September of 1948.  Again, I have to say, it's hard to let you know how happy, the depth of feeling and emotion, all this work and study that I have done, and here I'm being accepted into Howard University College of Medicine.
Speaker 2: Well, that's a wonderful thing that the president did.  I mean, you know--.
Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely.  And I, and I, I often tell that story.  And I told his son [William H. Gray III], who just stepped down as head of the United Negro College Fund, what his father did.  And I won't forget that.  There's a good possibility if Dr. Gray had not come up, that we wouldn't have been accepted to school that year or any year.  Somebody said, "Well, with the grades you had, you could have gotten in school somewhere else."  But I don't know.  I can't prove that.  All I know is I was not accepted at Meharry, and had not been accepted, even as late as July of 1948.  People often ask, "Well, what were you going to do if you hadn't been accepted?"  I cannot tell you.  I have no idea because Florida A&M did not have any graduate programs.  I couldn't have worked on a masters at Florida A&M.  What was I going to do at age eighteen, I'm now eighteen years of age.  Am I gonna go and try to teach in some high school where the students are as old as I am, bigger than I am?  What am I going to do?  So it was just luck, but I had worked hard.  I, I was a good student, and I have to tell you another part of that story if you don't mind.  Later, after I became a member of the faculty at Howard, Dr. Joseph L. Johnson was still here.  And I went to him--he, he had retired, but he was still here.  He was still alive.  I asked him, "Dr. Johnson, why did you and the admissions committee take a chance on George Rawls and me?  We had not been accepted, and when you don't hear until July of the year before and school starts in September, you know you're not among their first choice.  You're--they're getting down toward the end.  He said, "Well, after Dr. Gray came up and spoke with us, and we looked at your records--" and we only had fair grades on a national test.  There was something called the Medical College Admissions Test.  That's what we call it now.  I think then it was called Professional College Admissions Test, the PCAT.  Now, it's called the MCAT, the Medical College Admissions Test.  We just had average grades, slightly above average grades, but no, not outstanding scores.  So Dr. Johnson told me, he said, "We looked at your college grades.  Here you had all these good grades.  You graduated summa.  George Rawls graduated summa.  We said, if you give it to these young men, they can get it.  You cannot expect them to know something to which they've never been exposed.  If you ask me a question about something, I don't care how smart I am, if I haven't been exposed to it, how can I possibly know the answer to that.  I, I can't know.  So we decided to give you a chance.  And that's why today, when people ask me about affirmative action, I say, affirmative action is such a buzz word and has such negative and pejorative implications, I'm for affirmative opportunity.  They say, "What do you mean by that?"  Look at a young person, a young man or a young woman, look at their record, and you decide whether it's worth giving them a chance.  Whatever you do, do not lower your standards for them.  If you lower the standards, you do a disservice to that person, to the profession of medicine, and to the patients that they will ultimately take care of.  So don't lower your standards, but give them a chance and hold them to the same standards.  And in that way, you don't measure an institution by what they take in; you measure them by what they put out.  That is, they must meet the standards.  And I feel that very deeply.  And I give a lot of talk--a lot of talks to young people, and I'll talk about affirmative opportunity.  Affirmative opportunity to me means giving people a chance.  Whatever you do though, do not lower standards.  Hold them to the same standards.  You tell them, look, you--we found you a little weak in this area or this area, but we believe you have it.  We believe that you can do well in medical school.  And we want to give you the chance.  And we call it affirmative opportunity.  We hold you to the same standards, want you to know that.  And what made that so good, I happened to finish number one in my class, in the Class of 1952, and Dr. Johnson reminded me.  He said, "Well, you see that we did well." And George Rawls finished two or three in the class.  So the point is, he said, the admissions committee was right.  And this is Dr. Johnson talking to me now, when I've asked him the question "Why did you take a chance on George Rawls--with George Rawls and me about admitting us to medical school?"
Story_ID: 9992
Speaker 1: What was Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] like for you?  What--what was the difference between Howard and FAM--?
Speaker 2: And FAM-C?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, Howard is a university.  Here I am in Washington, D.C., the seat of the federal government, and here this is Washington, D.C.  Howard University is a true university.  They have schools in everything, medicine, dentistry, law, architecture, engineering, pharmacy, nursing, you name it; Howard has it.  But the main thing to me is it had a medical school, and I wanted to become a physician.  And so they had offered me the opportunity to become a physician.  So that was the thing.  During my first few months here, believe me, my primary focus was on studying.  I went to few social functions.  On the weekends, George Rawls and I would go to a dance up on the hill.  We'd take one night out, either go to a movie, go to a dance up on the hill, go to the dance at the nurses' home--at the nurses' home.  But the primary thing we wanted to do was to study.  We had not done all this hard work, not to do well in medical school.
Story_ID: 9993
Speaker 1: One of your teachers, I know, was W. Montague Cobb, and that's someone who--?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, Dr., Dr. W. Montague Cobb was one of my favorite teachers [at Howard University Medical School, Washington, D.C.].  He was a man I met in my first year because he taught anatomy.  And he used to have what we would call "bust out sessions".  Now, what does that mean?  You'd go into him, and you'd say "bust me out", meaning, ask me any question you want to ask me.  I think I know the answer.  And, and I liked that kind of challenge.  And he liked that.  He liked young students who felt so confident that they would walk in and say, "Dr. Cobb, bust me out" (laughter), and that meant, ask me anything you want on anatomy.  And we wanted to let him know that we knew the answers.  And I just enjoyed him as a teacher.  And we used to have something called the cadaver walk.  On the final examination, they would ask a hundred and eighty questions, and the cadavers have all been dissected then.  All the cadavers are dissected.  And they would have labels on some of everything, arteries, veins, muscles, bones, all this.  And you had to identify those structures.  And I really loved that.  And when I was a medical student in my later years and as a surgical resident, I used to come back every year to go over with the freshman, medical and dental students, the cadaver, to prepare them, help prepare them for the cadaver walk.  But Dr. Cobb was, I think an outstanding teacher, but in addition to that, I worked with him as assistant editor of the "Journal of the National Medical Association", and even though he was not a practicing physician, he did some of the early work in helping to integrate Gallinger Municipal Hospital, which was the city hospital then, but controlled totally by whites, no blacks on the staff.  And Dr. Cobb was one of the major ones who helped integrate that hospital.  And so in addition to being an excellent teacher as professor of anatomy, he also helped in--on the social basis, for social justice in medicine, helping to integrate Gallinger Municipal Hospital, which later became D.C. General Hospital.
Speaker 1: Now, he was also a musician too, I believe.
Speaker 2: Oh, he loved to play the fiddle, the vio--I say the fiddle.  He loved to play the violin.  And when we'd have the medical school smoker, he would come, and he would play the violin.  He was a very learned man.  I, I learned a lot from Dr. Cobb, having worked with him as assistant editor of "The Journal of the National Medical Association", and then having this interest I had in anatomy, I would go and talk with him.  And he was just a first-rate individual and it was a, an honor for me to get to know a man like that.
Speaker 1: Now, maybe we should say something about what "The National Medical Association" is?
Speaker 2: The National Medical Association is an association founded in 1895 by black physicians because they were denied admission to the American Medical Association.  And the National Medical Association still exists.  And we think it exists because even though blacks can now become members of the American Medical Association, the National Medical Association still addresses some issues that affect black physicians disproportionately.  And therefore, we still think there is a role for the National Medical Association, even though black physicians can become members of the American Medical Association.
Story_ID: 9994
Speaker 1: Who are some of the other teachers here at Howard that--?
Speaker 2: Okay, let me mention some, and I told you, Dr. Cobb was one.  Dr. Robert S. Jason in pathology, and was a very good teacher in pathology, and I also got to know him very well when he was active in the D.C. division of the American Cancer Society.  But since I became interested in surgery, there are three names I would like to mention to you, three people.  When I came to Howard [University School of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] in September of 1948, Dr. Charles Richard Drew was professor and head of the department of surgery, and by far, the best-known person.  There was nobody was better known than Dr. Drew.  Dr. Drew was the best-known person, and he had done this seminal work on, on blood preservation.  He had his thesis on banked blood, it's the study in blood preservation.  It's interesting that we found him, as students, to be stimulating, dynamic and inspirational.  I was a member of the last class that Dr. Drew taught, March 31, 1950.  I'll never forget it.  It was a Friday, and he had given us this last lecture.  He was talking about fluids and blood, blood replacement.  And that evening he went to a student council banquet, and later that evening, he and three other colleagues set out for Tuskegee, Alabama for John Andrew Clinical Society meeting, a medical meeting.  And the car ran off the road early that morning, the next morning.  Dr. Drew was driving.  Of the four people in the car, he was the only one who was killed.  He was the only one who was killed.  And that was April 1st, 1950.  I can always remember the date because we used to have class on a Saturday then.  Dr. Walter [M.] Booker was professor of pharmacology.  And I used to always sit on the front row because I didn't want to miss anything.  So Dr. Walter Booker is lecturing.  Somebody comes in and whispers something to him.  I can't hear what this person whispers--I think his name was Bill Miller [ph.].  We called him long, tall Miller.  He was a pharmacology technician.  He leaned over and whispered something to Dr. Booker.  I noticed Dr. Booker's face turned ashen.  I couldn't hear what he, he had said to Dr. Booker, but I could hear what he said to Miller, what Dr. Booker said.  He told him, you shouldn't joke like that on April Fool's Day.  And April Fool's Day is always April 1st, and I knew I was sophomore medical student.  So I could always remember Dr. Drew died April 1, 1950.  Dr. Booker then turned to my class and said, "Class, I have some very sad news for you.  Our chief of surgery, Dr. Charles Richard Drew, was killed this morning in an automobile accident, just outside of Burlington, North Carolina; class is dismissed."  I remember when we left, we were in a daze, like how can this university continue? In other words, Dr. Drew was such a massive presence, such a, a force, that you wondered if the school could go on.  And yet we know that no one person is bigger than an institution.  It did go on, but I want--I always tell that story.  He was a stimulating man, and I was a member of the last class he taught.  He used to give sophomore medical students--the course was called "Introduction to Surgery", and he would give three lectures.  And he had given us the third of three lectures that Friday, March 31st, 1950.  And then, died the next day.  Now, there's a big myth about his death, and I always like to emphasize that.  They said that Dr. Drew died because he did not get good care.  That is not true.  That's one big myth--I've tried to dispel that myth and so many other people have.  The three people in the car, all of whom were physicians, one of whom was a trained surgeon said that Dr. Drew received the best care that could be given at a hospital of that size, at that time in our history.  It was the nature of his injuries, the severity of his injuries.  He apparently had a severe head injury because both pupils were dilated.  He had blood coming from his ears.  He had a crush injury to his chest.  He had an avulsion wound at, of the thigh, lost a lot of blood.  It was the nature of the injuries.  And those three doctors who were with at, at the time said that.  Yet, this big myth has--remained, and I tell people and sometimes I think people become angry with me by saying, "Well, you know, why you say anything?  You know, white people have been so bad to black people."  But to me, to tell a lie, to fabricate a story to make the story sound better, makes us, as black people, just as guilty as white people were, when they told lies about us.  So I said, "We can't do that."  And everything that we know, including those three eyewitness accounts--I went down to Burlington [North Carolina] thirty-three years later in April 1983.  And I talked with some of the same people who had helped take care of Dr. Drew.  And they said the same thing.  Well, my friends, colleagues said, "Well, what else are they gonna say?  Sure, they're gonna say the same thing."  But the people who were there with him said that.  They received--that Dr. Drew received the best care that could be given at a hospital that size at that time in our history.  Alamance General Hospital, it was in Alamance County [North Carolina], A-L-A-M-A-N-C-E, Alamance County, and it was Alamance General Hospital.  And later on, I wanted to talk with the, a nurse anesthetist who was with Dr. Drew.  And she was out of town when I went down there.  But when she came up [to Washington, D.C.]--I went down to L'Enfant Plaza Hotel to talk with her, and she said, "Dr. Leffall, I want to tell you, I understand that his family has often wondered, did Dr. Drew receive the best care.  I hope you will tell them for me that I was the nurse anesthetist.  I put an endotracheal tube in his windpipe to give him oxygen.  I was there when we started fluids.  I was a member of the team"--not that she did everything herself.  But she was saying, "I was there from the time that he got there until he died."  She told me she had a patient on the table.  They ran one room on Saturday, and this patient was on the table, and she was getting ready to give him an anesthetic.  But they called her from the emergency room and said, "There's been a bad accident out by Haw River, H-A-W River, just outside of Burlington.  And they're bringing these injured people in.  Can you come right down?"  And she said, "I'm so glad--." She said, "I'm so glad that I had not given my patient an anesthetic because if I'd given one patient an anesthetic, I can't leave my patient to whom I've given an anesthetic to go down and take care of another patient whose life is in jeopardy.  My obligation is to my patient.  But I hadn't given anything."  So, she went down.  Dr. Drew came.  She put in the windpipe.  They started the fluids.  They gave him plasma.  They didn't have any blood, and she said, by the time he got blood, he was dead.  He gave him fluids and plasma.  But it's the severity of his injuries, and there was some talk about transferring him to Duke.  And people said, "See, they turned him away."  No, they were going to transfer him to Duke because Duke was a university hospital.  They--if he had something that could be taken care of by more specialized care, Duke could do it when Alamance General Hospital could not do it.  But he died around 10:10 that morning, the birth certificate [sic, death certificate] says 10:10, and he got there around 8:00, a little after 8:00, April first of 1950.  So it's a myth about the fact he did not receive proper care.  It's the nature and the sever-severity of his injuries.  To me, as somebody who knew him as a student--I didn't know him as a colleague, I knew him as a student, didn't know him as a resident, cause he died when I was a second-year medical student.  But we found him stimulating, we found him dynamic, we found him inspirational.  He was just the kind of man you wanted to emulate.
Speaker 1: Okay, as someone who has, who's been around, I guess, Howard for a long time, and you've heard this story developing, how do you--do you have any idea how it got started or why it's so persistent?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think so.  In 1964, I went back--there's an article that Whitney Young, who was then head of the National Urban League, wrote.  And he said that Dr. Drew was turned away from this whites only hospital.  And so if Whitney Young says it, who was a leader and it's in an Afro--and I--the article it said, 1964, the--I think it was April of '64 [1964].  But it's in 1964, an article by Whitney Young and stating that Dr. Drew was turned away.  And that just really gave credibility to the fact of what some people said anyway because we know in the South, there were many places where blacks were turned away.  So it made sense.  But the point is, it's not true.  And if something is not true, we cannot persist in telling a falsehood.
Speaker 1: Now, there's a similar story involving the death of singer Bessie Smith, with her--that she was turned away or something or?
Speaker 2: But you know when they, when they checked, they found that wasn't true.  Did you know that?  I--okay, because somebody, somebody mentioned that to me.  I was talking about Dr. Drew and someone mentioned it.  I, I've got to check this out to find out.  They said that same story was told about Bessie Smith.  Yet, when they checked into it, that story was not true either.  But, you see, we knew that it could be true.  The mere fact that it could be true gave it credence, gave it, gave it credibility because we knew that it could be true.  And I'm told, however, that Bessie Smith's story is just like Dr. Drew's story.  And I'm going to check and find out if, what evidence is there that states that it's not true that Bessie Smith was turned away.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, did you have a chance to really Dr. Drew well or--?
Speaker 2: No, no.  That, that's what I'm emphasizing.  I only knew him as a student.  I only knew him as a student.  I, I, I would see him.  Obviously, he was here.  If you were here in the medical school, sometimes he'd come to the medical school, be coming to a meeting, and you'd see, oh, that's Dr. Drew.  But I had contact with him, not personal, but as a student on three occasions.  He gave us three lectures.  And so I was in the class on each of those three lectures.  And so the way he presented himself and he talked about research and the great value of research and what was going on in banked blood and blood preservation and fluid balance.  And it was very impressive.
Story_ID: 9995
Speaker 1: You said there were some others too?
Speaker 2: Yes, after he [Dr. Charles Drew] died [April, 1950], there were two people who were responsible, really, for maintaining the general surgery residency program.  One was Dr. Burke 'Micky' Syphax,  Dr. Burke 'Micky' Syphax, who became chief of general surgery, head of the surgical residency program, and later became chairman of the department.  And the other was Dr. Jack White.  And Dr. Jack White had been sent away by Dr. Drew to go to Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York [New York] to study about cancer and come back to Howard.  So both of them were responsible, after Dr. Drew's death, for maintaining the surgical residency program here at Howard.  They were the, they were the main forces, those two people.  And Dr. Syphax had taught me as a, a medical student.  So I knew him--I met him too in 1950 when he gave two lectures.  Dr. Drew gave three lectures, Dr. Syphax gave two lectures.  And he later became head of the surgical residency program, outstanding man.  We called him 'Master of the Abdomen.'  If you have a problem with your abdominal cavity, then if he can't find out what the trouble is, you're in deep trouble because nobody else can either.  We called him 'Master of the Abdomen', Dr. Burke Micky Syphax.  He emphasized fine technique.  He emphasized paying attention to what the patient said, to being absolutely certain that your correlated the patient's symptoms with the physical findings, with the x-ray findings, with the laboratory findings.  He emphasized good surgical judgment.  Now, surgical judgment is something that's so important, and over the years, I've learned it's a combination of what knowledge, intelligence, experience, analysis and restraint, all of those, cause Dr. Syphax would tell us, it's just as important to know when not to operate as when to operate.  So he was a major teacher.  And most of the general surgery that I know, I learned from him.  The second person is Dr. Jack White who stimulated my interest in cancer surgery.  Dr. Jack White had been trained by Dr. Syphax and Dr. Drew, and he emphasized surgical principles and surgical technique, but he also let us know this exciting area of oncology.  He had gone to Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center as the first black, and just talked about the exciting things going on.  And he made it sound so exciting, I wanted to go there and fortunately, I was able to be admitted to Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Training, after I completed my surgical training, mind you, to go to Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center also.  But the two people who, after Dr. Drew died, kept that program going, this program going, not--this program at Howard University, this general surgical residency program going, were doctors Burke Syphax, Burke Micky Syphax and Jack White, those two doctors.
Story_ID: 9996
Speaker 1: Tell us something more about Dr. Jack White and cancer research?
Speaker 2: Okay, Dr. Drew sent Dr. Jack White to Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center [New York, New York] as the first black to get advanced training in oncology.  Oncology is the study of tumors.  They could be benign tumors or cancerous tumors, but the study of cancer.  And Dr. White went to Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, stayed two years, and came back, and was one of my major teachers.  And he not only emphasized surgical principles, but he was emphasizing the exciting things that were going on in cancer surgery, then at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.  Patients with cancer of the head and neck, cancer of the liver, cancer of the pancreas, and different procedures that were being done.  So he stimulated my interest in cancer and played a major role in my being accepted.  He wrote very strong letter and spoke to people at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, after I had completed my surgical residency at Howard.  After I finished medical school, I interned at Homer Phillips in St. Louis and then came back to Howard to do my surgical residence.  And after my surgical residency, I went to Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.  I was the third black to go there for a senior fellowship.  Dr. White went first and there was a Dr. Frank Perry from MeHarry, in Nashville, who was the second.  And I was the third to go for a senior fellowship.  And there were others, other blacks who had gone for one year.  But I was the third black to go for a senior fellowship, meaning you spent anywhere from two to three years there doing cancer surgical training.
Story_ID: 9997
Speaker 1: You started at Howard [University School of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] when you were eighteen years old--?
Speaker 2: I started medical school--.
Speaker 1: --in medical school.
Speaker 2: --in medical school when I was eighteen in September of 1948.  I graduated June of 1952.  And I was fortunate to be first in my class, and I won prizes in surgery and OB-GYN and medicine.  Then I interned at Homer [G.] Phillips Hospital in St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 1: That's a famous place in St.--a lot of--so many black doctors interned there.
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: But there weren't many places that you could intern in those days, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.  Essentially, there were--the four big places for blacks to intern were Harlem Hospital in New York [New York], Homer Phillips in St. Louis, Freedmen's [Hospital] in Washington, D.C., and [George W.] Hubbard [Hospital] in Nashville [Tennessee].  And I had spent four years at Howard, so I didn't want to stay here.  I wanted to go and get a different perspective.  I didn't want to go to New York.  I didn't want to go to Meharry, so I applied to Homer Phillips.  But really, I applied to Detroit Receiving in Detroit [Michigan], but I was turned down.  I, I didn't get there.  That was the teaching hospital for Wayne State [University].  And I thought since I had ranked first in my class, that I would get there.  Some people told me well, you know, but you're still black, and that was 1952 now.  So I didn't get it.  But I was accepted at Homer Phillips Hospital in St. Louis.  And that was one of the most wonderful experiences I could have had in terms of teaching, in terms of the great variety of cases, it was wonderful, and I met some wonderful people there.  A lot of my colleagues from Meharry [Medical College, Nashville Tennessee] who were interning with me, just had a wonderful time.  But the important was the great experience that I had when I, I was there, wonderful teachers.  There was Dr. William Sinkler [Medical Director of Homer G. Phillips Hospital 1941-1960], who was a Howard graduate from whom I learned a lot.  There was Dr. Carl Moyer, M-O-Y-E-R, who was chief of surgery at Washington University in St. Louis, the predominantly white medical school--it was all white then, in St. Louis.  So that was a wonderful teaching and learning experience for me, as an intern at Homer Phillips Hospital in St. Louis.
Story_ID: 9998
Speaker 1: It was after the internship at Homer G. Phillips that you went to Sloan Kettering?
Speaker 2: No, after my internship I came back to Howard [University School of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], came back to Freedman's Hospital and did my general surgical residency under Dr. [Burke] Syphax and Dr. [Jack] White.  See, I had Dr. Syphax and Dr. White, I had met as a student.  But I primarily got to know them much, much better when I came back after my internship to do my general surgical residency.  I did my general surgical residence from 1953 to 1957.  And after that, then I went to Memorial Sloan Kettering [Cancer Center] for two and a half years.  I went there in July 1957, and left in December 1959.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, this is, this would be your experience in an integrated sort of a--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Not really.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) --setting?
Speaker 2: My first experience in an integrated--and that's, I'm glad you asked that question, was at Gallinger Hospital [Washington, D.C.].  See, in my second year, Dr. [Charles Richard] Drew always wanted to try to get residents [from Howard] out at Gallinger Hospital.  It was all white, run by Georgetown [University] and George Washington [University].  And he said, "But I ought to have some residents there."  So in 1950, they--the Georgetown service accepted the first Howard resident in 1950.  I was the fourth Howard resident.  So I spent one year there in that integrated environment.  But Dr. Robert Coffey was chief of surgery at Georgetown and he and Dr. Drew had great mutual respect.  And, therefore, Dr. Coffee, said, yes, you send a resident over and we'll be sure that it works.  And it did work.  And I had a wonderful year over there.  But just to let you know how things can be, it was my first time in a predominantly white environment.  Dr. Charles Hufnagle, the noted cardiovascular surgeon was doing a heart operation.  And he would sing a little song, "Clonorchis sinensis, Clonorchis sinensis."  And he turned around and asked, what's that?  Well, it just so happened, I had given a report in parasitology on Clonorchis sinensis, and I said, "The Chinese liver fluke."  And I'm the only black in the room.  My white guys turn around and look at me.  Wh--?  I just think how, sometimes luck can be on your side.  There were so many flukes and parasites that I knew nothing about.  But he just happened to sing about the one (laughter) that I knew and asked about the one I knew.  And after that people would say, "You have a question you want to ask--you ask Leffall, he'll know.  You ask him.  But it was just a--it was luck.  But, but I did know.  But it was a wonderful time, but I think the real thing I want to emphasize is that Dr. Robert Coffey who was chief of surgery at Georgetown wanted this experiment to work.  And I think because of the respect and admiration he had had for Dr. Drew, and that was why it did work.  So, that was my first time in an integrated environment.  My second time was when I went to Memorial Sloan Kettering in July of 1957.
Story_ID: 9999
Speaker 1: Tell me about that experience [his surgical residency at Memorial Sloan Kettering from 1957-1959]?
Speaker 2: In July nine--?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: When I got there, I thought I'd walk into a place, it would all be sad and a lot of melancholy and morose and downcast.  My colleagues and I walked in that first day, they said, "Oh, doctors, Dr. Leffall" and called the other doctor's name, welcome.  I could hardly believe this.  I had said to myself this is a cancer hospital, and they have this kind of attitude, but that's the kind of attitude they wanted you to have, a positive, upbeat attitude that there's something that we can do about this disease, cancer, and we want you to know that.  And so they had that positive attitude, and that positive attitude is the one that really carried the day when we were there.  And it was a wonderful experience.  See, I was working with the leading cancer surgeons and researchers in the world because Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center was known was the best cancer hospital in the world at that time, certain by best in the United States and, but, one of the best in the world.  And here I had the opportunity to train there, and I thought--here I'm from this little town of Quincy, Florida.  I wanted to go to medical school so badly.  I finally got in.  I wanted to go to Memorial Sloan Kettering.  I finally got in, just to emphasize that if you work hard, some good things can happen to you.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you were there until 1959?
Speaker 2: --Nine, I was there two and a half years.  I went July 1957, and I completed my training December 31, 1959.  And then I went to the army.  I went to Munich, Germany for two years.
Speaker 1: Okay, when you were at Sloan Kettering though, what, what did you--I hate to ask you what, what did you learn, but what--where was the--?
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, at Sloan Kettering--.
Speaker 1: --cancer research in those days, yeah?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, my primary emphasis was on clinical cancer surgery.  I was learning how to do advanced operations for cancer, no matter where the cancer was; whether it was in the head and neck; whether it was in the breast, whether it was in the intestinal tract, the liver, the pancreas, wherever it was; on the extremities, the arms or the legs, we were learning to do advanced cancer surgery, the techniques for advanced cancer surgery.  People who had advanced cancers and the techniques that you use to remove those tumors.  At the same time, you were learning about what we call the multi-disciplinary approach to the management of cancer--the role of radiation therapy--x-rays, the role of chemotherapy--drugs.  How all of these could be used with surgery in the treatment of cancer.  So what it was, it was giving you a total picture.  Even though I was there primarily learning about techniques for taking out cancers that were advanced or not so advanced, I was also learning about this combination approach, this multi-disciplinary approach; how do you use different techniques?  A little of this, a little of that, some of this, to give the patient the best chance for cure.  And it was the best place in the world to learn that at that time.
Speaker 1: In those days, were they--was there any emphasis on prevention or any--?
Speaker 2: Oh, and people were still talking about prevention.  Yes, but not as much as we talk about it today.  I think then we were concerned more with, okay, people who have it, what can we do to get rid of it?  Even though we talked about prevention, but when I look back on it, we didn't talk about prevention nearly as much then as we talk about prevention now.
Story_ID: 10000
Speaker 1: So in '59 [1959] you--were--.
Speaker 2: I finished my--.
Speaker 1: --you went into the military?
Speaker 2: --I finished there, and I went to the military January 1st of 1960.  And I spent two years [sic, two months] at Fort Sam Houston in order to learn the military rules and regulations, and after two months there, I went to Munich, went to Munich, Germany.  See, at some point, we have to go back and I have to--I haven't even gotten [into] it, but I was dating my wife and my, and got married.  So we have to do that.  We've got to be sure we work that in.
Speaker 1: Well, let's go back and deal with it first before we take you to--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously)--Okay, okay, very well.  I met Ruth McWilliams, whose sister was working in the dean's office.  And I saw this nice looking young lady in the dean's office.  And I was saying something to her, and she let me know very quickly she was dating a resident.  I'm just a medical student.  She said, but I have a sister who's coming up.  And so when her sister came up, I met her.  That was Ruth McWilliams who had just graduated from Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia].  So I met her in 1951, took her to the Med-Dent Dance.  The Med-Dent Dance was "the" social event of the season if you were in medical school or dental school.  And Duke Ellington played.  So that was a big thing.  And I took her to the Med-Dent Dance, and we started dating.  And we got married in 1956.  And I was young, and I wasn't making much money.  I made fifty dollars a month as a intern.  I made a little over a hundred dollars a month as a resident.  So I wasn't making that much.  And so we got married in 1956 at the beginning of my chief residency here.  My last year as a surgical resident was 1956, July 1, 1956 to July--to June 30th of 1957.  So we got married in August of 1956 and have remained married over that time, up to until now.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so did she go with you to Germany?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes, and, and she came to Munich with me.  After I had finished my two months' of what we called required military training, in which you learned the rules and regulations about the army, then I went to Munich, Germany, and she joined me in Munich.  And I was there for two years, two of the most wonderful years of, of our lives.  It was a place I didn't want to go because all I could remember about Munich is this is where [Adolf] Hitler had signed a pact with Great Britain saying he would not invade any more of Europe.  And Neville Chamberlain was the prime minister, and he was standing in front of a plane--I can remember the picture in the newspaper.  And he held this sheaf of papers, and he's says, this Munich--I have just met with Herr Hitler.  This Munich agreement represents peace for our time.  That was 1938.  The next year Hitler invaded Poland.  So all I could think about is Munich, ugh, that's where Hitler duped Chamberlain, well, duped all of us.  Two of the most wonderful of, of, my life and our lives, for my wife's and mine.  And I say that because so often you have a preconceived notion about something or someone.  Should--I say to young people, don't have that.  Keep an open mind, and two of the most wonderful years.  I learned a lot about surgery there.  I certainly learned a lot about Europe.  We had a chance to travel all around.  We went to Spain, Italy, the Scandinavian countries, Switzerland, you name it, we went there.  It was a wonderful time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and so you were there for--you were in the army for two years?
Speaker 2: For two years.  Two, the two years, mandatory.  I had mandatory military service, and those were my two years.
Story_ID: 10001
Speaker 1: You came back to the States, what did you do?
Speaker 2: Okay, I came back January 1st of 1962, as an assistant professor in the Department of Surgery here [Howard University School of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].  And that'll be coming up, so, so I have been at Howard since--as a professor, forgive me, as a faculty member.  I was an assistant professor, January 1962.  I became full professor in July, 1970.  And I was chairman, full professor, and chairman of the Dpartment of Surgery for twenty-five years, from 1970 to 1995.  In 1992, I was named the Charles R. Drew Professor of Surgery.  It's the first named chair, it's the first endowed chair in the Department of Surgery.  And I was named that in 1992, and I'm still the Charles R. Drew professor of surgery.  I stepped down from being chairman at the end of 1995, but I'm still [in 2004] a full-time faculty member, teaching, operating, meeting students, talking to residents, teaching residents, taking care of patients.
Story_ID: 10002
Speaker 1: During this period of time, you've had a number of different opportunities to travel and you, you, you've served in Liberia for a while, right, but you're not--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Well, well, let's see--.
Speaker 1: --but you were in Iran.
Speaker 2: --some nice things have happened to me.  When I came back from Memorial Sloan Kettering [Cancer Center, New York, New York] and the army, I joined the D.C. division of the American Cancer Society.  I was told that if you're going to make your life, your life's work, cancer, then you should be willing to give something back.  And so the voluntary organization, related to cancer, is the American Cancer Society.  I'm so glad I did because it opened a lot of doors for me.  I became president of the D.C. division of the American Cancer Society, and I was the first African American president, national president of the American Cancer Society, 1978-1979.  It was when I was president there that I had the opportunity to go to Liberia, saw what was going on there.  But with the American Cancer Society, I went to China, I went to Vietnam, I went to the Soviet Union.  So I've had some wonderful trips, all associated with my being active with the American Cancer Society.
Speaker 1: And are there any stories from any of those trips that you want to tell us?
Speaker 2: Oh, stories for, on, on all of them.  When went to--I went to Vietnam, Senator [Edward] Kennedy sent me and three other people on a humanitarian mission to Vietnam to see what we could do about helping to restore some of their health's--health facilities in Vietnam.  When I went to Liberia, they, it was a flourishing country, but shortly after that, they had a coup.  And a lot of the people whom I met are not now in power, but I believe if those people could come back in that we could see a resurgence of the kind of healthcare that I saw when I was there because they were giving good healthcare and good cancer care, which is what I was particularly interested in. Went to China, saw the 'barefoot doctors' and saw all that was going on there; went to the Soviet Union and saw what they were doing.  And they wanted--"they" meaning those countries wanted to establish closer ties with the cancer groups, cancer hospitals, cancer organizations in the United States.  And I believe that the American Cancer Society helped facilitate those.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you were--you were in Iran just before, I guess, the coup there, I guess about a year before--
Speaker 2: That, that is correct.  I was a visiting, I was for six weeks in Iran as a visiting professor.  It was a wonderful time, and it was about a few months before the coup there.  But there, I had a chance to see a lot of disease, they saw in particular liver cysts, different kinds of cysts of the liver that we saw to learn how to take care of.  So that was a learning opportunity also.
Speaker 1: Now, when you go to a population in another country, it--well, I'm just inferring from what you're saying that there were more persistent kind of cancer problems in one country than in another or were (unclear) (simultaneously)--?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yes, for--yes, indeed.  For example, when we were in, in Iran, we saw more tumors of the, the liver, for example, than we would see here.  When I was in Liberia, we saw more cancers of the cervix than we would see here.  When I was in China in a certain area there, what they called Linhsien County, L-I-N-H-S-I-E-N, [Linxian] county, there was an increased incidence of cancer of the food tube, the esophagus.  So, and in the southern part of China, there was increased instance of cancer in the nasal pharynx, that part of the throat that's behind the nose cavity, the nasal cavity the nasal pharynx.  So there were different kinds of tumors that we saw in the different areas.  But it was, it was a wonderful opportunity to go to those different places, see what you could learn and see what you could impart there.
Speaker 1: Well, I guess part of the research is to find out why these are, you know, why these certain cancers persist in one region as opposed to another?
Speaker 2: Well, they were doing a lot of research to try to find out why.  And sometimes they thought it was related to diet, but it was difficult sometimes putting your finger exactly, why more cancer of the, of the nasal pharynx?  Why more cancers of the liver?  They had different theories, but nothing specific that we could learn when we were there.  But we did learn the methods they used for diagnosis and for treatment.
Story_ID: 10003
Speaker 1: A great deal of your focus here in the states has been the cancers that affect the African Americans.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  We know that there are certain cancers that affect African Americans more.  For example, black men, black, African American--well, African Americans, black men have a higher incidence of cancer of the prostate than white men.  Cancer of the lung is higher in black men.  Cancer of the breast is more in white women, but black women are rapidly catching up--they're gaining a kind of parity they don't want.  And cancer of the colon is about of equal incidence but still black people are dying more because we think they come with more advanced stages of disease.  That's why we try to emphasize, be aware of the signs and symptoms so that you can come in early, so that a diagnosis can be made.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that speaks to, I guess, the, kind of the, I guess the comparatively, I guess, compared to the white community, the poor level of--?
Speaker 2: We, we--we think that socio-economic factors play a role.  So often I've talked about these things and a patient would tell me, 'Dr. Leffall, my breasts aren't hurting me, nothing is bothering me down there," pointing to their pelvic area, I'm talking about the pap smear, "But I've got to put food on the table.  I've got to send my children to school.  I've got to clothe them."  So socio-economic factors do play a role, and we think they--these environmental factors tend to play a major role.  And that's why we're trying to be sure that people know about them so that we can do what we can to eliminate these disparities.  So much today, so often today, in cancer talks, in cancer conferences, you hear about cancer health disparities.  And there are disparities in the incidence, the numbers of people who get the cancers and the death rates.  More people dying.  Black people tend to have a ten percent lower survival rate, just overall, generally, a ten percent lower survival rate than white people.  And you think about that.  So we want to change that.
Speaker 1: Okay, well what is being done to change that?
Speaker 2: Okay, there're several things being--practically every organization now has a committee on cancer health disparities.  There's something called the Intercultural Cancer Council based in Texas, headed by Lovell Jones and Armin [D.] Weinberg, where they look at all different racial and ethnic groups, African Americans, Latino Hispanics, Asian Americans, Alaskan natives, Native Americans, Pacific Islanders, all of them, Native Americans, looking at all groups, particularly, what can we do about implementing programs to decrease those disparities?  The National Cancer Institute has an office on cancer health disparities.  Just think about that, now.  The government's largest cancer group, the National Cancer Institute, has an office on cancer health disparities.  That, that showing that the largest group we have is trying to do something about it.  The American Cancer Society has a large committee on cancer health disparities.  You talk about groups like "Sisters Network", a black group, breast resources, Sisters', headed by Karen Jackson.  Breast Resource Committee [sic, Breast Cancer Resource Committee (BCRC)] , headed Zora Brown, Susan G. Komen Foundation, headed now [until 2005] by Susan Braun.  I happen to be chairman of the Susan G. Komen Breast Cancer Foundation.  We just had that walk, 'Race for the Cure'  this past Saturday here [Washington, D.C.].  All have committees on reducing cancer health disparities.  So what are we doing?  Committees to let people know, getting out to sororities, fraternities, church groups, social groups, letting them know there's a high incidence in African Americans and Latinos and this group--Asian Americans.  You've got to come in for your screening.  You've got to come in for your pap smear.  You have--you must have your colonoscopy.  You must have your mammogram.  All of these are being done.
Speaker 1: Okay, in terms of prostate cancer in black men, that's, that's really discussed quite a bit these days.  I think it's kind of well known.  Is there--do you have any idea why black men have more prostate cancer?
Speaker 2: As a--an interesting question.  Why do black men have more prostate cancer?  And we really don't know.  We've looked at all kinds of things, infections, how many times they fathered children.  We don't know.  They think it's probably related to diet.  They think, but that has not been proved.  So that's still being looked at.  Why is it that black men--it's a common cancer in whites too, but black men have it more.  I mean, quite a bit more.  I mean sometimes people say that the instance may be two or three times higher than that in white men, incidence of prostate cancer.  And so that's why we want to be sure that we continue to do studies.  We've done some studies here with our colleagues in West Africa.  Our division of urology and the department of surgery was working with the group in Africa.  We haven't come up with anything specific.  More often than not, people think it's something environmental.  Perhaps something dietary, but we don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we've got to keep looking at it.  We've got to keep looking at the PSA because that's not specific enough.  There were articles the other day, some people had a normal PSA, prostate specific antigen tests, and they had cancer.  And it was normal.  So you say, what is going to be the value at which you should look at, before you recommend that men get a prostate biopsy.
Speaker 1: Okay, in terms of being a cancer surgeon and I know, people look at, say, lung ca-, cancer, and they can pretty much see that you, you know, if you--you can contract it without smoking, but that seems to be like a primary cause--.
Speaker 2: By far the majority of people who have lung cancer, though, smoke.  There's no question about it.  We still believe if you just stop tobacco use, you can stop one third of all human cancer.  Just think about that, one third of all human cancer we think can be prevented if we stop using tobacco in any form--cigarettes, cigars, pipes, snuff, chewing tobacco.
Speaker 1: That's dramatic.
Speaker 2: That's dramatic.
Speaker 1: That's more than I would have guessed.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do black pe-people smoke more than other people?
Speaker 2: Yeah, black, yes.  It's been shown black men smoke more.  I, I,--and even though I say that, as I go around the country, I see so many young people, black and white, smoking, black and white.  But, yes, but there are more black men who smoke, and so we have a high incidence of lung cancer.
Story_ID: 10004
Speaker 1: As a cancer surgeon, have you, have you--what have been--well, do you have any--stories, I guess, stories about the, you know, that are interesting in terms of treating a cancer or victory stories that you want to share with us?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, well, there are so many, there are so many people who've been told they've had cancer and nothing could be done, and something can be done.  So I can recall a lady, for example, who had a highly malignant type of cancer of the uterus called choriocarcinoma.  And she was told she'd dead in six to nine months.  And just about the time the diagnosis was made, some researchers at NIH [National Institutes of Health] found that a drug called methotrexate could be used to treat this cancer.  This lady got that drug, and was cured.  She got that drug--so, I tell people, even though they may come in with advanced cancer, I'll say, in our current state of knowledge, we cannot cure you, but how do we know that while we are treating you with what we have available, someone will not find something that can be used that will cure you.
Speaker 1: Is the turnaround time fast enough, generally to--if something is dis-discovered, I mean, I know there's been a lot of discussion on the news about--treatments that are popular in Europe that can't be used here because they haven't been approved by the Food and Drug Administration and that sort of thing.  Is there, is there a lag time between when--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, lag time, but still--and you don't want to be too soon with something.  You don't want to use something before adequate studies have been done.  You think about the use of thalidomide in women who were pregnant.  You remember those babies born with deformed limbs, so you want to be sure you've taken enough time.  And we think now that if something is proved to be of value, it can be approved by the Food and Drug Administration and can get to patients, yes, we believe so, definitely.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, one of the most mysterious aspects of, not just cancer, I guess, but illness, but it's really been, I think, talked about a lot in terms of cancer, is the person's attitude and--?
Speaker 2: Well, we think that attitude is important.  There's no evidence that attitude improves survival, but the one thing we know it does do, it improves the quality of survival.  See, it's hard to prove that a positive attitude improves the length of time that you live.  But there's no question, based on numerous studies, that it will improve the quality of the survival that you have, very definitely, it can improve the quality of that survival, because you're thinking more positive thoughts.  You're not walking around every day thinking, "I'm gonna die, I'm going to die."  No.
Story_ID: 10005
Speaker 1: One of the happiest moments in, in my life was the birth of my son [LaSalle G.Leffall III].  We just have one son, and he was born January 6, 1963.  So I came back here [from Army service] January 1st, 1962.  So a little over a year later, our son was born.  And he's brought us a lot of joy and happiness.  He was not interested in medicine.  I tried to talk him into medicine, but he said, no, he was interested in science and history and economic--forgive me, in economics and history.  And he went to, went to St. Albans [School, a college preparatory school in Washington, D.C.], and he went to Harvard College [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and Harvard Law [Cambridge, Massachusetts]and [Harvard] Business Schools [Boston, Massachusetts].  He is a, a lawyer and businessman, and he now works as a top executive for something called the National Housing Partnership Foundation [NHPF].  And the National Housing Partnership Foundation helps to find housing for low and moderate income people.  And my wife [Ruth McWilliams Leffall] and I have always told him, "You have opportunity, and you have abilities.  You ought to be able to give something back."  So after 9-11, he was on Wall Street [New York, New York]  He's an investment banker.  So after 9-11, he came back cause he said, many a day he's been in the World Trade Center, and he could have been there that morning, and he wanted to give something back.  So he's coming to the end of a two-year stint, and then he's gonna go back into the private world.  But I wanted to mention that because he, he has brought us a lot of joy and happiness.  And I always say that the, the numbers of happy times far exceed those times when your children come to you with some problem, you say, "Oh, what is this, this time?", you see.  So that's--I, I wanted to mention the, the positive aspect of his being a part of our family.
Story_ID: 10006
Speaker 1: This is not just a pattern in your family, but I think in a lot of families, I think that, where people find themselves successful or they'll work towards a goal, when in your grandfather's family, I think you said there were twelve children or eleven--?
Speaker 2: No, there were eleven children.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But in, in terms of education--I'm glad you've asked that because on my wife's [Ruth McWilliams Leffall] side, there are five generations of college graduates, five.  And, and, and you don't find that very often in black families.  So my wife's mother, her father, see--so my, so my wife's mother, her father two, and her father's father, three.  Then my wife, four, and then her daughter, I mean her son, my wife's son--our son.  So there are five generations--on my wife's mother's side, there are five generations of college graduates.  Her mother's grandfather, her mother's father, her mother, my wife, the daughter, and our son.  So there are five generations.
Speaker 1: Well, this is worth getting into detail about, but the grandfather of your--let's see the--well, go back to the earliest one.  Where did he go to school?
Speaker 2: Okay, the--.
Speaker 1: And what was his name?
Speaker 2: The first one, his name was a, Grasty, I can't think of his--I don't--his first name, G-R-A-S-T-Y, Mr. Grasty was her grandfather.  And he had gone to school in Pennsylvania.  And then her father, my wife's mother's father had gone to Pittsburgh and became a lawyer.  And then my wife's mother had gone to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia].  Then my wife had gone to Virginia Union.  And then my wife's son, our son had gone to Harvard.  So there are five generations, Pennsylvania, Pittsburgh, Union--Virginia Union, Virginia Union, Harvard.  So five generations of, of Howard graduate--forgive me, of college graduates, of college graduates.
Speaker 1: But I also notice that the number of offspring has gone down from, you know, twelve--?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yeah, well, yes--.
Speaker 1: --in the family to one, you know.
Speaker 2: --oh, yes, but, well, that's just the way it was.  You know, some people (unclear) have said, "Were you trying not to?"  No.  As I said, that's just the, the Lord in his wisdom, said, we would have one.  So we just have one.  And we were not just trying to have one.  I wouldn't have minded have two or three children cause, as I say, I, my family had two.  I have a sister.  So I was thinking about two or three, but as I said, we just have one, so I'm grateful.  You have to be grateful for what you have and not what you don't have.
Story_ID: 10007
Speaker 1: I think the presidency of the American Cancer Society came first, right?
Speaker 2: It did.  I became president of the American Cancer Society in 1978, had a year from 1978 to '79 [1979], and had a lot of wonderful trips.  I went all around speaking to the different groups and chapters here, went abroad, many different places, to the Soviet Union, the Peoples Republic of China, Vietnam, Liberia.  Then other places, just around--the Dominican Republic, this--speaking for the American Cancer Society.  But I am a surgeon.  I'm a trained surgeon.  And my specialty happens to be cancer.  That's why I was active in the American Cancer Society.  But I'm also active as a surgeon, and I became the first black president, African American president of the American College of Surgeons.  That was in 1995 -'96 [1996].  So I, I was deeply honored by that, and I went around speaking to the different chapters.  Your primary role as president of the American College of Surgeons is to go around the country, speak to the different chapters with the fellows who are in the chapters, to find out what their concerns are and bring those concerns back to the national body and see what can be done on a national level to help, help address the problems they tell you about.  And that's what I did, but in addition, I went to South Africa.  I went to Hong Kong, I went to Canada.  I went to different places, and--went to Germany.  So I got an honorary fellowship from Canada, from South Africa, from Germany.  So that was a, the height of my professional career as a surgeon was to be president of the American College of Surgeons.  That was the height of my professional career.
Story_ID: 10008
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: You mean as far as health is concerned or what are--?
Speaker 1: Well, health, and yeah, health and anything else you think of--.
Speaker 2: Well, well, certainly, I believe what my father told me is true.  You have to have a good education.  I would like to see education enhanced for the black community.  I'd like to see young black boys and girls, men and women, get more education because I think that's the key.  That's what I was taught, and that's what I still believe, education, education.  Sure, you'll find an occasional person here or there who did something without an education, but overall, if you look for people who are doing well, being successful, helping out, giving back to the community, they are people who have had a good education.  And that's what I would like to be sure that we can see in the black community.  As far as medicine is concerned, and obviously, since my area is cancer, I want to see more done so we can find out what's, what's the real cause?  And I, I think this is one of the most exciting times now in all of cancer research because we know so much more now about the cancer cell.  You can get drugs that can zero in right on that cell.  They don't have to affect the normal cells, just can affect the cancer cell.  But for the black community itself, I want to see education enhanced, and certainly, I want to see everybody to have access to good health and good healthcare because what is life if you don't have good health.  So I want to see everyone, and that certainly includes blacks in our country, but I want everyone to have access to quality care, which would include good cancer care.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us some kind of prognostication of what the future of cancer research holds?
Speaker 2: I, I think this is one of the most exciting times of all for cancer research because we know so much more now about what actually goes on in the cancer cell.  I just came back from New Orleans two days ago, a meeting ASCO, American Society of Clinical Oncology.  And everyone there is talking about targeted therapy.  We now have agents that can zero right in on the cancer cell, zero in on the cancer cell.  That's exciting, and I think as the years go by, we're going to get more and more of these agents that'll be able to do that.
Story_ID: 10009
Speaker 1: In your position as president of American Cancer Society, I know you've met a lot of the big politicians in the world and so forth.  Do you have any reflections on any of them, like George Bush and others?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yes.  I have very positive feelings--I work right now on a program with President George H.W. Bush, you know, 'number forty-one'.  It's something first called the National Dialogue on Cancer.  Now, it's called C-Change.  And he and his wife [Barbara Bush] are the co-chairmen and I'm chairman of the board of directors of this group.  And what we're trying to do is to see what we can do about everything we can for prevention, better access to care, quality of care and improved creening--screening and diagnostic methods.  I have found both of them to be very committed to this fight on cancer.  I, with three other colleagues, went up to Kennebunkport, Maine to spoke--three other colleagues and I went to Kennebunkport to speak with President and Mrs. Bush about joining us in this fight against cancer.  And he said, "Well, he didn't want anyone to think that this is some political ploy to help his sons."  One [Jeb Bush] is governor of Florida, one [George W. Bush] at that time was governor of Texas, he's now president of the United States.  And I reminded him, since I was spokesperson for the group.  I said, Mr. President, in 1953, you and your wife lost a daughter to cancer, your daughter, Robin.  She was not quite four years old.  She had leukemia.  Had she been born today, she'd have an eight-five to ninety percent chance to be cured.  Things got very quiet.  And nobody said anything.  We're sitting in his home at Walker's Point, at Kennebunkport.  The waves are hitting the rocks outside, and after about a minute and a half, he said, "We'll do it."  He said, "We'll do it.  We feel so committed to this."  And what I have found out, that when they give their name to something, they are there.  I've been fortunate also that his son, President [George W.] Bush, has appointed me chairman of the President's Cancer Panel.  There are three people on the President's Cancer Panel.  I'm chairman, there's a woman [Margaret L. Kripke, Ph.D.] from [The University of Texas] M. D. Anderson [Cancer Center, Houston, Texas], and Lance Armstrong, the cyclist is on it.  And it's been wonderful getting to know him.  He is a young man who had cancer of the testicle, that had spread to the lungs and brain.  And look, he's won five consecutive Tour de France championships, and is trying to win a sixth.  So this, this has been wonderful, having the opportunity to serve as chairman of the President's Cancer Panel.
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts on how he recovered, you know, or how he (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, he went to good people.  He went to some very good people, and he found the best people in the field.  He said, he got on the Web, found the best people in the field.  He was in Austin [Texas]  Then he went M. D. Anderson in Houston, but he found the person who had done some of the seminal work on testicular cancer.  He had cancer of the testicle that had spread to--he had cancer of the testicle that had spread to the lungs and brain.  He found that the person who was doing some of the seminal work was at Indiana University in Indianapolis.  He went there.  He was treated.  That was 1996.  At this time, he has no evidence of cancer.  He's won five consecutive Tour de France championships, and I hope he can win this sixth.  I hope he can win the sixth which is coming up in a couple of weeks. [Armstrong won that race, followed by a seventh victory in 2005]
Story_ID: 10010
Speaker 1: A victory over cancer is often portrayed as some heroic rallying of the human spirit against this evil disease, you know.  And I mean it's depicted in, almost in terms of--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) --in terms that have nothing to do with medicine--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes.
Speaker 1: --that have more to do with, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, it has, I, I think that attitude is important, but as I said, I've asked that--I'm asked that question so often.  What does attitude have to do with survival?  And it improves quality, but we cannot prove that it improves longevity.  But still, won't you accept your treatment must better if you know that you have a positive attitude?  Certainly, you're going to accept it much better.  And we believe that you're open to other forms of advice that you think may help you.  I don't mean something that hasn't been proved, but you say, look, I want to live.  I believe these people have my best interest at heart, my doctors have my best interest at heart.  They're gonna do their best for me, and they do.  And I believe that with the proper treatment and that, and that attitude, that we're gonna find more people being cured.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I always like to emphasize that--because people like to, want to ask, like, "Is the attitude making you live longer?"  Well, scientifically, we can't prove that.  But there is no question we can prove that it improves the quality of life.  Whatever time you have left, it improves the quality of that time.
Story_ID: 10011
Speaker 1: What about your, your own father?  I know he, he was excited about education.  He encouraged you and what did he think of your success as a surgeon?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, that, that's interesting you would, you would ask that because more than any other person, my father [LaSalle Doheny Leffall, Sr.], as I told you is my greatest hero, as my mother [Martha Lula Jordan Leffall] is my greatest heroine.  But he is the one who did more than anyone to make me think about going to medical--he used to tell me, from the time I was nine, when I thought about going to medical school.  He said, "It's a noble profession.  It's an honorable profession.  You can help people."  He always said, "And, and just think, at the end of the day, you can go home and be proud of what you've done."  More than any other person, he's responsible for my becoming a physician.  He never saw it happen.  He died my senior year.  I, I went home between my junior and senior years.  My had been sick.  He had hypertension, bad hypertension, malignant hypertension.  And I went home, and my father had lost so much weight.  He was this stocky man, about six feet, and I went to him, and he had lost so much weight, and he just looked very ill.  And he told me--I'll never forget, he said, "Now, your mother and I'll be up next summer." --next, next spring.  I was graduating in June.  "We'll be up for your graduation, looking forward to it."  And I was looking at my father, and I was asking myself, I wonder--to myself, is he gonna be around to--? I came back to school.  And within a month my mother called me and said, "Daddy's had a stroke."  And by the time I got home, my father was dead.  He had a massive stroke.  So more than any other person, he's responsible for my becoming a physician.  But he sa--, but he never saw me get the diploma.  But when I was sitting there in that audience that day, and my mother was there and Ruthie [future wife, Ruth McWilliams] was there and my sister [Dolores Leffall] was there, I could feel my father's presence.  I, I could, I, I--if anybody wanted to be there, my father wanted to be there.  I knew that.  And I could feel his presence there, even though physically he was not there.  So--but he was very proud of my being in medical school.  Every time I'd go home, he'd tell everybody, "Well, you know, my son's in medical school,", and then "He's doing this and that and so forth," because I was leading my class every year.  He knew about that.  He knew my grades and also he, he knew about it, but the final thing, he never saw because he died in my senior year in medical school.
Speaker 1: And what about your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother lived some forty-two years after my father died.  And she was just a wonderful woman, stimulated a lot of young people.  After my mother died, so many of them wrote me.  My mother died in 1993, August of 1993, and wrote me to say what your mother's done, showed she was so nice to me, she did this.  And there was a young man whom she taught who lived in the quarters.  Now, the quarters is a low-income area in Quincy [Florida].  And he had a single-parent mother.  His name was Willie Adams.  He was smart, and he said, your mother used to stimulate me.  And she said, you're smart, you can go on, you can become a physician.  He went to Florida A&M.  He went to Meharry.  He trained  in New Jersey.  He was, became an outstanding OB-GYN specialist in Albany, Georgia.  And what happened in February of this year?  He became mayor of Albany, Georgia.  I wrote and told him, I said, Mother would be so proud of you if she knew that in 2004, you, not only were a very successful practitioner, an OB-GYN practitioner, but you had become mayor of Albany, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And his name again?  What's his name again?
Speaker 2: Dr. Willie Adams.
Speaker 1: Willie Adams.
Speaker 2: Dr. Willie Adams in Albany, Georgia.
Story_ID: 10012
Speaker 1: What would you see at this point as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I would like to say that my legacy, I, I hope is twofold; that I have really stimulated young men and women whom I have taught as medical students and whom I have taught as surgical residents.  And secondly, I'd like to think that I have given patients excellent surgical care.  And that's what I've tried to do.  I've tried to give excellent surgical care to patients.  So I'd like to be remembered two ways, as a teacher of medical students and residents and as a surgical clinician, as a practitioner who gave his patients top-quality care.  And I, something I'm asked very often, but what about a teacher.  I've thought about this long and hard, so--what is the role of the teacher in my judgment?  It's to instruct, to inspire, to stimulate, to teach ethical and moral value, to stretch the imagination, and to expand the aspirations of others.  Now, that's what I think a teacher--a real teacher should do all those.  If you think of each one, to instruct.  You got to teach them something.  If I'm teaching surgery, I have to do that.  To stimulate:  I want to teach in such a way you're gonna be stimulated to learn.  You'll want to learn more about surgery.  To inspire:  I want to inspire you.  I am so glad I am in medicine.  I'm so glad that surgery is a part of medicine.  So you inspire them.  To teach ethical and moral values:  When you see something going on that you don't think is right, you didn't treat a patient properly, call attention to it.  To teach ethical and moral values.  To stretch the imagination:  Don't be limited in your output to think, Well, I can't do this because no other black has done it.  No, no, have broad imagination, stretch your imagination and expand the aspirations of others.  I want you to think you can do anything you want to do.  You can be anything you want to be.  But you have to work hard for it.  So I thought--you can tell I thought a lot about that definition of what I think the teacher should be and do, and those are the things.
Story_ID: 10013
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts on socialized medicine or a national medical plan and that sort of--?
Speaker 2: Well, well, I, I believe this.  I believe the government should revisit and implement comprehensive healthcare reform.  Now, I try to get away from buzz words like socialized medicine and universal healthcare because you could have universal healthcare, but suppose you're not sick, and you want to go in for a checkup, the government's not covering, gonna cover that.  And I think that's wrong if you talk about prevention.  So I am in favor of comprehensive healthcare reform, comprehensive healthcare reform, which would include those preventive services for example, which may not be covered on the, if you're just talking about universal healthcare.  So I want sure access to healthcare for all citizens and, and healthcare includes what?  Prevention, screening, diagnosis, treatment, rehabilitation, all of those.  So I hope you see the difference I'm trying to make, comprehensive healthcare reform, which would include prevention, which sometimes is not included when just talk about universal healthcare.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you think that things the way they are now need to change?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think we need to implement comprehensive healthcare reform.  I definitely believe that, yes.
Story_ID: 10014
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you wish you had done, that you have not done or would have liked to?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, there's always something you-- you know, I, I would, I wish that there had been some original contribution I could have made.  I haven't.  Yeah, I haven't made an original--some, an original contribution.  Somebody said, "Well, you're asking, that's a big, something big, a responsibility you're placing on yourself."  It may be, but sure I'd like to have done that, and I'm still looking.  If there is something--I'm still looking and observing, hoping that there may be something that I can do from an original point of view.  But while thinking about that, I want to do to the best of my ability what I can do, teaching and taking care of patients.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there any period of your life that you would see as your greatest victory?
Speaker 2: It's hard to say because each builds on the other.  It's hard to say that one period is better than another.  For example, if I hadn't been a good student in college, I wouldn't have gotten into medical school.  If I hadn't done well in medical school, I would--they would not have accepted me in the surgical residency.  If I hadn't been a good surgical resident, they would not have accepted me at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, where I've gone to the best cancer hospital in the world for training.  If I hadn't done well as a surgical resident, as a cancer fellow, I would not have moved up in the ranks of the American Cancer Society.  If I hadn't been president of the American Cancer Society, would my colleagues have looked upon me to be president of the American College of Surgeons?  So each thing builds on the other.  So it's so difficult to say one period is better than another.  I think each period brings its triumphs and failures, and things have not worked out perfectly all the time. There have been some things that have not worked out.  And, for example, I wanted to establish a, a strong research unit here [at Howard University School of Medicine] in the Department of Surgery when I was chairman.  Well, I wasn't able to do it.  We got some research going, but not what I wanted to do.  And someone said, if you're ever able to accomplish everything you set up, well, you didn't plan high enough, you didn't aim high enough.  There should always be something you didn't do that you want to do, or wanted to do, that you can tell people who come behind you, look, I want you to try to do that because I wanted to do it, but I, I couldn't do it.  I failed.
Story_ID: 10015
Speaker 1: What is your assessment of the state of medical educational opportunities for black students now, and are we taking advantage of them and, and what advice would you offer for new students?
Speaker 2: I offer black students this advice: don't think in a narrow way.  You can go anywhere you want.  You--black students are accepted in every medical school.  They're accepted in every residency program.  They're accepted on every hospital staff.  There's--I'm not aware of any program that has refused to accept a black student at some time or other.  And if you work hard enough, if you want it badly enough, I believe you can get it.  So I tell them, give your best.  And if you give your best, the best is going to come to you because in my judgment, there's no question that black students can aim much higher than I could aim.  I wanted to teach.  I really wanted to teach when I got out of the army.  There were only two places I could think about going.  Howard and Meharry, two predominantly black medical schools.  That's all, where I could legitimately and realistically think about going.  Young students today can think about going anywhere, anywhere.  A black colleague of mine was just named chief of surgery at Duke University [Durham, North Carolina], one of the most prestigious surgical posts in the country.  So you can do whatever you want to do.  And that's why I tell them, don't go around thinking, well, I can only go to Howard or Meharry or Morehouse or Drew.  You can go anywhere.  But I also tell my colleagues who tell me, send me some of your good students.  I say, well, I want them too.  You see, I want them to stay at Howard too.  Sure, I know some are going elsewhere.  But I'm looking for the good ones also.  But I tell them that you can do, you can do whatever you want.  The world is your oyster.  You can do whatever you want now.  Keep an open mind, aim high.  Don't restrict yourself by saying, I'm black, I can't do this.  No, no. No--not at all.  You can do whatever you want to do.  I think it's a wonderful time.  I think it's a wonderful time to go into medicine, a wonderful time to be able to do what you want to do.
