Story_ID: 572658
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Bishop Vashti Murphy McKenzie: Bishop, B-I-S-H-O-P, that's the title; Vashti, V as in victory A-S-H-T-I; Murphy, capital M-U-R-P-H-Y; McKenzie, M-C capital K-E-N-Z-I-E [HistoryMaker Bishop Vashti McKenzie].
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind the name Vashti?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Vashti is a family name.  It was my [maternal] grandmother's name.  Vashti Turley Murphy, and it seems that one female, one girl in each generation, ends up with the name Vashti, so my aunt, my grandmother's daughter, one of the twins, was Vashti [Vashti Murphy Matthews].  I'm the oldest girl in this generation, in my generation, and so I was named Vashti, and I have a daughter named Vashti [Vashti-Jasmine McKenzie Saint-Jean].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there--do you know the ethnic origin of the name?
Speaker 2: It's Persian.  Actually, it's a biblical name from the Book of Esther.  Vashti was a queen and she preceded Esther and you know that she was, I guess, the first womanist, if you will.  Her husband was on a 120 day party with all these guys in the palace of Susa [Palace of Darius, Susa, Iran], and he demanded that she come with nothing on but her crown, because they were having bragging rights; my wife is better looking than your wife, mine is prettier than your wife, well no.  So, the king says, "Mine has you all beat," and of course the guys say, "Well prove it, so send for the queen and tell her to come with nothing on but her crown," and she refused, because she felt it impinged her dignity.  He would have been fine with it but his advisors would say, "No, if she says no to you, then all the women in the kingdom will say no to their husbands," and so rather than kill her, she was banished from the kingdom and when he sobered up, some scholars say, when he sobered up he realized what he did.  To appease him, counselors advised, "Pick out a new younger model," and so Esther became queen.
Speaker 1: It's a struggle that goes back a long way.
Speaker 2: Yes, it does.
Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 28, 1947; Baltimore, Maryland; Provident Hospital.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a bishop in the African Methodist Episcopal [A.M.E.] church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And at one time you were the titular bishop--
Speaker 2: They call it the titular head.  That meant I was the president of the Council of Bishops, and at that time, it was in 2004, and at that time it meant I was the highest ranking woman in the predominantly black Methodist denominations, and it was the first time that a woman was president of the Council of Bishops.
Speaker 1: You were the highest ranking bishop at that time, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.  That would be the terminology for that, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Oh, today is the 14th of May, 2007.
Speaker 1: March.
Speaker 2: March, you know, I'm way ahead.  Actually, my mind is in May, which is where I've been all morning long, but is March 14, 2007.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Nashville, Tennessee, in the Sunday School Union of the A.M.E. church in my office, the Thirteenth District [Thirteenth Episcopal District].
Story_ID: 572659
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone that are sort of a warm up--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: A favorite food. I have several favorites within vari- you know, food groups, but if you have to nail me down, I would have to say chicken wings.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Purple.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring, summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Anywhere there's water, sunlight, and sand.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I guess for me it would be a favorite scripture and that would be Psalm 37:5, "Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also unto Him and He will bring it unto pass."
Story_ID: 572660
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Her name was Ida Murphy Smith Peters [Ida Murphy Peters].  Murphy is her maiden name, born in Baltimore [Maryland], married to Ed Smith [Samuel Edward Smith], that is my father, and when they divorced, to Del Peters [B. John Peters].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth?
Speaker 2: September 20, 1918.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what do you know about her side of the family?  That she was a Murphy, on Murphy's side.
Speaker 2: Yes.  They were known as the Murphy girls.  There were five of them in my mother's family and she was the second, the second oldest.  There was Elizabeth [Elizabeth Murphy Moss]; Ida, Ida Ann--we hardly ever put the Ann in there, but it's her name, Ida Ann--then there were the twins, Carlita [Carlita Murphy Jones] and Vashti [Vashti Murphy Matthews]; and then, the baby which would be Frances, Frances Murphy [HistoryMaker Frances L. Murphy, II].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right now, what--now how far back can you trace that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, back to my great-grandfather.  My father--my grandfather was Carl Murphy [Carl J. Murphy], who was publisher of the Afro-American newspaper [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers] and chairman of the board.  This would from the '20s [1920s] and the '40s [1940s] to '50s [1950s] and to the '60s [1960s].  His father, which would be my great-grandfather, John H. Murphy [John H. Murphy, Sr.], and his wife was Martha Elizabeth Murphy [Martha Howard Murphy], and then we have a smattering of other cousins and relatives along that tree, the Howards, of course the Howards of Howard County [Maryland] is in our family.  We also have Isaac Murphy [Isaac Burns Murphy].  Isaac Murphy was a jockey, actually.  He was a jockey.  And then, I don't know his first name, but we always called him Sergeant Murphy, and Sergeant Murphy was in the Civil War and the remnants of that is, you know, there're a few bullets that were saved, wooden bullets and metal bullets and other paraphernalia that was saved when he served in the Civil War.
Speaker 1: His hat, too, I believe.  I've seen his hat in Baltimore.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.  And the swords (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Isaac Murphy--
Speaker 2: And the swords.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Isaac Murphy rode in the Kentucky Derby, if I'm not mistaken, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes he did.
Story_ID: 572661
Speaker 1: And the family is the family who found the Afro-American Newspapers [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers] in Baltimore [Maryland] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, so, the family legend and the family story is that my great-grandfather, John Murphy [John H. Murphy, Sr.], published the Sunday School Helper, which was a newspaper that was published in the basement of Bethel A.M.E. Church in Baltimore.  There was a failing press and he borrowed two hundred dollars of his wife's [Martha Howard Murphy] butter and egg money, and brought the printing press and began the Afro-American newspaper.  Growing up we were told he founded the paper so that his children would always have a place to work and would always have employment.  He was a white washer prior to going into the publishing business, and also he wanted a place where he would not be called by his first name; in other words, he would have the dignity and integrity that was missing for so many African Americans at that time.  He put the newspaper together at a time only, I believe, one, one half percent of African Americans could read, so that was really a risky venture.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any other stories from that side that are passed down?
Speaker 2: About that time?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's pretty rich so far, but (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather [Carl J. Murphy] didn't have any sons, so in a large family my great-grandfather had ten children and my grandfather was the youngest of ten, and everyone was expected to work somewhere in the family business, and each of the sons had a particular department.  Some of them were in advertising, in marketing, some were in the lighter type and, you know, the physical printing of the newspaper with the printing press, there were those who were in addressing, the addressographs; in other words, getting the newspaper out in circulation.  Others were in the editorial side of the family, so my grandfather took over when his father told him to come home.  My grandfather was teaching German, of all things, and at the Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  That's where he met my grandmother, Vashti [Vashti Turley Murphy], and you know, in 1918, you're talking about the end of World War I [WWI], and teaching German is not necessarily a popular class to be taught in the United States at that time.  His father told him to come home and to help manage the family business and he did, and took over as publisher and chairman of the board.  So, he was on the editorial side.  One of the, with no sons, (cough) excuse me, (cough) from my great-grandfather, all of the people, all of the sons worked in the business but the women didn't, all right? For the most part. And so now here's my grandfather with five daughters looking at no one necessarily following him in the business.  So, he didn't treat his daughters with this is only women's work.  This is the only thing that you can do.  You mind the home fires and we'll leave the rest of the business and work world to the men.  No, each of the five daughters worked in the business.  Betty [Elizabeth Murphy Moss] was on the editorial side.  My mother [Ida Murphy Peters] was in advertising.  Carlita [Carlita Murphy Jones] was a schoolteacher, but she was also in the writing and editorial side.  Frances [HistoryMaker Frances L. Murphy, II] was on the editorial side.  Of course, she became the publisher and the chairman of the board later on, so everybody worked in the business.  My mother talks about how when she graduated from the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], which was pretty extraordinary because there were very few African American students at the University of Wisconsin.  She was a journalism major, graduated, and began her career at the Afro-American, making thirty-five dollars a week.  That was a lot of money back in, you're talking about in the '30s [1930s], this is the late '30s [1930s], like 1939, and, you know, worked her way from advertising and retired from that and then went into the editorial side.
Story_ID: 572662
Speaker 1: So, in growing up in a house full of leaders, now you're talking about leaders, extraordinary leaders, my [maternal] grandfather [Carl J. Murphy], my grandmother [Vashti Turley Murphy] was the founder, one of the founders, of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.], and then all of my aunts who were extraordinary women, there were no nos, there were no obstacles, there were no gender biases in growing up in that kind of family.  So, you would go with whatever your strength was, whatever your gift was.  You could pursue that, which was really kind of extraordinary.  My grandfather was very interested in us as grandchildren, in exploring our gifts and talents, and so actually he used us to break the color line in many different areas, so we found ourselves the first African American students at the Baltimore Museum of Art [Baltimore, Maryland], art classes for children, at the Peabody [Peabody Conservatory of Music; Peabody Institute, Baltimore, Maryland], study of music; you know, I was taking piano lessons like most kids were.  Next door with Mrs. Swan [ph.], who took--next door to my house--who taught music in the Baltimore City school system [Baltimore City Public Schools], so your grandfather finds out okay, you got a little talent in doing music.  Let's go to the Peabody Conservatory, and off you go, and you are now taking piano lessons at Peabody.  So, he was very interested in the gifts and skills that we had, and then he placed us in those places where, in those areas, where African Americans were not seen.
Story_ID: 572663
Speaker 1: There's certainly a lot of history on that side of the family, the Murphy side.  Did your mother [Ida Murphy Peters] talk about growing up and what it was like for her?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Growing up in the, in West Baltimore [Baltimore, Maryland], of course, they were all five jammed together.  They were known as the Murphy girls, and my grandfather [Carl J. Murphy] built the house out in Morgan, Morgan Park [Baltimore, Maryland], and the family moved.  She thought it was a great move because they had a lot more space.  Of course, they still had to share rooms, but they had a whole lot more space.  One thing she didn't like about Morgan Park is cutting the grass.  All of them had to take turns cutting the grass, and it was a chore because you're talking about, you know, a fairly good sized piece of property, and this was before electric, gasoline lawn mowers, so it was a hand mower, and I remember that hand mower, and my grandfather prided himself on the gardens and the grass.  He had a wonderful rose garden and fruit trees, and all of that, but cutting the grass was a major chore.  My brother [Carl Smith] was the old- is the oldest grandchild, and he also has horror stories of cutting the grass at Morgan Park.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where did your mother go to school?
Speaker 2: In Baltimore [Maryland].  She graduated from Douglass High School [Frederick Douglass High School] and then went to the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin] as a journalism major.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  There were basically two high schools in Baltimore where blacks went to school.  One was Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar High School for Health Professionals, Baltimore, Maryland] that was on the east side, and Douglass High School was on the west side.
Story_ID: 572664
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Samuel Edward Smith.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in Kentucky on April the 16th--I have to count back--1915.  He's three years--no, it's the other way--yeah, three years older than my mother [Ida Murphy Peters]. Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she, do you know the place in Kentucky that he was born?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Do you know if it's western Kentucky or eastern?
Speaker 2: The family history on my father's side is not as preserved as the family history on my mother's side.  My grandmother on my father's side, Muriel Smith [ph.], was part Cherokee Indian [Native American], and she had blue eyes, and my father had one sister, Jessie, Jessie Smith, Jessie Smith Henderson [ph.], because she married, and they moved to Chicago [Illinois] when he was a little boy, so he grew up on Chicago's South Side.  He tells us his father died in World War I [WWI], and he was a jack legged preacher. We didn't know there--before my generation, we didn't know there were any preachers in our family. But he says, you know, he was a jack legged preacher, un-ordained, but, I never knew him at all.  He died, you know, in World War I, so I mean we don't have any recollection of him at all.
Speaker 1: This is your grandfather, your grandfather died during World War I, right?
Speaker 2: On my father's side.
Speaker 1: On your father's side, right, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Story_ID: 572665
Speaker 1: Your father [Samuel Edward Smith] grew up in Chicago [Illinois].  Now, did he get a chance to go to school, too?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.  He was a--he went to the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin] as well.  That's where he met my mother [Ida Murphy Peters], and they met and married in their junior year and graduated, you know, stayed--married, stayed there in Madison, Wisconsin, and then returned to, came to Baltimore [Maryland], after they both graduated.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how they met or how they got together, or about their courtship?
Speaker 2: Actually no.  We didn't hear those stories about how they met.  We heard stories about their first year of marriage, you know, when after they got married they rented a big house and they had several bedrooms in the big house, and so they rented it to other black students who were at the University of Wisconsin because they couldn't stay in the dorms and so they stayed in this one big house, so my mother came, became like the housemother for all of the other students, and so--
Speaker 1: So your mother lived there too?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother and father--
Speaker 1: Well, your mother and father, but your mother, after she got married became a housemother for the other students.
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.  They lived in that, that big house, and I think there was another sister who was also, who by that time had come to the University of Wisconsin; I'm not sure which one.
Story_ID: 572666
Speaker 1: My father [Samuel Edward Smith] was a track star.  He was an AAU [Amateur Athletic Union] track champion, a high hurdler, he won lots of medals and lots of trophies, and most of them we played with and dismantled when we were young growing up, but he was a track star in the late '30s [1930s], didn't make the Olympics. I think he got, I'm not sure whether he was drafted or something, but he didn't make the Olympics but he was a contemporary of Jesse Owens and all those other guys who ran.  A story about my dad, they were--and I'm not sure which school but I think it was the University of Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana].  I'm not quite sure which school, but I think it was the University of Indiana, or the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], and the team was running against the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin] team was competing against that other university.  The other university refused to compete if my father was going to run because he was black, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that sounds like the University of Indiana, but (laughter)--
Speaker 1: I'm not quite sure.  I have to go back and--
Speaker 2: I hear you, but it does sound like Indiana.  Indiana had just come off with having the governor as the grand dragon [D.C. Stephenson] of the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] in the 1920s, and it kind of stayed through.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And so, they refused, they refused to compete against the University of Wisconsin because my dad was on the team, and so they said just, you know, kick him off the team and then we'll run.  Well, the team said no, if he doesn't run we don't compete.  And that was really something in the late '30s [1930s], for his teammates to say if he doesn't compete then we're not gonna run, we're not gonna compete as a team.  He's a member of the team and we are together, so I thought that was really great that the team stuck up for him in spite of their racial differences.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That is a story.  Now, so what did your father do when he, when he graduated from school?
Speaker 1: When he graduated from school, he became a high school teacher and a track coach.  Yeah.  He was at Carver Vocational High School [Carver High School; George Washington Carver Center for Arts and Technology] in Baltimore [Maryland], where he taught school and, of course, coached track.  And then he went on into--you know the War on Poverty came and he went on to be into the EEO [Equal Employment Opportunity].  He worked for the federal government in Washington, D.C., and that's where he retired from.
Story_ID: 572667
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My mother.  Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, why?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was, it's kind of really hard to say, I think I realized I was most like my mother when I was sitting at her funeral and they were reading the obituary.  Of course, I knew what the obituary said, but listening to the obituary being read, I realized how much of she is in me, and me mirrors her, if that makes sense.  Community activist, involved in community redevelopment, my mother was a lot of firsts in, in many respects in her career in advertising and marketing, and in entertainment.  I have a lot of firsts in my life.  We have a variety of interests.  You know, it's just not, you know, you're gonna peg Vashti [HistoryMaker Bishop Vashti McKenzie] for one thing.  You can't peg Ida [Ida Murphy Peters] for one thing.  You have to name several different things behind our names, because we just have a variety of interests.  My father [Samuel Edward Smith] was always saying, "Vashti, you have to be the master of--you can't be a jack of all trades and master--if you're a jack of all trades you'll be master of none."  And I used to tell my dad, I said but I have all these interests and I want to pursue them.  You know, I want to pursue piano playing.  I want to be in the band.  I played the flute.  I want to dance.  I had ballet lessons, you know, right up through high school [Eastern High School, Baltimore, Maryland].  I loved to paint and I, you know, went through art school.  When I left the Baltimore Museum of Art [Baltimore, Maryland], I went to the University of Maryland, I mean the Maryland Institute of Art [Maryland Institute for the Promotion of the Mechanic Arts; Maryland Institute College of Art, Baltimore, Maryland], and had classes there.  You know, all of these things interest me and I want to pursue them and my mother was the same way.  My mother played the piano.  She loved flowers and plants, and so, I mean, just there's so many things about her life and my life that kind of mirror together.
Story_ID: 572669
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: An earliest childhood memory. Yes.  I had a dog.  The dog was a Boxer, and you can imagine that the Boxer was just as big as I was, and when the Boxer sat, we were about, you know, tall with each other.  You can imagine I was a very curious child.  I was a very active child.  I was not the kind of kid that, you know, your mother tells you to sit on the front steps and come back in an hour and I might still be sitting there.  I'd be off wandering and exploring my world.  So, my mother [Ida Murphy Peters], on many, many, many occasions said, "Do not go down the street and don't go in the alley."  In the alley, in that section of Baltimore [Maryland], these homes, the home that we lived in originally, were built for middle-class white people and behind those houses were smaller houses that were built for the servants.  And so, the alley was, course, the roadway that led to these smaller houses built back behind these three story, two story real homes in Baltimore City on the west side.  And so, don't go back there, you don't go by yourself, you'll get lost, something will happen to you; you know, all the worries and fears that parents have when your little three year old, you know, goes wandering off.  So, of course, I did and I went into the alley and for some reason, I made friends with a man.  I don't know, I have absolutely no idea, I don't remember, and I heard my mother calling me home, and so I'm walking home, skipping, holding this person's hand.  Well, my dog had never met this person, never seen this person, and he comes down off the front steps and the next thing you know, he's sitting on this man's chest barking.  I mean, he, Hans [ph.], Hans was his name.  I couldn't say Hans.  Hans was a German name.  All I could say was Hands because he had four white paws, so to me they looked like, for a little girl, they looked like they were hands.  And so I remember Hands being very protective, not letting anybody near me that he hadn't met and had not been welcome to the house.
Speaker 1: What happened to the poor man?  Did he (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Well, I guess he's all right.  We didn't get sued.  Nobody got put in jail.  I mean, you know, he just, I think when he just saw a little girl walking around the corner, he didn't like it.  Do you know where your parents--where's your home--why aren't you--why are you out here by yourself?  And so, he's probably doing the Good Samaritan deed, bringing me home and gets knocked down by the dog.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well he was lucky, you know, that's all that happened to him, I guess.
Speaker 2: Oh, very lucky because behind the dog was my dad [Samuel Edward Smith] (laughter).
Story_ID: 572671
Speaker 1: Did you grow up in one neighborhood the whole time, or were you in two different neighborhoods?
Speaker 2: Two different neighborhoods.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because you moved to Morgan Park [Baltimore, Maryland], you said, at some point--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, my mother [Ida Murphy Peters]--
Speaker 1: Your mother did that, that's right.
Speaker 2: My mother grew up in Morgan Park.
Speaker 1: Grew up, yeah.  So where did you, what two places live in in Baltimore [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: I grew up on Carey Street, Carey and Cumberland Street, which was very near Pennsylvania Avenue, and Pennsylvania Avenue was the hub of the black community in Baltimore.  My mother organized the Pennsylvania Avenue's Merchants Association [Pennsylvania Avenue Merchants Association, Baltimore, Maryland], to help them in their marketing and advertising and capitalizing on their business and in the community.  The Royal Theatre was located on Pennsylvania Avenue.  Anybody who was anybody doing anything in the entertainment world came to the Royal Theatre; of course, we were never allowed to go there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, the World Theater, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Royal Theatre (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, the Royal Theatre.
Speaker 2: It doesn't exist now.  They tore it down, but I remember hearing, you know, Sammy Davis, Jr. is gonna--is at the Royal Theatre, you know, James Brown, all the stars of, you know, back then, you know, The Dells, The Platters, or whatever, they all came to the Royal Theatre, so it really was a hub.  At one time, my father [Samuel Edward Smith] had a business with another friend on Pennsylvania Avenue.  It's a lot of businesses and associations there, so it was really a, really a kind of nice place to grow up.
Story_ID: 572673
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, it's hard to admit, and my brother [Carl Smith] probably could say it, tell it better, but I remember going downtown, well going down, you know, to lower Pennsylvania Avenue, which goes close to downtown Baltimore [Maryland], one day with my mother [Ida Murphy Peters] and watching her pick a chicken out and seeing the chicken get their neck wrung.  I mean, you just don't, you just don't see that anymore.  In the houses that were behind the big houses, people kept goats and sheep and things like that.  You know, we're talking about the late 1940s, you know, as a little girl.  I always remember the bus.  The bus passed by our door (laughter) and you only needed ten cents to ride the bus, and I was happy when I was old enough to take the bus and go to church by myself, because I was really kind of a church child.  Street lights--I remember when the street lights were little and we had to go buy--the lamplighter came to light the gas lamplights, and then I remember when they disappeared and these huge lights came, they came on automatically in the evening, and it was very bright and you had to close your shades; otherwise, you're going to be watching that light all night long.  I remember walking.  We could walk anywhere.  Nothing was far away.  Everything was close.  The Met Theatre [Metropolitan Theatre, Baltimore, Maryland], it was like two blocks, and for twenty-five cents, you could watch the movies.  On the corner was the day old bread people because they made bread around the corner from the Met Theatre, and you could go in and get a bag of day old bread or you could go and, you could tell when they were making donuts and you could go get the holes or the donuts and stuff, you know, the bag was twenty-five cents.  It was a great thing.  The library was right across the street from the Met, so it was just like going around the corner and every day there was a story hour and I was there.  I was there for every story hour, to hear the story.  Mrs. Bell [ph.] was the story teacher and she would light a candle and that meant it was time for us to sit down and be quiet and she would read a story.  When the story was over, she blew the candle out and that meant we could go off and explore the other parts of the library.  So, I remember walking and everything was close and then when integration came, everything was far away.
Story_ID: 572681
Speaker 1: We were talking about sights and sounds and smells of growing up.  Now, you said that church was a big part, for you, of growing up.  You'd get on the bus?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: To go to church, and--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your family church, then?
Speaker 2: The church then was St. James Episcopal Church.  It was located on Lafayette Square [Baltimore, Maryland], and there were four churches, actually, that made up Lafayette Square.  My brother is about nine years older than I am, so there's a pretty big gap between my brother Carl [Carl Smith] and myself.  As such, that meant that, you know, when I was eight, he is like sixteen, seventeen, and he's in a teenager lifestyle, so like my mother's [Ida Murphy Peters] at work and my father's [Samuel Edward Smith] work at work, "Carl, take care of your little sister."  Well, Carl's gone off to be with the guys and the girls, so that meant I had a lot of alone time, so in my alone time I was at the library with Mrs. Bell [ph.], I was at the movies for twenty-five cents, I'd get, you know, some donuts from, you know, the bakery that was on the corner and I'd take the bus and go to church.  There were a lot of youth activities there.  There was a young people's association, children's association, there was a choir, and I started singing in the junior choir before I could read.  That was the time when my mother would take me.  I didn't catch the bus at five, but I would go on Thursday evenings and listen to the songs and memorize the songs so I could sing on Sunday.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, when the church door opened, I was there; Vacation Bible School, I was there all day Sunday.  At that time, you know, you would go to Sunday school and then go to the eleven o'clock service, and then there would be youth activities following the Sunday service.  So, theoretically, you were there until about one or two o'clock in the afternoon with the other young people, and you'd catch the bus and go home.  Dinner would be ready.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, did they have Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] there too, or what?
Speaker 2: Well, Girl Scouts came through school, came through, you know I went to public school and Girl Scouts came through school. I--my Girl Scout troop met at my dad's school, Carver High School [George Washington Carver Center for Arts and Technology, Baltimore, Maryland], and it was great.  It was a wonderful experience, you know.  I earned a lot of badges and that was fun; that was fun.
Speaker 1: Now, so you spent a lot of time alone when you were growing up.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your personality when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Very effervescent, outgoing, active, busy (laughter) bust. And enjoyed being busy.  When I said I had alone time, it wasn't lonely and I wasn't left, you know, by myself in dangerous situations.  Yes, I was a latchkey kid, school was out at 3:00.  Parents didn't get home until 3:30, so in that 3:30 to--3:00 to that 5:30 time, I wasn't the child that sat and twiddled her thumbs, and television is not like what it was today, so I didn't sit in front of the television.  I was at dance class, I was at art class, I was at music lessons, you know, in the library with Mrs. Bell, or at church at choir meeting.
Story_ID: 572683
Speaker 1: Where did you start school?
Speaker 2: At Robert Brown Elliott School, No. 104, Colored School No. 9 [Public School No. 104, Robert Brown Elliott School, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: That's a lot of numbers; Robert Brown Elliott, school number--
Speaker 2: One o-four [104].
Speaker 1: --one o-four [104], and Colored School--
Speaker 2: Colored School No. 9.  I didn't know the, I really didn't realize that Colored School No. 9 for many, many years, but of course, it was etched into the facade of the building, so even though the plaque around it says school No. 104, when you look up, stretched across is Colored School No. 9.  Growing up, it didn't really mean that much to me.  As an adult, I'm going, wow, that's what that was.
Speaker 1: Well, I assume you liked school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.  I liked school.
Speaker 1: What aspects appealed to you the most?
Speaker 2: Well, what I remember about elementary school were the teachers, and it was true.  The teachers, the principal, Mrs. Dairy [ph.] was the principal, Mr. Wallace [ph.], I remember, was the vice principal, and one of my aunts on my Aunt Frances' [HistoryMaker Frances L. Murphy, II] side was the teacher.  Ms. Woods [ph.] was my third grade teacher.  Mrs. Robinson [ph.] was my fifth grade teacher, Mrs. Burkett [ph.]--I remember all my teachers.  Mrs. Burkett and Mrs. Whits [ph.] were my kindergarten teachers and it was a family atmosphere.  We learned in those, you know, from kindergarten to fifth grade, not just reading and writing and arithmetic, but we were taught, you know, we had to sit up straight and we couldn't slouch and young ladies didn't cross their legs, they crossed their ankles, and, you know, all those little things that you learned that you don't get in public school today, we got there.  Generally, we felt that the teachers really cared about you and they were really looking out for your best interest, wanting you to push forward, wanted you to rise, wanted you to climb, wanted you to do good.  If you messed up in school, my mother [Ida Murphy Peters] knew about it before I got home; absolutely.  There would be a call from the teacher.  If I messed up in the neighborhood, then there would be a call.  I mean, everybody was watching out for everybody's kids; so, I may have gotten scolded at school, got scolded by a neighbor, and when I got home, got scolded by my mother, so once you go through that one, two, three pattern, and then everybody, we were all in the same church together [St. James Episcopal Church, Baltimore, Maryland], so you come to church and then, you know, so you really want--you minded your Ps and Qs.  You really, you know, had to do good because you had all of these people who had an invested interest in your success.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Not really.  History, when I got to middle school [Garrison Junior High School; Garrison Middle School, Baltimore, Maryland].  Junior high school, then.  That tells you how long ago history was, and it became my favorite subject.  Reading, I guess.  If you had to say reading and it was just different from English (laughter).  Reading would be then my favorite subject. You know, but school I've changed in the sixth grade, so things became a bit different in the sixth grade.
Story_ID: 572684
Speaker 1: What happened in the sixth grade?
Speaker 2: Integration.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was when we were bussed across town.  We left our neighborhood; our comfortable little world where everybody knew everybody, and all of that, and I was bussed to School No. 18 [Public School No. 18, Franklin D. Roosevelt School, Baltimore, Maryland].  The school song was like (singing), "School," you know, "School 18 up on the hill" and that was a very different experience for me.
Speaker 1: So school number, that was the full name on it? School No. 18 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) School--yeah, it didn't have the long name that I had in the other school, but it was School No. 18.  Most of the schools had numbers.  The public schools had numbers, so it was a cultural shock coming out of my West Baltimore neighborhood into that section of Baltimore [Maryland], as it was just, it was a culture shock.  I found it, you know, teachers were not, they were not supportive.  They didn't necessarily have a vested interest in you doing well.  Mrs. Earnest [ph.] was my sixth grade teacher and she was a, you know, kind of full figured woman with big, thick-thick fingers.  I remember her coming around and tapping on my desk. And she, the pronunciation of my name in, I guess in her heritage is not Vashti [HistoryMaker Bishop Vashti McKenzie], it was Vashtee.  So I spent most of the sixth grade going, "It's Vashti, not Vashtee."  The classmates had a hard time with the name.  Of course, it's a different name, so they would say, "Why can't your name be Marian Ann, like ours?"  And I'd say, "Well because my name is not Marian Ann, my name is Vashti." Tie, I kept saying tie, so they decided to call me Tie, which I thoroughly hated because it ended up being a singsong thing.  "Hi-tie, Hi-tie."  I'm going like, "Please, it's Vashti.  If you can't call me Vashti, call me Vash."  In a house full of Vashtis, because my [maternal] grandmother [Vashti Turley Murphy] was living and my aunt [Vashti Murphy Matthews] was living, I ended up being called V because if you say Vashti, you get too many people answering.  So, you know, "Just don't call me Tie please."  By the time I got to middle school, middle school was a fairly good experience--
Speaker 1: And what was the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and sixth grade wasn't that bad either, but Garrison Junior High School [Garrison Middle School, Baltimore, Maryland], Garrison Junior High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The difference about, besides the culture shock of being with a different culture, people who pronounce words and languages different, the slang and all of that was different, and being somebody's first black experience, sometimes it's not always a very positive process, but you live through it.  We were, we had things at School 18 that we never had at 104 [Public School No. 104, Robert Brown Elliott School, Baltimore, Maryland].  There was a gymnasium and we were like, this is a gymnasium.  This is a part of the school?  I mean, wow, this is so cool.
Speaker 1: You didn't have a gym at the other school?
Speaker 2: We didn't have a gym.  And, you know, like this is a gym where we, you know, we had gymnastics and we never had gymnastics.  We learned how to climb the ropes, you know.  There were all kinds of things that we just never had at 18 [sic.], so it really was opening a new world.  I had always had piano lessons and then, you know, I was introduced to the flute because we have twenty piano players.  We don't need another one in the band, so they give you a musicianship test and, you know, and then they put you in an instrument so I had a choice between the oboe, the piccolo, and the flute.  I decided I'd take the flute.  The oboe had a reed, and I watched the saxophone and the clarinet players deal with the reed and I didn't want to deal with that, and so since the flute was bigger, I took that.  So there were things that we never experienced.  I mean, you had instruments and you had, you had a music room where you sat on rise platforms like you're in a band, and you had concerts and we never had that before, so all those things were really nice, they were really, really nice.  The hard part was is that the expectation of the adults that you weren't gonna do good, so then you had to say to yourself, well no; no, no, no, no, we do good.  I knew music before I got here.  I could read before I got here, and so it just made you push a little harder because you figured out even in the sixth grade that you had to better than the best other kids in the class in order to be even considered good; not great, but just good.  To go through middle school, there were other--now, when we got to middle school, there was actually a track and a field. You know.  There were actually field sports that you could participate in.
Story_ID: 572685
Speaker 1: Then high school was a bit different.  High school, it was Eastern High School [Baltimore, Maryland].  There were only six, six of us there.  Six, it was an all-girls school.  There were only six of us there and I remember the counselor sitting down with myself, my mother [Ida Murphy Peters] and my father [Samuel Edward Smith], telling my parents to plan on my--your daughter not going to college.  She is not college material, she, you need to put her into a trade, something that she can do with her hands, that she's not college material.  I'm sitting here going like, huh?  And, you know, what a blow to your self-esteem and all of that.  I'm saying hm, I grew up in a house where college education is not an option.  Everybody is going to college, period. Even if you have to work your way through college, wash dishes through college, everybody is going to college.  By the time I got to high school, it was like, I'm going to the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin] or the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I'm going to Morgan State [Morgan College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], I'm going here, going here. And to sit and, you know, the people who you think would have a vested interest in your success are saying that they really don't believe that you have that kind of future at all.
Story_ID: 572686
Speaker 1: When you look back on it, do you think--I mean, I imagine when you were at the first school [Public School No. 104, Robert Brown Elliott School, Baltimore, Maryland], everybody knew you, I mean knew your family--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --background.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The Afro-American [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro American Newspapers], I mean, you couldn't get much more visible, I guess, than to have a family that's publishing the paper.  But at these integration times, did it feel strange being in a situation where people really didn't know or didn't really you know, care about that?
Speaker 2: I really, to tell you the truth, I really never was conscious of that.  Yes, you're in an environment where everybody knows you, but I didn't go through school saying I'm a Murphy, I'm a Murphy, I'm one of the Murphys.  Your first name, you know, Smith is your last name, and I actually never put my middle name back into my name until long after I was married, because I didn't want people to think I was looking for any special advantage, any special notice or any special treatment because my middle name is Murphy, so I was just known as Vashti Smith [HistoryMaker Bishop Vashti McKenzie].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there were several other, it was a Vashti Jew that wasn't related to us, and in high school [Eastern High School, Baltimore, Maryland] there was another Vashti whose last name I can't remember right now, so there were several other Vashtis, so without the middle name or the middle initial, in that environment nobody knew who you were, so it really didn't bother me.  You know, I wasn't looking for any advantage in that respect.
Speaker 1: Well, what I was basically trying to say--there's been studies that have shown where teachers' expectations of the students' success is based on who they think the students are sometimes, and certainly with the white neighborhood schools, they know who the parents of these kids are.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They know who they are.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, and they have--in some--it influences what they think, you know, your potential is and I just wondered if you, did it feel different being in that environment where people just have no idea.  They may not have known in the black school, all of them probably didn't, you know, because kids don't--
Speaker 2: I don't think I was thinking of it in that way.  The process was is that there were just racial tensions.
Speaker 1: And you could feel that they just didn't seem to care as much as--
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm. Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) as the other teachers did.
Story_ID: 572687
Speaker 1: You know, remember now, I'm an active kid so, you go out and try out for a play in the drama, you've been in plays all along, and you know you read that part and you ought to get that part.  You didn't get that part.  They got that part, and we're all sitting in the audition, everybody going huh?  And you know the reason why.  You can't because, you know the play, 'Our Town' [Thornton Wilder].  Well, you can't have a black girl be the girl in 'Our Town' because it's the white guy that's got to be in love with--and so you can have two white kids, you know, being the stars in it, but you certainly can't have one of the stars being black.  That's not going to work out, see.  So, it's just this racial tension, so even though, even though you're good you can't be there, because these circumstances etched you out, so in my senior year [at Eastern High School, Baltimore, Maryland] I got a, I won a scholarship to the Blair Summer School of Journalism [Blair Summer School for Journalism, Blairstown, New Jersey] and what Blair does is it takes high school students who are interested in journalism and you spend the whole summer in New Jersey taking, essentially, like a freshman course in journalism, writing, feature writing, news writing.  We had press conferences every night.  People came from New York [New York], reporters from The New York Times, politicians, community leaders, and we had to conduct a real press conference.
Story_ID: 572688
Speaker 1: I want to go back to middle school [Garrison Junior High School; Garrison Middle School, Baltimore, Maryland] before we get you out of high school [Eastern High School, Baltimore, Maryland] (laughter) but are they--
Speaker 2: Are we going too fast (laughter) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are they, when they had this conference with your parents [Ida Murphy Peters and Samuel Edward Smith]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --had your grades dropped, or was that the--
Speaker 2: I was a B student.  I wasn't an A student.  I was a B student.  I didn't get to be an A student until I got to college [Morgan College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] (laughter). But I was a B student (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What would prompt them to actually, well, you know, we have like maybe in fifteen hundred interviews, maybe a thousand bad counselor stories from school (laughter) where people go to the counselor and counselor tells them they're not supposed to go to college and that sort of thing.  Seems like that's the general rule for those days, but I just wondered if it was something that--
Speaker 2: I think by the junior year I stopped trying.  Writing for the school newspaper and, no, you can't write the school newspaper.  You try out for the drama, no, you can't do that.  You keep trying, you keep trying, it doesn't work.  The only thing that works are in those areas where they expect you to be in.  So, I sang in the choir, I ran track.  Those are areas where you were expected to be.  The other areas where you weren't expected to be, where you had an interest in, it was just very tough.  So I just stopped trying.
Speaker 1: Had you, were there enough activities, say, at church [St. James Episcopal Church, Baltimore, Maryland] to kind of give you recognition for, you know, as a teenager?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  You know, I sang in the church choir too.  I sang in the choir at school.  But, by that time, I was writing for the family newspaper.  I started a--Moses Newsome was the editor at the time and he asked me would I write a teen column, so I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, here's a situation where they won't let you write for the school newspaper, but you can write for the African American [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers].
Speaker 2: Right.  And I got paid for it.  That was my, you know, most kids had an after school job.  That was my after school job.  I got paid twenty-five dollars a week.  That twenty-five dollars, boy I did a whole lot of things, but I was a paid journalist at sixteen, and enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 572689
Speaker 1: Now, were you, I suppose in a news family, you must have been fairly cognizant of the political dynamics of the Civil Rights Movement and what was going on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --in the nation as well as in Baltimore [Maryland], I guess, probably more so than most people, I would think. Than most kids.
Speaker 2: And, I think it's reflected in, in my writing.  My column was called All About You and Others [ph.], and I wrote about your typical teen scene, who was doing what, where they were going, the parties or whatever, and other activities.  By the time I got to college, it really became political and social commentary. Nineteen sixty-eight [1968]--1966, '67 [1967], '68 [1968], were pretty volatile times as far as civil rights.  I was at Morgan State University [Morgan College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and we shut down the university. Sat in and did all that kind of stuff (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, and I don't wanna get you there before I ask this question. I just want to know if when you were growing up, did you get a chance to meet some of the civil rights figures--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --as a result of being part of the paper [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers]?
Speaker 2: Oh, won- being at my [maternal] grandfather's [Carl J. Murphy] house was just, because we were at my grandfather's house all the time; I mean, Sunday afternoon dinners, every holiday was at my grandfather's house.  But, anybody who was anybody was coming through town came to my grandfather's house, to Morgan Park [Baltimore, Maryland].  He would have a reception or invite them out to dinner.  You have to understand, many times blacks didn't have hotels to stay in, so they stayed in people's homes.  So, they would stay at my grandfather's house.  I met Marian Anderson, I met Althea Gibson, Martin King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], you know, when he came--Jr.--when he first came through and it was just astounding. Now when you're young you don't realize the magnitude of, you know, it's just another person that your grandparents say, "Now, shake hands, say hello.  Tell them your name," you know, "what you do" you know, that kind of thing, and you go, another thing, not another event.  But then when you really get to know who they are, I mean like Thurgood Marshall, when I was at Blair [Blair Summer School for Journalism, Blairstown, New Jersey], we read Thurgood Marshall's book, and so when he came to my grandfather's house, I was like, "That's Thurgood Marshall.  I read his book."  My grandmother [Vashti Turley Murphy] says, "Go shake his hand, tell him that you read the book and tell him what you think of the book."  You know, and I was just like, star struck.  It was an awesome, awesome experience.
Speaker 1: Hm, that's a pretty, from what I understand, that was a pretty, I mean Thurgood Marshall had strong ties to Baltimore through Clarence Mitchell [Clarence M. Mitchell, Jr.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) University of Maryland law school [University of Maryland School of Law; University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law, Baltimore, Maryland], and all of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, with Clarence Mitchell, and your grandfather--that's really quite a, that's quite an experience, growing up to meet all the heroes.
Story_ID: 572690
Speaker 1: Yes, and sometimes you don't--at the time, you didn't understand when the March on Washington came, I was in camp, summer camp, I went to summer camp every summer.  You know, summer camp, and my mother [Ida Murphy Peters] calls and the counselor comes to get me and tells me, "You're leaving camp."  I said, "Where are we going?"  "Your parents are coming to get you," and so my parents came to get me.  I said, "Why are we leaving camp?" Swimming, hiking, why are we leaving this place?  I mean, we had two more weeks here.  "No, you're coming home.  We've got to go to Washington [D.C.]."  "Why are we going to Washington?"  "Because Martin King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is leading a March on Washington, and we're going," you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was your impression of the march?
Speaker 1: Once I got there, I thought it was great, but on the trip there, I couldn't understand why I was leaving the swimming, the hiking, and all the fun at camp, and how come I'm the only one that has to leave camp and all those other kids get to stay.  We stayed at the Willard Hotel [Willard InterContinental, Washington, D.C.].  My mother's sisters, they all rented a huge suite, and we all stayed in the various suites together and we marched and, of course, once they explained it all to me, it was really, really great, so, it was hot, it was sunny, and we went to the Washington Monument [Washington, D.C.], being a very busy, interested and active child.  Of course, I didn't stay with the family group.  I'm exploring.  I'm out exploring and I, my poster was about education in schools.  I carried a poster, and when it came to march, if you look very closely in the pictures, you'll see a pair of anklets about three rows back, and that's me.  You know, my brother [Carl Smith] would say I always have, you know, I always go to the head of the line but I mean, we're all standing there and say it's time to march, let's go.  So, I picked up my poster and I went and, of course, my mother had to retrieve me.  "You're not supposed to be behind--you're supposed to be over here with the family," you know, whatever.  But, it was a great day and I recall, you know, there was a huge tree when you're facing the steps of the Lincoln Memorial [Washington, D.C.], a huge tree on the left side and that's where my family camped out, and when anybody was coming by, there's Sammy Davis, Jr. and I would run to the steps and try to reach out and touch him, and then there's [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, and you'd run to the steps, and then I would come back and tell everybody what I saw, you know, because by that time they got tired.  In the afternoon, everybody's standing and walking.  But it was a great day, it was a great day.
Speaker 2: What's the most memorable part of that day?  Is there anything stand (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Actually, it wasn't the speech.  I didn't hear the speech, really, until after the March on Washington because there was so much going on.  People were talking.  They were just talking, but it just looked like a family reunion.  I mean, like everybody was there, I mean everybody was there; not just the stars and all the important people, but everybody was there.  There were old people, young people, and we were all together.  I mean, you're talking about united in unity?  It was really great.  It was really great.
Story_ID: 572691
Speaker 1: In high school, now, you went to Eastern High School [Baltimore, Maryland], it was an all-girls--
Speaker 2: All-girls (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) school? Do you all have a prom and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Yes, you do (laughter).  It runs just like a school except you don't have a football team, you know, you had girls basketball, girls softball, baseball, those kinds of events, but the boys high school is located right across the street, so we didn't miss anything (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Take more than a street, I guess, to separate--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.  Well, that was a time in public education where they believed that girls and boys ought to be separated in the education process.  I don't know, I don't remember what the reason is behind it, but you had Poly [Baltimore Polytechnic Institute, Baltimore, Maryland] and Western [Western High School, Baltimore, Maryland] on the west side, and you had the City high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland] and Eastern School on the east side of town.
Speaker 1: These aren't all the high schools in Baltimore [Maryland], were they?
Speaker 2: No, those were just those two.  Douglass [Frederick Douglass High School, Baltimore, Maryland], of course, was still Douglass, coed.  Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Baltimore, Maryland] was still coed.  Patterson High School [Baltimore, Maryland], those were all coed schools.  I guess you would call them today magnet schools, magnet schools.  City high school was a college prep high school, Poly was polytechnic school of engineering, so they were preparing engineers over there.  Western teachers, you know, teachers, Eastern High School, teachers.  Teachers and it was a business track.
Story_ID: 572692
Speaker 1: Now, did you get the idea in high school that the--what did you, what sense did you get about what women can actually do in terms of occupation and what did you want to be?
Speaker 2: I didn't get a sense of what women could do from high school [Eastern High School, Baltimore, Maryland].  I got that more from my family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And more of that as growing up.  There was never a no.  Do you understand what I'm saying?  It's sort of like, you know, I'd really like to explore this.  Okay.  Go.
Speaker 1: Well what about--I guess what I'm asking is did the high school promote women the same way your family did?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  This is, you're talking about the early '60s [1960s], mid-'60s [1960s] in high school and that was very typical.  Women went to college in the early '60s [1960s] to get a husband.  You know, the goal was to graduate and be married in your fourth year, because men would go to college to get a career.  Women would go to college to have a career until they got married, or to be educated so that you'll be an educated wife of the husband that's matriculating with you.  So, in high school, women were prepared for mainly women's jobs.  You were gonna be a secretary.  You were gonna be a teacher.  There was no discussion about being an engineer, or being a doctor or a lawyer in all of that.  You were prepared for women's professions.  In high school, I fell in love with history in junior high school [Garrison Junior High School; Garrison Middle School, Baltimore, Maryland].  Loved history.  Went to college to be a history major.  To be a history major.
Speaker 1: Did you have a particular teacher in high school or junior high that really focused you in on that?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I cannot remember her name, and she just made history come alive.  It was more than just dates and places and she really made it come alive, and coming from a family that, you know, we all knew our history and heritage all along, it just opened a new door for me, and I wanted to go to school.  I wanted to go to college and major in history to research and write history, but they were not really, you're talking about in the early '60s [1960s], they really were not looking at women to be history researchers.  Dr. Benjamin Quarles [Benjamin A. Quarles], noted historian at Morgan State [Morgan College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], was the one I wanted to study under, and so I went to Morgan to study under him.  In my first semester at Morgan, he went on sabbatical.
Story_ID: 572693
Speaker 1: Now, what year did you graduate from high school [Eastern High School, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-five.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so you went to Morgan State [Morgan College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], you know, hoping to be taught by Benjamin Quarles [Benjamin A. Quarles], Dr. Benjamin Quarles, and he went on sabbatical.
Speaker 2: Yes.  He went on sabbatical.  Absolutely.  Totally disappointed but I was undaunted.  I was still excited about history.  I wanted to spend some time in African American history.  This is before there was an African American studies department.  There was just the history department and maybe there had been one course somewhere on African American history and that would be about it.  The person who substituted or came to teach really was not looking for a woman to be in class.  I recall in my very first history class, the teacher asking the students who they were and where they came from and what their desires were, and there were six guys in the class and I was the seventh student, and I was the only woman in the class, and I, you know, who I am, I want to research and write about history, and the instructor says, "You want to teach?"  I said, "No.  I want to research and write about history."  "You want to teach."  "No.  I want to research and write about history."  I mean this, you know, this went on. "Well.  There were no women researchers," and you know, he just went on this tirade, you know, and the guys were all laughing and I'm looking at them--I mean, he goes on this tirade about what women can and what women cannot do and so forth and so on, and I'm looking at these guys and I say, "And you're my friends.  We had other classes together and you think this is funny?"  Of course, I dropped the course.  I said I'm not gonna sit here all semester--
Speaker 1: Now, now this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and go through this.
Speaker 1: What sounds incredible about this to most people who probably listen to this is that there were seven people in my freshman history class.  Was this--
Speaker 2: It was African American history.  People--it was just--
Speaker 1: So it just wasn't--
Speaker 2: This wasn't world history or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In an all-black--an African American school [HBCU]; I mean.
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: So an African American history class in an African American school, you had seven people.  I mean, first is who would be in American, how many would be in American history?  What size class?
Speaker 2: Oh, you're talking about twenty, thirty students or more, easily, easily.
Speaker 1: So there's no real fervor for Black History Month [Negro History Week; Black History Month] at a black school.
Speaker 2: Not at that time, not at that time.  But after 1968, different.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have Roland McConnell [HistoryMaker Roland C. McConnell]? Roland McConnell?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: I know he was, we interviewed him at Baltimore [Maryland].  He was, he is professor emeritus at Morgan State in history, and--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  He's probably after my time (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, he's retired--
Speaker 2: He was there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) he's way retired.  I mean, he was there then.
Speaker 2: I do not even remember the teacher's name.  I remember the experience and remember that, you know, of course my mother [Ida Murphy Peters] said, "You should have said something to the dean," or whatever.  I said uh-huh, um-hm.  I didn't have time for that.  You have to understand that as I'm coming out of high school, coming out of a high school experience where I thought people were just, you know, not investing in you and not really caring and I chose to go to Morgan.  I said I'm going to Morgan because I wanted to be in an environment where I thought it was supportive and yet, I'd come sit in a class and I said, no, no, no, no.  I'm not doing this no more (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I just won- I just wondered in those days, have you 'Homespun Heroines' ['Homespun Heroines and Other Women of Distinction'] by Hallie Q. Brown [Hallie Quinn Brown]?
Speaker 2: No.  Remember now, black history wasn't taught in high school, so all I knew about black history was what Dr. Quarles wrote, and I've heard him give his presentations.  You know, he was writing his book and, you know, wow, this is what I want to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, in terms of black history in those days, we know that in Baltimore people knew about Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] and Frederick Douglass, because the high school was named after him at least, but was the name Harriet Tubman or Sojourner Truth or Mary Church Terrell known generally by people or--
Speaker 2: It depends on where you went to school.  Now, those names we heard when I was at Robert Brown Elliott School No. 104 [Public School No. 104, Robert Brown Elliott School, Baltimore, Maryland].  Then it was Negro History Week, and there would be pictures on the walls and then, my--of course my grandparents [Vashti Turley Murphy and Carl J. Murphy] and my parents [Ida Murphy Peters and Samuel Edward Smith] kept names in front of us, because they encountered all these people in moving around, and writing about them in, you know, in the burgeoning Civil Rights Movement.  All of these people and names were there, so we knew them by association, or either reading about them in the Afro [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers] or meeting or encountering them as you go along, not from school studies.  Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I guess because, well, so did you stay in history at Morgan?
Speaker 2: I stayed in history. I stayed--and minored in journalism.  I think at the time I was being adolescent, you know being adolescent meaning that I had been writing since, I had been writing professionally since I was sixteen.  It's a family newspaper.  I grew up with writers and editors and so, don't make the assumption that I'm gonna be a writer, when I have an interest in history.  Well, of course, you know, I'm gonna be writing history (laughter) so, it's similar to say the subject matter is just different, so I think at that point, you know, just don't make the assumption I'm going to be a writer, and so I stayed with history while I was at Morgan.
Story_ID: 572694
Speaker 1: Now, you were telling us before about this journalism summer experience, summer experience you had, but that was after your--when did that take place, was that your freshman year or--
Speaker 2: That was right after high school [Eastern High School, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay. Right after high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You spend the summer at Blair School of Journalism [Blair Summer School for Journalism].  It was in Blairstown, New Jersey.  It was at a private school, I guess during the regular year.  It was a private school, but we, we spent the summer there.  It was an extraordinary experience.  It gave me an opportunity to stretch out in some writing skills. In writing skills. Sometimes you think that because you write for the family newspaper [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers], people just tolerate you because you're a family member, and then when you get out in the broader community and then you get stretched in your skills, your newswriting, feature writing, which was my forte in feature writing, not just the hard news.  I wasn't just interested in when it happened and how it happened, I was interested in the people and, you know, all the other strings that lead up to things that happened, so I found that my forte really is feature writing, people writing.  The human interest.  That was really my forte.  And then, when you stretch out on that and people say, well, you know, this is really good and you go like, oh, okay.  So, it's not just because you're a family member.  You may have something else going on here.  It was a good maturing process.  We were students from all over the United States, black, white, Asian, Hispanic, I mean we were all there from many different cultures in a very strict program.  I mean, you had to deliver a newspaper every day.  You had to do a daily newspaper every day.  Your news conference you had to do every day.  You had to prep for it.  You had to read for it.  You had to stand up and say who you are, "I'm Vashti McKenzie [HistoryMaker Bishop Vashti McKenzie] from Baltimore, Maryland," and so forth and so on, and you had to, you know, do the whole nine yards and write your interviews and go to class.  We had history class, we had English 101, we had, you know, all these classes that you would take in a regular freshman year in college, and you had to produce, so it was a very stretching and growing environment, and race had nothing to do with it, which was wonderful, and gender had nothing to do with it.  It didn't matter whether you were male or female.  What really mattered is whether you could produce, whether you could write.  That was a wonderful summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So that's the summer of '65 [1965].
Story_ID: 572695
Speaker 1: Did you become a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] at Morgan [Morgan College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't become a Delta until I got to grad school.  I was grown.  Out of college (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Okay.  So did you participate in campus activities?
Speaker 2: I wrote for the newspaper and I was editor of the poetry journal, which was a wonderful experience as well, too.
Speaker 1: And you said you became an A student at Morgan?
Speaker 2: No, I was still a B student.  I was still a B student.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to the--I graduated from the University of Maryland, College Park [Maryland], and that's when I became the A student.  I figured it out.  It took me awhile.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you got married at Morgan State?
Speaker 2: I got married at Morgan State.
Speaker 1: Were you a junior?
Speaker 2: I was in my junior year, met my husband, he was playing, Stan [Stan McKenzie] was playing NBA ball [National Basketball Association].  He was a rookie for the Baltimore Bullets at the time and we met and fell in love and got married and rode off into the sunset.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now he was, traded to Phoenix [Phoenix Suns] or something?
Speaker 2: It was an expansion draft, right.  The expansion draft, the teams could only protect so many players and then the others would go in expansion draft and he was drafted by Phoenix.
Speaker 1: Now did you have second thoughts about getting married, only because I think you said before that the expectation that women go to college just to get married--I know that wasn't on your mind, to get married in college--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --and then here you are, you're married in college (laughter) so--
Speaker 2: So you want to say go figure. You know, no, I wasn't afraid to get married that early, unh-uh, no, I grew up with athletes all my life.  My brother [Carl Smith] played football and my dad [Samuel Edward Smith] ran track, so I kind of understood athletes, which is a little bit different from other people who were outside of the athletic world, understand athletes and their particulars and so forth, and so when my husband asked me to marry him, that was an automatic yes when he got drafted.  I knew I was going with him; of course, you know the better part about it would have been to stay one more year, complete your college education, then join your husband.  No (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: People who love each other stick together.  So--
Speaker 1: Now, he was playing for Baltimore, the Baltimore Bullets in '68 [1968], was it?  When you all got married?
Speaker 2: In '68 [1968], right.
Speaker 1: Correct me if I'm wrong, but I think they had an Earl Monroe that year?
Speaker 2: Earl Monroe (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he was--
Speaker 2: Gus Johnson.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Earl Monroe, Gus Johnson.  This is a good team.
Speaker 2: It's a good team (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jack Marin.  The big guy from Louisville [Kentucky], what's his name?  The big center.  Wait a minute, you may not--
Speaker 2: You talking about, I know who you're talking about, now I can't recall his name.
Speaker 1: Wes Unseld.
Speaker 2: Wes Unseld. He still lives, he and Connie [Connie Unseld] still live in Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yes, it was a good team.  It was a good team.  And Gene Shue was the coach and it was really, it was a, he coached hard but he--it was a family team.  It really was a family.  He really cared for the guys, stretched them, you know, really got them, you know, really got them going, so when we left Baltimore we were like, (makes sound) leave this family.
Speaker 1: He has a good team, too, going to the playoffs every year, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, very good team.
Speaker 1: Fun team to watch play, too.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 572696
Speaker 1: So he was drafted by the, an expansion draft of the Phoenix Suns.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so you have to all of a sudden leave what you're familiar with here in Baltimore [Maryland] and go to Phoenix [Arizona].  So, how did you like that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Three thousand miles away.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was a stretching and growing experience.  You have to remember the Vietnam War was going on and for young men, if you weren't in school, you were draft eligible.  So my husband [Stan McKenzie] had to go into the National Guard.  He had to go really in the [U.S.] Army.  He was drafted.
Speaker 1: So he was drafted by the--
Speaker 2: He had to go, he had to go.  And he went to boot camp.
Speaker 1: How soon after he was drafted by Phoenix Suns did he have to go--
Speaker 2: No, no.  It was in his first year, while he was at Baltimore [Baltimore Bullets] and whatever happened is that he had to go to boot camp as soon as the season was over.  The season was over.  He went into boot camp, went through boot camp, went into the National Guard, and his unit did go overseas.  His unit did go to Vietnam.  And, he went into the National Guard.  He had to serve in the National Guard for eight years or whatever, whatever the amount of time that--
Speaker 1: So, he didn't have to go to Vietnam.
Speaker 2: No, he didn't have to go.
Speaker 1: If he had stayed, he would have--
Speaker 2: He would have gone, he would have gone.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We got married in August, but he came right out of boot camp or wherever else he went after boot camp, and then we were married.  We were married on one day.  The next day we flew to Phoenix, and he put me in a hotel room and went to training camp for three weeks, and in three weeks I had to find a place to live, move everything from Baltimore to Phoenix and have house set up in three weeks, so for a twenty-one year old person that was a whole lot to do in a little bit of time.  Didn't know anybody in town.  The only person I knew was the team doctor and the scout.  Let's see, the scout was the one that took me all over Phoenix, and we looked at places to live.  Remember now, I'm an East Coast girl, so I'm out in the desert with no grass, no trees, you know, desert sand, palm trees, and it was excruciatingly hot.  But it was a new culture and a new world to get to know.
Speaker 1: Now, was there a black community in Phoenix?
Speaker 2: It took us awhile.  It took us about a month to find it because, of course, when we, you know, you can go where the team--this is the neighborhood you ought to live in.  You know, this is, well my wife lives here.  Well, we got another team member who lives over here, you know, the Van Arsdales live on this side of town, you know, so you may want to look over this.  We went to look where they took us.  They didn't take us to the black community.  We lived in the Camelback area of Phoenix.  We could see Camelback Mountain from where we are.  It's kind of halfway, it's the suburbs of Phoenix on the way to Scottsdale, Arizona.  We lived around 144th [Street], 148th Street and out in the desert.  So, when he came back from training camp, that's when we started looking.  You know, we started driving around ourselves and finally we crossed the river and ta-da.  There, everybody--we're like, there you are.  We knew you were here.  You know, you gotta get your hair cut.  Gotta get your hair done.  You know.
Speaker 1: Now, these are important points, because in those days, I mean, this was, black people actually preferred to have their hair cut by black barbers, and sometimes you have no choice, at least certain times, anyway.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: There's a, you know.
Speaker 2: Plus, it was your, it's talking about your community, the familiarity of the community.  There are certain things you don't have to explain.  There are certain expectations and there were some really good people in Phoenix that kind of adopted us because we were still fairly young.  My husband was in the early twenties, I'm just twenty-one, and we met some really great people who just kind of grabbed us and pulled us into, you know, pulled us into the black cultural life of Phoenix.  It was good.
Story_ID: 572697
Speaker 1: So, how long did you stay in Phoenix [Arizona] and what did you do when you were--while there?
Speaker 2: Well, we were there, I think, for two years, maybe two and a half or two years, and I did the next best thing that a young journalist does.  I got a job (laughter) at the newspaper.  I wrote a year for The Arizona Republic, which was really a unique experience.  I was the first, I was the second woman hired for city desk, to be in the city room.  I was really hoping to be hired to go into the feature section, because my for- I figured my forte is features rather than hard news, but they were looking for a city reporter, and my mother [Ida Murphy Peters] shipped out my scrapbook--of course, you know mothers keep everything--my scrapbook of all the stories that I had written since sixteen, and I had an interview with the editor and he looked at my scrapbook and hired me immediately.  I went wow.  This is something else.  So, I was sent on what they call the chicken and pea circuit where you have to cover the banquets and the luncheons and so forth and so on, but because my forte is feature writing, all of that feature writing stuff jumps into the hard news.  I just couldn't write about it that he went and this person spoke and whatever; I had to write it in my own way.  They said it takes you a year to earn a byline.  I think I earned it in ninety days.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It didn't take as long as they expected, and then eventually that's what I was doing in the city room.  I was writing feature stories.  I was writing feature stories.  The biggest story that I did at the time was on, you know, the War on Poverty.  The sent me down, of course, to the poor section of Phoenix to write the stories and it was a big feature; I mean, like a byline, you know, you get advertised.  Vashti McKenzie [HistoryMaker Bishop Vashti McKenzie] has a feature story coming out in the Sunday newspaper with huge pictures and color and all of that, so, it was really, you know, that's what I did.  I wrote, and then the second year in Phoenix, my career and my husband's [Stan McKenzie] career were just bouncing on each other.  He was getting more play time and he was doing well in Phoenix [Phoenix Suns], and you just can't tell your husband, you know, "I can't pick you up from the airport when the team comes in town because I'm on a deadline" (laughter).  "I'm going to be late to the game, but I'll be there.  I'll be there.  The editor made some changes to the story and I really have to finish." Got to be ready for a morning newspaper, so afternoons you're busy trying to get, you know, trying to get the editor to write off on your story so you can go home, and you produce the story every day; you know, every day you had a story.  So, that really, that wasn't working out.  It wasn't working out.  He's on the road for two weeks playing on the East Coast, comes home, and you know, "See ya, I'm going to work."  "I haven't seen you for two weeks."  "Yeah, I haven't seen you too, but I got a job and I gotta go to work." So that didn't work out so I had to leave that job.
Story_ID: 572698
Speaker 1: And because I'm a busy, active person interested in a whole lot of things, I'm just not your housewife type; in other words, I'm, you know, my floors are clean, the house is wonderful, but there's more to life than clean, waxed floors and I wanted to find out, so I did modeling.  That's what I did.  I was shopping one day at Diamond's department store [Phoenix, Arizona], and a lady stopped me and asked me did I model.  I said, yes, I did, because I did back in Baltimore [Maryland], you know the little modeling shows that you have, and I said yes.  So she said, "Would you like to model for us?"  I said, "Okay.  Sure."  And she said, "Come back for an interview."  So, I went in, sat down for an interview and she said, "Phoenix [Arizona] is a modeling town.  You can't model without an agency.  Here's the card, here's the person that you talk to."  So, I went to the agency, they signed me up.  I had to take all--get all these pictures taken and so here I am.  That's what I did, I modeled, fashion shows, photography, the whole nine yards.  So, it was something that I could pick and choose.  In other words like, "Vashti [HistoryMaker Bishop Vashti McKenzie], can you do this show?"  "No can do.  The team's [Phoenix Suns] in town."  Works out good.  "Can you do a show tonight?"  "Nope.  Team's in town."  "Can you do," you know, they had, what they call a lunchroom show where the ladies would come and have lunch and then you would just, you know, "Can you do that day?"  "Nope.  Plane's landing.  Gotta pick up my husband [Stan McKenzie]."  It became something that I could pick up and put down, pick up and put down.  Work as much as I wanted, or as less as I wanted, and our careers were not bumping and I could be there for him and support him.
Story_ID: 572699
Speaker 1: Phoenix [Arizona], just thinking about Phoenix in the '60s [1960s], it seems to me it was probably a fairly conservative town, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very much so.  Barry Goldwater.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Barry Goldwater, right?  He was a candidate for president there in '64 [1964] and I don't know, it just seems, isn't it still the only state that hasn't ratified the Martin Luther King holiday [Martin Luther King, Jr. Day]?
Speaker 2: I remember, yeah.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It's kind of a conservative place.  Did you find it, you know, super conservative when you were there?
Speaker 2: Sometimes when I think the only thing that really bothered me is that we were being the first experience for a lot of other people who otherwise would not have encountered.  There were a lot of black guys on the team [Phoenix Suns].  They still were not playing five black guys at the same time.  Remember, you could only have like two black guys on the court or three black guys, and then if by accident, somehow there were five black guys on the court, you know, they'd call timeout and take somebody out because you just couldn't have it.  That was the time.  That was--
Speaker 1: This is actually--that was the policy, or that was the policy--
Speaker 2: Or just let's say some unspoken policy.  It was nothing that was codified or written down.
Speaker 1: I mean, you watch these games on television and sometimes you suspect a certain team has that, you know, I know we've talked to people in Kentucky that were there when Adolph Rupp was there [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky], you know, and it was confirmed exactly what you thought was going on on television, that was going on.  But that's what was going on--
Speaker 2: That, that was going on.
Speaker 1: --in Phoenix (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, at that time, like I said we lived in Camelback Mountain area, and I remember one night there was a black couple that lived a couple of blocks beyond us, closest to Scottsdale [Arizona] and the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] burned a cross on their front yard, and so I'm thinking it's a matter of time (laughter) they're coming this way; you know, they're going to come in our direction and my husband [Stan McKenzie] was on the road and I called him and I said, you know, and he pauses and says, "And what do you want me to do about it?"  And I'm like, he's in Atlanta [Georgia].  There isn't a thing he can do about it.  There's not a thing he can do about it.  And, I said, "Well, have a good night, you know, love you, hug you, kiss you, pray for me.  If anything happens I'll give you a call."  And that's when, you know, that's one of those defining moments where you know that, you know, when he's away you're gonna have to take care of yourself.  You're going to have to take of yourself.
Story_ID: 572700
Speaker 1: So, you were there another year and a half after you worked for The Arizona Republic.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, how did you come back to Baltimore [Maryland]?  What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, he [McKenzie's husband, Stan McKenzie] goes to Portland [Oregon] and he plays for Portland [Portland Trail Blazers], and then he plays for Houston [Houston Rockets].  He had knee surgery and he played one more year after that.
Speaker 1: So, did you go with him to Portland and Houston [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Um-hm.  Oh, yeah.  You know, wherever thou goeth, I goeth with you.  So, wherever he went, I went.  But I had a career that I could pick up and put down.  So, when we went to Portland, I did the same things that I did in Phoenix [Arizona].  I wrote, I wrote a series of articles for the Portland newspaper, The Oregonian.  The Oregonian was the name of the paper, on everything you wanted to know about basketball but were afraid to ask, because they were having a problem with women understanding basketball, so I said okay.  And I wrote, and so I did stuff like that and I modeled.  I modeled for Jantzen [Jantzen Knitting Mills; Jantzen Apparel, LLC] and all the companies that are up there, and had a fairly nice career doing that; something I could pick up and put down.  When he went to Phoenix, I modeled again.  I didn't write in Phoenix, but I did model when I was in Phoenix and I became one of the top ten models in Houston, Texas.  So, I'm, you know, all of that works.  Our careers were not butting and I could be there to support him and that worked out fine.  It's from Phoenix that we got back to Baltimore.  My husband decided to retire and we weren't sure what we were gonna do, because we had really put down roots in Portland.  We had really settled down.  We were a part of, you know, the Portland community network.  We had a home church there, families that we became very close to, our oldest child's godfather, godmother were in Portland, and so we were trying to decide if we were gonna go back to Portland, back to our home, which we didn't sell and we still had the house, or my husband didn't want to go to Florida because that's where he's from, or go to Baltimore, so we were just really, just kind of in limbo and my dad [Samuel Edward Smith] called and says, "Why don't you come home for Thanksgiving until you figure out what you wanna do." And we came home for Thanksgiving and Thanksgiving became Christmas and we decided to stay.  You know, we came home and went (makes sound) right back into our friends, our family, and all of that, and decided to stay.
Story_ID: 572701
Speaker 1: So, did you go back to Morgan State [Morgan College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] or no?
Speaker 2: No. Unh-uh, unh-uh (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Finished? So you finished at--
Speaker 2: I--well--went back, pregnant with our first child [Jon-Mikael McKenzie], and so I'm, you know, I'm--pregnancy and being a mother--and I'm writing for the family newspaper [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers].  I started a new column called The McKenzie Report, and I'm back writing again.
Speaker 1: What year is this?
Speaker 2: This is '74 [1974], '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you know, I'm writing and having babies (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. Writing a column. And so, how long was it before you got back to school and all that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In '76 [1976] I started taking classes at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland].  I was writing and met Lee Guber and Shelly Gross.  Lee Guber and Shelly Gross are men who developed the theater in the round; Westbury theater [Westbury Music Fair; NYCB Theatre at Westbury] in Westbury, New York; Painters Mill [Painters Mill Music Fair] in Baltimore [Owings Mills, Maryland]; Shady Grove [Shady Grove Music Fair] in Washington, D.C. [Gaithersburg, Maryland].  They were getting ready to bring a whole lot of African American acts and singers and they needed someone who knew the African American press.  I met them when I went to review 'The Joan Rivers Show' that they brought to Painters Mill.  I was very pregnant, she had just written a book about women and pregnancy, (background noise) a humorous book about women and pregnancy and I'm sitting in the audience very pregnant, you know, covering the show and she singles me out, you know, so we have a little repartee back and forth laughing about, you know, the pregnancy process, and they liked what I wrote about it and so they hired me to be a media director.  I didn't know anything about public relations and all of that, only what I've learned from my mother [Ida Murphy Peters], and, you know, there are some things that you suck in by osmosis and I started taking courses at Maryland to get some basics about public relations and media relations so I could have that information under my belt.
Story_ID: 572702
Speaker 1: We left you at Sh- the Shady Grove Music Theater [Shady Grove Music Fair, Gaithersburg, Maryland] working for them.
Speaker 2: Yes, so I was in the world of public relations and media relations and because I grew up in the area with family newspaper and all the connections, I was familiar with the press in the Baltimore [Maryland]/Washington [D.C.] area and what I learned from my mother [Ida Murphy Peters] is a lot about advertising and promotion.  Just because you have a show, people are just not gonna come just because they hear about it.  You have to create the want, the need, and the desire, so there was a very learning time in pulling all of that together.  That's how I got to the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland].  They had the courses that were offered on the weekend, actually, so that I could, you know, work during the week and then take a course on Friday night and Saturday morning and pick it up.  The counselor stopped me one day and said, "You know, you've got about fifteen credits here," (laughter).  "You gonna turn this into a degree?" And I said, "Well, I've had three years at Morgan [Morgan College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]," so they sent for my transcript, and so, hey, fifteen more credits and, you know, take a couple of courses that Maryland requires you to take and you're in.  And so I did.  I, you know, rather than continue doing the weekend classes, which could take a long time, I decided to jump in and become a full time student, and so I did, and a year later I graduated.  This had to be '76 [1976] or '77 [1977], around there, between '76 [1976] and '77 [1977] I hadn't thought about these dates in a very long time. And graduated with my degree, and that's where, like I said, I finally figured out as I constantly tell my children, once you figure out how to make A's, that's the same pattern you repeat in every course.  And, I finally figured it out.
Story_ID: 572703
Speaker 1: How do you make A's?  For those youth of the future who watch this video, how do you make A's?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, for me, you know, for me.  It was a part of that research, my love of research.  You read more than is required, you write more than is required, and you establish a track record of excellence, and once you do that, then the teacher knows that you're a serious student.  Even if you should blow a quiz, the teacher will come to you and say, "You don't usually blow quizzes, what happened?"  Because they know you're a serious student.  So, the teacher says, "I want you to take three books and I want you to write a paper," but I'd find three other books that would be just as good and include other things.  You know, you're always adding a little bit more, showing the teacher that I'm just not trying just to get the grade, but I'm really interested in the subject.  I really want to learn what you're offering, and once--and you establish--you can't come in and make Ds half of the semester, and all of a sudden wake up and start making A's.  It doesn't happen.  You have to establish a track record of excellence.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's good.  That--
Speaker 2: That worked for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And be in communication with your teacher; talk to your teacher.  I'm at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland]. I'm in a class. There are 220 people here.
Speaker 1: So did you sit in the back?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Absolutely.  I had no qualms with sitting in the back.  To the teacher, I was just a social security number, but if I want that teacher, especially when I came out, I wanted to be sure I get a good grade, I don't want to be a duty bound grade student, you know.  This teacher never gives out A's.  You know, I'm gonna work for this A.  So, you know, I'm taking a class and this teacher doesn't give A's.  Then, on the first day of class I go to that teacher and say, "What do I need to do to get an A out of your class?"  "Well, you need to do this, this, and this."  "Okay.  I'm gonna go home and do that.  And if I do that, I'm gonna expect my A."  And the teacher knows I'm interested in the subject, I wanna get what you got. And I'm not--I don't wanna be mediocre in the process.  It worked.
Story_ID: 572704
Speaker 1: So, you graduated in '76 [1976] in--with a degree in--
Speaker 2: Actually it was a Bachelor of General Studies, because I had all of this other stuff that I had. Courses in journalism and human development, really.  I don't even think they have a general studies degree anymore, but I think it's a B.S. degree, what it is now.  My focus was, of course, in journalism and human studies, human development, and I went on to start a master's [degree] in the department of education in human development.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so did that take up most of your time?  Did you do that right after you graduated [from the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I kept right on going.  I mean, it's best to keep right on going. If you stop, something else will happen in the case.  I was still working.  You know, I graduated but see, you know master's classes are not like you're at school every other day.  When you're a full time student, your classes are in the morning and you go do something in the afternoon.  I graduated, got my undergraduate degree, and I think my son [Jon-Mikael McKenzie] was about a year and a half, two years old, and going to school and having small people worked for me, because you go to a class for an hour or an hour and a half or two hours and then you're back home with your, you know, I'm back home with my son, so that worked.  You know, that was a pretty good relationship in having small children and going to school.  When I graduated, well, now I'm going to have to contribute to the family finances here because family finances just, you know, pay tuition and bought books and pay the babysitter so I can go to class every other day, so, you know, it's time for me to contribute, so I began to pray and asked God for I need something that I can do to contribute to my family finances, some little course that interests me that's in my area, and that will give me an opportunity to be home with my son.  And that's when I went into radio.
Story_ID: 572705
Speaker 1: You mentioned praying.  Are you in the church, were you still a member of the Episcopal church at that point?
Speaker 2: No.  I joined the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church.  The A.M.E. church was really my family church.  My [maternal] great-grandfather belonged to Bethel A.M.E. Church, John Murphy [John H. Murphy, Sr.].
Speaker 1: That's one of the, that's the oldest church, black church in Baltimore [Maryland], is it not?
Speaker 2: Relatively speaking, yes.  It's the oldest A.M.E. church.  It's older than the annual conference system of the A.M.E. church.  My grandfather [Carl J. Murphy] belonged to Bethel.  My mother got to St. James [St. James Episcopal Church, Baltimore, Maryland].  She was a member of St. James because her godmother was a member of St. James, and right after my mother was born, my grandmother [Vashti Turley Murphy] had a set of twins [Carlita Murphy Jones and Vashti Murphy Matthews].  Well, now, you got a lot of children on your hands.  You got four children, and you got two automatically, so my godmother, you know, my grandmother says, "Take Ida [Ida Murphy Peters], take Ida with you," and my mother started going with her godmother to St. James, and so that's how we got over to St. James.  She got over there, got rooted, liked it, you know, and that's where we were, but I came home to Bethel A.M.E. Church in--when we came to Baltimore, and we started looking for a church home and Bethel resonated with where I was, with where I am, with a good, strong social, social gospel, social justice, me worshipping, yes, but I want to be sure that the people who live in the neighborhood who have needs, are met.  That's called ministry.  Of course, at the time I didn't understand that, but I mean, that's where I wanted to be sure that other people were taken care of and that the love of God is demonstrated in tangible ways in tangible works, not just taking care of us in the household of faith, but taking care of the people who live in the shadow of the church, whether they're a member of your church or not.  So, that's what Bethel A.M.E. Church under John Bryant [John Richard Bryant], that's what Bethel A.M.E. Church was about, and we joined, we joined Bethel Church.
Speaker 1: About what year was this when you--
Speaker 2: It's about the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976]. Between '76 [1976] and '78 [1978] by that time.
Story_ID: 572706
Speaker 1: So you were pursuing a master's in--
Speaker 2: Human development.
Speaker 1: Human development.
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't complete it because I went to seminary.  I was, you know, going to Maryland [University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland].  I accepted my call to preach.  My pastor [John Richard Bryant] says, "You need to go to seminary.  Where are you in school?" And I said, "Well, I'm in a master's degree program now."  Seminary is another master's program, so I stopped Maryland and went to Howard School of Divinity [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Now, what happened that changed your focus, or did it?  I mean, how did it, how did you go from pursuing a master's in human development to pursuing the ministry and studying to be a minister.
Speaker 2: It's not like, you know, you go from here to there.  A part of becoming a member of Bethel [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland] is what I call a part of my spiritual awakening.  Like I said, I was always a church child.  I was always in church, but the operative word is church.  Our relationship was with the church. And during the '60s [1960s], during that Civil Rights Movement, during that civil rights era, me and the church had major difficulties here.  We're coming into the black power era and I began to ask questions.  You remember I told you my column, you know, took on a very social justice, political--it's no longer a teen column, so I'm asking questions like why are there pictures of white angels in this black church?  And is it true that the gospel was used as an opiate for slaves?  You know, I'm asking questions, and my pastor refused to answer, refused to answer the questions.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is the pastor at St. James [St. James Episcopal Church, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Who's the pastor at St. James you're talking about?
Speaker 2: Wilson, Father Wilson [Donald Wilson].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He didn't answer my questions, and I'm sure if you remember now, you're talking about the '60s [1960s], where we're coming out of the King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] season and going into Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] season so, you know, the nonviolence is still working, and so here we are the g- the younger--I remember standing in Baltimore [Maryland] watching the troops come through the neighborhood and you're on lockdown and nobody can go out.  Well, I had a press pass, so I could cross the press lines, you know.
Speaker 1: This was in '68 [1968] when Dr. King was killed?
Speaker 2: This is '68 [1968].  I remember this and I remember turning around to the adults going, "Aren't you going to do anything?"  This is the [U.S.] Army.  It's coming into our neighborhood, and you know, it was sort of like just lay down and be quiet.  I said, "How can you be quiet?  This is terrible.  This is terrible."  I mean, you know, people are going out, what are you doing?  You going to loot what?  You're going to burn what?  You're burning your own neighborhood.  You're looting your own neighborhood.  What is the matter with you?  You know?  And the people that you're talking to and asking questions, you say you all must be out of your mind, and it was very frightening to watch the Army trucks with soldiers coming through your neighborhood and saying that you can't--remember I'm a journalist so when the news hit that King was killed, I picked up the phone and I'm calling the editor and finding who's out, who's on the street.  You know, I had nothing to do with the editor, had nothing to do with--but as a journalist you go like who's out?  Who's going?  What are you gonna do?  The phone was dead.  Nothing.  Couldn't get a call through for another fifteen minutes.  I mean, communications was locked.  Now, my little journalist mind, I'm very suspicious so I have to be out on the street, and my husband [Stan McKenzie], who was then my fiance, you know, this wild and crazy woman, I said, "We're going out.  I need to see what's going on," and we had a press pass so we could, you know, cross the press lines and I went out. Crazy, foolish, stupid, could have gotten shot, killed, anything could happen.  People could mistake you for a looter or anything out on the street, but I had to see what was going on.  That's the journalist thing in me.  So I'm out, you know, I'm writing these things, I'm asking my pastor, you know, and I'm not getting a response.  So, we had a little falling out.
Story_ID: 572707
Speaker 1: When we came back to Baltimore [Maryland], the issues I had with the church were different, because I had grown to the place where my relationship was not with Cri- with church, my relationship was with Christ.  And, coming into my relationship with Christ, God is neither black nor white.  Scripture says neither Greek nor Jew, male or free--bond or free, male or female, we're all one in Christ Jesus.  God is a spirit and we worship Him, in spirit and in truth.  So, you know, having white angels didn't matter.  It didn't make any difference anymore, because I had gotten to that place where God is a spirit.  We worship Him in spirit and in truth.  My relationship is with Christ and not with the church.  So, when I came back to my home church in St. James [St. James Episcopal Church, Baltimore, Maryland], my husband [Stan McKenzie], who was not Episcopal, I said, "You need to go through, you need to understand what this is all about," and I need to (unclear) because I need to, you know, I belonged to Bethel A.M.E. Church when we were in Portland [Oregon], but I still need to get back up, and I'm sitting in the pews and the pastor is standing next to my pew and he says, "All of you who have these questions about these white angels and this, that, and the other, we are the church of the middle class, and (makes sound)" and I'm going like, you are still there?  It's been almost ten years.
Speaker 2: So, the pastor is actually telling you that we are the church of the middle class, and we're--
Speaker 1: And I'm sitting there going, well what about the people who live around Lafayette Square [Baltimore, Maryland] who don't do this?  I'm not saying it out loud, but in my head I'm saying this and I'm going like, I'm thinking like we have gone away.  We have grown.  We have come back, and you are still in the same place.  So, then I walk into Bethel Church [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland] and the pastor [John Richard Bryant] is telling us about the outreach center that's gonna help people, the women's ministry that's exploring these things, all of these ministries, and I'm saying this is my place.  This is my place right here.  This is my place.  And the other church, if you say, "Praise the Lord" they would turn around and look at you.  If the baby cried, it was like (makes sound) that's terrible, we don't do that.  Somebody did say, "Praise the Lord" once and the ushers came and ushered them out, and so now I'm sitting in a church where people shake hands and hug and, you know, whatever.  That's not to say that St. James wasn't a wonderful place.  It was a blessing to many people.  It just was not the place for me.  And, when I went into Bethel and learned about the ministry, then this is the place for me.  The Holy Spirit grabbed me when I walked in the door.  I didn't understand it at the time.  I didn't understand it.  I understand the Holy Spirit now. But it grabbed me and I knew that this was--I had come home.  This was the place for me.
Story_ID: 572708
Speaker 1: I know ministers often feel that there is a moment when they're called.  Did you have such a moment?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Many.  (Laughter) Many.  I believe that every believer has a call, has a call to fulfill, and so I felt my call was being fulfilled in broadcasting.  I was in Christian broadcasting.  I was at WYCB Radio in Washington, D.C.  I was on air and--
Speaker 1: How did that come about?  How did you get involved with the radio?
Speaker 2: Actually, that evolved from the people I met at Shady Grove Music Theater [Shady Grove Music Fair, Gaithersburg, Maryland].  I was trying to break in to the media.  I was trying to break into television, because I did television work out in Portland [Oregon], and I had my own program, you know, a thirty minute talk show before the basketball game so--
Speaker 1: In Portland, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  KATU-TV in Portland, so I was trying to break in to media in D.C.; of course, D.C. is like a huge market, you know.  You just don't break in in D.C.  You come from someplace else, but I was trying to break into the media in the Baltimore [Maryland] and Washington area and I met Dewey Hughes.  Dewey Hughes was at WRIC-TV [WXEX-TV] in Washington [sic. Petersburg, Virginia] and he was married to [HistoryMaker] Cathy Hughes, who is a great mogul in media, and she was the general manager for WYCB in Washington, and Dewey said, you know, called me, that was after been praying and called and says, "We're putting together a radio station that sounds a little bit like you.  Why don't you come on in and do the interview?"  And, I did, and I went in, had an interview with Cathy and she hired me.  Those were the days when you had to have a license.  You had to be licensed by the FCC [Federal Communications Commission]--
Speaker 1: First class license, they call it.
Speaker 2: Third class, wasn't it?
Speaker 1: Third class, maybe so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so they would hire an engineer to do--while I just did the voice and selected the music and I had to go study and I had to take the exam and get the license and then I did it myself.  So, I went on air and I started my career there, and I thought I was fulfilling, you know, I'm here, Christian music, I'm talking to people every day, actually ministering over the radio but if you had told me then I would have told you that you were lying.  So I went from midday to afternoon drive, and I became the program director and became operations manager at WYCB, got good numbers, we got up to about number eight.  I think it was the highest that, when I was there we got up to like number eight in the market, in the top ten, which is good in the D.C. market and that was it.
Story_ID: 572709
Speaker 1: The prompting, which you say, is there a moment that--I say it's a series of moments.  I was on air early in the morning on Saturday mornings.  I did the early morning drive shift from six to ten [o'clock], and I began getting calls from people who were falling between the cracks.  They were between church and social service agencies and they had no one to help, and so I began praying and praying for them and sharing with them and saying, you know, somebody needs to do something.  You have all these people who are in need, but yet we're not reaching them as a church, as a people, as Christian people, as God's people, and we need to be able to do that.  And, coupled with that, of course, being in the gospel music industry, I'm always being invited to emcee programs at churches, so I'm, Sunday afternoons I'm at a church, I'm emceeing a program, a women's day program, and then all of a sudden you'd have this experience where all I'm supposed to do is just introduce these people, you know, introduce the next group that's coming to sing or introduce the next event or person, and then all of a sudden you open your mouth and all this stuff comes out, and you didn't intend to say it, you didn't mean to say it, and it just comes out, and then when it's over, you were like, oh, did I do that?  So, I was preaching and didn't intend to preach, and then you start organizing ministries.  Well, we didn't call it ministries.  We just called it Christian people helping other Christian people.  So, we started, I had this vision, you know, for seven people wise and full of the Holy Spirit, that we would come to do Acts 6 [Acts of the Apostles], and Acts 6, while the preachers were preaching you would take care of the widows and orphans.  And so, our response to that was to have a twenty-four hour hotline.  In other words, people calling me on the radio in the middle of the night and early in the morning, in the middle of the day, late afternoon.  They're in trouble.  They have no place else to go, so we organized a twenty-four hour hotline so that people could call in and find the help that they need with people.  We sent people for training.  We had a house where there were clothes and things, if people needed clothes and all of this to take care of that.  This was just Christian people helping Christian--actually it was a ministry--but Christian people helping ministry.  Out of those seven people, seven people that we put this together in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], all of us became preachers save one, and out of the seven, three are bishops.  So, I mean, you know, it's just an extraordinary move of God that we didn't understand.  We didn't know.  We just thought we were just trying to help, trying to help other people and trying to fill the gap.  You know, fill the gap, like it says, and who will stand in the gap, and we were just trying to stand, stand in the gap, so like I said, it was a series of moments, series of moments.  I accepted my call to preach on a Sunday in November, November 11, at Bethel A.M.E. Church [Baltimore, Maryland], Cecelia Williams Bryant, who is my pastor's wife and she was a preacher as well, was preaching a sermon called The Call the Called Sent.  That was my epiphany.  That was my moment where I knew I was called and I was being sent, and I walked down the aisle of the church and told my pastor [John Richard Bryant], "I have to be about my Father's business."  And he says, "Would you define that for me please?  What does that mean?"  I said, "That means I have to preach."  And, it was like the weight of the world off my shoulders; incredible peace, just, because I had been wrestling.  Preachers call it we're running.  We're running from the call, and I wrestled and I wrestled and I said can't you choose somebody else?  It's not me, it's got to be somebody--why didn't you call me when I was a child?  I could have come out of high school [Eastern High School, Baltimore, Maryland], gone through seminary, been done with all of it.  Why now?  I'm in a career.  I'm in broadcasting.  You know, I'm program director/operation manager [of WYCB Radio, Washington, D.C.].  In my mind, I'm on my way to owning my owning my own radio station.  I'm following [HistoryMaker] Cathy Hughes, you know?  I'm gonna own my own station, two or three, who knows, you know, why are you gonna interrupt my career now?  It's got to be--can't be right, can't be true.  But the moment I walked down that aisle, the moment I said yes, there was such peace and everything fell into place.  The school fell into place.  The money for the school fell into place, the job fell into place.
Story_ID: 572710
Speaker 1: I was really ready to come out of D.C. [Washington, D.C.] because I'm, you know, driving to D.C. from Baltimore [Maryland], Columbia [Maryland] area.  You know, it gets kind of wearing, and being program manager, many people remember one year we had like thirty inches of snow.  I'm program director.  I can't get to the station [WYCB Radio, Washington, D.C.], so I'm on the phone trying to figure out who I can get, who's close enough to the station to walk because you couldn't get through the roads with thirty inches of snow.  My husband [Stan McKenzie] dug the driveway all night long so I could get to the station, because on Sunday night, the engineers cut the power off and they did whatever repairs.  You were going to have to power up on the next morning, on that Monday morning, and nobody's in the station, you know, and all the talent is calling me, I can't come in.  I'm in--I lived in Virginia and came over, lived in Virginia, lived in Virginia.  I couldn't get there.  When the sun came up, there was enough light, yes, our driveway was clear but there was thirty inches of snow in the street.  They hadn't plowed the street, and I had to trudge through the snow to get to the highway and flag down a Greyhound bus that was going to D.C. in order to get to work.  That's, you know, we need to work a little closer to home, so I wanted to come home to Baltimore to work and Dorothy Brunson, another mogul in media, hired me for her radio station and I did gospel.
Speaker 2: What year is this now?
Speaker 1: Let's see now.  We're talking about 1981, '82 [1982].
Speaker 2: What station is this?
Speaker 1: WEBB [WEBB Radio] in Baltimore.  And I did midday, morning drive.  Started at midday, I think, and then I went to morning drive.  Yes, that was morning drive, because I know (unclear) Pauline [Pauline W. Lewis] did very early and I came in and started at six [o'clock], six A.M., from six to ten, so I did morning drive, which meant when I left, after I did my commercials or whatever else you had to do, then I was on my way to D.C., back to D.C. to go to Howard divinity school [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, you know, that provided, you know, a good segue for me.
Story_ID: 572711
Speaker 1: Why did you end up choosing Howard divinity school [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.] of all of the--?
Speaker 2: I wanted to study with theologians and people that I knew that were best in their area.  Dr. Delores Carpenter [Delores Causion Carpenter] was about the best in Christian education.  She was also a woman in ministry, had been preaching for about fifteen to twenty years, so she was a pioneer for us.  Dr. Cain Hope Felder, who is just about one of the eminent New Testament scholars that we have, black or white, and I wanted to study--same thing--and they didn't go on sabbatical (laughter).  They were there.  She was writing in women and ministry and he was doing, he was doing some extraordinary work in, about blacks in the Bible, which was absolutely wonderful.
Speaker 1: Right, he's nationally known for that work right now, yeah, Cain Hope Felder.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I wanted to study with men and women who were going to be a part of the same kind of church in that I'm in a predominantly black church and I wanted to study with men and women who were preparing themselves for the black church.  I had friends at Bethel [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland] who were going to Harvard [Harvard Divinity School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and to Princeton [Princeton Theological Seminary, Princeton, New Jersey] and all the other schools and they would come back and talk about where the professors don't believe there is such a thing as a black church.  I said, okay, whether you believe it or not, I'm in one.  So I don't really need to be anywhere you're gonna, where, you know, you're gonna tell me that what I'm in doesn't exist when I'm in it and it does exist.  So I wanted to study with other men and women who were preparing for careers, essentially and predominantly in black churches and when we graduated, most of us settled in that northeast corridor and we're friends today and we partner in ministry today, even today.
Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, Howard divinity school is a deep tradition going back to Howard Thurman, and people talk about that even now, but so what was your--did you have to write a thesis?
Speaker 2: Not for my master's [degree].  You could either write a thesis or you take a couple extra courses.  I didn't write a thesis in the master's program.  Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: What was the most, I guess, memorable aspect of going to Howard divinity school?
Speaker 2: Studying under Cain Hope Felder, and being with Dean Lawrence Jones [Lawrence N. Jones].  Lawrence Jones was the dean at the time, extraordinary man yesterday, extraordinary man today, and Cain Hope Felder, I mean, if you're talking about being pushed to the edge, Cain Hope Felder was the teacher that you hated and loved at the same time.  You hated him because he was tough; I mean, he was really tough.  He speaks seven languages, and he would float in and out of those seven languages while he is teaching.  He just opened the New Testament for me and he demands that you dig deeper, dig deeper, dig deeper, so it was really a stretch and painful; you know, sometimes stretching is painful. Painful. And sometimes, I swear, we were masochistic because we kept going back and taking courses, so, courses from him, so although he is very good, wonderful, powerful, and stretched you.  When you got out of his class, you knew, you knew a thing or two.
Story_ID: 572712
Speaker 1: Well see, my [maternal] grandfather graduated and got a master's degree from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in German, and they weren't expecting him to be at Harvard at that time.  Can you imagine?
Speaker 2: This is Carl.
Speaker 1: Carl.  You know, Carl Murphy [Carl J. Murphy].
Speaker 2: Carl Murphy (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, it's like, then Ben Quarles [Benjamin A. Quarles] going to a library and being denied because he's not white and they don't expect a black man to be there who's interested in researching and writing history.  You wouldn't expect Carl Murphy, you know, to be at Harvard getting a master's degree.  At--you're talking about the early 1900s?  I mean that's unheard of.  And you certainly wouldn't expect Vashti McKenzie [HistoryMaker Bishop Vashti McKenzie] to be a bishop in 2007 (laughter).  You just wouldn't expect it.
Speaker 2: Okay, Cain Hope Felder is really peeling things back here.  Did you, is there anything that you learned at divinity school [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.] that you, that you wouldn't have guessed that you would learn, have learned before you went?
Speaker 1: A part of the seminary process is that they mess with your belief systems.  You know, every seminary student comes with a set and a subset of belief systems, and then you come into a very open, a very plural environment for a person from many different denominations and belief factors, and your beliefs systems are challenged in theology, challenged in biblical studies, you know challenged in the philosophy of your belief system is challenged and I think it's a very good, I didn't realize it was going to be challenged.  Dean Jones [Lawrence N. Jones] told us that in our freshman orientation that your belief system is going to be challenged and I'm going like, hm?  Don't we all believe the same thing here?  God?  His son, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit?  Wait a minute, hold on.  And they work, but we're better for it because we come away knowing exactly what we believe, and the people that we find in our ministries and in our pews who have questions and we are better able to answer them.  I realize that I love to read anyway, but I, one of the things you will do in seminary is read even more, but you will read for the rest of your life because you are constantly preparing.  I remember my senior year, Dean Jones said to me, "Well, Vashti, I think we can graduate you.  I think we can trust you to leave this institution."  And so what he was saying to me in essence is that what we do is we teach you how to learn.  We teach you how to research.  We teach you how to ask questions, and we teach you how to go find the answers and we teach you where the resources are that you can go and find the answers and then we teach you to trust the Holy Spirit that God just might have a new revelation for you that he hasn't given to anybody else.  So, I, you know, I thought we could go to school, you know, there's another aha moment.  You learn how to make A's in college, then you get to seminary and you're learning that they're teaching you how to learn, they're teaching you to be critical thinkers, not just accepting the answer but being a critical thinker and so, you know, in high school, you know, just tell me what you want me to give you on the test.  Just tell me what you want me to give, to regurgitate back to you.  But no, we're being taught to be critical thinkers, and the institution trusts you enough to release you so that as you continue in your career, you will continue this pattern of searching, researching, and learning and getting the resources.
Story_ID: 572713
Speaker 1: Now, when you--you graduated from Howard divinity school [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.] in--
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-five [1985].
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-five [1985], and now at that time, in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church were there--there were other women as pastors, right? But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were very few.  There were women who had pastored but in 1985, no you didn't have a lot of women pastoring.  I grew up ministerially in a very wonderful environment.  My pastor's wife [Cecelia Williams Bryant] was a preacher and there were twenty-one preachers on staff with a membership of somewhere six thousand, seven thousand members and a lot of ministries, you know, just a whole lot of ministries.  I was in charge of the media ministry, of course, you know that was right in my suit, right into my strong suit, but there were other women who were coming along as well.  One woman who was out of Bethel [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland], Reverend Vivian Castain went on to preach, I mean went on to pastor after that, but I think she was the first woman involved in my annual conference to pastor, let's say, officially.  There were other local ministers that when the pastor may have died or a problem at the church, was sent to hold a church, to bring it in to the annual conference until a new pastor could be assigned, but for the most part there were not a lot of women who were pastoring at the moment.
Speaker 1: Now, were there any stated or written rules against women pastoring a church in the A.M.E. church?
Speaker 2: Women, women, no.  Women were licensed to preach from the late 1800s, Jarena Lee was the first woman licensed to preach in the A.M.E. church, and that was in the 1800s.  Women were granted ordination first at the diaconate level, I think somewhere around 1947, and then as an itinerant elder in the 1960s, so once you're an itinerant elder, you are eligible to pastor.  What colors the process of women in the A.M.E. church and in the church is the thought that women are just unable to do it.  You have two conflicting things; one, women are not called to preach.  God does not call women to pastor.  To evangelize, fine; but to pastor, no.  And then, two, intellectually, emotionally, and physically, they're not able.  A woman cannot prepare a sermon every Sunday and preach it plus bible study, nurture the people, do the ministry, as well as take care of her own husband and children; just physically unable.
Speaker 1: Now these are the, what you got lined up the beliefs of the--
Speaker 2: Culture. Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of the culture of the church.
Speaker 2: And the people come from the culture who make up the church, you know, so women don't belong here.  It's the same thing where in medicine, when a woman showed up first time in medical school, well you can't do this.  You don't have the intellectual capacity to do this.  You don't have the physical stamina, and then, plus the men are not gonna follow you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The women are not gonna follow you.  The men are not gonna follow you (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But there are no, there is no--
Speaker 2: There is no law in the discipline that says--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a woman cannot pastor.
Speaker 1: None of the gospels speak and say hey, you can't do this.  You can't have a woman pastor, or--
Story_ID: 572714
Speaker 1: There have been scriptures, yes, that have been misused to say women can't, God says women can't do this, but there's nowhere in the Bible that says God says.  Paul says a woman should not have authority over a man.  You know, how can you be a pastor and be submitted to your husband.  Well, you take the scripture out of context.  The scripture before wives submit yourself to your husband, says you ought to be submitted to one another.  So, once you take a look at the word of God and you see what God does.  Moses' sister was just as much a prophet as he is.  That's what it says in the Book of Deuteronomy.  Isaiah's wife was a prophet.  Huldah was a prophetess in the Old Testament.  There were many--Deborah, judge of Israel for forty years.  When you come into the New Testament, the first preacher was--first woman preacher was the woman at the well, who had an encounter with Jesus and left and went back and preached the sermon, same sermon all over again.  Come see a man who told me everything about myself.  The four daughters of Philip prophesied in the New Testament.  There were pastors, Aquila and Priscilla, who were pastors.  Well, Aquila was a man and Priscilla was a woman.  They were co-pastors in the church. Lydia allowed her house to be a place where a church was started, it was founded.  So all through the Old and the New Testament, God has used women in leadership positions as preachers, as prophets, as leaders.  Our cultural mindset takes what it finds, takes out of context and says God says you're not supposed to do that.  How can God say that when Jesus appeared to Mary at the tomb and said, "Go tell."  The word prophesy.  Go prophesize.  Go preach.  Go tell.  The men that didn't wake up that morning and come to the tomb, and so when you watch what God does, you see who God uses, you watch how Jesus treated the women, then you see.  Yes, women are called to preach, are called to serve.
Story_ID: 572715
Speaker 1: So even in the African Methodist Episcopal church [A.M.E.], the first black church, you know, forged on a platform of freedom, you know, and eradication of slavery and rights for freedmen and even that church did not promote women into leadership as such for a long, long time.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, one of the things that we find, one of the things that has happened is that the door that we opened together, which I mean black men and women, the door that we open together, is often a door that is closed by the brothers in the sisters' face.  In other words, we can work on opening that door in racism.  Racism is rampant and so we work together side by side against eradicating racism, and so together we open this door and then you close another door in my face because I'm a woman. See? So, okay many feelings in the church is that for black men the only place where they can exercise leadership is in the church.  Therefore, women ought to step back, because that's the only place where men can exercise.  But that--is that biblical?  I've never read that in the Bible.  Well, a woman can't preach because none of the apostles were female.  Well, there's some scholarly debate that Mary Magdalene was, perhaps, you know should have been the one, but they decided to go through another selective process, but to make the comment that, well, women can't, women can't preach or pastor because none of the apostles were women, well none of the apostles were Hispanic.  None of them were Eurocentric.  They were not English or Scottish (laughter).  They were all Jews.  None of them were Asians.  So, if you use that same argument, are you gonna say now that every Asian that's preaching is in error?  Every Sweden?  Every Norwegian is in error?
Speaker 1: Okay, so now, now--
Speaker 2: So, the same scriptures that were used, that were misused to deny African Americans, slave obey your masters.  That same cultural mindset takes scriptures to misuse to keep women as second class citizens.
Story_ID: 572716
Speaker 1: So when you finished divinity school [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.], did you think--now you went on to United Theological Seminary [Dayton, Ohio] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I went to pastor first.
Speaker 1: Pastor fir- okay.
Speaker 2: I went to pastor first.
Speaker 1: When you went to pastor did you--
Speaker 2: Understand, graduating seminary with two children later.  We now have three children now [Jon-Mikael McKenzie, Vashti-Jasmine McKenzie Saint-Jean, and Joi-Marie McKenzie].
Speaker 1: Now, at that time, were you thinking, well, you know, I'd like to pastor a church and we're there.  Now you're articulate, you can write, you are charismatic, you can be a model, you can be on the radio.  People--it would seem to me that if I was a bishop of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church and I'm sitting there, I mean you had everything going for you, except you're not a man, I guess to these guys (laughter)--.  Now here's a young person full of life and full of energy to do this work and, you know, idealistic and, you know, so, what was your, did you think at that time, you said I would certainly like to pastor a church and I'm gonna, that's one of my goals, or and what forces were arrayed against you?  What did people actually say and do to--
Speaker 2: Okay.  It was a very good time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to either stop you or help you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was a very good time to be in the Baltimore Annual Conference.  It was a very good time to be a young preacher in preparation.  I knew--I didn't know immediately I was called to pastor, I knew I was called to preach, but I didn't know immediately I was called to pastor.  By the time, let's say, two years, a year and a half in, I seemed inappropriate.  I was preaching every week somewhere in Baltimore [Maryland] or Washington [D.C.].  I was preaching every week, and then I just got this, sort of like that inward knowing, I'm really tired of going to different churches every week.  I want to go to my own church.  I want a group of people that I have an opportunity to minister on a regular basis and see them grow, and nurture them and do ministry and watch the community change and transform because the gospel is an action.  So, when it came time for me to be ordained a deacon, in the A.M.E. church ordination is a process.  You go to the, you're in seminary but you're in the Board of Examiners, which these are elders who teach and train us in A.M.E. polity and all the other kinds of things we need to know to prepare for ministry in the A.M.E. church.  After two years, you're up for being ordained at the diaconate level, and so I went in going in to the annual conference knowing that after ordination it is possible to be ordained.  The annual conference is in April.  In January of that year, I--God woke me up in the middle of the night.  Bam.  And I woke up in a cold sweat and I sat straight up in the bed and my husband [Stan McKenzie] woke up and goes, "What is the matter?"  And I was going like, "I could be sent to North Carolina.  I could be pastoring in four months.  I could be pastoring a congregation.  Oh.  Wow.  What's that going to do to the family?  What are we gonna do?  Supposed I get sent to North Carolina?"  And my husband is going, "Wherever you go, I'll go.  As you went with me, I'll go with you.  Don't worry, it'll be all right."  "Suppose the people won't like me?  Suppose they won't receive me?  Suppose this happens?  Suppose--," you know, you know. I was going through all the supposes. "(Makes sound) Wow.  This can really happen."  And we just sat there and we prayed together, it will be all right, we'll be together, it'll be cool.  Went back to bed, forgot about the whole thing.  Thursday night, Thursday during the day, during the ordination service, we're ordained deacons.  Thursday night, the class of deacons we're on the phone.  "Wow, wasn't it awesome?  This is a great thing.  Were you scared?" Because we all cried.  This is just really, it's just a very awesome moment.  In the life when you take on this mantle of ordination, you are no longer a regular member of the pew, and the weight of your ordination is heavier on you than it is on just a regular member.  I mean, the souls of people are in your hands.
Story_ID: 572717
Speaker 1: I mean, it's just a, just an awesome responsibility.  So, we're on the phone, we're laughing, we're crying, wow.  You know, we're going through this whole thing and now it's eleven o'clock at night.  Now we had already been up the night before praying and fasting, scared to death about what's gonna happen, and so now it's like 11 or 11:30 at night and I'm just getting off the phone with the other deacons in the class, and my pastor calls and he says, "Are you ready to pastor?"  I go, "Yes."  "Are you ready to pastor?"  I said, "Yes."  "Are you sure?"  I said, "Yes."  Then what happened in January all of a sudden comes back.  This is God's way of telling me that I'm gonna go.  So, I don't know where, I don't know what, I don't know how, and so that Friday night at the close of the annual conference, I was given a church and in Cecil County, Maryland, which is about two and a half hours away, I was given what we would call a two charge appointment.  Bethel A.M.E. Church in Chesapeake City [Maryland], and Ebenezer A.M.E. Church in Chesapeake City.  This is the circuit.  And, it was just, it was mind blowing.  I mean, it is, you know, it's almost overwhelming.  On Thursday you're ordained a deacon and Friday you're sent out to pastor a church.  You really are not usually sent until you're an elder, which would be two years down the road, but we were sent out because there were churches that were opened, that nobody really wanted to go to, and there were several deaths, several retirements, so they had to come into the deacon ranks and [HistoryMaker] Bishop John Hurst Adams, was brave enough to assign me to Chesapeake City.  I had seven members in one church and about twenty members in another, and I loved my people, you know.  The brothers said, "I wouldn't go if I were you, only seven people, going so far away."  At that time, I had two children [Jon-Mikael McKenzie and Vashti-Jasmine McKenzie Saint-Jean], my baby was a baby.  She was a baby in our arms, about a year.
Speaker 2: Did you, now when did this happen and did you have to actually move to--
Speaker 1: No.  Unh-uh.  Unh-uh (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) this area? No. It's just a long drive.
Speaker 1: It's a long drive.  It's a long drive and--
Speaker 2: What year was it?
Speaker 1: Now see--I was assigned Oak Street [Oak Street A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland] at '84 [1984], so this has to be like '82 [1982]. Eighty-two [1982] because I started in '80 [1980], so this has to be like around eighty--
Speaker 2: And the two churches were Bethel--
Speaker 1: I'm trying to remember these dates.  You know, I haven't thought about these dates.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, the two churches are Bethel and--
Speaker 1: Ebenezer.
Speaker 2: Ebenezer, okay.
Speaker 1: This is the early '80s [1980s].  I remember my elder's, my elder's ordination more than I remember my deacon, because it's like (makes sound) you were ordained and you were sent out.
Story_ID: 572718
Speaker 1: My determination was to pastor my congregation, even though I was a part time pastor in a full time process.  So, that meant I had taught bible study on Tuesday night.  I would go up on Friday nights for prayer meeting and I would spend the night in the community [Chesapeake City, Maryland].  One of the persons who ordained with me, Reverend Ann Lightner [Ann Lightner-Fuller].  Fuller is her name now.  We have an Ann Lightner-Fuller, was seven miles from me in Cecilton, Maryland.  Her church had a trailer and so I would go up and we would hang out in the trailer together.  Jon [Jon-Mikael McKenzie] was about seven years old, and Jasmine [Vashti-Jasmine McKenzie Saint-Jean] was about two, so you know, it was Jon and Jasmine.  Sometimes my husband [Stan McKenzie] would stay in Baltimore [Maryland] and come up on Sunday because my son had Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] and football and all of that, so he made sure that Jon got to all of his young people's activity, and I had the baby with me, so it was baby bottles and I was still in seminary [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.], so I was still studying and writing papers on a typewriter that I carried in the trunk of my car, and miles and miles and miles of the tape that you put and you punched, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The corrections tape--
Speaker 1: Yeah, there you go.  Miles and miles and correction--of correction tape, but you know, those were the days that my office was in the trunk of my car.  We blew the transmission on the car the first year because we were just up and down the highway, 95 [Interstate 95], we were up and down.  There were some nights I came home for the church and I don't remember crossing the Susquehanna bridge [Millard E. Tydings Memorial Bridge].  I remember getting in the car, putting on my seatbelt, and driving home and not really being conscious until I got to the toll gate at the Susquehanna bridge, I mean, 'cause you're tired, and your mind is, you know, now I'm just not thinking about what's happening at the church now.  Bible study was good.  We stopped by and visited somebody at the hospital and you visit somebody else who is sick at home, and now you're in the car, you gotta get home.  It's about 9:30 or 10:00 at night, and you're thinking like, are the uniforms ironed for school?  Did I set the lunch stuff out?  Do I have enough change for lunch money for Jon?  Do I have this--and you just zone out, and then because you're at the toll booth, you zone in and you go, only by the grace of God. You know, only by the grace of God did you get there.
Speaker 2: Okay, so these are pretty tough times, they're tough times but they're--
Speaker 1: They were good.  I was doing what I was called to do.  I was called to pastor.  I wanted to pastor.  I didn't care where it was.  I wanted to pastor.  And I felt I was ready to pastor and I was excited.  My mother [Ida Murphy Peters] went with me, and, of course she was our saving grace because with two children, you know, she go- she went to help us.  I mean, she left, she left Bethel [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland] to come and go with her daughter up into Cecil County [Maryland] to help me in ministry.  My mother said, "Vashti [HistoryMaker Bishop Vashti McKenzie], do you know where you are?"  I said, "Mama, I don't have a clue."  I'm on the shores of the C and D Canal [Chesapeake and Delaware Canal] and the ship comes across every Sunday morning at eleven o'clock and blows its horn, which I swear is on purpose.  And the people were wonderful.  They were, they were very receptive.  Of course they were skeptical; you know.
Speaker 2: What are they?  Do you recall any remarks or actions that kind of showed?
Speaker 1: I remember on my first Sunday, you know, you meet with your officers and you call all your officers together and I began to ask questions, of course, like you know, where's the church rosters?  Can I see your annual conference reports for the last three years?  Would you bring the bank records, who signs the checks?  I'm doing, you know, I'm getting and my mother, of course, was sitting in the back and they don't know who she is.  And a lady, lady set- was sitting next to me and she said, "(Makes sound) She's getting ready to organize us.  She's getting ready to do some work here.  I'm leaving."  (Laughter) I don't wanna do all of this work.  I don't want to do all of this work.  And, and, and we did a lot of work.
Story_ID: 572719
Speaker 1: We really did a lot of work. I was there for a year and a half.  We really did a whole lot of work.  The people were great.  We renovated Bethel [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Chesapeake City, Maryland], put in new pews, you know, landscaping, and did the whole nine yards, had a wonderful revival, and a hundred people gave their lives to Christ.  A friend of mine who was an evangelist in Detroit [Michigan], came on a wing and a prayer, said, "Girl, I ain't got no money.  I could get you a ticket and we're gonna stay in Ann's [Ann Lightner-Fuller] trailer in Cecilton [Maryland] for the week and we're gonna, you know, go back and forth and you'll teach during the day and preach at night," and she did.  She's a bishop now, but I mean, and she did and we fasted and prayed and the people said, "That's not gonna happen, that's not gonna happen," and I said, "We're gonna believe God for a hundred souls, a hundred souls," and people came from Delaware, Pennsylvania.  The church was too small to have it and we had a tent, an outdoor tent, and we borrowed chairs from Lottie, Dottie and everybody, and this was on a weekend when they were having the seafood festival in Ocean City [Maryland], and every tent, every tent on the Eastern Shore both North and South, was down south to do this event and we had one tent at Ebenezer [Ebenezer A.M.E. Church, Chesapeake City, Maryland].  Bethel was the city church.  Ebenezer was out in the rural area.  It was in the middle of a horse farm, where they raised thoroughbred horses and we erected the tent, and the horse farm owners came and said, "You're scaring our horses," and, "We're having a revival."  (Laughter) So they moved the horses to another field, but the people just did not believe that God was gonna do this, and God did.  A hundred people gave their lives to Christ.  They raised more money at that revival than they had raised in a whole year, and so the faith level of the people bumped up; I mean, just really bumped up.  I mean, that's, that becomes eye opening for people.  You believe God can do this, God does it, then the next question is what are you willing to believe God for next?  Can we renovate?  Oh we can't, no it's gonna take years.  Yes, we can do this.  We can do this right now.  And God blessed.  It was a wonderful time, wonderful time.
Story_ID: 572720
Speaker 1: You mentioned Oak Street A.M.E. [Oak Street A.M.E. Church].  Was that your next stop?
Speaker 2: My next church, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Next church, okay. Was that in Baltimore [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: That's in Baltimore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's in Baltimore.  I was pregnant.  I was pregnant with our last child [Joi-Marie McKenzie] when--about my last season in Chesapeake City [Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, of course, everybody was praying.  I was praying.  We had had, someone in another district, a woman was pregnant and she just walked off from her congregation and went to the West Coast, went home to have her baby for six months and may or may not come back without really communicating to the bishop or the presiding elder what was going on.  I was determined because they were saying, "Well, you're gonna do the same thing.  You're gonna leave," is what people say, "You're gonna leave us, you're not gonna be with us.  You're gonna go away."  I said, "I'm not going away.  I'm not pregnant, I'm not sick.  I'm having a baby.  I've had two others [Jon-Mikael McKenzie and Vashti-Jasmine McKenzie Saint-Jean].  You know, we kind of know how this goes along," so we were in our Women's Day season and I promised the women, I said, "I will be here for Women's Day.  Don't worry about it."  Now this time, I'm huge. (Laughter) You know, I'm really big. I could barely reach over the pulpit, you know, to do this and my husband [Stan McKenzie], my mother [Ida Murphy Peters] just praying me up to, you know, on either side, praying me up to Chesapeake City and praying me back.  I don't wanna have this baby on the road, but I went into labor on the morning of Women's Day, in October.  It took an hour and a half for me to get dressed because the pains were starting to come, and my husband was saying, "Are we gonna make it?"  I said, "We are going, I promised these women I would be there for Women's Day."
Speaker 1: This is the same day you had your baby?
Speaker 2: Yeah, same day.  October 13, 1985, nope, 1983.  And, yeah, 1983. And when I, when we got Bethel [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Chesapeake City, Maryland], because Women's Day was at Bethel that year, I walked in the church, my friend, Reverend Jo Ann Browning, was the Women's Day preacher.  I walked in the door.  She took one look at me and she said, "You're in labor."  I said, "Yup.  I sure am."  She said, "What are you gonna do?"  I said, "I'm gonna wait until the eleven o'clock hour and we're gonna start this service." And we started the service and they sang, the women marched in, we had the morning prayer, and after the morning prayer, I stood up and said, "I'm having this baby.  I'm in labor.  I promised you that I was gonna be here for Women's Day and I kept my promise.  Now, I'm going home to have this baby."  I had an associate preacher and I said--my associate preacher was also a woman--and I said, "She will take care of all of your ministerial needs.  If you need me, call me.  But I'll be back when the doctor releases me six weeks from now.  But, you know, have a great successful Women's Day."  Well, my head trustee, Brother Brown [ph.] and his wife wouldn't let me go.  They said, "You can't go home now.  It's an hour and half."  I said, "We got here, we'll get home."  "You cannot leave until you talk to your doctor because your doctor may not want you to go."  So, the Browns took us to their house, which is not far from the church, had tea and biscuits and whatever, and I'm calling the doctor and the doctor's at home, and I said, "I'm in labor."  "He says how far are you apart?"  I said, "I'm not counting at this point."  He says, "From the sound of your voice, I'll meet you at the hospital."  He said, "You have a choice.  You either go have this baby in Christiana, Delaware, which is about fifteen miles up the road, or you can come back to Baltimore and have the baby."  I said, "I don't know."  I said, "Are you coming to Christiana?"  He says, "No."  I said, "I'm nobody in Christiana.  I'm not coming."  And so, we got in the car and went back to Baltimore.
Story_ID: 572721
Speaker 1: You're waiting on your brother [Carl Smith] or something and you're (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Waiting on my brother, who was going to take our two smaller children and keep them while we were at the hospital.  So, the doctor calls while I'm just sitting there waiting, waiting, waiting, and says, "Where are you?  I'm at the hospital, I'm looking for you."  And I said, "I'm here at home."  He said, "What are you doing at home.  You know, you were at church [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Chesapeake City, Maryland].  You're supposed to come directly here," and he says, "you need to come now.  You can't wait for him.  Bring the kids with you, and they'll be fine."  So we got to the hospital and deposited Jon [Jon-Mikael McKenzie], who I guess was about eight or nine then, and said, "You have to be a very big brother to your little sister," who was about three, and, "because mom's gonna go have this baby and everything is fine." 'Cause you know, the kids are going like oh my god, you're going into the hospital, what's happening to you. "Everything's going to be fine and wonderful."  I think they had like a candy striper or somebody to bring them something to eat, and sodas and keep them company and turn the TV channel for them so they could keep each other company.  And I went up and the nurse, you know, they put you in a wheelchair and set you aside. And I said, "I'm having this baby right now."  She says, "Don't worry about it. The doctor will be with you."  You know, like a new mother, you don't know when you're having a baby.  "Sit right here."  And so, I said, "Okay," and I sat there and the other nurse looks over her shoulder.  "She's having this baby right now," and so they just whisked me in and, you know, get you all ready and the doctor says, "You know, we been waiting on you," and Joi [Joi-Marie McKenzie] is born (makes sound), just like that, and the doctor said--she was a nine pound baby.  She was a big baby. "If," he said, "if she was a six pound baby, you would have had that baby on the road.  You would not have made it." You know, but all of my babies had been big, you know, eight and a half, nine pound babies, so, yay.  She was a big baby.  And she came, and you know, my husband [Stan McKenzie] was there and Jon and Jasmine [Vashti-Jasmine McKenzie Saint-Jean] got to see their baby sister right there.  They were so proud.  They walked around, you know, say I'm a big sister and I'm a big brother button.  You know, they were so proud that they were there when their little sister was born.
Story_ID: 572722
Speaker 1: So, in '84 [1984] you took the--you left Chesapeake [Chesapeake City, Maryland] for Oak (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I was assigned to Oak Street [Oak Street A.M.E. Church] in Baltimore [Maryland].  It was a small congregation of about eighty-eight people.  They had about a rough time for about two years.  They were a struggling congregation and I came in at a difficult time in the life of the church and the Lord blessed.  I was there for about four and a half years, four and a half, five years, and the Lord blessed to grow that congregation from about eighty-eight to three hundred members.  We were able to purchase new property from the city for a dollar, good exchange.  Actually what we did was exchange property.  It was right next door.  It was a stone church, a stone school building that was being used as a police station, and they built another police station and moved.  So, we gave them our property and we took over the school, and we were in the process of renovating it into a sanctuary when the bishop moved me.  I'm all--it seems like I'm always in the middle of a building project.  When I was in Chesapeake City, we're about--we were just about to finish the parsonage.  They had a parsonage that had fallen in disrepair, so we had been raising money to renovate it so that when we came up, we had a place to stay.  We couldn't just stay in Reverend Ann's [Ann Lightner-Fuller] trailer forever.  And, we were just about through with that, and the bishop moved us and we were just about ready to start work on this new church and the bishop moves me.
Story_ID: 572723
Speaker 1: A pastor died.  Howard Camper.  This is in 1990.  He died suddenly and I was assigned in his place at Payne Memorial A.M.E. Church [Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Payne Memorial. Okay this is a--
Speaker 1: P-A-Y-N-E (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) named for Alexander Payne [Daniel Alexander Payne] of the, I suppose, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Um-hm. I was assigned to Payne Church.  It was about three hundred members on roll.  There was about eighty-five in worship.  He had been sick for, about the last two years, and so the congregation had dwindled.  They had just finished building a brand new sanctuary.  It was absolutely beautiful, a beautiful church, a beautiful new church and the Lord blessed there.  There were about eighty-five people in worship when I got there and when we left there was about seventeen- more than seventeen hundred members, people who were members of the church.
Speaker 2: Now, a church like this, I mean, did the church have a capacity?  I guess it did with seventeen hundred members.
Speaker 1: It did have the capacity, right.
Speaker 2: I mean, I can see, I'm picturing eighty-five.  What was the capacity of the sanctuary?
Speaker 1: In which place now?
Speaker 2: In this one.  In Payne.
Speaker 1: In Payne?  Five hundred.  It seats five hundred.  Um-hm.  Yeah, they had the capacity when they built the church, but when the pastor got ill, you know.
Speaker 2: So, the church had fallen off.  Membership had fallen way off, of what it originally was designed to--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --before.
Story_ID: 572724
Speaker 1: So, how, how were you welcomed at this church?  It seems like you must have received pretty good, you know--well.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean I was the first woman to pastor each of these three churches and there were skeptics in every, in all churches.  There were skeptics there; skeptics to whether you can do it, you have male egos.  They don't want to take direction anyway.  Especially they don't want to take direction from a woman.  You have female egos, like who do you think you are?  You're supposed to be down here in the pews with us.  You're not supposed to be up there.  I take directions from the pastor and you're just another woman.  You know, you're just like me.  I'm not taking direction from you.  So, there are skeptics all along the way, but what I've learned is that when you come to a congregation, it's just like any new leader.  You have to give them time to get to know you, and then let them receive you at the level that they can receive you.  They may not be able to receive you as a pastor right away.  You may have to grow into that, that relationship with them.  Most people receive you dependent upon their female experiences.  If they had negative experiences with their mother or with a wife or former girlfriend or aunt or grandmother, or they had bad female teacher experiences, then that kind of experience kind of is pushed off on you, you know, rubbed on you.  And so you have to work your way.  You work your way through that until they're able to get to a relationship where you can be the pastor.  So, yeah, there's been negative responses and there've been positive responses.  When I got to Payne [Payne Memorial A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland] and preached the first Sunday, the second Sunday a husband and wife came to me and said, "I was one of the ones that didn't want you to be our pastor and I'm glad you're our pastor."  There was an outspoken layman in the congregation who told the presiding elder and the bishop, "Don't send that woman here."  When they were talking to the congregation about who they were gonna send, and they said, "We're gonna send a woman."  "Don't send a woman here.  We don't want no woman.  We will not tolerate a woman here."  When, six months later, I have to count them because I came in--I didn't come at the annual conference time, I came right after their pastor [Howard Camper] died in October.  When I came to the annual conference six months later, that same man, when the bishop said, "How do you like your pastor now?"  He says, "I like her fine and don't move her.  Don't send her anyplace else."  And I stayed at Payne for almost eleven years.
Story_ID: 572725
Speaker 1: What were the highlights of your stay in Payne [Payne Memorial A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland]?  I mean, well, growing a congregation to seventeen hundred has to be, but that's a gradual process, I imagine.
Speaker 2: It is a process.  A part of ministry is the creative process.  I always wanted to be a pastor.  I wanted to nurture the people and grow them.  I want to see the transformation that takes place when the love of God is demonstrated within the congregation.  Many highlights, many highlights.  A lot of people highlights, watching people grow.  Come in quiet as a mouse, would just rather be content to sit on a pew and not say anything and do anything, and watch them grow to be active disciples, become active in ministries, help start ministries, do ministries.  I believe God assembles the team, the people that are necessary to carry out the work, and the team was assembled in that congregation from all over.  They came from Baltimore [Maryland], Washington [D.C.], they came from Pennsylvania, drove down, you know, to be a part, Silver Spring, Maryland, people came.  People go where their needs are met.  So, they were coming to Payne because their needs were met, so we had a lot of ministries; twenty-five new ministries that we developed, so from, and the ministries are all to meet a need.  Payne is in the urban core.  It's in the hood in West Baltimore [Baltimore, Maryland], not far from where I grew up.  Not far from the Met [Metropolitan Theatre, Baltimore, Maryland], not far from the library with Mrs. Bell [ph.], you know, not far from where I grew up. So, I knew the neighborhood, and I knew their issues.  It was a drug infested neighborhood, there was an apartment building across the street where prostitution was going on and drug dealers on the corner.  So, I'm a full time pastor, so I noticed that when I came into the neighborhood every morning at nine o'clock, that the guys who were on the corner went away.  So, the secretary would come in and we're doing work at the church.  When we leave, the guys come back out.  When we go to lunch, the guys are on the corner.  So, as long as we are doing something, then they--we interrupt their business because they don't want to be seen.  There are too many people who could see too many things.  So, and there were a lot of kids in that neighborhood.  Elementary school is right down the street.  So, there's a lot of kids in that neighborhood, and so in the summertime the weather is warm.  They're everywhere.  Kids everywhere.  And so, the drug dealers were recruiting the kids into their business by playing football, you know, street ball with them.  And, I'm watching out of my office window, I'm watching these guys recruiting these kids who don't know nothing, so only one they're looking up to in the neighborhood are the drug dealers and the pimps.  Well, how do we change this?  How do we change this?  How do we change it?  So, a friend of mine who was visiting the other church, Reverend Eleanor Bryant, she's Bishop Bryant's [John Richard Bryant] sister.  She's no longer living, but she was in the neighborhood and we were walking in the neighborhood.  I'm talking to her and I'm saying, "We have to change this equation."  So she turns around to the kids who are sitting on the steps.  "Have you been inside this church?"  "No, we've never been inside this church."  Remember, it's a brand new church, new carpet, new walls, new everything.  Everything smells new.  Everything is new.  Beautiful blue and white church, gorgeous.  "Have you been inside this church?"  "No."  She goes to the next one.  "Have you been inside this church?  Do you know who the pastor is?"  "No."  "This is the pastor.  This is Vashti McKenzie [HistoryMaker Bishop Vashti McKenzie].  Do you know her?  She's on the radio, (makes sound).  Do you know these kids?"  All this and no.  "Come on, let's go to the church."  Well, the officers were standing at the door like, "(Makes sound) You're not letting these children in here."  I said, "Why?"  "They're gonna get fingerprints on the glass."  I had a trustee who religiously (gesture) cleaned the glass two or three times a day so that you could just shine through it.  "They're gonna drop candy and paper on the floor.  They're gonna mess up in the bathroom, and (makes sound).  You can't let these kids in here."
Speaker 1: Now this is a phenomena, I guess, that happened after integration, that the congregation of middle class blacks no longer live in the inner city, though they still own part of the congregational churches that are in the inner city.  So they--
Speaker 2: You come back to the neighborhood and get your hair done, your nails done, your hair cut, and you go to church and your social club, even though you may live in a county--it was a drive in.  I would say only 5 to 10 percent of the people were from the neighborhood and these were elderly persons who refused to move.
Speaker 1: Or couldn't move.
Speaker 2: Or couldn't move.  And then you had young urbans who were repopulating; in other words, they buy the property cheap, put a lot of money in it, you know, and that's where they lived.  So I'd say about 5 to 10 percent of the church was a part of that population.
Story_ID: 572726
Speaker 1: So, we got the kids in, and then the first year, after the first year we had a free summer camp program, because kids are on the street.  They're not doing anything.  Parents are at work.  You know, the drug dealers are recruiting left and right.  So, we had a free summer camp from nine to two [o'clock] every day.  We fed them lunch, gave them a snack, and then had extended stay for those who were really too young to be at home, until their parents came home at five o'clock.  And, we used the school teachers that were in our church to be the teachers and to put the curriculum together, and we had a good balance between fun and education.  In other words, they had an educational lesson somewhere.  It was either reading, writing, or arithmetic that was grade appropriate, and then they swam, they had roller skating to do, arts and crafts, karate. So they came because they were going to go swimming and they were going to go roller skating, and then you sneak in a little reading lesson or English lesson to keep their skills up in the summer.  After that first summer, I just really couldn't let the kids go, because I knew after school we were going to send them back to the street, so we began our after school program.  That's when our after school program began and the kids would come to us every day.  They'd walk up the street from the school and we did homework.  We gave them something to eat, soup and sandwich, you know, along that line, spaghetti and meatballs, those kind of thing, and we would have volunteers who would come to the church, many that were seniors, and we hired students from Morgan [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] to come in to help with homework, because, you know, like I didn't go to school during the new math, and I don't think you did either, so this new math equation, you know, is beyond us so we hired a couple of college students to come in, which was great, because here you had neighborhood kids sitting next to college students, and the interchange is always so fun, like, "Do you have any children?"  "No."  "How old are you?"  "Nineteen."  "You don't have any children?"  "No."  "Well, I thought everybody at nineteen had children."  "No."  "You're in school?"  "Yeah."  "You go to college?"  "Yeah."  "Real college?"  "Yeah."  "Your parents rich?"  "No."  "Well, how do you get to go?"  "I'm working.  Here [Payne Memorial A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland]."  (Laughter) "I'm working on the weekend.  That's how I go to college."  So, it's a wonderful experience to show kids that you don't have to be rich to go to college, and you can be nineteen and not have any kids. So, I mean, it was great and because were, we were having all these activities, we just interrupted the whole drug process.  They couldn't, they can't sell, they can't sell until the nighttime, and then when we come to bible study, we had nighttime activities.  Then, it interrupted the problem--then that became the problem.  Then, we started the take back the streets campaign to enlist the neighbors.  Look, y'all, we cannot let the drug dealers rule our neighborhood.  Let's clean up the neighborhood, let's plant, let's paint, let's get it all beautiful and wonderful.  We had outdoor services, this was in the summertime, outdoor services, and so the drug community said, "Now look, you gotta stop all this."  So, we campaigned with several of our churches, other brothers and sister churches.  A lot of the pastors, people who were pastoring, were the same people I went to school with at Howard [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.], and so I called my friends and I said, "Look guys, we all have the same problem.  Let's have rotating revivals.  We'll go to your church on this night and your church on this night, and we're gonna interrupt this drug traffic.  Let's get the city involved." [HistoryMaker] Kurt Schmoke was the mayor at the time.  Park Heights [Baltimore, Maryland] was really the tough area, so we were a week in Park Heights.  I remember he came and he says, "Aren't you afraid?"  I said, "Hadn't thought about it."
Speaker 2: Now, did you get direct threats from gang members?
Speaker 1: No.  Filtered threats.  Direct threats, you can go to the police (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I heard that they're going to do, rather than them saying hey, if y'all don't--okay.
Speaker 1: Right, right. I really hadn't thought of it.  Really hadn't thought of it.  We just wanted the neighborhood back.  We wanted it safe.  You know, when you have drug traffic, you have people who can't afford it, so we had seniors who were robbed, houses broken in because they have to hawk stuff in order to get the money to do that, so seniors are easy prey.  People that work, homes are empty, that becomes easy prey.  So, we had members who were afraid.  If they drove up to the church and the dealers were on the corner, they didn't stop.  They kept right on going.  It was kind of tenuous to tell young girls who were members of the congregation and young girls of the neighborhood, don't talk to this man and you don't have to do that, when they're living next door to a prostitute and that's a quick way of making money.  So, we're having great confusion here, so we had to work with the city.  Y'all need to clear this apartment out.  This is Section 8.  Y'all need to clear this out and you need to partner with us to help get the drug trafficking off the corner.  So, we were, we were successful because we were taking care of the needs of the people.  That's ministry.
Story_ID: 572727
Speaker 1: We had an outreach ministry where we helped with shut off notices, we helped with eviction notices.  We had a food pantry which was run by our seniors and they were wonderful.  These were sixty-five, seventy, seventy-five year old women who, on Tuesday at twelve noon, handed out food, and they mothered every last one. "Baby, why you in my line this month?"  (Laughter)  "What are you gonna do next month not to be here?"  "Now, you don't look good.  You're not taking care of yourself.  Here's the number at the free clinic.  Go to the free clinic."  So, here these women were nurturing.  So, you're feeding the neighborhood, you're clothing them, you're taking care of the children, so when the drug dealer started mumbling, the regular people in the neighborhood [Park Heights, Baltimore, Maryland], you know, who the drug dealer may be living in the same house or right next door, says, "Unh-uh, they're taking care of us.  You move them, we don't have no help, no resource."  So, in ten or eleven years, we never had a break-in [at Payne Memorial A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland].  Nobody broke in to take our computers.  Somebody tried to pilfer our downspouts; you know, your downspouts are metal and they can rip it off and go sell it and buy drugs with it.  You know, you put plastic downspouts up and that's the end of that, but we didn't have a lot of trouble.  We didn't have a lot of trouble because we were taking care of the needs of the people.
Story_ID: 572728
Speaker 1: There was an apartment building right across the street from the elementary school, five story.  It went out of business.  The owner went belly up.  The bank tried to sell it several times.  The people couldn't buy it.  I mean, this was a huge, thirty-two thousand square foot, five story building and the bank couldn't get its money back.  Finally the bank came to us.  Wow, were we floored, because our outreach had grown.  We were running out of space.  I mean, we had no more space, too many kids in the camp, we had ninety kids in the camp.  It was larger than what we could do.  Our after school program had grown.  Our senior program, we had senior--the Golden Doves [Golden Doves Senior Ministry].  Our senior program had grown.  Our marriage ministry, our young adult ministry, our bible studies, I mean, it had just grown beyond the capacity of the church [Payne Memorial A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland], so we needed additional space.  So, we were looking for a building and every deal went through, because once they found out that we were a church trying to buy this property, the price would go up.  The bank calls and says, "We want to offer you this building."  I said to the bank, "We don't have a half million dollars to buy a building.  We don't have a million dollars to buy a building."  "What do you have?"  I said, "We got seventy thousand saved."  "We'll take it."  This huge building cost us seventy thousand dollars.  So we began to--we partner with the city, with the state, and with a couple of other people and raise the money, $1.8 million, to renovate that building.  That is now a human and economic development building.  We call it the Nimrod Building [Baltimore, Maryland].  Nimrod is an African in the Bible, in the book of Genesis, who was the first builder, and we named it the Nimrod Building.  In it is a Head Start.  It is a senior program, which will become a senior adult day program eventually, but it houses our senior program, offices, there's an insurance--we lease out offices and office space, and other outreach ministries are in that building.  Just about right after we purchased that building and got the money in place and now we're bidding contractors and all of that, another facility became available because we had grown beyond our kitchen space, and that is a two story office building that was on Eutaw Street, in the 1500 block of Eutaw Street.  We were at the 1700 block of Madison Avenue, so it's only about two blocks away from us, and we were able to purchase that building for about, for roughly about six hundred thousand dollars, and full commercial kitchen, a banquet facility that seats five hundred, office spaces on both levels.  Our desire was to move all of our church offices into that building, and outreach activities. So we had twelve community service projects that operated out of that building, along with we leased space to an HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], AIDS ministry that, you know, interacts and helps people who have HIV/AIDS and do testing and counseling and all of that.
Story_ID: 572729
Speaker 1: And then, all of this--'bout at this, about at the same time, this is coming towards the late 1990s, between '96 [1996] and 2000, actually, the welfare to work piece hit.  Remember Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], the government, the welfare to work, welfare to work, welfare to work.  Well, we really didn't like all the people being pushed off of welfare, but we really didn't like people who were going to work with them who didn't understand who they were, the culture, the needs, the language and everything else.  There were a majority of people who were African American who were on welfare, although the majority of the people were white.  We wanted to show how, in church we're already doing community service projects, which was one of my beefs with the city, with the mayor.  You know, I said we're feeding people, we're clothing people, we're doing your job.  We are doing the human services that the city cannot do.  People who have fallen between the cracks.  They're somewhere between the church and the human service agencies, and we're doing this.  You know, you're making decisions in the city that's impacting my bottom line.  A HOPE VI project came.  They shut down all of the Section 8 housing that was closest to the University of Maryland hospital [University of Maryland Medical Center, Baltimore, Maryland], they're going to put all these cute little houses there.  They cut those people off.  Who do they come to?  All of a sudden in six months, we fed and clothed the same amount of people we did in a twelve month period.  In six months.  We served five thousand families in six months.  We take care of five thousand families in a whole year.  So that says what am I gonna do for the rest of the year.  I can't turn people away.  So, if you're gonna make these decisions, these arbitrary decisions, you wanna make these decisions, include us in the decision making process so we can be prepared, or you find a way to help us take care of the people that you're not taking care of.  So, the federal government gave money to the state and the state puts out bids, requests for bids, RFBs, and we responded.  We already had a 501(c)(3) separate, Payne Memorial Outreach Incorporated [Payne Memorial Outreach, Inc.], we have a 501(c)(3), where all of our community service projects were operating under, and we made a bid, we made a bid.  We put together the people already in the church [Payne Memorial A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland], experts, wonderful, glorious, they were marvelous, we wrote it.  We went to Annapolis [Maryland].  We had to go through the hearings and whatever, we got a 97 percent rating on our proposal, and the state gave us $1.5 million.
Speaker 2: This is in '96 [1996].
Speaker 1: This is late 1990s, yeah, between '96 [1996] and 2000.  And, we got $1.5 million from the state to train men and women to take them off the welfare rolls.  I'm sure, they chose us, I'm sure, because our proposal was good but also because we went for hardcore people.  We didn't want to deal with the people who had only been welfare for six months or a year.  We wanted to deal with people who had been on welfare for three to five years, second generation welfare recipients, hardcore people.  And we trained in two career paths, office staff, office clerical staff, and nursing assistant.  We knew that we would do more than the contract provided.  The contract provides you to come in, teach soft skills, do an assessment, teach them how to do resumes, teach them how to go do a job interview, send them out on interviews, and help them to get jobs.  Bingo.  When the people came in, they couldn't read.  They didn't have a high school degree.  They didn't have a GED [General Educational Development].  How are you gonna be an office assistant when you can't read?  You can't write, you can't speak.  You can't get an office job in T-shirts and tennis shoes.  You just can't do it.  Well, we're a church.  We're a ministry so we're not held to budget.  In other words, because we demonstrate the love of God in ministry meeting the needs of the people, then we knew we were going to go above and beyond the duty to do this.  So, we organized a professional clothes closet, so that when we sent the people out, they went out, and you couldn't tell, you couldn't tell that they had been on welfare.  You couldn't tell, you couldn't tell.  A professional clothes closet, we started a GED program, a GED preparation program, where we prepare people so that they can get their GED.  We connected them to community colleges so they can get some other courses and skills that would upgrade them so they could be successful, and we provided that nurturing support system so that, you know, when they came back, "It went terrible, it was awful." "Baby, sit down, it'll be fine.  Now, this is what you do the next time."  We walk people through the resume process, show them how to go online, how to get on a computer and look for a job, how to read the newspaper for a job, what to say to, so forth and so on.  And in the end, in two years we trained and placed into employment six hundred people.
Story_ID: 572730
Speaker 1: It sounds to me like you're part of a, or one of the leaders amongst ministers who are trying to get these inner city churches to fulfill the missions that they had in the first place.
Speaker 2: Well, the vision in the mission, or the mission and purpose of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church includes the things that we talked about at Payne Memorial [Payne Memorial A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland]: feed the hungry, clothe the naked, cheer the fallen, visit the sick, those who are mentally ill, deal with homelessness, economic development, or, and all of those things.  So, the ministry at Payne reflects the mission and purpose of the A.M.E. church, and I think the mission and purpose of the A.M.E. church should be fulfilled whether you're in the urban core, or whether in the suburbs.  There was, I think at that time, there was a trend for many urban core churches, downtown churches, to move to the suburbs, so that you have, of course, you know, inner city churches we have the same problems: parking (laughter), not a lot of land to expand and to grow.  So, a lot of churches were moving to the suburbs, but at that time, my opinion was okay, you go.  Somebody has to take care of the city.  So, our job is to take care of the city.  So, we built our ministry there and we stayed and we weren't looking, looking to go.  If everybody goes, who's gonna take care--people still need ministry, wherever they are.
Story_ID: 572731
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about storefront ministries in the black community, of which there are very many in the inner city.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Smaller work, smaller churches, you know.  Everybody--you know, church is not a one size fit all.  I guess you can tell because there are multiple denominations, multiple styles and approach to ministry.  Everybody can't sit in the congregation with twenty-two thousand people.  Mega ministry in Houston, Texas, Joel Osteen, as huge as that, everybody can't sit with all those people there.  Some people need to have a medium sized ministry, ministry that is very active like Payne [Payne Memorial A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland].  Some need laid back ministry, where it's just really nurturing the people who were within the household of faith.  Some people need to be in a small church setting, because they need that kind of touch and care.  When there are twenty-two thousand members of the church, they know the pastor is not gonna come visit them when they're sick.  It's gonna be the minister to the sick and shut-in who will come and sit, or the healing and recovered, kind of ministry (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or one of them.
Speaker 2: Or one of them, or one of them.  I mean, needs are met, don't be mistaken, needs are met and nurture takes place, but everybody can't take a huge mega ministry and some people need smaller ministries, so the storefront ministry kind of serves as that kind of purpose, and many great ministries started in a storefront, like the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church started in a blacksmith shop.  It was a small blacksmith shop and it grew so be Mother Bethel [Mother Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church], in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In fact, they towed a barn over to that site from where I could see it, and settled there and started.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  So, whether the church is this size, in the city, out of the city, small or large, they all have a function and a purpose, a gospel mandate to fulfill.  I just want us to do what we're called to do.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think, well, I don't know if we'll get into this, but there's a, I think there's a difference in theology in a lot of the storefront churches and, say, the A.M.E. or the Episcopal church, or any number of other churches in terms of approaching that kind of service in the neighborhood.  You know, there seems to be an emphasis on saving your soul rather than feeding the conger- you know, feeding people or getting them jobs or that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: The things have, I guess there is a trend now in congregational life.  Many people call it the me generation.  The I gospel, (laughter) the I gospel. Where the emphasis is on personal growth and development and what you get and what you receive, and not necessarily what you give, what you share, what you help.  So, we'll have to see how it all turns out.
Story_ID: 572732
Speaker 1: Now, in 2000, 2000, the year 2000 is a pivotal year in your life.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay.  You wanna talk about, I don't wanna get too far ahead of what we're doing, but that's, you know, you're receiving recognition and, from a number of different people, from your works as a pastor at Payne [Payne Memorial A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland], but in 2000 what happens?
Speaker 2: In 2000, I was elected to the episcopacy at the general conference of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church.  The A.M.E. church elects bishops every four years, where delegates come from all over the United States and Canada, the Caribbean, Africa, London [England], Amsterdam [the Netherlands], you know, come from everywhere, and these delegates vote on who's going to be bishop, and they, you know, bishops are assigned and laws are made, laws are changed, laws are dropped.  And so, that only happens once every four years.  I declared my candidacy in '96 [1996], because I knew that the church was gonna need time to get to the point where a woman can be elected.
Speaker 1: Now, in '96 [1996] too, you published a book called 'Not Without a Struggle' ['Not Without a Struggle: Leadership for African American Women in Ministry,' Vashti McKenzie].  It was a history of--
Speaker 2: Was it '96 [1996], or '93 [1993]?
Speaker 1: Well, it may be '93 [1993], but right here it says, (laughter).
Speaker 2: Ninety-six [1996], was it '96 [1996]?  Ninety-three [1993] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On the paper I have it says '96 [1996], but I don't know, you know, I don't know.
Speaker 2: 'Not Without a Struggle.'
Speaker 1: You know, so I can correct this based on what you say.
Speaker 2: We'll look it up.  We'll look it up.
Speaker 1: 'Not Without a Struggle' was sort of a preparation for this in some ways because it chronicled the history of women in the A.M.E. church, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't do 'Not Without a Struggle' as a preparation for that.  'Not Without a Struggle' grew out of my dissertation at United Theological Seminary [Dayton, Ohio].  I did the dissertation on the subject of women in ministry because when I came into the women in ministry, there was nothing for me to read.  There wasn't a book that helped me understand where I was in my call, there was no guide.  I didn't know who the forerunners were, I didn't know who the early women in ministry were.  I knew none of this history, as history comes back again.  I knew none of that.  Plus, everywhere I went, you know, as a young pastor, everywhere I went, the same questions.  Are women called to preach?  Why are women called to preach?  How do you think women--what does the Bible say about it--what is the theology--what is the theological basis for your existence, for who you are and for what you do?  And then I got tired of answering the questions over and over again, so I decided we're gonna do this as a dissertation and answer, you know, and wrestle with this question once and for all.  And then I did 'Not Without a Struggle' because I wanted to help women who were coming along behind me, women who were coming up through the ranks, women who were accepting their call and for future women, because women are called to preach and you just can't spend your whole career going over the same questions over and over and over again.  If you spend your whole career justifying your existence, you're not going to get anything done.  You're not going to have any ministry.  You always will be the ministry of explanation, and I don't think God called us to a ministry of apologetics for women in the ministry; so, I did--it was a twofold thing, to answer this question so when people ask I said, "Go read the book" (laughter).  And then I did it for women so that they could properly deal with power and authority.  You're here.  This is your call.  You are a woman.  If God wanted you to be a man, He would have fixed it before you were born.  He didn't.  You're here.  Now, deal with your call and this is what you need to know about power, authority, leadership, and leadership skills, and I did ten commandments for women in ministry.  And so, it wasn't as a response to help people understand about women in the episcopacy.  It just took me that long to develop the book out of the, after the (laughter) after the dissertation process.
Story_ID: 572733
Speaker 1: Announcing in '96 [1996] was, was a strategy.  I went to the '96 [1996] general conference praying.  I said, "God, if you want me to run for the episcopacy now, if you want me to pursue this process, then--," we call it biblically like throwing out the fleece, "then I need some sign.  I need some inclination.  I need some affirmation.  I need, I need something that tells me that the time is now and the time is right for me."  When I began to wrestle with the call much, much earlier, when I was in Oak Street [Oak Street A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland], and older pastors who were retired would come to me and say, "Hi bishop," and I would go, "Huh?"  "Bishop, bishop, bishop" I'm like go away.  I was just trying to be the best pastor I could be, and the best preacher I could be.  That was nowhere on my radar screen.  I felt so pressured that I went to Dean Jones [Lawrence N. Jones].  I had graduated from Howard [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.], but I went back to Dean Jones and we sat down and had a conversation.  I said, "I don't know what to say to people when they say that to me.  I'm not thinking it.  I don't really, I got eighty-eight people on the east side of Baltimore [Maryland] I'm trying to take care of, and I don't know what to say, I don't know how to respond.  I'm feeling--you know, what do I do with this?  What do I do with this?"  He said, "There are two kinds of people.  He said there are those who pursue the episcopacy, and there are those for whom the episcopacy pursues.  Be still and listen to God."  So, from that time I didn't worry about what anybody else was saying.  So, I'm listening to God, and if God wants me to do this, God is going to tell me that this is what I am to do.  So, in April 1995, I'm standing in the pulpit after the annual conference is over.  I made my, you know, made our report.  Traditionally I would come back to the congregation the first Sunday after annual conference.  I would lay out the vision for the next year; this is what we're gonna do.  By that time, that building, you know, that apartment building was in sight and, you know, we're growing, our ministries are growing and I'm beginning to tell the congregation this is what we're gonna do, and I'm telling them that the ministry that God has given us here is greater than one location.  It's greater, it's just not for this neighborhood [Park Heights, Baltimore, Maryland].  God has given us these kinds of ministries to develop these model of ministries.  The collective banking group, the church health coalition, the technology ministry, youth ministry, economic development, ministry for youth. All of these ministries, you know, and I'm naming these ministries.  This is not just for here.  God has called us to develop models of ministry that can be replicated all across the United States, and I'm talking about how God wants us to erase the walls of this congregation, that we're transparent, that what happens in here must happen out there, and how God is moving.  And I'm--you know, I didn't have this on my paper to say, and it's just coming, it's just coming.  All of a sudden I'm crying, I mean tears are coming down my eyes.  My son [Jon-Mikael McKenzie], of course, who is a teenager, you know, who's college, comes to the front and stands next to me because he doesn't know what, you know, to cry before a congregation?  He's never seen me cry before a congregation.  Never.  It's like the commercials never let them see you sweat.  Never let them see you cry.  And I mean, I can't stop.  I can't stop talking.  I can't stop crying.  You know, my husband [Stan McKenzie] then comes to stand next to me 'cause he doesn't have a clue at what I'm saying, and then the girls [Vashti-Jasmine McKenzie Saint-Jean and Joi-Marie McKenzie] come and stand with me.  My administrator, who had been my right hand, who had been with me since Oak Street, since 1984, this is now ten years later, who is on the pulpit too, comes behind me and says, "God just called you into the episcopacy, didn't He?"  And I said, "Yes," (laughter).  "Yes."  That was the moment that I knew that everything that we were doing at Payne [Payne Memorial A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland] wasn't for here; that God was getting me ready for a broader, for a broader ministry.  So, this is in April '96 [1996].  We go to the general conference in July, and I'm saying, "All right, God, if you want, if this is what you want, this is what you want, this is what you want, then I need to have some indication." And all during that '96 [1996] general conference, there were so many clues and so much affirmation and so much of this and so much of this to tell me, that the time was now.  So, I announced, you know, I called the leadership in my district and, you know, talked to the new bishop who was coming in, and said I'm, I'm announcing my candidacy.
Story_ID: 572734
Speaker 1: At that time, the prevailing mood was the church is not ready to elect a woman.  Campaigning for the episcopacy is like campaigning for the president of the United States.  Balloons, bumper stickers, newsletters, you know, you have a whole world that you have to introduce yourself to.  They may have known you, may have known your church, may have heard about you, but you have to introduce your qualifications to people all over the world, so I--you got to go to Africa, you gotta go to the Caribbean, you gotta visit annual conferences and districts all across the United States.
Speaker 2: So, the election is every, every--
Speaker 1: Four years.
Speaker 2: Four years.
Speaker 1: But in between that time, you know, if you want to be elected, it's like how does the president of the United States get elected?  President has to present your platform and yourself to your people, to the people who are gonna vote.  So, I had to present myself and my platform to people who are potential delegates, because the delegates don't get elected until the year before the general conference.  So, I had to introduce myself to--you know, that meant a lot of travel, a lot of visiting, looking for creative ways to get beyond the politics, you know, 'cause, you know you're trying to get people to know you, and folk are trying to keep people from knowing you, so you have to look for creative ways to be able to do that, to be able to present your platform.  So, after about the first two years of the campaign, which was mainly paper campaign, you know, sending out a lot of paper, newsletters, praise reports, you know, different kinds of things.
Speaker 2: How is that paid for?  Does the individual have to pay for it themselves, or--
Speaker 1: You have to raise money.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Just like a presidential--okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sure.  You raise money.
Speaker 2: Raise money specifically for that?
Speaker 1: You raise money; for me, the ministry of Payne Memorial was not to elect me as a bishop in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church.  So, I was very focused in attention with the congregation.  God has called us to do ministry from Payne Memorial A.M.E. Church [Baltimore, Maryland], and, you know, we know what we're doing.  We've got a welfare to work program, we've got this building, we've got twelve community service projects, we got these kids and this youth program, and all of this stuff we're doing, and we're not gonna stop doing that because I'm a candidate, and I'm not gonna stop being your pastor, okay.  The pressure's on me; I mean, the weight is on me because, you know, I go to visit somebody's annual conference, I gotta come back and teach bible study Wednesday night (laughter), go visit somebody else's annual conference, I gotta come back and preach Sunday morning, but we had a good staff of wonderful, Reverend Mason, Angie Mason [Angelique Mason], was my administrator, good support staff, you know, that stood right there while I was, you know, campaigning and getting the work done but, yes, you have to raise money.  I mean, you raise money outside of what you raise for your church.  You raise money specifically for that campaign, so about two years in, it wasn't the church is not ready to elect a woman; they had evolved to the church can elect a woman, and by the time we approached 2000, it was which woman are we gonna elect?  And my response is because there were two women who were candidates, myself and Caroline Tyler Guidry [HistoryMaker Bishop Carolyn Tyler Guidry], and I said I don't, I just want you to elect me (laughter).  When you say which woman, I say no, who are we gonna elect?  I said, I want you to elect me, and praise God, you know, the Lord, it was really actually a work of God, totally, because we're in a general conference and the pendulum is swinging back and forth.  One day you think you're ahead, the next day you're behind.  One day you're ahead, the next day you're behind.  There are a whole lot of tricks and traps along the way because you got caucuses who are caucusing votes, you know, and then we had a move by our lay organization, which voted four years ago, back in '96 [1996], that the lay organization, the lay people, would support electing a woman in 2000.  No specific woman, but just, it was time, it was time, to elect a woman in 2000, and so there was a resolution.  Now, the church had done that before.  There was a resolution to elect a Guyanian, Bishop Talbot [Frederick H. Talbot], and he was elected on a resolution and a South African was elected on a resolution, and so they were trying to elect a woman on a resolution, so that resolution came to the general conference, and it failed, so everybody who was trying to not get you elected were very happy, because to them they felt that the church was not ready to elect a woman, because here's this resolution to elect a woman; it failed.  But what they failed to do was to notice that six hundred people had voted for the resolution.  It was only gonna take two hundred more people to become a bishop.  So, in my mind, I said okay.  We got six hundred and some solid votes here.  I need to find 250 votes in a day and a half in order to become a bishop.  We have to, you know, find those votes and the groundswell happened.
Story_ID: 572735
Speaker 1: The groundswell happened.  There was just a whole lot of, you know, little things that added up to major big things.  Did we have a political strategy?  Yes we did.  Did we have a marketing campaign?  Absolutely.  It was different from everybody else's.  I think every candidate who won had a different marketing strategy, but we had about two or three key strategies that tipped the weight, that tipped the balance.
Speaker 2: What were they?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, one was just very simple.  Usually what happens is the candidate comes with a color.  All your campaign workers wear the same color, and you have the same placard with the same picture, so what we did was develop a series of placards and a series of media presentations, items, you know, campaign items where it changed every day, so people came looking to see what we're gonna do; so, our colors were red and white and black and gold, because there was another candidate that had red and white.  He was a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], fraternity, colors are red and white.  I'm a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority].  Colors are red and white.  So we had to figure out--he went heavy on the black and I ended up heavy on the red, but I chose four colors so that we had to distinguish from each other.  He chose black.  I ended up with red.  What we found out when we got to, we had red, white, and black, and we had scarves that had yellow stuff in it, so we rotated each day.  People came and said what they gonna have next?  What they gonna do next?  What they gonna do next?  What they gonna do next?  So, we found out that red made us stand out.  So we ended up wearing, after about the third day, we wear, it's like an eleven day conference.  We wore red every day.  We really challenged the meaning of red, especially those who didn't bring a lot of red with them, but we wore red every day, so what happened, as people joined the campaign, in other words, they could, they wanted to be a part of the campaign or they were gonna support me, they started to wear red.  When we got to Saturday, which is like the midpoint in your general conference, it looked like everybody had on red, and we kept saying like, I don't know none of these people.  They didn't come with me from Baltimore [Maryland], (laughter), I don't know who they are, but they're in red, so what it looked like was that the whole general conference was supporting my campaign.  The other thing was is that in every hotel, the hotels have channels and on those channels whatever convention is in town, is playing their spiel.  So, we developed a video, about a fifteen, twenty minute video, where I introduced myself, took them on a visual tour of our ministry, showed them what we do, you know, and what I essentially was saying, don't elect me because I'm a woman, elect me because I have a track record, I'm qualified, and I got experience.  Now, let me show you what I mean, and I showed all the ministries [at Payne Memorial A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland], and then I had several sermons, you know, several sermons, you know, where I was preaching on that and that played twenty-four hours a day in four of our major hotels, so whenever you clicked the channel, there I was, there I was, there I was, there I was. The convention center had channels, so I got the video tape at the channels, so when the people sat at the cafe, there I was.  You couldn't get a cup of coffee, couldn't get any water, couldn't get any juice without sitting there looking at me.  So although, as you call it, the big boys lock you out of the political circles, they couldn't lock me out of the minds of the people.  There's catwalks in Cincinnati [Ohio] that connect the hotels.  On two of the catwalks there were TVs, the videos were showing, and there I was, there I was--everywhere they turned, there I was, there I was.  That was, that was very key, you know, looking for ways to go beyond the system to get your campaign in front of the people who vote.
Story_ID: 572736
Speaker 1: The third key thing is that this was the first year we were voting electronically.  That means there are key pads.  That means every individual votes their vote, but wasn't every individual voting their vote before?  Well; technically yes.  But when you have to get up and you gotta take a punch card and punch it out on who you vote for and hand it to the election committee with bishops, presiding elders, and pastors, although they're not supposed to be looking, they can see who you voted for.  So, let's say everybody on this side of the room decided to vote for A, but you're really for B, and you know A is wrong, A is not going to make a good candidate, you really are for B; you have no choice than to vote for A, because your delegation leaders receiving that ballot and sticking it in the machine and seeing you vote for it as it goes from here to there.  There are stories of the past, machines break down, mechanics, counting ballots by hand, and they make the announcement and who they announce, it's like we didn't vote for that person, how'd that person get elected?  So now, you have electronic voting.  That means it's between that person and that machine.  It was the fastest election on record.  It has taken us to twenty-four hours to vote.  It's taken us a day and a half to vote.  Once we start voting, we don't stop until it's over.  So, I've been in a general conference where we've been on the floor for twenty-four hours trying to elect bishops, but here (unclear) we start at like eight or nine o'clock at night, by ten o'clock it was over.  It was absolutely over. And I was elected on the second ballot.  On the second ballot.  I and Bishop Richard Franklin Norris was elected, came in first, and about twenty votes or whatever number of votes, I was right behind him in second, and then on the next ballot, we elected the other two bishops. And so it was--and I never really heard, I never really heard, my name being called, you know, the chair election committee comes to the podium and announces these votes are cast.  This is what is needed for a majority, simple majority, and then announces who got the top votes, and then it's flashed on the screen.  Well, you know, we're standing in the back, you know, because in between votes you have to campaign.  You have to, you go to each district. "Now, come on guys, I need you to vote, I need your support," so, you know, we have, we run around to each of the districts to the delegates saying, come on, now, we're close, you know, we need you to vote for us, so all of our delegation, we moved to the back of the arena and we stood there because we weren't sure.  Like, if we don't win, we have to make that run again, depending on who we can figure out who voted for us, who didn't support us, we have to go find those extra votes so we can win.  So, myself and Norris' campaign, we were sort of standing side by side.  He was in the First District [First Episcopal District], I was from the Second District [Second Episcopal District]. So his campaign went, "Yay."  I said, Norris is the bishop, okay, he made it, he made it, he made it, and then the next thing I heard was a roar.  You know, a roar.  I mean, I couldn't hear.  We couldn't talk.  Nothing was going on, and people were tapping me, "You're a bishop, you're a bishop, you're a bishop."  I'm going like, "I didn't hear my name." "You're a bishop, you're a bishop." "I didn't hear my name."  So finally, my husband [Stan McKenzie] and I made contact.  "What is it?"  And he says, "You're a bishop."  I said, "Okay, good."  I'm fine.  'Cause he's tall.  He could see over everybody's head.  He could see the screen and I couldn't, but to this day I hadn't heard my name.
Story_ID: 572737
Speaker 1: Wow.  So that's, that's in 2000--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and but there was, from what I read there was one kind of a caveat to this, in that you have to go where you're assigned and it's often to the most unpopular places.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Or the furthest away places, you know, and so you were assigned to southeast (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Africa.
Speaker 1: Africa, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Botswana, Swaziland, Mozambique and Lesotho, and that's where I was assigned.  It's like a rookie.  A rookie is, you know, is not assigned to a major thing.  You're assigned--and most of our smaller districts happen to be outside of the United States, although the districts in south Africa, the Fifteenth [Fifteenth Episcopal District] and Sixteenth Districts [Sixteenth Episcopal District], are just as large and as populous as any district is in the United States with just as many churches and people.  So, the southeast Africa experience was a great experience.  It was different, of course, but I had been to Africa.  Everybody said you have to go to places to introduce yourself, so I had been to Africa before and I had been to some of the countries before, so it wasn't totally a culture shock to go to Africa for the for the first time.  What is different is that you're living in Africa, which is a whole lot different than being a visitor in Africa.
Speaker 1: Did your family go with you?
Speaker 2: My husband [Stan McKenzie] went with me.  Our two oldest children [Jon-Mikael McKenzie and Vashti-Jasmine McKenzie Saint-Jean] were in college.  The youngest [Joi-Marie McKenzie] was in high school, and she was a junior when we were assigned to Africa, so we wrestled for a long time with taking her with us and putting her in school there, but the closest international school--that means they speak many languages and children of diplomats and other people go to the school when you have to serve in a foreign, in a foreign place. And the closest international school was in Johannesburg [South Africa], which is about six hours' drive from where we would be living.
Story_ID: 572738
Speaker 1: We were talking about being assigned to southeast Africa.
Speaker 2: Yes, Botswana, Swaziland, Mozambique, and Lesotho.
Speaker 1: Now, that's a lot of territory to cover.  Did you have to fly to the different churches in those countries?  They're not even contiguous, right?
Speaker 2: Well, from Mozambique to Swaziland, it's easy.  It's easy.  Lesotho was surrounded on all sides by South Africa, so, you know, you fly into South Africa, and then fly to where you're going, whether it's Mozambique, Swaziland, or whatever.  But I lived in Maseru [Lesotho] and we lived in the same neighborhood with the embassy, with the American embassy; in fact, we lived right across from the embassy in a compound that has brick walls and razor wire around the edge of it and everything.  It's a nice rancher, you know, one story, you know, ranch house and very nice.  A very nice place to live and my office was there.  Bishop Frederick Calhoun James built the James Center in Maseru maybe about twenty, twenty-five years previously and it serves as a service center for the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, and that's where my office was located at the James Center.  So, from Maseru, we would go fly to the other countries.  We had maybe about 250, 200 odd churches in Maseru, I mean not in Maseru, but in this district [Eighteenth Episcopal District].  What is different about this district is that from the United States district is that most of the churches had schools, so there were about forty schools across the district, several high schools which were very, very large; the Hillside School [Hillside A.M.E. High School] in Mbabane, Swaziland, had about twenty-five hundred students that go from preschool all the way to high school, and then there was a school outside of Maseru in Lesotho, which was fairly large, eleven hundred, hundred students.  In Swaziland, it was a day school.  The kids came and went home, but in Lesotho, they stayed in dorms and, you know, they came from all over the country and stayed in dorms, so we had quite a challenge because we wanted to be able to assist the people in the educational needs, so we were able to build on a foundation of our predecessor, William DeVeaux [William P. DeVeaux], Richard Allen Chappelle [Richard Allen Chappelle, Sr.], these are the bishops that I followed into--and of course, Bishop James--into the district.  The most, let's see, what did we tackle first--we tackled technology first, because we found that the schools, you had high school students that didn't have computer training.  We know in the 21st century, you can't, everybody had, what are you gonna do without a computer?  And so now we have a whole subset of kids who are not technologically adept, because there are no computers in the school.  Well, they had Internet cafes, and the different businesses had Internet, the banks and all that, but if you don't get introduced to it coming through school, then you're gonna have to pay for it when you get to be an adult, and most likely in a very agricultural country, you're not, you're not gonna learn it.  So, without that technological advancement, it's like either you're gonna be working a white collar job, or you're gonna be a farmer.  Simple.  I mean, it's a separation just like that.  Without education, you're gonna be a farmer.  You have, in a country with 55 percent unemployment rate, it's very tough to take care of you and your family.  People would, you know, there are bright spots where people, middle class and lower class and people working, working poor, but I've never seen poverty like I've seen in Africa.  I've seen poverty in America, but poverty in America doesn't come anywhere near poverty in Africa, so for us the key is education.  So, we put, helped to get computer centers into the Hillside School to support that effort.  The parents and teachers got together and they raised the money and got it all together, and in the school in Lesotho, we purchased computers to start the computer lab there.  Then we started a for profit computer school in the James Center, my sorority, Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.], gave us money to purchase the computers, and we put that training program in it for young people to be introduced who wouldn't--didn't have computers in school, but also for adults.  The challenges that we had is that a lot of schools didn't have electricity.  If you don't have electricity, you can't have computers.  So, that was very daunting.  You know, you could only have computers in schools where there are electricity, and the schools have to be able to afford to pay for the electricity, you know, once the computers got in there.
Story_ID: 572739
Speaker 1: The other issue that we faced that was very major was HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome].  One out of--when we first arrived in Africa, I would say one out of four people were HIV infected.  When we left Africa, it was one in three.  In the southern region, they were giving us statistics like seven thousand people were dying every day.  We know that AIDS and HIV interrupted, interrupted life period.  There were people who were just sick and dying.  Many of them refused to understand or really want to know anything about AIDS.  Human sexuality was not a public discussed conversation.  It was just not publicly discussed.  Africa was a very conservative patriarchal community and discussions of human sexuality, even between husband and wife, was not an ordinary thing to do, so it was very tough to talk about AIDS without talking about human sexuality.  Now, they had all kinds of programs, you know, condoms, and television ads and things like that, they had banners and billboards that talked about it, but AIDS was a very devastating, devastating process.  There were children being orphaned on a regular basis, pastors were burying people every weekend, and it takes a long time to bury in Africa in many of the traditions, so, you know, that funerals are held on Saturday and they're all day, and so I can't have a conference meeting on a Saturday, because everybody's got to go to the funeral.  In other African countries, like in Botswana, it takes a whole week to bury someone.  During one of our annual conferences, a presiding elder died.  Well, that's a major leader and it was very difficult having the conversa- having the conference because every night we had to go to the home place of the presiding elder to have a service.  The missionaries had a service one night, the young people had one, this auxiliary, the male auxiliary had one, so it was like one service after the next.  So, it was really interrupting ministry life.  So, we had to find a way how to address AIDS.  One thing we found out is that the women got it.  Women understood.  AIDS kills.  Let's protect ourselves.  If a woman talked to her husband about AIDS, and about protected sex, he would think that she was having outside relationships, so she didn't talk about it.  Because of the economic situation, many men traveled and were not at home.  So the husband would leave to go to work on Monday and would not come back until the weekend, or the wife was a schoolteacher and she taught way away from home.  She lived at the school, and would come back home on the weekend.  Places like Mozambique, people left Swaziland and went to work in Mozambique, and left Mozambique and went to work in Swaziland.  If you don't cross the border in time for the border to close, you're not crossing.  So you would have hundreds of people trapped at the border every night.  What are we gonna do tonight.  I'm not gonna see you again, you're never gonna see me, so you know, it became a breeding ground.  The only places, no hotels where you're gonna stay.  The only thing that was open was the bar and a restaurant on either side of the border, so it becomes a precarious process.  In some way outlying areas and traditions, an elder male could demand a relationship from a younger girl and she would have to comply.  So, there was this myth that a virgin would cure you from AIDS.  So you found older men marrying very young girls, so girls getting married at twelve, thirteen, or fourteen with the men who may already be affected, and then when the woman comes down with AIDS, she somehow slept with somebody else; it's not me, somebody else.  Then you have men who are in the trucking industry, who travel on the road for months and months and months and months before they get home; well, they may not have abstained while they were away, pick it up and bring it back home to the wife who has been faithful.
Story_ID: 572740
Speaker 1: Then because AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] is a blood borne disease, people get AIDS, HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] positive not just from sex.  The roads are terrible, people drive terrible, (laughter) you know, if you think New York [New York] drivers are treacherous, you should come to some places in Africa and folks are just speeding around, speeding around, no seatbelts, no nothing.
Speaker 2: No signage from what I've heard, very few stop signs, or--
Speaker 1: Outside of the city.  Absolutely.  And people just drive, drive.  That's how the king of Lesotho [Moshoeshoe II] died. Late at night, off the curve of the road.  So, there's an accident, there's blood everywhere.  People go to help a victim.  You get blood, blood gets in a cut, body fluids exchange, and what are you gonna do?  Well, people should keep rubber gloves.  You were talking about people who may make a hundred dollars a month.  They're gonna spend money to buy rubber gloves?  And keep them in the car?  Then the issue of let's go get tested.  All right.  What if I find out I am HIV positive?  I can't afford the medicine.  You're talking about taking five dollar pill every day for people who make a hundred dollars a month. So if you choose a five dollar pill, what am I gonna eat?  What is my family gonna eat?  I'd rather not know, I'd rather not know.  Let's say out in a rural area, in a rural area in multigenerationals living in one house, a man borrows another man's razor and he nicks himself.  The other guy's HIV positive.  That same razor is used to cut the umbilical cord of a baby that's just been born, in the same bed with a person who has full blown AIDS, has been lying in body fluids on the sheets and everything.  The mother lies in the bed and has that baby in that same bed.  The bedclothes are washed in the pot that the people cook in.  So, they wash their clothes, everybody's, body fluids and everything, but the fire doesn't get the water hot enough to burn off the germs.  The clothes are hung up, the water is thrown out, new water is put in, and rice is put in and now the family eats out of the same pot.  So, we've got a major problem.  It's not just sex.  There are other ways that people catch AIDS.  And how to get the message to the men, because the women got it.  Gotta give it to the men, (background noise) and if the educational program is already afoot, okay, then we need to go beyond education.
Story_ID: 572741
Speaker 1: So, our prayer was, you know, God show us and guide us which is the right way to go.  So, we decided to take care of those who were least able to take care of themselves, and that was the children and the women. So, we raised close to two hundred thousand dollars to build group homes for children who were orphaned by AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] in Swaziland.  The A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church owned land in Mbabane, Swaziland, and just on the outskirts of the city, we built three group homes.  Each home houses twelve kids plus two house parents, and the kids come to us recommended by agencies who wanted to keep them closer to their ancestral homes, because your ancestry includes land.  You're a member of this family, you have a right to this land.  If you move the children too far away from the land, they may lose their heritage, so you want to keep them close to their heritage, and that was a blessing.  Our goal was to do five, we only got three, but we were happy for the three that we were able to build in Swaziland.  There are kids in the houses now, and some of those kids are just absolutely amazing.  They love, you know, everything is wonderful, brand new, brand new beds, brand new furniture, brand new, I mean, they're living better than their families are living, other people are living in the villages on the outskirts of the city.  One little girl that came to us, she died subsequently last year or the year before last.  She was eleven years old.  Her mother had died of AIDS, or complications due to AIDS, and the family was afraid that the little girl was going to give it to the rest of the family members.  They were ignorant about how AIDS is transmitted, so they locked her in a closet, locked her in her room, and sometimes they remembered to feed her, and sometimes they didn't.  And she was developing similar complications because she did have AIDS and she was found by a social worker and brought to us and she lived in our--it's called the Selulasandla A.M.E. Village [Selulasandla Vashti Children Village] in Mbabane. Sosula, sosula sandla [sic. selula sandla] means extending a hand, extending a hand, and she came to us.  She was just a frail, tiny little thing but she gained weight and she started going to school and she did real well, but then she died a couple years ago.  The other program for AIDS was started in, by Bishop DeVeaux [William P. DeVeaux] in, not Pitsane, Botswana, but I can't think of the name but it was right outside of Gaborone [Botswana], about an hour or so outside of Gaborone, on a piece of land, he build a community center.  In that community center, with the help of Mrs. Joan Cousins [sic. M. Joan Cousin] out of the Fourth Episcopal District, Bishop Cousins' [sic. Philip R. Cousin, Sr.] wife, to start a day program for AIDS.  We did AIDS testing, AIDS education, there are many children who were orphaned by AIDS that live on the fringes, you know fringes of extended family members, so they would come to us and we would feed them, have after school activities, extracurricular activities in the city to try to help the kids.  One of the goals was to start an educational program for women so that they could have marketable skills.  Many times women have to say yes to a marriage arrangement because they have no marketable skills, so instead of being an asset to the family, they become a liability to the family, but with marketable skills, the woman can take of herself, and so she makes the choice rather than having the choice forced on her.  That center is growing.  When I left there were seventy-five kids being taken care of by that center in Botswana, so AIDS was really a tough challenge.  We tried to improve classroom settings where we could all discuss money and it's tough raising money.  It's tough raising money.  It was better before 9/11 [September 11, 2001].  After 9/11, it just got very hard to raise money because so much money went into the 9/11 effort, and so many helping agencies went in that direction, they didn't have any money for Africa, so it became really hard, but we were able to build about four classrooms there.  We wanted to improve the life of our pastors and they live in mission houses so we were able to build eight of them, and we had about thirty-seven new church starts, between, most of them were in Mozambique, in the northern Mozambique area, so there was a whole lot to do.  You--once you start to work in Africa, you get to the point where you can't do everything.  You just have to pick.  You have to, you know, this is--we're going to try to do something about this, and then you dig in your heels and do the best you can.  Bishop Sarah Davis [Sarah Frances Taylor Davis], who was elected a bishop in the A.M.E. church in 2004, followed me into the Eighteenth District [Eighteenth Episcopal District], and she's doing an exceptional job.  She, we established the annual A.M.E. schools conference, like our churches meet at an annual conference, we wanted our school leadership and teachers to come together in a conference.  Well, she built on that concept by instituting a summer science and technology camp conference experience for children, so the work continues and she's doing an excellent job.
Story_ID: 572742
Speaker 1: How did the population receive you as a, as a female bishop, 'cause you were the first, you know, and you describe a society that's been maybe even more sexist than U.S. society?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, one thing about Africa is Africa has a great respect for leadership and they have a great respect for hierarchal leadership; in other words, the chief of the village is the chief of the village and they respect the chief.  So, you are viewed as the chief of this A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] village, and so they respect the chief. They respect (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, the title carries--
Speaker 2: The title carries a lot of weight.  The title carries a lot of weight.  I found that in Africa, I wear a clergy collar on, you know, high service times.  We were in conference for ordination for communion, but as a rule I don't wear it as an everyday process.  I found that in Africa, I had to wear it a whole lot, because otherwise they don't distinguish me from any of the other women.  They can tell you are American by the kind of clothes you wear, how you comb your hair, that kind of thing, although we tried to blend in with our culture, they still by the way they can tell that you're American.  If I don't wear the clergy collar, (makes sound). I've walked into international setting with moms and priests and whatever from a variety of faiths and not have a clergy collar on and you just get bumped out of the way and moved over (laughter) and all this. And I said okay, I see how this works and you know, you put on your collar and then you can stand with everybody else.  Otherwise, they just push you right on out of the way, hey, hey, hey, hey.  This is just a female, just a female.  So, I found that I had to, you know, you have to assert your authority to do that.  I found that people were receptive. They looked to see what your strengths are, they looked to see what you bring, you know, what you bring to the table, and once they ascertain that you've got strength and gifts to bring to the table, then they pretty much work with you.  We forget that there are women in Africa who are college presidents, they are prime ministers, they are ministers of housing, ministers of this, ministers of that, and the government of that African nation, they are principals of schools, they are school teachers, so women occupy leadership positions.  Most often, it's your gift and skills.  If you can do it, go ahead and do it.  Now there may be a man who says as long as it's not my wife, I don't care (laughter) you know. But if you got gifts and skills, then you rise with those, those gifts and skills.
Story_ID: 572743
Speaker 1: Correct me if I'm wrong, but it sounds as if it's--that the I guess polarization between a male and female is more profound at the lowest economic level, really--
Speaker 2: Yes, but even when women, even when women are at a higher economic level, it's still there.  We have women coming into the ministry and I'm sitting with the presiding elders and the board of examiners and I said, "Which students are you bringing forward, which students are you going to present to me in the annual conference?"  And they give me a list of who's this, and who's this, and who's this.  "Well, we're not gonna bring Sister So and So and So and So."  "What happened?  She didn't do her work?  She failed the courses?"  "No.  She doesn't have a letter from her husband giving her permission to join the ministry."  "Excuse me?  Did Brother So and So and So and So and So and So bring letters from their wives to join the ministry?"  "No."  "Okay.  So why does Sister So and So have to get a letter from her husband?  If you're gonna require it from her, require it from all.  There's nothing in our law and discipline that says you have to have a letter of permission."  So, it's there.  It's there.  Sometimes it's subtle.  In the Mozambique annual conference, you know the secretary of the conference is calling the roll, and call the roll of itinerant elders.  These are pastors, and you know the pastors are sitting right in front, right behind the presiding elders, right in front. And women still worship separately now.  Women were sitting on one side, men are sitting on the other.  And all of a sudden they call a pastor's name, like Reverend Rosa Chileo [ph.].  Well, Reverend Rosa Chileo is the pastor and I hear her voice in the back going present in the back of the room.  "Why are you sitting back there?"  "Well, it's women sit on this side and men sit on this side."  I said, "But you're a pastor.  You exercise leadership in your congregation."  And then they kept calling the roll and three women, they were all in the back.  I said, "You all need to come up front.  You need to sit with your colleagues.  You are a pastor.  You're a leader.  You sit with your colleagues."  So they came up front looking for places to sit and all the guys spread out so they didn't have a place to sit.  The women weren't gonna sit on their side of the church, you know.  Here comes this American upsetting our fruit cart here, so they weren't going to let the women in so they thought that was the end of that.  So I called the marshals, the marshals of the conference, and I said, "Brothers, bring me three chairs and put the three chairs in front of the presiding elders."  Oh, not now.  To sit in front of the presiding elders?  Women sit in front of the presiding elders?  They found those three seats so fast, they moved over, scooted, gave the women seats.  This is a part of your cultural difference.  This is that--it's there.
Speaker 1: They actually separate men and women in their churches just as a matter of--just as a general course?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Like it was in the United States a long many, many years ago.  Women worshipped on one side of the church and men worshipped on the other.  But we've gotten over that but in many parts of Africa women still worship on one side of the church, and men still worship on the other.  So you go respecting a person's culture.  You go respecting a person's culture, but you also have to strive to do what is right.  I'm in Mozambique and we've gone to visit the family of a pastor who died.  We're not inside of major city, we're really out in the rural area, and you come into the compound of the house and all the women are sitting on the ground, all the women are sitting on the ground and all the men are sitting in chairs, so I'm saying okay, how they gonna work this out (laughter), so they bring me a chair to sit down, and so I'm conducting the meeting, you know, I'm trying to respect the culture, this is their tradition and so forth, and so on. And a woman comes in, obviously very elderly, barely making it on a walking cane.  She looked like she was in her nineties and she was barely making it into the door.  There was one chair left.  She is moving towards that direction.  A young boy comes in, sixteen at the most, sits down in the chair and the woman is looking for her place on the ground.  I couldn't take it no more.  I said, "Unh-uh, unh-uh.  Young man, get up and give grandmother a chair.  You gonna make--she can barely bend to get down on the ground."  I looked and I said, "Don't tell me it's your custom.  But I can't sit here and allow this grandmother who can barely walk when you are sixteen and you got legs and you can stand real good.  You know, why don't you honor your grandmother?"  And he did.  I'm sure they talked about it for days after I left, (laughter) but, after I left the village, but that's a part of the cultural difference.
Story_ID: 572744
Speaker 1: In Maseru [Lesotho], I was at a Sunday school convention of one of my presiding elders and so, when offering time comes, the music is always great.  The people sing four, four part harmony; I mean, it's just the best this side of heaven, and it's singing and dancing.
Speaker 2: How do they do that?  (Laughter) When you hear them they just sing, they just do it. I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and you never hear them off pitch, never hear them off pitch.  I think they key is who starts it.  If they start it on key, they got it.  The starter is the key and everybody else falls in line, so I turned to my husband [Stan McKenzie] and I said, "I'm gonna go down and dance." Because, you know, we all join in the dancing and we, and it's easy.  If you danced in the '60s [1960s], you can do this (laughter).  A little sway and a little dip, you know, you can do this.  I watched, I figured out the step and so I'm gonna come in and join in the line. So, I waited for the line to come around, and I got up, I came behind, you know, I said the men in the front, the women in the back, I came behind the women and I started to dance.  All of a sudden, song stops, dance stops, church dead silent.  I said, "Oh my god," (laughter), "what's the problem," and I see the elders at the top of the line having a major discussion, and so then they come, come get me, and they take me to the front of the line and I said, "What's the issue here reverend?"  They said, "Women don't lead the line, bishop.  But you are the leader and the leader must lead the line.  We cannot have the leader in the back.  You must lead the line." And they put me in the front and I had to lead the line.  That was a major cultural process right there.
Speaker 2: These are problems that have to be untangled and (laughter)--.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, since that time there was a woman who was a presiding elder, so when they dance, she leads and it's not as much of an issue.  She's the leader.  She leads. She leads. And we've had, they have in the rural area especially or the city, it's a little bit different, it's more subtle in the city, but it's there.  In the rural area, I was visiting a church and a school for an annual conference, and my elder tells me, my pastor tells me that the leaders ride in on the horse.  I hadn't ridden a horse in fifteen or twenty years, and would you ride the horse as a leader, and the Lesotho horsemen are famous.  They wear these beautiful colored blankets, and the hats and everything, so we get to, we drove all the way there and we got to the entrance of the village and there he was with a horse for me and the blanket that matched, you know, it's like a tribal thing.  The blanket that matched everybody, everybody's blanket and my hat, right, and I get up on the horse.  Now, what's different about this story is that a year before, I'm coming in to the village and the chief says I can't lead.  But I'm the chief of the A.M.E.'s [African Methodist Episcopal].  She's a woman.  She can't lead.  I said, no issue.  I have no issue with this.  I'm fine, I'm fine, and I'm in a car and I'm behind the horseman and they lead me into the village.  A year later, chief says, I lead.  I get on the horse.  I ride five miles into the village and the people just celebrated.  I mean, it was just, it was mass celebration that the leader of the A.M.E.'s was able to ride the horse into the village.
Story_ID: 572745
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Bishop Vashti Murphy McKenzie [HistoryMaker Bishop Vashti McKenzie].  Bishop is the title.  Vashti is V as in victory, A-S-H-T-I; Murphy, M-U-R-P-H-Y; McKenzie, capital M-C, capital K-E-N-Z-I-E.
Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 28, 1947.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am an Episcopal servant; a presiding bishop in the African Methodist Episcopal church.
Speaker 1: And, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is March 16, right?  This is March 16, 2017 [sic. March 17, 2017].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Dallas, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is the Tenth Episcopal District of the A.M.E. church, and I'm the presiding bishop for the A.M.E. churches in the State of Texas.
Story_ID: 572746
Speaker 1: We're finishing, or we're gonna attempt to finish, an interview that we started ten years ago.
Speaker 2: (Makes sound).
Speaker 1: In twe- in 2007 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were just, we were just children (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, right (laughter).  We were talking, we had an interesting discussion about your assignment to East Africa, and we had concluded that discussion and so when did you come back to the United States?
Speaker 2: Came back to the United States in July 2004.  I had completed four years.  In the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, we are assigned to districts in four year increments.  You can serve up to eight years in a district.  I had completed my four year assignment and at the quadrennial, the general conference in 2004, I was assigned to the United States to the Thirteenth District [Thirteenth Episcopal District], which is Tennessee and Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's where we found you in 2007.
Speaker 2: That's where we connected.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were assigned as a bishop to the Thirteenth District, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, what were your duties?
Speaker 2: What did we do?
Speaker 1: What were your duties?
Speaker 2: My duties?  Well, as a presiding bishop, we see to the ministries of the churches that are within our area.  It's a part of, it's not necessarily tending to the sheep, but you tend to the shepherd.  You're directing the ministry traffic if, in that particular region, if there's a particular need or concern, then you work to address it, develop ministries to address it.  If there is something lacking, you try to, you know, pull things together to help (unclear) the churches and local congregations, help them to grow, evangelism, help them to plant new churches, take care of the churches that they already have.  We ordained clergy, we assign clergy to their local congregations.  We assist in the budgeting; in other words, we raise funds that goes to the connectional church that maintains eight colleges and universities and three seminaries, missionaries, oversees development fund to help congregations outside of North America and the like, so there's a whole lot that we do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, there were colleges and universities in the Thirteenth, right?
Speaker 2: No, not in the Thirteenth District.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: Here, in the Tenth District [Tenth Episcopal District], yes.  We have an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities], Paul Quinn College [Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 1: Well, now, I'm not asking you about that yet.  We're still in 2004, so I'm just asking about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What Tennessee did, was we supported Payne Theological Seminary in Dayton, Ohio [sic. Wilberforce, Ohio], so a part of our responsibilities then was raising funds to undergird the work at Payne and also to help our students who were in, within our area, to get to Payne Theological Seminary.  We were responsible for getting at least thirteen students into Payne, graduated, and back in the congregations.
Story_ID: 572747
Speaker 1: Isn't The Christian Recorder published in--
Speaker 2: Christian Recorder is in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in Nashville?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The editor of The Christian Recorder resides--at that time, resided in Nashville, Tennessee.  Most, the majority of the general offices were living or participated, you know, they headquartered their ministry is in Nashville, Tennessee.  The A.M.E. publishing house [Sunday School Union] is in Nashville, Tennessee.  All of that activity is happening there.  It's almost like, you know, the headquarters of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, yeah.  That's what you think because I know A.M.E. is founded in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but how did Nashville become the headquarters, basically, with all the activities?
Speaker 2: It's where our publishing house is, and not only where our publishing house is, but the C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal], A.M.E. Zion, United Methodists have their publishing houses also in Tennessee, so way back there in the history, somewhere, that area became a mecca for publishing.  I think Thomas Nelson is a very large publisher that's out of the Nashville area as well.  We do have an annuity and investment headquarters, which is in Memphis, Tennessee.  Our treasurer, in other words, our financial headquarters, is in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: We're everywhere.
Story_ID: 572748
Speaker 1: You were there from 2004 to 2012, that's--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --eight years. What were some of the, were there any particular issues there that you had to deal with, you know, or (background noise) what was going on--
Speaker 2: What were some of the things that you were--
Speaker 1: That happened in those eight years, yeah.
Speaker 2: --wrestling with. Hold on, my grandbaby's waking up, looks like she's getting ready to have--she may be okay.  One of the issues that were taking place in Nashville [Tennessee] is that we had a small to medium congregations that was struggling to do ministry.  They may be in rural areas.  They, the shift of the community center, the economic center in the community was taking place, and so we found groups of people who were struggling to do ministry, and so we were trying to figure out how we can help and how we can undergird them.  At the same time, our discipline required that our itinerant elder, in order to be ordained an itinerant elder you had to graduate from ATS seminary [Association of Theological Schools], and so how do we help these candidates to get a seminary degree?  So, we put together Believe, Incorporated.  I felt at the time coming to the district [Thirteenth Episcopal District] that morale was low, people needed encouragement, they needed to believe in themselves, they need to believe in God, they need to believe that God had a niche ministry for them to fulfill, and so we put together a nonprofit, a 501(c)(3), where we raised money outside of tithes and offering, to be able to get funds to preachers who are trying to go to seminary, as well as in the form of a grant, give money to local congregations to start a ministry, expand a ministry, general purposes, in other words they're trying to renovate the bathroom, they're trying to, my computers--have a computer lab.  They're trying to refurbish something, renovate something, renew something, and so we devised a mechanism where churches could petition the district for a grant of up to a thousand dollars to do some work, and they could do it every year, you know, but it was the real deal and they, in other words, there was a board of directors who reviews the grants, there was a formula of grant review. If you didn't use it the way you were supposed to use it, you had to give it back; I mean, this was the real deal, and we were able to raise 140 plus thousand dollars that would be turned back to local congregations, and that assisted theological students in school, and for a district outside, that was pretty good.  For an idea, I mean, it was an unheard of idea, if you understand what I'm saying.  This is a hierarchal denomination, where your fund base comes from your local congregation and comes up to support.  You know, that's what a connectional church is.  A connectional church is a grouping of small churches that put their funds together to do a larger work, which is how you get colleges and universities, which is how you get seminaries, which is how you get missions, missionaries on the mission field, which is how you can do work greater than the 150 people that are in your church, and so we wanted to revise that plan and rather than everything coming up from here, figure out a way where we can put money back into a local congregation to support them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when it comes in from the bottom, it was then redistributed back down to the neediest.
Speaker 2: Well, usually in a hierarchal denomination, your funds come through assessments, but we wanted to raise money outside of those assessments; in other words, people who are in our communities who are good community partners who are vendors who we keep in business who we make a lot of money for.  You know, you got the florist who has, all you know, the funeral director.  You have the food vendor, who, you know, the chicken, the mac and cheese, the greens, and all this.  We keep these people in business.  We make them rich.  So, we're asking these people, you know, outside of our local congregation, we're trying to expand our work and as a good community partner, can you partner with us to expand what we're trying to do, because we're trying to be a help outside of our local congregation.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what was this project called here?
Speaker 2: Believe, Incorporated.
Story_ID: 572749
Speaker 1: I don't know if I asked you to do this last time, but can you--you wanna talk about the colleges?  You know, I don't--you started talking about Paul Quinn [Paul Quinn College, Dallas, Texas], but I wanna say maybe we should wait 'til you get here, but on second thought I'm thinking maybe you should talk about, because the colleges are, I guess, ministered first from Nashville [Tennessee] to--I mean, is that how it works in A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal]?  I don't know.
Speaker 2: Each college and university that is undergirded by the A.M.E. church has its own board of trustees-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know.  It operates according to how the state where it's located says you have to, you know, you have to be accredited, all those rules and everything to do that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But, we're blessed to be able to have HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] that are part of the A.M.E. church family, so Edward Waters is in Florida [Edward Waters College, Jacksonville, Florida], you have Wilberforce in Ohio [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], Paul Quinn in Texas.  You can go on and name each school.  We belong to the ITC, the Interdenominational Theological Center [Atlanta, Georgia], where we have a seminary that's a part of the grouping of seminaries that are there, undergirded by various denominations like the Baptist church and Church of God in Christ, and so forth and so we have our seminary that is there, Morris Brown [Morris Brown College] in Atlanta [Georgia], you know, now you're gonna challenge me to remember all of them.
Speaker 1: No, I wasn't trying to make you name all of them, but there are how many altogether?
Speaker 2: Eight.
Speaker 1: Eight, okay.
Speaker 2: Eight colleges and universities, and they flow from junior colleges to colleges to university, which is Wilberforce.
Speaker 1: All right, we'll point out, I think, the historical point to be made is that the A.M.E. church was the first black organization to fund a college.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Wilberforce back in 1856, if I'm remembering my dates correctly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right.  That's exactly right.
Speaker 2: Eighteen fifty-six [1856], we're the first denomination to own a college, but if you go back into you're A.M.E. church, wherever--A.M.E. church history--wherever you had a church, you had a school.  You had a church, you had a school, you had a church, you had a school.  So, the education thrust, as well as our social justice thrust, was with us from the very beginning.  You didn't have a church unless you had a school.  My very first church that I pastored in Cecil County [Maryland] on the northern part of the Eastern Shore of Maryland; you know, the church was located in the middle of the horse farm.  It was Ebenezer [Ebenezer A.M.E. Church, Chesapeake City, Maryland], and what was the dining hall--you know when I came along in the past--what was the dining hall used to be the school where all the black kids in that area were educated from grades one to twelve.  Now trust me, that school was really just a little bit bigger than this room.  Just a little bit, and you had all grades from one to twelve, and the kids were around that potbelly stove to keep warm in the wintertime, but in other words, you know, wherever you found an A.M.E. church, you found a school back in the day.
Story_ID: 572750
Speaker 1: I know, there's an argument about what is the oldest historically black college [HBCU], and the argument for Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] is that there's only one founded by a black organization, so if that's your definition of black, it's the oldest, because I think Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] was founded (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think Wilberforce is the oldest for us.
Speaker 1: I think Lincoln was founded maybe a year before, but Lincoln was founded by the American Missionary Association [sic.], I think, or, not a black organization.
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, it had a white president, too (laughter). To start.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that happened in many historically black colleges and universities in the beginning.  There were many benefactors, just as there are benefactors today and, I guess, the stereotypical mindset of the time was college educated black men and women was not a priority but, okay, fine.  If you want to go to school, then you go to school over here, but we don't believe you have the intellect and the wherewithal to be the president of the school and guide the school because you're talking about a group of people that did not have degrees, but as people became degreed, master's, Ph.D., I mean, my [maternal] grandfather had, my grandfather, Carl Murphy [Carl J. Murphy], had a master's degree from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Harvard, Harvard.  You're talking about in the 1800s or early 1900s.  He has a master's degree, and so as people became degreed and became distinguished in their discipline and their professions, and became Ph.D., then they rose to the positions where, you know, we can handle, we got this.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, you have a tradition of education in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church.
Speaker 2: Yes, we do.
Speaker 1: And, on all levels, not just a college level but on all levels.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Where it, most of the time where there was no school you had, you know, the A.M.E. church became the place where you could learn how to read and write in the basement of Big Bethel [Big Bethel A.M.E. Church] in Atlanta, Georgia, which is where Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] began.  You know, you have to have an educated leadership, and so that's where it began.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's so many Bethels in the beginning, I think that Martin Delany [Martin R. Delany] learned how to, well he knew how to read and write, but a lot of his higher schooling took place in a church in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], you know, in a Bethel Church.
Speaker 2: Bethels are everywhere.
Story_ID: 572751
Speaker 1: Did I ask you about the four horsemen of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church before?
Speaker 2: Maybe (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, it may be important just to briefly talk about them and maybe some of the historic black women in the church, too, because, you know, as we were discussing, the patriarchal nature of religion anyway.  But, there are four men, they call the four horsemen (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They call them the four horsemen.
Speaker 1: But I'm sure there are women, too, that have done great things, but--
Speaker 2: There are many exciting women who have contributed to, you know, you're talking about Henry McNeal Turner, Richard Allen, and so forth, and so on--
Speaker 1: Alex Payne [Daniel Alexander Payne] and-
Speaker 2: Right. You know, Henry McNeal Turner always stands out because, you know, we like to liken him to be the first black theologian because he was very Afrocentric and Jesus is black, and so forth. And so he was very ahead of his time as far as the theologian, you know, Paul Quinn [William Paul Quinn] moved the church west of the Mississippi [Mississippi River], west of the Appalachian Mountains, and so if you can imagine how dangerous it was in those days, there were no cars, nor airplanes, it was you walking or a horse if you were blessed to have one, to be able to carry the church on your back to the western parts of the United States.  Of course, Jarena Lee is our shero of the faith.  Jarena Lee was a preacher.  She travelled like hundreds and thousands of miles to preach without ordination.  Richard Allen, at that moment, did not believe in ordaining women and, as the story goes, at Bethel [Mother Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Richard Allen, there was the worship service and the preacher was preaching, and he forgets, he stops, you know, he loses his way in the sermon, and Jarena Lee stands up and completes the sermon, and she did it in such a way that Richard Allen licensed her to preach. So this is back in the 1800s, and so she was the first of our A.M.E. women to be--
Speaker 1: Now this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) licensed to preach.
Speaker 1: This is interesting.  So, she was licensed by Richard Allen--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 572752
Speaker 1: And, Richard Allen, from everything I read about him, was such a progressive mind for those days, you know.  He founded the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church; I mean, he built a relationship with Haiti.  I don't know what Richard Allen, I mean he was, just a great--
Speaker 2: He was a very progressive person, very bright, very smart, very centered.  You're talking about a man who was enslaved and earned his way, you know, to buy his own freedom, came to Christ and converted his master, so, he was preaching.  He was ordained in what we would call the United Methodist church today, or the Methodist Episcopal church at what is called the famous Christmas conference in Baltimore [Maryland].  I think it was like 1774.  I don't remember the exact date, but if you look at the Christmas conference, he was ordained then and was preaching at St. George's Methodist Episcopal Church [Historic St. George's United Methodist Church] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and he, along with other freed men and women, were an integral part of that congregation and the numbers grew and grew and grew.  Richard Allen was allowed to preach in the very early morning services, and where most of the people came.  I'm talking about, you know, the freed men and women came and they paid their tithes and their offerings like everyone else, but gradually they were pushed back; you know, you can't sit up front.  You've got to sit here, you've got to sit here.  Nope, y'all have to sit in the balcony, and then that infamous Sunday morning where the usher came to tell Richard Allen and Absalom Jones you have to get up off your knees, because there is a majority person, I'm talking about a different skin-toned person, who needs your seat, and Richard Allen and Absalom Jones says if you just let us finish our prayer we will trouble you no more, and they got up and they walked out, and people walked with them, walked across the street to the blacksmith shop, and the A.M.E. church was formed.
Speaker 1: Now he was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not out of a theological difference, but out of wanting to worship in dignity and being respected.
Speaker 1: Yes, what is ironic is that the Methodist church was founded by John Wesley, who was a strident abolitionist.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That was in England, you know.  That's where, so I just wonder he would have thought--
Speaker 2: Everybody didn't catch that vision (laughter).
Speaker 1: --when it comes to America, it has to--
Speaker 2: He didn't catch that vision (laughter).
Speaker 1: --it has to get Americanized on some level, I guess, and that's part of the, it just mirrored what's going on in America after it got here and got started.
Speaker 2: Part of the culture, it became a part of the culture in society at the time.
Speaker 1: And Allen was a blacksmith and that was his blacksmith shop that became the first church, A.M.E. church, Mother Bethel [Mother Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Yes, well that building had become, he built Mother Bethel.  He built Mother Bethel land, the oldest piece of land owned by African Americans in this country, and I think that Philadelphia was first to buy, buy and own land, which they had to fight every day in order to keep, because the Methodist Episcopal church kept coming to try to take the building, kept coming to try and send pastors to pastor, that the people were not able, you can't possibly pastor yourselves, you can't possibly minister yourselves, you can't possibly do this.  But year after year, decade after decade, they proved them wrong.
Story_ID: 572753
Speaker 1: So, I guess he'd [Richard Allen] be the first of the four horsemen at the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church.
Speaker 2: Yes, he would be.
Speaker 1: And then, second would--may be Paul Quinn [William Paul Quinn], I guess?
Speaker 2: Paul Quinn, Edward Waters, and Henry McNeal Turner.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what about Payne [Daniel Alexander Payne]?  I thought he was one of them.
Speaker 2: One of them.  You see, you're asking me to name all of my history on point here--
Speaker 1: All right, I thought Payne was one.  Edward Waters (laughter) I don't think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who are these guys?
Speaker 1: He may be the fifth one, but Payne, I think, was third and then comes Turner at the tail end.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Because he was a chaplain during the Civil War, and based in Atlanta [Georgia], I guess.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure where he was based.  Like I said, you asked me to remember all my history right here.
Speaker 1: Payne is the founder of--founding president of Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And Quinn, there's so many churches in the Midwest.
Speaker 2: Quinn went to the South, I'm sorry, Quinn went west.  Waters also was moving west, but he was moving west south.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I learned the other day that Quinn was from India.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: He was actually born in India and was associated with some trip that the British East India Company made to New England.  That's how he got to America.
Speaker 2: See, if you told me we were going in this direction, I would've read up on my history (laughter).
Speaker 1: But that's an interesting set of men that were not just important for, like religious history before the history of our people, you know--
Speaker 2: They made an impact at the time in which they served, and the history of African Americans are told through the history of our their bishops on what their interest was, that, key ministries, where they went, how they plan at the church, and I'd say that's the same in the United States as well as in Africa, too.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  There's so many scholars we've interviewed that have a link to the A.M.E. church; I know, [HistoryMaker] David Levering Lewis' father was in charge of Payne at one time--Payne Theological Seminary [Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: It just says a lot, so many associated with it.
Speaker 2: There is a lot.
Story_ID: 572754
Speaker 1: So we were talking about some of the issues in the church, and I know, one of the issues I know where I come from is the status of Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], because it seemed to be under a lot of economic pressure to stay open now.  There was a tornado, the oldest black college in the country is nearly blown off the map by a tornado in 1974.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And it has to be rebuilt.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And Wilberforce is still standing today.  She's doing great.  I think HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] are having a challenge, simply because there are a lot of other places that you can go to school.  You have more of a choice, you know.  HBCUs are born in land grant colleges, and they were born in a day that you could go to no other place but to what we call today as HBCUs.  But we have to be very careful not to, not to diminish the value of these schools.  Like, Paul Quinn [Paul Quinn College, Dallas, Texas] is 140 years old.  For 140 years, has been faithful to train students, and so, if you have, if my figures are correct, there are over four thousand institutions that grant degrees in the United States.  Of those four thousand, 103 are HBCUs.  There are, on average, three hundred thousand degrees that are given each year out of these institutions, and 10 percent, 10 percent, thirty thousand degrees, are from HBCUs, so you have four thousand plus schools and a hundred plus schools.  You have three hundred thousand degrees and thirty thousand degrees out of those 103 schools, and so that's amazing.  It is not like four thousand schools and three thousand schools, no, no, no.  It's 103 schools that are granting 10 percent of all bachelor degrees in the United States.  That's amazing when you take a look at, in New Orleans [Louisiana], Dillard [Dillard University] provides more, I think it's more bachelor degrees of students who go to medical school than any school in the United States.  Unheard of.  HBCUs graduate more students who are the first in their family to get a college education.  So there's a role to play for HBCUs.  In the United States.  So, all schools struggle.  If you're talking about, I can go to, what, SMU [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas], I can go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I can go to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], I can go to all these other different places and graduate with a hundred thousand dollars in student loans. Or I can go to HBCU, and graduate without any debt at all, and still get the same top flight education and then be able to go on and get my master's or terminal degree.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --there's a role to play--
Speaker 1: Yeah, still (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) for HBCUs.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah.
Story_ID: 572755
Speaker 1: A.M.E. publishing house [Sunday School Union, Nashville, Tennessee], now what all is published besides The Christian Recorder?
Speaker 2: Well, you know The Christian Recorder is the oldest, continuous published newspaper of Africans in America today, and the publishing house does publish The Christian Recorder, but also all of our Sunday school material, our A.M.E. Review [The A.M.E. Church Review], which is our intellectual magazine, and our Discipline ['The Doctrines and Discipline of the African Methodist Episcopal Church'] and other books and things that are printed out of the Publishing House.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know The Christian Recorder goes back to Martin Delany's newspaper, The Mystery.
Speaker 2: Way back.
Speaker 1: He sold to the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church when he joined up with Douglass [Frederick Douglass] to form The North Star in 1848, I think?  But it goes way back.  It's been a continuous publication, probably since the early 1840s.
Speaker 2: You have to understand, it really has and it still is today, there are a lot of organizations and institutions that are really not interested in publishing what we've got to say and what we think and what interests us, and certainly back in the 18- 1700s and 1800s, there were, The New York Times was not publishing what you were thinking about and when you were thinking about it, or any other institution, so you had to do it yourself.  You know, the Afro-American newspaper [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers], of course, that's our family newspaper.  That started in the basement of Bethel A.M.E. Church in Baltimore [Maryland].  It started out as the Sunday School Helper, and then broadened its scope to cover the City of Baltimore and then Washington [D.C.], and New Jersey, and on and on and on, until it became, at one point, the largest chain of black weekly newspapers in the United States.  So, the church was the center out of which schools were planted, elementary schools, colleges and universities.  It was the birthplace of publications, to be able to preserve our thoughts and share ideas, a way to express ourselves, to enter into intellectual dialogue about one thing or another, so the church was the starting point of leadership.  You know that in the church, no matter what you did from Monday through Saturday, when you came to church you were in charge of something.  You know, you were the steward, you were the trustee, you were the deacon.  You were Mr. So and So, you were Mrs. So and So, you were Ms. So and So, although your career outside of the church may have been unskilled or domestic, domestic career.  When you came to church, this is where you exercised your leadership skills.
Story_ID: 572756
Speaker 1: The Christian Recorder, being the oldest, continuous- continuously published periodical in the--black periodical in the country.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And the, now what else, you said there are Sunday school materials published too?
Speaker 2: Yes, all of our Sunday school materials.  So, your youth lessons, your adult lessons, your adult basic lessons, your teen lessons, all of that is published for the United States, and in the global market, the global market becomes a digital base so it could be translated in different languages and on Discipline on Law ['The Doctrines and Discipline of the African Methodist Episcopal Church'], which is like a huge volume, you know how we are, and all of that comes out of the publishing house [Sunday School Union, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Certificates, altar paraments, communion wear, you know, all of the kinds of things that churches need.
Story_ID: 572757
Speaker 1: Now you have written several books yourself, and they've been published.  Are they--do you publish them, are they published by the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church?  Are they published by independent--
Speaker 2: Mass market.
Speaker 1: Mass market publishers, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  Correct.
Speaker 1: And so, tell us about some of your work.  I know, well, go ahead.  'Not Without a Struggle' ['Not Without a Struggle: Leadership for African American Women in Ministry,' Vashti McKenzie] was one--
Speaker 2: 'Not Without a Struggle' was the first book, and, it is, was basically my dissertation.  It is for, it's about women in ministry and leadership.  The issue of 'Not Without a Struggle' is that the premise is that women in ministry is not new.  There have always been women in ministry, from the biblical times all the way up to the present time.  What is different today is the amount, the number of women.  It is not just one.  It's just not Jarena Lee over here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  You're talking about hundreds of women, and so since hundreds of women are here, my concern was how you handle power and authority; how you handle, what is your leadership skill and style.  Since we're here, let's make sure we do it well, and that's with 'Not Without a Struggle'--and I updated the edition in 2012, an updated edition.  My interest in leadership expanded to 'Strength in the Struggle' ['Strength in the Struggle: Leadership Development for Women,' Vashti McKenzie] and it was really for all women, not just for women who were in the ministry.  That was followed by 'Journey to the Well' [Vashti McKenzie] and 'Journey to the Well' is about transformation, about change and using the Samaritan woman as a foundational process of how Jesus engaged her and how she changed.  So, the power was not in the result, the power was in the journey; how she went from a woman talking about water, to wanting the living water, to going back to an environment where she had already been prejudged by her lifestyle to tell them come see a man who told me everything about myself. The next book was Jacob, Rachel, and Leah.  It was called 'Swapping Housewives,' ['Swapping Housewives: Rachel and Jacob and Leah,' Vashti McKenzie] and it is a story that is excellent for married and unmarried love; I mean, I call it your original baby mama drama book, of how you've got two women and one man and how they work their stuff (laughter) and how they navigated this relational aspect in the biblical times and what implication that it had for our relationships in modern times.
Story_ID: 572758
Speaker 1: So this is a story from biblical times that you have retold, basically, right? Is that what you're saying?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And this is a story of who? Who in the Bible is--
Speaker 2: Jacob, Rachel, and Leah.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Jacob, Rachel, and Leah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, Jacob's the trickster, you know, took his, stole his brother's birthright, went to stay with Uncle Laban, fell in love, love at first sight, you know, kissed a girl at the well, fell in love, the father says, "You've gotta work for me for seven years and then you can marry her," and then switched brides on the marriage night and married Leah instead of Rachel, and he consummated the, you know, the relationship anyway, stayed married to her and the father said, "You work for me seven more years and then you can have the other one."  So, it's the--
Speaker 1: How was the switch accomplished?  I mean, he didn't know--
Speaker 2: Well, brides were all covered then, way back in ancient time.  You know, you just have to trust the one that's coming out to you, that's gonna be the one.  I mean, it was, you know, intricate, you know, an intricate process.  You know, she went from her father's tent which was supposedly her husband's tent. I mean, that's all a part of the mystery of the story.  You watched Rachel, you looked at her for seven years, you kissed her at the well when you first met.  Couldn't you figure out that this one, that when you walked into the tent, this is not her (laughter)?
Speaker 1: You'd think, you know.
Speaker 2: Couldn't you figure that out? So, that's a part of the mystery of the thing.  And then, you have relationship tension.  You know, you're the other woman, but, you know, you're married to him, but you're the other woman, he doesn't want you.  You know, he didn't want you, period.  And he's looking at your sister, wanting her every day, but he goes home to her every night.  And, she's the unwanted woman.  She's the, you know, she's the other woman but she keeps having babies, so wait a minute now, if I don't want her, I don't like her, I don't want to be with her, I really want her, then how come she keeps having babies?  So, that opens another door here, like wait a minute.  Maybe we're not so disinterested as we'd like to make pretend we are, and then he gets married to Rachel and she's not having babies. So now you have your sister, nah, nah, nah, nah, nah, look what I got.  And, you have nothing and, in ancient times, a woman's value was interpreted by the number of sons she had, so I mean there's a whole lot of stuff in there that you can pick apart and share about.
Speaker 1: Do these stories like resonate with people today in terms of the dramas they have in their homes?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely.  If you, you know, look at any reality show or watch any soap opera, nighttime or daytime soap opera, where you have a woman who stands up and says, you know, well I have the ring.  Okay, but I've got the baby (laughter).  I've got the kid, okay?  All you've got is a ring.  He's got to come see me because he's got to take care of this kid, you see.  So now you've got relational tension happening. It's not new (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So there--I realize there's no one solution, romantic solution to all that, but what is, I guess, a protracted solution for those kind of issues--is it counseling or what is it?
Speaker 2: Oh, if I had that, I'd be a wealthy woman sitting on a mountaintop somewhere waiting for the world to come and ask me all these wonderful questions that I had to answer to.  There's a whole lot of things that have to take place.  Yes, counseling may be it, but being able to teach the values and the standards of the scripture before they become necessary.  We tend not to teach the standards and values of the scripture until after something happens.  We have to learn how to be proactive, like preventative medicine tries to get you into a position before you need the doctor.  If you take these vitamins and you exercise, you eat right, then, you know, you may not have to visit the doctor as often as you think, rather than you just do whatever you feel like you want to do.  Then you go to the doctor and the doctor says, ah, you gotta eat right, you gotta exercise, you gotta take vitamins, you gotta do these kinds of things, and so we don't have preventative relationship opportunities or experiences where we try to get the stuff in you first, so that when life happens--and life always does--when life happens, at least you have some kind of foundation and framework to work with.
Story_ID: 572759
Speaker 1: I know when we started interviewing ten years ago, I asked you about your name, and you really telled a--told an excellent story about how you got your name and about the person that you were named after, actually, in the Bible and it was--do most of your, I can't say I've heard one of your sermons, but do your sermons and your writings tend to retell biblical stories and apply them to--
Speaker 2: Well, when I preach (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) what's going on.
Speaker 2: --it absolutely comes from the word of God.  That is my foundation.  That's where I stand on it.  It comes from the scripture and so, you know, when you preach, when God gives you a word, gives you a message to preach, sometimes it's couched in a story. And sometimes it's couched in biblical principle that you're teaching on a particular aspect and not always telling a story, although the stories of the Bible are there for you.  When I preach, I'm preaching for the word of God.  When I write, it may be a combination of things; you know, there may be other resources that come in there and other people's stories.  It depends upon the trajectory of, you know, where I think God wants me to end up with this story.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And sometimes things are just fascinating.  I mean, that's how books are born.  There is a curiosity; you know, what is the answer to this, and in your searching and trying to find that answer, it just goes on and on and on and on, and ends up being a book.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And as you said, a lot of, you know, certain situations we get in life, there may not be an answer for the problem.
Speaker 2: There may not be an answer?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right. For certain--it depends on how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know what your great-grandmamma used to say is that some answers won't be answered until you see Jesus face to face and then you ask and then you get the answer.  There is a mystery.  There are some answers that we may not find on this side of glory.
Speaker 1: Now, when you preach or teach, is it always strictly from a biblical standpoint?
Speaker 2: I take a text; yes, I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, do you ever, I guess, acknowledge, I guess, that there can be moral teaching from other sources?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh sure.  Oh, yeah.  Absolutely.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, there's always a synthesis of ideas.  There's always a synthesis of ideas; so, if you take Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], when he developed the nonviolent approach in the social justice, addressing the injustice of the Civil Rights Movement and what was happening in their day, it was a synthesis of ideas from Reinhold Niebuhr, which, a theologian.  You had Gandhi [Mahatma Gandhi], which is absolutely not Christian, but on the other side of the world, and the Christian faith, and all these flowed together to produce what we call a nonviolent approach in addressing the injustices during the Civil Rights Movement.  So, there's always a synthesis of ideas; most preachers that I know are avid readers.  I am one.  I have more books than I care to, I just don't have enough space for books and thank God for technology, so now I have, I carry books in my iPad now, in my tablet which is wonderful, because I, you know, you read.  That's what you do.  You are hungry.  You want to know.  There is a quest for knowledge and somebody has an answer so you read over here, and many, many people are just eclectic in their taste of reading.  You have to be.
Speaker 1: Now one of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because your people are.
Story_ID: 572760
Speaker 1: One of the, I guess one of the problems that Christians face is trying to prove or disprove ideas with the--using just the Bible, and it becomes a--I know during slavery days masters could prove that slavery was all right by using the Bible.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Abolitionists could prove it was wrong by using the Bible.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean, today you see issues of women's rights, racism, homosexual issues are all, they are subjected to a similar test.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And it seems to depend on who you're talking to, what passage they use, to--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there is a whole, I mean you could go to seminary and spend the rest of your life taking a look at the interpretation; how to interpret the Bible, and there are many lenses through which, where you begin your interpretation.  It's part of theology.  It's why you have black theology, feminist theology, womanist theology; I mean, those are the starting points for those persons to begin their interpretation.  Of course, King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was, had his Ph.D. in systematic theology, and so there were many different ways to approach the scripture to develop your interpretation.  A part of my dissertation when I wrote 'Not Without a Struggle' ['Not Without a Struggle: Leadership for African American Women in Ministry,' Vashti McKenzie] is that for years, people had misused, or used certain interpretations to their own advantage.  Slaves, obey your masters without in the historical context, the social context, what was said before that, what was said after that, what were the circumstances where Paul or Peter or John, whoever was writing, which sources that were used, which is why we go to school, which is why we had to take Greek, which is why we had to take Hebrew, so that you can go yourself inside these texts to come up with the interpretation. So there are many factors that go into it, and yes, people use and misuse the scripture to support their own point of view.
Story_ID: 572761
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think I'm not alone in thinking sometimes that too much emphasis is placed on in a sense that it's the ultimate arbiter of everything.  There are some things that we just know are wrong.  I think Douglass [Frederick Douglass] said in a 4th of July speech, that if slavery is wrong, nothing is wrong; I mean, if it's not wrong.  If slavery's not wrong, then nothing is wrong.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, though people would point out, well, Jesus said, "Slaves, obey your masters." Well, it would seem like, you would think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he did not say that.
Speaker 1: Well, they used to say he said that.
Speaker 2: But no, but see, that's a part of your interpretation matrix.  He did not say slaves obey your masters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, that's, there's a whole body of believers who stake their lives on the red, the red and nothing else, and the red Bibles are what Jesus said, so they just--everything that Jesus said in the gospel is printed in red in that Bible and, you know, they stay in the red.  That's it.  If it's not in the red, that's it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think Jefferson [President Thomas Jefferson] wrote one like that at one time ['The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth'].  He tried to write a book just with everything that Jesus said, and then--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But then, that's out of context, right?
Speaker 2: No, I'm just saying.  They printed what Jesus said.  They just colored the ink.  The ink is colored in red, so they said this is what Jesus said, so when you come over further down in the New Testament, it wasn't necessarily that Jesus said that, it's what Paul said about whatever.
Speaker 1: What Jesus said?
Speaker 2: You know, what Paul said about whatever.  So we hear all the time wives should submit to their husbands.  Okay, that's there, but a couple of verses above that it says each one should submit to each other.  Oh, but we don't hear that part.  We just hear wives submit to their husbands.  We don't hear that each of you should be in submission to each other.  That's the only part we hear, but we don't hear the other part about husbands are to love their wives as they love their own bodies, and then we don't hear further down, further in another New Testament, in a book which escapes me for the moment where it said, just paraphrasing, I'm not quoting exactly, which, you know, paraphrasing said if the husband doesn't take care of the wife, his prayers are not gonna be answered.  Whoa.  Wait a minute.  That does not get as much play as wives submit to your husbands.  So, it's, you know, picking and choosing what supports where I am and what I believe.
Speaker 1: Well, what I was getting at was whether it says it or not, can't we figure out what's right without, you know, without using just one document, I mean, whether it's the Bible or the Koran [Qur'an], or whatever, if it doesn't--
Speaker 2: You have two houses of [U.S.] Congress arguing over the Constitution of the United States and its amendments and the Declaration of Independence. So now, if people can't, you know, which is a later document, and we hem and haw and argue and fuss over that, so we argue and fuss over the Bible as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well, I mean--
Speaker 2: Your Constitution, what does this mean, does this mean, okay, so am I in violation of the Second Amendment if I refuse to sell guns to people who are mentally incompetent?  And that's what they're arguing about right now.
Speaker 1: You should be, (laughter) but it's not. Yeah, I heard what you're saying (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm saying, you know, it's the interpreta- everybody has a right to have a gun.  Okay, okay.  Including whom?  Not whom?  I'm saying that as they argue over the Constitution and the interpretation of a particular part of it, that we argue over the Bible and how it's interpreted and different pieces of it.
Speaker 1: Well, the church is like a staging for all kinds of organizational life at one point or another, and I guess it's through that dynamic of organizing ourselves that we, you know, ultimately answer some of these questions, whether somebody who is mentally incompetent should have a gun (laughter).  I think that most of us would probably say no, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right most people would say no, but--
Speaker 1: --but that person might say sure.  I should have one like anybody else.
Story_ID: 572762
Speaker 1: So I thought I'd ask you some philosophical questions so we can get a headache before we finish this or I probably wouldn't be doing my job.  But, in, now in 2012, you left Nashville [Tennessee] for Dallas [Texas], and what happened?  What was the decision?  Was it a promotion or was it just a lateral move or what happened?
Speaker 2: For me, it's a promotion.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm in the great State of Texas, are you kidding me?
Speaker 1: Okay, so, I mean, but hierarchically in the--
Speaker 2: Oh, hierarchically, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) church, is it a promotion too?  I mean, the position here in the tenth district, as the presiding (unclear).
Speaker 2: If you understand how we do things.  Every four years, there's a general conference.  At a general conference, and I was the host for that general conference in Nashville, Tennessee in 2012.  I was the host bishop, thirty thousand people; it was an awesome event.  It, you know, wears everybody out because we are there for two weeks and deliberating.  We make laws, we change laws, we elect general offices, we elect bishops, and we assign bishops; so, I had, you could only serve eight years in a particular region.  I had already served eight years [in the Thirteenth Episcopal District]. So I knew I was moving.  There's no mystery to that.  So, you serve for eight years and you've gotta go someplace else, and the Episcopal Committee, you know, is the body that says this is where you go and I was assigned to Texas, and so I get to move further west.  I get to move further west, so our headquarters is in Dallas, but I have the whole State of Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So basically, the State of Texas is the Tenth [Tenth Episcopal District].
Speaker 2: Yes, I got the whole state.  Is this the state that has the largest number of A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] churches in it?  No.  South Carolina, the State of South Carolina is likely to have the majority, it's the state that has the most A.M.E. churches in it, I think followed by maybe Florida, maybe followed by the Northeast.
Speaker 1: That's interesting because I would never have guessed South Carolina.  You know, just because--
Speaker 2: Oh really? You've got a church on every corner in South Carolina; I mean--
Speaker 1: A.M.E. (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in South Carolina, you've got more A.M.E.'s per square mile than any other place in the United States.
Speaker 1: Not that I've been to South Carolina that often but, I just would have thought it would have been more of a Baptist oriented situation.
Speaker 2: There are more A.M.E.'s per square mile in South Carolina than any other place.
Speaker 1: Are there A.M.E. colleges in South Carolina, too?
Speaker 2: Yes, there are.
Speaker 1: Which ones are there, do you remember?  I just never would have thought it.
Speaker 2: I'll get back to you (laughter).  I knew you were going to ask me about that, because I start, you know, it's not Bene- because that's the--
Speaker 1: It's Benedict, Benedict [Benedict College, Columbia, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Benedict may be there, but that's not our school, but it'll come back to me in a minute.
Speaker 1: I know--
Speaker 2: What is our school in South Carolina?  This is a shame.  I should know that.
Speaker 1: Livingstone [Livingstone College, Salisbury, North Carolina] is A.M.E. Zion.
Speaker 2: Yes, but that's not, that's not ours.
Speaker 1: I was trying to think, but here in Texas, Paul Quinn [Paul Quinn College, Dallas, Texas]--
Speaker 2: Now, it's gonna worry me that I cannot remember that.  Okay.  It'll come back to me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Paul Quinn is the one here, right?
Speaker 2: Call it a junior moment (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, is Paul Quinn the only A.M.E. school here in Texas?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: Of course, named after the great Paul Quinn [William Paul Quinn], who--
Speaker 2: That is absolutely right.
Speaker 1: --Quinn Chapel [Quinn Chapel A.M.E. Church] in Chicago [Illinois] is named after him.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: There are plenty of Quinn Chapels around the country.
Speaker 2: Well, you remember now, he was a part of, he was the part of that leadership that was moving the church west.
Story_ID: 572763
Speaker 1: Well what's the condition of Paul Quinn [Paul Quinn College, Dallas, Texas] today?  I mean, how many students are there and what's the health of Paul Quinn?
Speaker 2: We have over four hundred plus, you know, 430 to 450 students on a campus that's a hundred and plus some acres, 140 years old.  Our president, Michael Sorrell, is doing a dynamic job where one of two work study colleges that are HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] are with a majority population of African Americans.  We have been HBCU school of the year.  Our president has been, male president, HBCU, student government has been HBCU student government of the year, as well as the president; and so, we are on an upswing.  We have raised $15 million over the last six years.  We are in the process of building a dorm, because we have more students now.  We have, student populated our dorm.  We are in the process of developing a block of apartments that would both serve the community as well as the school.  A lot of our students are nontraditional students, so they come to us married with children, so forth and living in the dorm is not quite, it does not quite suit families who come to us outside of the Dallas [Texas] area to attend Paul Quinn College, and so things are bright for us at this moment.  We are excited about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Paul Quinn occupies, I believe, correct me if I'm wrong, the campus of the former Bishop College here in Dallas (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It occupies the campus of the former Bishop College.  Paul Quinn College started in the basement of Metropolitan A.M.E. Church in Austin, Texas, and moved to a campus in Waco [Texas], where it had, you know, it was a broad campus, several buildings and the like, and it took Bishop College under Bishop Pruitt [Robert Lee Pruitt], when that school closed its doors.
Speaker 1: Now, I think Comer Cottrell [HistoryMaker Comer Joseph Cottrell]--
Speaker 2: Yes, Comer Cottrell (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the black businessman, had something to do with acquiring that.
Speaker 2: Yes, a very integral role of acquiring the school for the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, we just moved location.  We moved from Waco up to Dallas, Texas.
Story_ID: 572764
Speaker 1: Did you start any new initiatives here in the Tenth District [Tenth Episcopal District] when you became the presiding prelate here?
Speaker 2: Why of course (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well what initiatives I should say (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Why of course.
Speaker 1: I knew (laughter).
Speaker 2: Abington School of Religion had been on our books for years and we revived it by creating The Institute [The Institute at the Abington School of Religion, Dallas, Texas], which is an online continuing education opportunity for both clergy and lay.  In other words, we have master and doctoral level teachers who instruct on a variety of subjects.  This semester, we have two classes.  One is in adaptive leadership and the other is in soul care, pastoral counseling class.  This is an outgrowth of our 5G church conference call.  One of the things about Texas is it's so big; how to help people, you know, feel close and united.  We have A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] churches as far in the northeast as Texarkana [Texas], as far south as Corpus Christi [Texas], as far west as El Paso [Texas], as far north as Amarillo [Texas], and everything else along the Red River; Midland, Texas way to the west, down to the south.  Of course, your major area which is in central Texas, you're talking about Dallas [Texas], Fort Worth [Texas], Waco [Texas], Austin [Texas], San Antonio [Texas], Houston [Texas], and all the way to Galveston Island [Texas], and Galveston Island is where African Methodism landed in the State of Texas and then moved north, so it's a huge state, land mass, and so how are we going to bring people together when we're so far apart?  So, we decided to employ technology to help us satisfy that, so we had 5G church conversations and so we would have persons who were experts in a particular field that would meet a need, so someone would be teaching on stewardship, someone would be teaching on worship, contemporary worship, someone would be teaching about millennials, how to understand millennials and how to get them in our church if we haven't, and how to keep them; variety of subjects, so this was all by conference call.  We developed, we always had a newsletter in the State of Texas, but we went to digital format, so that if you have a computer, smartphone, or tablet, you will know exactly what is happening in the district at all times.  We do a weekly bulletin board, a monthly newsletter, a 5G church conversation, and then we would create a face to face institute before we got to revitalizing The Institute of the Abington School of Religion, and we did that during our Super Summer Convocation, where we had clergy and lay institute to be able to hone the skills, up the skills of the people who were doing ministry in the state, and they got continuing education credits through Payne Theological Seminary [Wilberforce, Ohio], and also the United Theological Seminary [Dayton, Ohio], so that those who are in school are getting ready to go to school will already have some continuing education credits to go into their process.  We developed the Tenth Future, Inc.  Tenth Future, Inc. is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit where we raise funds outside of tithes and offerings.  I call it the Girl Scout cookie process.  If you go to any group of people and ask anybody, have you bought any Girl Scout cookies, nine chances out of ten, the majority of people will raise their hands.  If you go back and ask them how many of you had a Girl Scout who was a part of your family, and that's why you bought Girl Scout cookies, then the hands would go down.  You buy Girl Scout cookies because you buy Girl Scout cookies.  So, what happens in our local congregation, we raise money from ourselves.  We don't create the marketing or the product to help other people outside to help raise funds to support our ministry.  So, that's what Tenth Future, Inc. does.  We have given back to local congregations and to theological students close to two hundred thousand dollars.  Through our golf tournament last year, we raised a hundred thousand dollars, and we're on track to raise another hundred thousand through our annual golf tournament this year.  So, they can get grants up to three thousand dollars, students can get grants a thousand dollars to assist them with their tuition, and in any seminary, ATS [Association of Theological Schools] school, so we're excited.  We're excited.  Legacy [ph.] is another project and plan that we have.  Legacy is looking to endow the district so that you, you know, it's just like in your own family.  You don't want to live from hand to mouth, but you always will want to have a plot of endowment sitting on the side that in case you need it, you can always go get it.
Story_ID: 572765
Speaker 1: How is the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church now fulfilling this historical role as an agent for social change and a protector of the black community and, you know, as a, as a institution that, you know, deals with social ills that befall our people?
Speaker 2: From the very beginning, from the very genesis of the A.M.E. church, we have been a social justice and liberating faith community.  You find that when the yellow fever hit back in the 1800s in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Richard Allen was very integral in organizing persons to assist.  There was a (gesture) misnomer that somehow black people (gesture) didn't get the yellow fever.  That was not true.  But--
Speaker 1: Then, there was a memo from somebody named, probably Trump, that we gave them--
Speaker 2: Yeah, or something (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Really. That was the discussion in those days.
Speaker 2: You know, back and forth, back and forth, but he organized persons to assist persons who were ill to take care of them, to make sure they had food.  They, you know, he organized the church to help people bury the dead, take out the sick, to do all of that, so from the very beginning, we have participated in social and cultural upheaval.  The first--we liken the first civil rights movement was when Richard Allen, Absalom Jones, walked out of St. George's Church [St. George's Methodist Episcopal Church; Historic St. George's United Methodist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]; but, you can go from era to era to era, and see that the church has been active in justice ways.
Speaker 1: Let me just say that I don't if you can amend this, but the Negro Convention Movement of 1829, you know, convened in Mother Bethel [Mother Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], was a kickoff of a series of conventions of black men and then sometimes women would be allowed to come that lasted over two decades--
Speaker 2: All through--
Speaker 1: --prior to the Civil War, but we were meeting to solve, and the A.M.E. church was at the core of it.
Speaker 2: Yes, which is exciting.  As it was then, so it is now.  We forget that Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]--Brown was Reverend Brown [Oliver Brown] from Topeka, Kansas; Reverend Brown, the pastor [sic. assistant pastor] of the A.M.E. church in Topeka, Kansas, so we were right there in the midst of Brown versus the Board of Education.  The first senator who served in the United States Congress, Hiram Revels [Hiram Rhodes Revels], was Reverend Hiram Revels, an A.M.E. pastor, and so we have A.M.E.'s participating all through, in every movement.  The A.M.E. church was involved in the Civil Rights Movement.  Our churches were used as center places where people met.  Plans were made, strategies were made.  The church in Memphis, Tennessee, when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came for the strikers, the garbage workers' strike, they met at Clayborn Temple A.M.E. Church in Memphis, Tennessee; in fact, he was scheduled to preach the Sunday, I think it was April the 6th, but he was killed on April the 4th, so he was scheduled to preach at Clayborn Temple when the strikers left to march out and the police, you know, did what the police did and they had to run back.  They ran back in to Clayborn Temple A.M.E. Church as a place of refuge there, so the A.M.E. church has always been involved (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. You've got Brown's Chapel [Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church] in Selma [Alabama], you know.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Where Malcolm X spoke and Dr. King and--you know.
Story_ID: 572766
Speaker 1: So, we can, you know, pinpoint justice movements or inequality movements.  The A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church has been there.  If you come today, let's, you know, if you say in Flint, Michigan when the water went bad, the A.M.E. church helped to raise money and bring in fresh water and to keep the eyes and ears and the attention of the nation on Flint, Michigan.  Here in Texas, Corpus Christi twice this year, twice last year, citizens were told not to drink the water because of something, you know, there's a large oil industry there in the gulf and the citizens could not drink water, so our A.M.E. church in Corpus Christi became a center place where residents can go and pick up bottle water.  I mean, we ship like nine hundred cases of fresh water down from all across the state to Corpus Christi, so that people could have access to clean and fresh water.  Our pastor there is working very hard to be sure that the people are treated fairly and they stay healthy.  The rash of black men and women who are being murdered in the United States or killed unarmed, hands up, not doing anything, you will find A.M.E. pastors like the Reverend Jamal Brown- Reverend Jamal Bryant, Reverend Stephen Green [Stephen A. Green], who is the youth organizer for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], you will see their faces on the news as they carry the A.M.E. church with them to speak up against atrocities.  We do have a social action commission in the A.M.E. church that is very active.  This quadrennial is being led by Dr. Frank Madison Reid III [Frank M. Reid III], and our social action director Jackie Dupont Walker, out of California, leads that effort.  We have an organized voter registration and voter education movement at every election, whether it is midterm election, presidential election, whether it's local election, because our mantra is informed people make better decisions, and so help people understand the crux of the issues, not just the sound bites and the opinions and commentary that you hear in other places, but this is the issue, this is what it means, and this is what it means to you. Now make up your mind and your decision on what you're going to about it.  So, the A.M.E. church is, we're not ostriches with our heads in the sand.  We're out there on the firing line.  We have ministry on the front line, not only here in the United States, but in at the global mart.
Story_ID: 572767
Speaker 1: Right, and in that regard, are there, are there--the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church used to be, I know it probably still is involved in bringing African ministers, I mean students from the Caribbean and the continent for training (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They come here from, they come and go to schools, yeah.  They go to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], they go to Payne Theological Seminary [Wilberforce, Ohio], and other institutions, but we have been, the A.M.E. church has been in Africa for more than a hundred years. In the Caribbean, we used to have churches in Cuba, and so we're excited about the relationship of what's happening in Cuba to go back and see if our members are still there, or their family members are still there.  This year, we have the first churches in Brazil that are A.M.E. churches, and so we're expanding in that global marketplace; of course, we've had A.M.E. churches all throughout the Caribbean and the Bahamas and Bermuda for centuries, you know, for a century, close to a century, I'm sure, there.  So we are a global ministry.  We have six episcopal districts across, you know, outside of North America.  So, we're a little bit everywhere, so in the fight of apartheid, you found the A.M.E. church on the front line of fighting apartheid in South Africa from A.M.E. churches that were there, freedom fighters that were there, that were, you know, standing on the mark  So, we go from Alaska all the way over to Angola, the A.M.E. church is present doing ministry.
Story_ID: 572768
Speaker 1: Tell us about your latest book.  Your latest book is coming out.  It hasn't come out yet, but--
Speaker 2: It's coming out in May 2017.  It is called 'The Big Deal of Taking Small Steps and Moving Closer to God' ['The Big Deal of Taking Small Steps to Move Closer to God,' Vashti McKenzie].  It is a basic book of incremental discipleship.  Many times we're overwhelmed by change.  I have a bad habit, I want to change it.  Well, because it's so huge, I don't know where to begin.  Or I want to grow closer to God.  I want to have a deeper prayer life.  I want to be able to find the eye of the hurricane in my life.  You know, I want an increase in faith.  I want to be able to love my neighbor as I love myself.  I don't know where to begin, and then on the other side I have pastors who say I don't know, you know, my people are in the church but they're not changed, and so how do I begin to initiate the ministry to help my people grow into a deeper relationship.  So, in the Tenth District [Tenth Episcopal District], I started what is called the 10 percent challenge, and the 10 percent challenge is an easy basic thing.  If you can make a change just 10 percent, just 10 percent, try that.  If it doesn't work out, you don't have that far to start over again.
Speaker 1: Now, what, give me an example of the kind of change we're talking about, and how a person can make that change.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I want to increase prayer life.  How long are you, how are you praying now?  I pray at least once a week.  Increase that by 10 percent.  I pray five minutes a day.  Increase that by 10 percent.  I pray fifteen minutes a day.  Increase that by 10 percent.  How often do you go to church?  I go to church twice a month.  Increase that by 10 percent.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What is your offering and tithe?  Increase that by 10 percent.  How do you participate in the life of the church?  I don't.  Start.  Ten percent.  So if you increase it, this incremental process, let me get that 10 percent, let me work that plateau, now I'm ready to go the next level.
Speaker 1: I don't know, but, I'm thinking as you were giving those, you were listing those issues, or those aspects you'd want to increase by 10 percent.  Those are things that most people wouldn't be that concerned, I mean concerned about, but these are things that the church would be concerned about; not necessarily the person, the member of the congregation.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Are they actually sitting there thinking how can I increase my prayer by 10 percent--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or how am I going to give more money to the church, or how am I gonna (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What they're asking is how do I have a deeper relationship with God?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right?
Speaker 1: Right.  Well--
Speaker 2: Say, I wanna build a stronger relationship.
Speaker 1: Are they--
Speaker 2: That relationship begins in communication.  You can't be in relationship without communication.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: If I fall in love with somebody and I don't ever talk to them that relationship is not gonna grow.  If I'm married to someone and we do not communicate, that marriage is not gonna last.  So, I wanna be in a relationship with Jesus Christ that begins in communication.  That communication is called prayer.  So, I wanna strengthen my prayer life.  I want to deepen my prayer life.  I wanna learn how to pray, learn how to communicate in such a way.  I wanna listen.  Most of our prayer is God, I want; God, I need; God I have; and I gotta have it right now.  But, being able to be in a prayer posture where I sit still long enough to hear from God.  Well, I don't know how to sit still.  I can't sit still.  Try sitting still for ten minutes and see what God has to say at the end of your prayer.  So, the question is not I wanna, I just want to increase my prayer for 10 percent; no, I want to have a better relationship with God (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 572769
Speaker 1: Let me phrase it this way.  Suppose, I mean, I would think that every person in that congregation would just be beset with the problems that most, that most people have, and they'd be framed like, I mean, I don't know how the, the 10 percent would be something probably posed by their minister, but they would--like how can I keep my brother-in-law from stealing all my money, or how can I keep my husband from cheating.  I mean, those are things that people are thinking about.  How can I pay for my children's education, or how can I find another job.  I mean, those are the things that people are thinking about.  And so, you want to connect to a power that's outside of yourself, instead of trying to solve the problem.  You understand what I'm saying?  So, I'm saying I want to figure out how to keep somebody from stealing my money who lives with me.  All right?  There's some practical things you need to do.  Lock your money up or put the person out.  There are some practical things you need to do, but in a spiritual framework, I want to call in the power of God to protect my house and to protect me.  That the power of God would be so much, the anointing of God would be so much in this house that even the thought of it would be revealed.  Even if the person thought to do, the power of God would stop him from doing it.  We would rather call on our human resources than call in the power of God.  Yeah.  We would rather do that.  What I'm saying is that let's call in the power of God to help us handle this stuff instead of trying to handle it all by myself.
Speaker 2: I hear what you're saying, but I see a lot of A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church history as being where the church leaders actually did something; like, they started a school because we didn't have one.
Speaker 1: That's fine, and how do you think that school got started?  They convened, you know, black leaders around the country at the Negro convention, and because nobody else had the capacity, the institutional capacity to do it, so they did it.  And they came together and they prayed, and they asked God to help them and by the grace of God it happened.  They didn't do it in a human capacity.
Speaker 2: All right.  I guess--
Speaker 1: They didn't do it in a human capacity.  If they did it in a human capacity, it wouldn't be here today.  If I did anything in my life just on my human capacity, I wouldn't be sitting here with HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers].  I'd be doing something else.  I'd be editor of a newspaper.  I'd own my own broadcasting company doing something else.  I wouldn't be doing this.
Speaker 2: Well, I think it's a matter of philosophy, I guess (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I'm saying it ends and begins with God (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, but I know--
Story_ID: 572770
Speaker 1: And, you know, I don't want you to lose your connection.  I don't want--I want you to strengthen your connection.  I want you to strengthen your prayer life.  I want you to strengthen your fasting life.  I want you to key in to the things of God, because you have so many other distractions that key you in to someplace else.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when Jesus says follow me, we don't talk about Jesus following me.  Remember I just said, pastor said, "I got all these people in the church but they're not changed."  They got church-ianity.  They understand, they have a basic understanding of what church, how church goes, what time church starts, what time church is supposed to be over, how it's supposed to run.  I know on Monday we do this, Tuesday we do this, Wednesday do that.  I know on Mother's Day, we do this.  Christmas, we do that.  Thanksgiving, we give out baskets.  Christmas, we do this.  We have back to school day.  They are church-ianity, and the pastor wants to know how do I get my people from church-ianity to Christianity.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, I still think that's--
Speaker 1: And, if you're preaching to them every Sunday, and you're talking to them every day, you say come on, come on, come on.  You can lead a horse to water, but you can't make him drink, my premise is to say, "Pastor, try this."
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: How do I, I'm talking about there's an institutional framework and there's a personal framework.  The personal framework says I want you to increase your prayer time ten minutes.  I want you to try and bring your family together and pray together before you leave the house in the morning, or pray together when you come home, or before you have conversation with someone else, you talk to God and ask God how God wants the day to go, or how you can play a part in the movement of God in your life.  That's on a personal level.  On an institutional level, what do I say to a pastor?  Increase prayer 10 percent, that when people come into the church, instead of y'all just talking and waving and saying hey, y'all, how you doing, and see who's here, who's not here. Go to the altar and pray and then take your seat and get ready for worship to start.  When you have an auxiliary meeting, when you're having a business meeting, pray before you begin your business, you know.  Have prayer; you know, we used to have prayer meetings all the time.  We don't have prayer meetings anymore.  People are too busy to pray.
Speaker 2: People still do.  I don't know, the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church as far as that goes, but they do.  I know--
Speaker 1: It's not like it used to be.
Speaker 2: --community organizers are always told, never try to hold a meeting on a Wednesday night because everybody's gonna be in prayer meeting.
Speaker 1: Yeah, through the Bible Belt I can say that, but in other places, no.  And the people who come on Wednesdays, you know, mama and them, and they don't have anything else to do so they may come to prayer meeting.
Story_ID: 572771
Speaker 1: But let's up the game.  Let's bring it in to 21st century.  Now, we do prayer calls.  Now, this is the Lenten season.  Every Wednesday, we have a prayer call.  All across the State of Texas, we come together and we pray.  We unite ourselves in prayer.  We ask God's power to be presiding us, and then we have some real prayer respects; you know, somebody's sick, somebody's homeless, some with some real issues that you have to pray for, but the whole deal is being able to connect and unite and use the power of prayer.  Don't diminish the power of prayer, but use the power of prayer and ask God to be in the midst of whatever is going on.  So, that ups your game from your regular prayer meeting, and you're including people who you may never know and never see, so we have our prayer time but there are people who are calling in to prayer from Ohio, Washington, you know Oregon, from Canada, because they're standing in the need of prayer.  Just because they're not in Texas, I don't want to exclude them.  Now, then you can go to your regular Wednesday night bible study or some pastors have them on Tuesday, some have them on Thursday.  There's a whole world out there that we're not reaching for Jesus Christ.  So, for me I use ministry as an example; so, when I came to the district, I said it's in, you know, "All of you say you want millennials in your church.  You want to keep your young people.  You want to be able to engage them, but you're not engaged in their world.  So, how many churches have a website?  In this technological age, if you don't have a website, you don't exist."  "Websites are too expensive."  "No, they're not.  Let me show you.  This is a free website service.  You go, log on," (makes sound).  "Oh, is that all you do?  Wonderful."  "Do you have a Facebook page for your church?  Do you have a Twitter account for your church?"  "No."  "How are you going to engage in people who are outside of your neighborhood?  So, I have a Twitter account.  I've got thirty-four thousand people on Twitter.  I have a Facebook page and a fan page, because they've got more than five thousand people on my Facebook page, and I have an app."  "You have an app?"  "Yes, I do.  It's called a pre-cation app, where people who come on to the app, and they have messages and they have prayers and they have scriptures."  You have to engage the community.  We're called, and I mandate.  We sing about it, we talk about it.  I am called to serve the present age and I can't serve the present age by using the same strategy that was used in 1956. Nineteen fifty-six [1956] would not work in 2017.  It just won't work, you know.  The, you know, I use the analogy that my parents [Ida Murphy Peters and Samuel Edward Smith] listened to Nat King Cole sing 'I'm Dreaming of a White Christmas' on a 78 glass record [78 rpm record].  I remember what they looked like.  My brother [Carl Smith] listened to 'I'm Dreaming of a White Christmas,' Nat King Cole, on 33 1/3rd [33 1/3rd rpm record].  I listen, I came along and I listened to Nat King Cole sing 'I'm Dreaming of a White Christmas' on a 45 spindle [45 rpm record].  Remember that big spindle?  And, we knew, we were teenagers, we used to carry the spindle from party to party, because if you didn't have a spindle, you couldn't play the record.  When my--
Speaker 2: Yeah, unless you had those plastic snap ins (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Well, that came later on, but you first came out with the spindle.  When my son [Jon-Mikael McKenzie] was born, he listened to Nat King Cole sing 'I'm Dreaming of a White Christmas' on an 8-track tape.  That was a short lived media blast.  My second child [Vashti-Jasmine McKenzie Saint-Jean] listened to the same artist, same song, on what?  A cassette tape.  And finally, my baby girl [Joi-Marie McKenzie] saw Nat King Cole sing 'I'm Dreaming of a White Christmas.'  Saw him, on a DVD.  Saw him and heard him.  Same song.  Same artist, but the delivery system changed.  I'm preaching about the same Jesus, the same sixty-six books, but the delivery system has changed, and so if we're gonna reach a new audience, we have to reach them where they are right now, engage them in conversation, and then lead them to where we want them to be.
Story_ID: 572772
Speaker 1: Now, what is your rhetorical style?  I know ministers have different styles of delivery.  What are you known for in terms of your communication with your congregation?
Speaker 2: As opposed to am I a storyteller, am I a lecturer?  No.  I'm not a lecturer.
Speaker 1: Or a whooper, as they call it?
Speaker 2: I don't, you know, some people say I do but I'm not into whooping.  If you would ask me to define my own style, it is a style of impact.  You know, I'm coming for you.  (Laughter) I want you to hear what I have to say and I want you to get it, and I'm coming for you.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm not a lecturer.
Speaker 1: All right.  Yeah, I don't think, there's a strain of Methodist ministers that sort of drone--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.  No.  No, no, no, no, no.  No. Unh-uh. I tried to be sure that you don't fall asleep in a sermon that I'm preaching.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: And if I catch you, I'm gonna wake you up (claps hands).
Story_ID: 572773
Speaker 1: Now, what is your future in A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church right now?  I mean, are you, have you reached the, you know, have you reached the top of what you, you're one of the stars of the A.M.E. church.  I know this.  But, are you, is there another place to go?
Speaker 2: We don't have archbishops or all of that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, right.
Speaker 2: You are at the--this is as far as you go in title and leadership, but, you know as far as ministry is concerned, for me it's always open season.  It's a wide open door.  God called me to preach, to pastor, and then to be an Episcopal servant, and that means I look after the ministry and prayer lives and administration of the people who are in the State of Texas.  I'm a preacher and I preach, and however God leads me, I believe that I'm used to be a role model, as I said, to help my preachers.  So, if you're gonna reach a new audience, let me show you how to reach a new audience.  If we need to capture a body of material, come on, let's do that.  If we need to strengthen our congregations, let's do that.  Is there a segment of population that we're missing?  And, we need to focus on and engage them and bring them in. Is there an issue we need to speak out on that we need to be present, you know, to be present, to show our presence to either show our displeasure or our pleasure of a particular topic.  Do we need to be educating our constituency on some issues so that they can, you know, govern themselves accordingly, protect themselves, or to be vocal wherever they are?  It is an ongoing flux.  For me, ministry is not just a bean counter.  I'm not just an administrator, but I am a, I am a steward, I'm a pastor, I'm a preacher.  I just, I pastor pastors now, and not just people, so it's an all encompassing thing.  We are active as bishops until the age of seventy-five, and then we no longer take charge of an Episcopal district, but I see ministry beyond that.  You do ministry as God gives you the ability to do ministry, so you write books and you have apps, and you stretch the boundaries of ministry.  You open new doors, you plow new ground.  You know, you, you seek new endeavors to be able to introduce the gospel of Jesus Christ.
Story_ID: 572774
Speaker 1: And what about the status of women in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church today?  Has it improved since you--the big push was to put, make you, I guess the pioneer.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: That's why others, I mean, Jamye Coleman [HistoryMaker Jamye Coleman Williams] and the rest of them, they worked hard to make sure that you had a spot, and what about the rest of the women in church now?  Are they in better, has their status improved (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Some things have improved and some things have not.  Some things have improved because we do have more women who are presiding elders.  We have three more women who have been elected to the episcopacy; Carolyn Tyler Guidry [HistoryMaker Bishop Carolyn Tyler Guidry], Bishop Sarah Davis [Sarah Frances Taylor Davis] who is now deceased, and now Bishop Anne Henning Byfield [E. Anne Henning Byfield], so there are women, which is more than we had before after two hundred and some years, and so that's good.  More presiding elders and more pastors who are serving in major pulpits than before, but that doesn't necessarily mean that the story has changed.  It's just like, just because you have a black president of the United States doesn't mean all black people are doing well.  It means he's the president of the United States [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], and so just because there is a woman who is a presiding elder or presiding prelate doesn't mean all things are well for all women.  What the encouragement is, is that the younger women see you in a place that they can get to.  It is a place that was formerly denied.  At each juncture it was like, well women are not smart enough to do this.  Women don't have the stamina to preach every Sunday, be a wife and a mother.  Women don't have the wherewithal to administer a million dollar budget, a multimillion dollar budget.  Women cannot hold the respect of a majority of a number of men.  You have women who work against the whole process.  You know, every time, it's always you can't do this, because you can't do this because; and now, all of a sudden it's like oh, they can.  Yeah.  Isn't it wonderful?  God uses everybody.  You know, God is not gender biased.  God uses everybody.  Your deal is to answer and to say yes.  So, things have improved, but my still process is and now that we're all here, let's see what we can do to be sure that everybody who is called to serve will serve their best.
Story_ID: 572775
Speaker 1: Now you have an Obama story, right?
Speaker 2: I have? Oh yes. Well  [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama, a extraordinary individual to be able to get to the place to serve the United States of America, an extraordinary personality to be able to take all that he took and not break, to be able to handle the business, to handle the business at hand.  Our paths crossed at Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].  When Katrina hit, I sent a film crew.  I said, "Y'all need to go down and capture these images, because the images that I'm seeing on television, doesn't represent what's happening."  We had--
Speaker 1: So, now he was in the [U.S.] Senate then, right?
Speaker 2: He was in the Senate then, and the role of the black church in recovery in the aftermath in the days and weeks and months after Katrina was just not, you just weren't seeing it on the 'Today' program ['The Today Show'] and 'Good Morning America' or CBS.  So, I wanted to capture those images, and Senator, then Senator Obama called a group of clergy together in Washington, D.C. to hear from us with the needs with what was happening, and so forth and so on, and to ask, you know, this is what we need y'all to do.  Y'all need to do something here, because you have thousands and thousands of people who are gonna need recovery for years to come.  This is not something that's just gonna get fixed overnight.  This is gonna be years, and they still, still, still are in recovery mode, and thought he was bright, articulate, had some good things to say, and we were reasonably comfortable that he may do something in the aftermath.  After that, I was in Tennessee, serving in Tennessee, and Ford was running for [U.S.] Congress, and Senator Obama then came to help him campaign, and I listened to his speech, and--
Speaker 1: That's Harold Ford [Harold Ford, Jr.], right, I think.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm, running for Congress, and he spoke and I just sat there and I listened to him and I said, he, this is more than a senator here.  This is more than a senator.  I remember hearing Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton].  Everybody was talking about Bill Clinton, Bill Clinton.  I said, "Who is Bill Clinton?"  Arkansas rep.  What, what, what.  And, I heard Bill Clinton speak and we were like, oh.  Now, y'all may think young and cute and all that other kind of stuff, but this man's smart.  He's got something here.  We may need to stand still and listen to what he has to say.  And, when I heard Senator Obama speak, I said, "What?  This is more than Senate material here.  And, I wonder if he sees, if he sees it or feels pressed of it, or has a sense of it himself."  Of course, he didn't indicate any of that, and he came and worshipped at Bethel A.M.E. Church [Greater Bethel A.M.E. Church] in Nashville [Tennessee].  He came and sat in a pew with the candidate and worshipped with us.  I later was preaching at Trinity [Trinity United Church of Christ] in Chicago [Illinois], and that was the church that he belonged to and he was there Sunday with his wife and the pastor at that time, you know, Jeremiah Wright [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Jeremiah A. Wright, Jr.], said, "The senator is home this weekend, and he's gonna run for president if his wife gives him permission, and every time I ask him if he's gonna run for president, he says, when Michelle [Michelle Obama] gives him permission then he'll run."  I'm going like, seriously?  (Laughter) Really?  And after service was over, you know, we were all in the pastor's office having, you know, eating.  It was Easter Sunday, I think.  No, I don't remember.  Was it Easter Sunday or whatever day it was, but we were all there and he was like approachable, touchable, and wasn't, you know, standoffish.  He sat around and yuck-yuck and laughed with everybody and we're like, this is unusual, unusual.  And then, when he announced, I said I'd support, because I felt when I heard what he had to say that it was more than where he was.  More than the position he was holding and he won.  He won.  We worked hard.  It was a hard campaign.  It was very, very hard because the other candidate, you know, I liked as well.  But, I felt that this was his moment.  This was his moment in time.  And we worked hard, and you know, there were many, many conference calls and many, many prayers and prayer meetings, and whatever. I said, Boy, I ain't never worked this hard for a candidate in my whole life.
Story_ID: 572776
Speaker 1: But he [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] won, and he invited me to be a part of the White House advisory of faith-based and neighborhood partnership [President's Advisory Council on Faith-based and Neighborhood Partnerships], and I served on that committee and said like, you know, at that moment in my life is almost like where I am right now.  I said, "Please don't call me to another meeting, not unless we're really gonna do something." Because I hadn't lived but so long, but in the time that I had lived, I've been to so many meetings where we talk about stuff and we walk away and we don't do stuff. And then something else happens and you get called to a meeting and you talk about it.  And then nobody does anything about it.  So, I was at the point like, you know, don't call me to a meeting; not unless y'all are really gonna do something.  But we went to the advisory committee, we met actually with the secretary, secretaries of education and this, that, and the other.  They shared with us their agenda, we shared with them how we saw it from the trenches; you know, the way we were seeing it from street level.  We examined policy.  We made recommendations, a huge book, you know, just a huge book of recommendations and the like, and I think that one of the best things that came out of that first year was the, My Brother's Keeper program, which was a huge, you know, a good success all across the United States, and I served on the inner committee of that, and there were a lot of bright, articulate people who were putting together that platform, which was, which was very good.
Story_ID: 572777
Speaker 1: The hardest thing, I think, to do if you take your call seriously, and I do, and one of the things that I see missing in people who occupy high echelons of leadership, is that they do not always get to hear the messages they need to hear, because they are always campaigning.  You know, Sunday is not a sabbath for them.  They're working.  Right or wrong, that's how it is often.  So, you have men and women who are mayors and governors and so forth and so on.  Who do they talk to?  Who do they hear their messages from?  Who do they pray with?  And, it's always been a burden for me.  Leader women.  Leader men.  And so, when the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] invited me to pray prior to the inauguration at St. John's [St. John's Episcopal Church, Washington, D.C.], I labored over that prayer a long time, because it would be the last prayer he would hear before he went to the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.] to take the oath of office, and I said, "God, you've got to give me something to say that will make a difference in his heart as he goes forward."  At each inauguration, I was blessed to give a prayer and it was the same prayer; but, I tell you it was when the president invited me to preach the Easter Prayer Breakfast at the White House [Washington, D.C.] and it's not an ordinary sermon.  You can't preach an ordinary sermon.  You have the leader of the free world sitting at a table in front of you, and what message could you possibly say that would make a difference in his life, that would help him, that would undergird his faith.  It is not that I wasn't preaching to anybody else in the room, but I was asking God for a word that would be tailor made for him, and that was about the hardest sermon anyone has to preach in the whole entire world, and, if I'm not mistaken, it was at this prayer breakfast, either this one or the one before, he is, being himself, he is shaking hands.  He knows you by name.  I don't know how he keeps track of all the people that he meets, but he calls you by name and shakes hands and he's hugging and kissing everybody and asking about the kids and this, and how's this, and how's that, and he's kibitzing with everybody and then, you know, the benediction comes and we leave and you go home and you're watching the news that night and find out that he was making up his mind on what to tell the folk about bin Laden [Osama bin Laden].  I mean, that night, he gave the order that went in and bin Laden died.  I said, I don't know how you could do that.  I don't know you could sit, see what I'm saying?  But it's not my calling.  I'm not called to be president of the United States.  I'm just called to be an Episcopal servant, but that day he is sitting there and all of these things, you know all of these things are swirling around.  Am I going to tell him to go or not to go?  Am I going to tell him yes, not yes?  Am I going to tell them no?  Am I going to do this, or do this?  And he's hugging and kissing everybody, and he's gonna have to push that button that makes a decision about whether these guys go in and get bin Laden.  To me, that's amazing.  It takes an extraordinary individual to be able to do that.  You're talking about grace under fire, calm under fire, peace under fire, and it is to that person that I had to preach a word to.
Speaker 2: What did you, can you summarize what you said?
Speaker 1: I don't remember all of it, but I remember the beginning of it.  The beginning of it was, the gist of it is: do you have the courage to see, and if you do, do you have the courage to do something about what you see?
Story_ID: 572778
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I will give it to you.  I wrote, after this last election, I wrote a letter to my granddaughter, who is just turning three, who just turned three, and my letter was that I hope that she inherits a country better than the one that we've got.  It's not to say that America's not great and wonderful and marvelous.  It is a land of hopes and dreams.  But, my prayer for her was that she would get a country less divided, less sexist, less racist, less violent.  My prayer for her was that even if culture and society is against you, that she would have the strength to rise, that she would prepare herself to lead, that she was not born, she was not born just to be a follower.  She was not born just to be hauler of water and a hewer of wood; that she was born to lead and all in her generation are.  That she has a pulpit to preach from and her pulpit may be in the church, it may be in the business, it may be in a classroom, it may be an artist's studio, dance studio.  It may be wherever, but you have one.  Find it, and then make an impact in your community that you would not be trapped, not be trapped by stereotypes, and that you will always be a stereotype breaker in your life, that you may have to face your mother and father's enemies again, just like we had to face the enemies of our mothers and fathers again, but this time I hope you win.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that your children won't have to repeat.  I'm a child of the Civil Rights Movement.  I was, what, eight, nine, ten years old at the March on Washington.  I was there.  I remember marching.  I remember the first time I was in college [Morgan College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  The first time the Baltimore [Maryland] riots happened when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died and the whole blocks of blocks were on fire.  I remember what it felt like standing.  When you saw when Freddie Gray died and you saw Penn North [Baltimore, Maryland], I lived one block from that, from there, and I remember standing on the street corner watching these huge trucks filled with the National Guard, and I kept saying this is America, and the [U.S.] Army's coming into our neighborhood.  What's gonna happen to us?  What's gonna happen to us?  Is this how we're gonna live for the rest of our lives?  My brother [Carl Smith], you know, was sitting at lunch counters, you know, integrating lunch counters.  We were a part of the first wave of, when the Civil Rights bill [Civil Rights Act of 1964] and all that was signed in '64 [1964], and all that, we thought, (makes sound) won and done.  There's no such thing as won and done.  Here we are at the rise of the same things that were rising back in our mothers' and fathers' times, and you have to take a deep breath and say, so, at this age in our lives, we're gonna have to do this fight all over again.  And my prayer is that my granddaughter will not have to fight that fight.  The fight will already be won.
Story_ID: 572779
Speaker 1: When you look back on your career and everything you've done to this point, is there any major move that you would do, make differently or do differently?
Speaker 2: No.  Because everything good, bad, or indifferent, added to my life today.  So, if there was never any rain, you know, if there was never any sunshine, now, every twist and turn up and down had a part to play in my life.
Story_ID: 572780
Speaker 1: Your mark in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church is obvious, but we always ask this question.  What today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, as a mother I'd say our children.  Of course, always, our children.  You say, what is your greatest achievement?  You know, our kids that they are alive.  (Laughter) We were able to raise them. They made it to adulthood.  They went to college.  They graduated, yay, and they're in careers and lives of their own and that's important. You know, and that's important. I think, you know, you say that you know, being elected a bishop was obvious.  Being elected, for me, is a demonstration to other women if God did this for her, there is no telling what God will do for me, and so the greatest legacy is that impossible is not always impossible.
Story_ID: 572781
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your children and your family.  I think we talked a little bit about your husband, but tell us about your family.
Speaker 2: Well Stan [Stan McKenzie] and I met, I was in college [Morgan College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  He was an NBA [National Basketball Association] basketball player.  We've been married forty-nine years.  Yay.  Yay us.  We have three wonderful kids.  They're all adults and a grandbaby, who is just the delight of our lives, who is teaching us all again--is teaching me, I don't know about my husband, but I'm sure him too--but is teaching me how to see the world again through the eyes of a child with wonderment and the excitement about little things.  Of course, I came from a two parent family, and there's only two of us, my brother [Carl Smith] and I.  He's older than I am.  He's retired now, wondering what's the matter with me, right?  (Laughter) But in due season, in due season.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My daughter has her first book out.  We've got strong genes, and so she got the writing part.  We come from a long line of journalists, so, and my kids' generation, Joi has her first book, Joi-Marie McKenzie, and her first book is entitled 'The Engagement Gang'--'The Engagement Game,' ['The Engagement Game: Why I Said "I Don't" to Marriage And "I Do" to Me'] and it drops this month, March 2017.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is it a book about--
Speaker 2: It's a book about her journey.  It's a book about, you know, as a young millennial navigating the roads of relationship--
Speaker 1: So how to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and making a decision on do I want to change everything about me in order to be accepted, or do I choose to be me.
Speaker 1: Well, we know the answer (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 572782
Speaker 1: Now, has anything--is there anything I have not asked you about or haven't mentioned or raised that we need to discuss?  I'm sure we'll think of them tomorrow, but before I ask my last question.
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I mean, we talked about kids and family and ministry in Africa and the United States and Texas and politics and books, and my embracing technology as a tool for ministry.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: She tried, and she tried her best.
