Story_ID: 135890
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Emmit Thurman Jones McHenry, E-M-M-I-T, T-H-U-R-M-A-N, J-O-N-E-S, M-C-capital H-E-N-R-Y.
Speaker 1: Alright, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born July 12, 1943 in Forrest City, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Forrest City, Arkansas.  And what is your occupation, sir?
Speaker 2: I'm chief--well I'm an entrepreneur and I'm the chief executive officer or chairman of the board of two or three technology firms.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Care to give us some of the names?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm the CEO of NetCom Solutions International. I'm chairman of the board of Visutel. I'm chairman of the board of LearnCity.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  What is today's date?
Speaker 2: The day is November 22nd, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time, and you don't have to give your address.
Speaker 2: Well, we're sitting in my living room in Great Falls, Virginia.
Story_ID: 135891
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions I am compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They only require a short answer.  The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughing) Well, I'm a vegetarian and I particular like curried vegetables.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Interesting enough, I find orange to be a great color for meditation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Good question.  I think--I'd probably say spring for the birth of things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Skiing in Colorado.
Speaker 1: Okay, and finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Life is a becoming process.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or clarity is power.  Those are the two things that I'm most often have to remind people of.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 135892
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side and your father's side.  Start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give me your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name, Mary, M-A-R-Y, Thurman,T-H-U-R-M-A-N, Barnett, B-A-R-N-E-T-T.
Speaker 1: Now what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was born in the State of Arkansas.  I don't know the exact town, and she's now seventy-eight, so that would be and I'm--do the math on that.
Speaker 1: 1925, I think.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  What do you know about your mother's side of the family, how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Most of our discussion would be my mother's grandparents, my great-grandparents.  I'm aware, we talk often about them, and that's about far back as we go on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you know about them?
Speaker 2: Well, my great, great--my great-grandfather has the dubious distinction, among other things of being a carpenter and a bootlegger.  He had a still in the attic of his home, of all places.  My great-grandmother was a farmer and she has the distinction of really being the person that negotiated on the parts of black farmers in Arkansas.  She did aggregated crops and brought things to market on a collective basis, and stood on behalf of sharecroppers particular as they tried to deal with the landowners.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I understand she was quite the entrepreneur.
Speaker 1: That was a job that could be pressurized in those days, dealing with landowners and sharecroppers and so forth.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My great-grandmother was a--what we refer to in our family as a Black Indian and my mother's--her husband, my great-grandfather, was a part Native American, as well and I don't know, they seem to had a kind of a very interesting drive in the community that they lived in.  I simply know that it was in the kind of Arkansas Delta, it would've been probably southeast of Forrest City [Arkansas], as far I can tell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they migrated into Arkansas from Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was that like after the Civil War or something or?
Speaker 2: Don't know the dates exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your great-grandparents I guess were born--they were born during the 19th century--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I guess, but--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that are passed down from that side of the family about, you know life in the 19th century in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Well, most of the stories that I heard, called more mystical stories because as a youngster, as a little kid I used to sit at my grandmother's knee or as she be in the kitchen with friends, I'd be under kitchen table and I'd listen to them telling stories.  Some of them, I think were to scare me and some of them they just been the way they entertained themselves.  But they--I have a range of stories from the mystical to snakes, hooked snakes with their tails in their mouths, rolling along dirt roads, to people going from farm to farm at night and being frightened by the Hoodoo Man.  To the saddest stores of them recalling lynchings that occurred that their parents had told them about, and that they may have seen even when they were youngsters.  So, there are range of things talked about around the table but mostly my family's always been future orientated, not spending a lot of time in the past.  I think some of that was that the past was pretty painful stuff.
Story_ID: 135893
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now can you tell us about your father's side of the family?  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Herman, H-E-R-M-A-N, McHenry, M-C-capital H-E-N-R-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: 1925 and he was born in Madison, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now what do you know about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well, I met--they're rural people, agrarian, farmers--his mother was a minister, a preacher woman and in fact as she moved from place to place, her church tend to move with her.  And though that she was in Arkansas and they moved back to Oklahoma, and the church followed her.  With that, her father, whom I met as a little boy was a farmer and, if you ever heard of a shotgun house, I remember going to visit and it was on this plot of land, and I'm not sure who owned it at the time, but it was a shotgun house that he lived in, you know?
Speaker 1: Yeah, for the benefit for those who are watching this and don't know what a shotgun house is, explain to us what a--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Shotgun house is a house that's built it could've been one large room, but several rooms divided with a door from the front door all the way through to the back.  If you threw a ball in the front door, and all the doors were opened it would go out the back door.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, straight through like a shotgun.
Speaker 2: Straight through like a shotgun.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Famous painting by John Biggers called 'Shotgun Houses.'
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 135894
Speaker 1: So any stories from that side of the family?  Did they tell ghost stories too, or--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, (chuckling) my grandmother, my father's [Herman McHenry] mother was--this recalls a story on my mother's [Mary Thurman Barnett] side of the family which I'll tell later.  But on my father's side of the family, she was a somewhat of a mystic healer and there are great stories about her healing people when she was a young woman in church revivals and rather well known for that.  That same line runs in my mother's side of the family, her father's brother kind of carried on an African tradition.  He's a man who had multiple wives living in the same house and his only occupation was that of a reader.  He read for people, he would tell them their life stories and solve their problems and that's what he did.  He had no other source of income, but he was able to manage, I think, I know at least two wives at the same time; there may have been a third.  I do recall them talking about the two.
Speaker 1: This is your grandfather or?
Speaker 2: This is on my grandfather's uncle.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandfather's brother rather.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your great uncle on your father's side?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side.
Speaker 1: On your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: This is on the Thurman side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 135895
Speaker 1: Well so are there any stories from your father's [Herman McHenry] side of the family about how the family got together and how they you know moved--why they moved from one place to the next or--(simultaneous?)
Speaker 2: My grandmother was noted for adopting people, adopting children.  In fact, one of the real questions in the family is to whether my father was an adopted, was not her birth child.  And many of the stories heard about her helping people, particularly young women in distress and she was a little woman.  She was no more than 5'2" but she had a heart of a lioness, you know.  Any argument she could counted to be on to step in to kind of break up the argument to keep things in focus, so there--those kinds of stories about her courage and her willingness.  Similar my mother's side, my mother [Mary Thurman Barnett] was the same kind of person, my mother interesting enough, she had nine children and when one of our neighbors who had five children died, the mother--the father kind of abandoned the family.  My mother took all five children into the house with us, so which is not unusual in the South of the generation that my mother was in.  Families took care of each other; I mean there was the extended family.  I remember discipline being a community activity.  We joke about that now, but that is indeed the truth, it was a community attitude.  Miss Little Bit [ph.] known as Miss Little Bit 'cause she was a little woman, she was about--I recall that when I was ten, I was taller than Miss Little Bit. But Miss Little Bit, when I was a little kid, I remember her tanning my hide as quickly as my mother might tan my hide, so.  That's a spanking for those don't know what that expression means (laughter).
Speaker 1: Not actual tanning?
Speaker 2: Not actual tanning, no.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 135896
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us about your mother's [Mary Thurman Barnett] life, I mean how did she grow up and what did she do and, did she have a chance to go to school, and that sort of thing in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother got married young, father [Herman McHenry] went off to war, she took a job as a--in a laundry as a presser and she worked in that for many, many years.  From that, she migrated to a retail stores, several liberties became more open.  She moved from being a presser in the back of a laundry to working out front in a retail store and indeed when she got a job in a school--went back to school, became a nutritionist and worked in the public school system as a nutritionist until she retired.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now tell us something about your father.  What was he like and you know what did he do?
Speaker 2: Bless his heart.  My father's now passed, my father following the war, came back, he and my mother were no longer married, and married, started a different family, had five children there.  He was a singer, gospel singer, and he had groups that went all through the--Arkansas, Oklahoma, even up to Illinois, where he lived for a while.  He managed singing groups and took great pride in getting young people involved in gospel singing.  But as often as the case, things don't go as you expect.  He was a man with lots of talent, he was an auto mechanic, he had his own construction business, cement construction.  He also fell to alcohol, became an alcoholic which was a long battle for him.  Ergo the day I don't find--I'm never comfortable with people who drink too much, having seen what it did to him.  He overcame that and went back into business; and he was pretty much a guy who wanted to cut his own kind of path.  And he did that for quite a while and as--after he retired, he retired literally from that business and started long distance trucking.  He drove trucks for the oil industry carrying oil rig equipment throughout the Southwest.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's not particularly intriguing but interesting.  My mother had been sent--was on her way to do some grocery shopping and this young--my mother was an attractive woman, still is, bless her heart, and this young man saw her, took a liking to her and that was it.
Story_ID: 135897
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Tell me about growing up--how many people were in your household when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm the oldest of nine children, and I was born in Arkansas, as I said, there's my mother [Mary Thurman Barnett], my stepfather and my siblings.  I was sent away in sixth grade--first grade actually to go to school in Kansas City, Missouri, to live with a relative, who didn't have children.  It was interesting time for me, in part I was sent away being the oldest boy in Arkansas, my mother was always afraid of what might happen. At an early age, I had a certain, let's say independence that created some difficulties for other folk and--for white folks in dealing with me.  I was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: In what way, what's some examples?
Speaker 2: I treated everybody the same, I mean I treated white folks I came in contact with, the way I was trained to treat black folks I came in contact.  I said to sir to people who were older than me and no, sir and yes, ma'am to those, but people my own age and near I didn't, for example.  So my mother was always a little concerned, so I went away to Kansas City, Missouri, went to school there for a year, came back home, with my siblings and lived for--until I was, I think probably ten and then I went away for a year to school again.  Then I came back home, and all the while, being the oldest boy is always fascinating because directly after me there were four girls.  And I have one sister, Dor--Nebi [ph.] now, Nebila [ph.], she was born Dorothy Jean but she became Nebila, she became a Muslim.  This girl got me into more difficulty, because I was always, when I was around, defending her.  She was always starting a fight or getting into a squabble with someone, you know.  Being the big brother, of course you stand up for your sister.  So there were many, many fights based on that.  Even to this day, we joke about her big brother being her protector, which was fascinating.  I didn't realize how much all of that occurred until fairly recently.  We were having a family get together and we started sitting around talking about some of those things, and it was rather amazing.  So later on I moved to--my mother--my father [Herman McHenry] came down and my grandmother, his mother to visit, and actually I hadn't seen him in many years, many years indeed, probably ten years.  And my grandmother convinced my mother that I should go to Oklahoma, to Tulsa [Oklahoma] to live for a year.  My mother asked me about that and I was already pretty active in sports and thought that--funny thing, even as a child I was thinking about college.  By the time I was twelve I was--how am I going to get to college?  Somehow I knew that I had to get to college and I thought that maybe by living in Oklahoma, Oklahoma being known for football and that sort of thing, I could be able to get a scholarship for school.  So I at age twelve, I moved to Tulsa, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You didn't move my yourself, you moved with your--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I moved literally to live with my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father's mother in Tulsa, you know.  And there I end up meeting four, five, six other cousins that I grew up around and then summers I'd go back to Arkansas initially to spend time with my siblings.  And then as I got older, start taking on jobs, it became less easy to do and I found myself working in Oklahoma during the summers and then trying to go home at Christmas holidays.  In my-my junior high school and high school, was pretty much like most people, going away to college, you know.
Story_ID: 135898
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I want to go back to childhood for a minute though before we get you that far.  You said you got in a lot of trouble when you were younger in school and kind of--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I created tension in the community.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright. What kind of young man where you, what did you like to do and who were your friends and activities?
Speaker 2: Well, at what age?
Speaker 1: Well, I guess from a young fella of four, I guess.
Speaker 2: Okay. Well--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Through middle school, I guess.
Speaker 2: Well, I can remember, I always liked to read, I remember the day I recognized I could read.  I had a cousin in Kansas City [Missouri] who, at the time had a job--one of his jobs was as a janitor, and he collect comic books and send me boxes of comic books.  I remember when I was about five years old, sitting on the steps of our house, just kind of turning through the pages of the comic book, and then I found the story picture less so interesting, I went back to the beginning and start reading.  And it was a comic book that was my first breakthrough that I could really read, and understand what's going on.  So reading was important, I always enjoyed that, my mother [Mary Thurman Barnett] always had things around the house to read.  We didn't have television so I used to watch radio, I remember in my household boxing was big so I remember watching people box or the World Series.  Listening to it on the radio and really being able to see it in my mind, as a little kid.  But we did the things in Arkansas and Oklahoma, in Arkansas particular; marbles were a big deal as a little kid.  I had lots of buddies and we'd sit around in my yard playing marbles.   I don't know if you ever played marbles or not but you gotta have a ring, it's gotta be flat, it's gotta be dirt.  And your parents don't--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: That was the age of marble playing, I guess, 'cause I've heard a lot of people your age, they say the same thing.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  You played a lot of marbles and you wanted to be good at it, because if you were good, you get the other guy's marbles, you see.  It was all about winning, and really winning and losing had a--almost an economic model to it, you know.  If I beat you then I kept your marbles (laughing) and so I had a big sack of marbles, big sack of marbles.  Don't know whatever happened to those marbles, but played a lot of marbles.
Story_ID: 135899
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Well, what about grade school, how'd you do in school?
Speaker 2: I was--I guess I was blessed; I was always good at school.  I always enjoyed writing, I did--I remember the--when I was probably in the third grade, I wrote my first poem, independently of anyone asking.  I often thought I should've of, I should've of been a poet.
Speaker 1: What inspired you to write a poem or how did you find out what a poem was at that stage?
Speaker 2: Interesting.  I think probably, teachers of-- when I was a little kid, pretended to be, I went to an all-black school, pretty gifted people.  There were people who didn't have other options or opportunities and so they gave you and kind of a--tried to give you an enriched life.  They found someone who was pretty bright; they kind of worked with you that way.  So I'm sure that my third grade teacher, Mr. Owens [ph.], introduced us to poetry in the classroom.  And I went home and wrote a poem and gave it to my mom [Mary Thurman Barnett].  It was a poem about a tree, as I recall.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: Stewart Elementary School [Forrest City, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's the S-T-E-(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: E-W-A-R-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And who was some of the teachers there that you remember, you still remember who was significant in your development?
Speaker 2: Well, Mr. Owens was one, Miss Turner [ph.] was another, Miss Sylvester [ph.], who is a Republican, I recall.
Speaker 1: Was that odd then?
Speaker 2: Not particularly, not particularly, there were black folks who were Republicans based on [Abrahma] Lincoln.  And I remember hearing her and another teacher have a debate on politics, it was the first debate on politics that I ever heard and I think it must've been around a presidential eElection or something.
Speaker 1: About 1960 you think?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.   It would've been before this, it would've been in the '50s [1950s]-
Speaker 1: Okay, '50s [1950s], so [Dwight] Eisenhower or--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably Eisenhower.
Speaker 1: Okay.  [Adlai] Stevenson, yeah, okay, any other teachers?
Speaker 2: Oh, those were the ones in elementary school [George Washington Carver Elementary School, Tulsa, Oklahoma] that really stick out for me, yeah.  Junior high school, a different set--by then I'm in Oklahoma, I'd moved to Oklahoma, and I'm in Tulsa [Oklahoma] and there's this wonderful teacher, male teacher's name was [George William] Tilmon [Jr.], he had been in the [U.S.] Air Force before and he came and he taught science and he really--a number of us he instilled an interest in science.  And there's a guy here at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], name's Joseph Cannon, he's a doctor of chemical engineering, I know Joe is inspired by Mr. Tilmon and a whole host of other folks.  In fact, I'm not great at recalling names but looking at faces, I can see I think, at least three doctors, two or three engineers, these are the guys that I know, but of my era that he taught.  He had a real significant impact on us.
Speaker 1: What was his first name, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Don't recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He had been in the Air Force?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Been in the Air Force, got out taught school and then later returned to the Air Force, interestingly enough, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: His brother is the Tilmon in Chicago [Illinois]; I think that had the TV--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: [HM] Jim Tilmon.
Speaker 2: Jim Tilmon, yeah.
Speaker 1: We interviewed him, yeah.  I was tempted to ask because I know.
Speaker 2: He's Jim brother.
Speaker 1: Yeah, ok, so he's Jim Tilmon's brother?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's something, that's a remarkable family.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's two of them.  Yeah, now this is in Tulsa, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 135900
Speaker 1: What was the name of your middle school?
Speaker 2: [George Washington] Carver [Middle School, Tulsa, Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: Carver, okay.
Speaker 2: And you know the Carver that it was named after?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.  Every black community's got a [George Washington] Carver or a [Paul Laurence] Dunbar or a [Frederick] Douglass or a [Booker T.] Washington High School.
Speaker 2: There was also a Dunbar Elementary School in Tulsa [Oklahoma], but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't go to that.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what about Carver Middle School, what was that like?
Speaker 2: Grade school.  Absolutely wonderful school, and I wish I could recall the teacher's name but we had a great--Mr. Owens [ph.], our band teacher, great guy, wonderful English teachers, just amazing experience.  I mean I look at schools today all over and you know at the time, students were stratified, I mean if you did well, then you got into one--and I know some of my experiences the function I did well and so I got in these very strata but it was the equivalent of private schools education.  I mean teachers really focused on you, you got a love a lot of support, it was in a way kind of an extended family and they took pride in your doing well.  So if you did well, the teachers really got excited about that and worked with you on it, yeah, it was a really wonderful experience for me.
Story_ID: 135901
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in Tulsa [Oklahoma], did people ever--I know this is in the '50s [1950s] I guess you were in middle school [at George Washington Carver Middle School, Tulsa, Oklahoma], but did people ever talk about the riot of 1921 or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Of course, of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they would talk about that in my family, that riot.  It was, Tulsa was an interesting place as a little kid to grow up of my era.  In many ways, the black community had access to all of the things that the city as a whole had.  I mean I didn't really have to go downtown for anything, I mean to the white downtown.  My parents did and others, but I really didn't have to, if I wanted to go to the barber shop, if I wanted to go to the drug store, if I wanted to go  movie theater, if I needed go visit the dentist, or even the bank, all of that was in my community.  I had all those things, readily accessible--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Did you live near Greenwood Avenue?
Speaker 2: No, I lived on Madison [Avenue], then I could walk from house to Greenwood--it was some walk but it was the thing you did.  [George Washington] Carver [Middle School] was close to Greenwood, actually and so Carver was between where I lived and Greenwood.  So often after school, on occasion, we'd go to a movie right on Greenwood and it was a vibrant community.  The thing that I recall, you go to the barber shop as a kid, and you hear people talking about John this or Bob that or, not so much a Bob, there weren't a lot of Bobs around.  But these guys who had gone away to school and maybe even gotten a Ph.D., but couldn't find work, and that now he was on Greenwood, (chuckling) kind of rambling like a mad man or something you know or become kind of a wino, et cetera.  And yet there are wonderful people that did quite well, but Greenwood was a very vibrant area.  Tulsa was vibrant community much more vibrant then than I find it to be now when I go back.
Story_ID: 135902
Speaker 1: We're talking about the history of Tulsa [Oklahoma] and that community.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In Tulsa, Greenwood Avenue, they call it Deep Greenwood.
Speaker 2: Deep Greenwood.
Speaker 1: And folks now try--you know they call it Black Wall Street now, I don't know did anybody there call it Black Wall Street?
Speaker 2: Well, it's not a term that I heard in the community ever, but it was a vibrant community it, it was a community that had some financial--had some cash, you know, people could build things, they could do things.  It was a different kind of community.  My grandfather in Oklahoma was in the cement construction business, we built sidewalks and storm shelters, which become bomb shelters, but in one little town, we even put in concrete streets, you know.  That doesn't sound like much but in a place in the '50s [1950s] where black group were putting in streets in a community, we thought it was a big deal.  And yet people--it was not a big deal in the community (laughing) because so often the case is that you focus on doctors, lawyers, and bankers, the classic blue collar entrepreneur isn't--doesn't get the kind of community esteem, but they did some important stuff in terms of building things, things that still exist , I mean I've--in high school got a chance to work on some of the crews who's doing some of that stuff so it was back breaking work, that's real work, you know.  But you're--we were talking about Greenwood, it's fascinating to me that two fires the community was rebuilt from and in the late '60s [1960s] I think it was or in the '60s [1960s] when I was in college, urban renewal ultimately destroyed a community and I'm amazed that there was not a national kind of uproar, but I'm not amazed because so much talent leaves the places of its birth, I mean so much talent has left Oklahoma, even though there is still great talent there.  Lot of folks have left seeking opportunities other places.  Now when I'm Washington [D.C.], I'm always running into folks from Oklahoma and Los--California particular, L.A. [Los Angeles, California] I run into lots of folks from Oklahoma.  So it became a source of migration as well as integration opened, things began to move, maybe it just didn't seem as important as it had been before but--- (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: With pride, I guess pride integration, I mean--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And even--well, right after the Civil War, Oklahoma would be foolish of a war or even black people who could get out of slavery and migrate, you know chose that space because of the freedom it represented, it was Indian territory--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Indian territory well they--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: In the 1850s and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Several stories there because one story that most folks don't realize that the Trail of Tears was not simply Native Americans, but there were Native Americans and people of African ancestry came home from that Trail of Tears together then to Oklahoma.  And that's why you look at the Creek Nation, you have black folk as a part of it-the Seminole Nation, the same thing and though the Seminoles are having some difficulty dealing with that in Oklahoma, they've had some difficulty acknowledging that, but it's true families came across on the Trail of Tears black and red together and settled.  The Chandler family was one of the first families, black families to settle in Oklahoma in Chandler, Oklahoma is the town.
Speaker 1: Right there at one time I believe there were over thirty black towns in Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Lawton [Oklahoma] and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Bouie (ph.).
Speaker 1: Bouie, yeah, the famous town that--where Pretty Boy Floyd was shot [Boley, Oklahoma], what's that one?  I can't think of the name of it right now.
Speaker 2: I don't recall either.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, but the black towns and just--it seem to be like a haven for black people that really wanted to start something new and exercise freedom.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Kansas had some of that but Kansas had a much more of a [Klu Klux] Klan [KKK], the Klan in Kansas was much more active, it appears to me than it was Oklahoma.  I don't recall, and this is not to say that it didn't happen, but I don't recall stories of the Klan in Oklahoma.  I'm sure that the Klan was there, I just don't recall any stories.  The Klan was very active in Colorado, I'm aware of that, but it apparently didn't have the same impact in Oklahoma that it had in some other places.
Story_ID: 135903
Speaker 1: There are lynching stories from Oklahoma--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, absolutely, lynching stories.
Speaker 1: Famous lynching, Okemah [Oklahoma], one there's another one where there's actually postcards of the lynchings but it may not have occurred as much you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In Oklahoma, that riot though of 1921, is the one that the people talk about.  Right now they're still discovering remains of people that--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That are in excess of the estimate of the time--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Of the estimate, yeah.
Speaker 1: The time they said--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: They burned out a community, killed off and ran away lots of folk.  Interestingly enough, people came back though.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So instead of about seventy-four people being--black folks being killed, and I think fourteen in whites as they reported initially, they are now hundreds of bodies discovered and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well you think about the times and the--what I understand the that the level and emotional tension in the community, it would've been very difficult to have only fifty or seventy people killed.  Clearly it was a massive riot, yeah.  You know that was talked about, but it's interesting enough, it's talked about more today than it was when I was a kid, yeah.  Our families were so concerned about the basics of protecting their children, providing opportunity for the children and some of that really was some isolation from the white community.
Story_ID: 135904
Speaker 1: There were functions, organizations like the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] that brought blacks and whites together.  There was an organization called Hi-Y and I was very active in Hi-Y in Tulsa [Oklahoma].  It got you, as a young person involved in the political life, black and white together, red and all whoever was.  Basically our community was white, black, and a few Native Americans in Tulsa, you didn't really have an observable Asian population and the Mexicans really hadn't come in very much at the time, so Hi-Y really represented principally blacks and whites.  I became--I was elected as youth mayor of Tulsa, the person who nominated me was a white kid.
Speaker 2: When was this?
Speaker 1: This is--when would've been 1961 or '60 [1960] or '61 [1961] yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, that is when you were a senior in high school?
Speaker 1: No, no, I would've been junior or sophomore, junior in high school at the time, yeah.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Later through High Y, I became the secretary of state.  Interesting politics there because I was running for governor, another guy whose name slips me and I was just looking, he's now president of a college, black guy, became governor, youth governor of the state.  And a couple of years after him, I ran and that's the first time I learned about voting blocs and how politics is really run, the real nitty-gritty, dirty behind the scenes stuff.  And it really came down to, and this is a really long discussion; I'll make it very short.  Okay, if you want to win any office, you're not going to get the governorship, we got that sewn up, and this is how we're gonna do it, da, da, ta, da, the votes are already in, so what was position do you want (chuckling), and the second most powerful, secretary of state.  So, the beauty of all of that process is that you learn public speaking, you learn something about organizing, you learn how to tell a story, how to solicit the support and you learn how to fight against what wasn't right.  So in the speech I gave, I threw my notes away and gave a speech from the heart about what was really going on and let's not be--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Or about the real--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The real--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: The real deal about what's going on here guys--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: The real political--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Yeah, this isn't about ability, this is really all about votes, this is about who can organize and get the votes the best, and who's giving up what for what.  So the guy who won the governorship, his bloc had gone out and found other people who wanted positions and committed their resources to support them if they could get their bloc of votes, you know kind of classic politics.  But you learn that stuff at a early age.
Story_ID: 135905
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now Tulsa [Oklahoma] has a rich musical tradition too, you know.
Speaker 2: Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Oklahoma, yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: You know it got Mr. [Charlie] Christian himself on guitar from Oklahoma City [Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: Now who is this?
Speaker 2: Charlie Christian.
Speaker 1: Charlie, okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In fact, I thought I was going to be a musician for a long time, I played trombone and I had to make a decision--there is a guy--I played second chair in junior high school.  The first chair was amazing, I can't recall his name, but his ear was so good, he could hear something played and he could play it by ear.  I read music, I didn't have his ear, you know you put a piece of sheet music in front of me and I could play it, but he could just listen and just boom, he was there. I'd say ah, so I said look, I may be pretty good at this, but there are a lot people probably better so how am I going to get a scholarship, still going back to the scholarship for college.  Sports, that's one of the reasons I came back to Oklahoma, so when I got to high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma], I put down my horn and really dedicated the time that band would have been to wrestling and football, and it worked out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I miss the music though, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I just a couple of years ago, I bought another trombone and I was putzing around with it and playing with it, and I go oh, my God, this sounds horrible, so now I'm teaching myself to play trumpet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you go to school with any of the guys in The Gap Band?
Speaker 2: No, they--I knew Coach Mays (ph.), my football coach, one of his sons was in The Gap Band and he knows, in fact I saw him--we gave a--we acknowledged--a group of us acknowledged the coaches who had impacted us the most as young men, not just as athletes, and Coach Mays and Coach Lacey (ph.) were the two guys and a bunch of us came together, some guys who had--former professional football players, some of us wrestlers, one who was an Olympian all came together and acknowledged these coaches.  And--so the Gap Band was after my time. I graduated in '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They would come after that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about--now you played football and wrestle, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: That's it, okay.  So well how did you do in all those sports then?
Speaker 2: I did well, I was offered a football scholarship to Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], wrestling scholarship, I was recruited for the [United States] Coast Guard Academy [New London, Connecticut], University of Denver [Denver, Colorado], some discussions about Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York] and I chose to go to the University of Denver to wrestle versus play football.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Only because I went on a recruiting trip to Colorado--I had been to Colorado my--between my junior and senior year for the Christian's Athlete's Conference up in Estes Park [Colorado], first time I'd ever seen mountains, blew my mind.  I mean this was--when you come from Oklahoma and Colorado, Oklahoma rather, and Arkansas, I mean this is pretty flat land.  And you get up and you see these mountains, my God, and Estes Park was like awesome, awesome experience. So when I was offered a scholarship to go to the University of Denver, there was no questions about that, sure (laughing). I'd considered applying to University of Colorado [Boulder, Colorado] because it had high altitude physics program that I was interested in, but I'm pleased that I went University of Denver, it worked well, it was a good size school for me.
Story_ID: 135906
Speaker 1: Okay.  Just go backtrack a little bit to high school, now did you--now you, so you were real active in high school and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: President of my sophomore and senior classes, student government, yeah all of that stuff.  I worked--I worked during the school year, probably twenty hours a week and did at least two to three sports, football, wrestling, track, yeah, I was pretty active.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And student government.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington [High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the time you went there--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: The Booker T. Washington High School.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, the first one in the country, huh?
Speaker 2: I don't know whether it was the first it is "The" (laughing).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Those of us who graduated from Booker T. Washington High School take great pride in that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now who are some of the teachers at Booker T. Washington that you remember that had an impact on you?
Speaker 2: Coaches had a significant impact, Coach Lacey (ph.), particularly, Coach Mays (ph.), they allowed me to be a student athlete, that is to say they allowed me to be an athlete, but also one who could get his academics taken care of at the same time.  I remember wrestling, if I had homework to do, we have a wrestling meet, I might be on the bench waiting to my time to wrestle finishing some homework because I also worked at the same time.  And Coach Lacey helped me get a job, I remember in high school, I really worked--I started working at ten as an adult, but financial on my own, since I was probably sixteen half way. By the time I was fourteen I was making most of the money I needed, but clearly by the time I was sixteen, I lived on my own money and made a contribution.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they were very significant, those two coaches.  There was a woman who wasn't at the school, but who had at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], Mrs. Whitlow (ph.), she was significant.  I had a coach--a couple of teachers, a math teacher and I'm looking at his face and I can't think of his name, but I mean he supported me in getting a National Science Foundation grant one summer to study at the University of Tulsa [Tulsa, Oklahoma] when I was in high school, to study physics.  Great guy, great guy, was a guy who was an engineer by training, applied for jobs in engineering as classic story.  Couldn't get a job, so he took a job as a teacher, the week he was to start teaching, some firm, had said--we now accept you as an engineer to come to work for us, and he said, "No, I committed myself to teaching, I gotta keep my commitment."  And so he's had a distinguished career teaching in Tulsa [Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now what position did you play in football?  I didn't ask that--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: I probably should've asked.
Speaker 2: Multi-faceted as always: halfback, linebacker and on occasion quarterback.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you the quarterback of the team, or were you the running back of the team your senior year?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a running back in my senior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were recruited as a running back or as a defensive player?
Speaker 2: As a linebacker.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 135907
Speaker 1: So well, tell us about college, now here you are University of Denver [Denver, Colorado], in the mountains, in the city.
Speaker 2: In the city, in the city, but seeing the mountains everyday, yeah, yeah, unique situation.  Well, first things first, my recruiting trip out, I'd gone out with another student who happened been a white guy from one of the other high schools in town the two of us had been recruited to wrestle and so we went out to--look at the  plant to meet people, to see the school.  First guy I meet on campus, was a black guy, his name was [Dan] Danny Killingsworth, which is a story in itself. Danny Killingsworth had come from Evanston, Illinois, he had fabricated his credentials as a track star by going to the local fair and producing--you know how the fairs, how you produce these newspaper articles?  He had produced a newspaper article about himself and had submitted to the track coach and got a track scholarship, he could run, but he couldn't run the way he said he could run.  He was the first guy I met, who ended up being a crazy man, and all the time I knew him, he was a crazy man who had literally, I think, became a crazy, crazy man, but delightful guy.  University of Denver had a very small black population, the guys were from all over, the girls, black girls, typically were from Texas, and we're talking about undergraduate and graduate school, less than a dozen people.  At the time, we probably had 4500 or so people at the university, but it was an interesting community.  Which meant when it's a small community like that, being a freshman or being a junior didn't really make any difference.  You got accepted in that community and you got nurtured in that community, which worked out very well for me.  But it was the first place that I was, that race didn't appear to be an issue.  It was remarkable that race wasn't a big deal, and so it was a good place to be, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: There were only twelve of you on campus, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think about a dozen at the time, yeah.  That grew over the years and then I think it also slid off but yeah, it was rather outstanding, interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So who were some of the other black students on campus?
Speaker 2: [HM] Badi Foster, who's here in the Washington [D.C.] area now, Bill Cross [William E. Cross, Jr.], who became a college professor, Earl Broughton (ph.), Walter Gibson (ph.), Judd Hart (ph.), an artist on the West Coast, Everett Beckett, Sherman Hunter (ph.), notice that I'm naming all of the guys (laughing) these were my running buddies.  The girls' names don't come so easily for me, but Ethel Griffin (ph.), who's a lawyer in New York, a young lady whose family had a newspaper in Houston [Texas], I don't recall her name, but she's back running that newspaper now, I understand.  Some sister from Texas when I was in graduate school, that came in a Rolls Royce, which blew everybody's mind.
Speaker 1: Rolls Royce?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah, with a chauffeur, was brought to school, interesting.   A lot of rich kids at the University of Denver but to have a rich black kid come to school there was really something too, I think.  I didn't get to know her, I was gone, I was leaving as she was coming in, so.
Story_ID: 135908
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was your major at the University of Denver [Denver, Colorado]?
Speaker 2: I started in physics and ended up discovering communications and majored in communications.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Like what did communications consist of then?
Speaker 2: It was principally human communications, but it was really done differently at the University of Denver.  It had a science basis to it, kind of a quality of basis as well as a social science basis to it and some really rather famous people were there.  At the time, I was the only black student majoring in the program.  Later I know a lot of others have, it was a lot of group dynamics, human communications, a lot of theory, it's a good program.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who were some of the teachers there that you remember that impressed you?
Speaker 2: Oh, three that come--a number, a guy who became a good friend and I later--when we talk about graduate school he will become significant, was Roy Wood.  Roy, when he was a graduate student and assistant professor championed me a bit. Alton Barbour, who had been a gymnast and was a professor who is a friend, Al Goldberg, Al Goldberg, among other things, was the on 'The Lone Ranger' radio show.  He was the Lone Ranger's nephew in Chicago [Illinois] when the show was produced.  Al and his family were really neat and very supportive.  I was part of a fraternity there and was president of the fraternity, actually.  Whenever we need we--one of the things we did, we'd had professors come and speak and Al was always right there, if you want to have someone speak.  In fact, the woman who was secretary of state, who didn't realize that she was Jewish, you know who that is?
Speaker 1: No, I'm thinking, I--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Think, woman, secretary of state.
Speaker 1: Secretary of state.
Speaker 2: In the [President William "Bill"] Clinton administration.
Speaker 1: Oh, Madeleine Albright?
Speaker 2: Madeleine Albright.  Madeline Albright's father [Josef Korbel] taught at the University of Denver.
Speaker 1: Okay. And she didn't know she was Jewish?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't.  At least that's what the report was, but we knew that he was Jewish (chuckle) at least we thought we knew he was Jewish.  This was a Jewish fraternity that I was president of, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What's that fraternity?
Speaker 2: Pi Lambda Phi.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: We had the first multi-racial, multi-religious fraternity in the country, I believe.  And we even had Black Jews, one of the--among the Black Jews was a guy from Virginia, whose father was in a line of Black Rabbis.
Speaker 1: What was his name, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Plummer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Howard Plummer (ph.) was his name.
Speaker 1: Okay. That's something that we don't discuss a lot but the Jewish, the Black Jewish community--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, it was a learning experience for me because that was the beauty at the university, it's with any university, I guess that you have this chance to meet lots of people who have very different backgrounds and you--it just broadens your whole way of thinking about the world, because you get a chance to look into their world view.  I remember once, I been on a construction site with my grandfather and we were working and this white man came up and he was just slamming some Jewish man, and my grandfather said um-hum, um-hum, um-hum, and I was wondering why he wasn't talking.  And then the guy finally left and my grandfather turned to me and said, you know, son, whenever you find they talk about their own that way, you know what they'll say about you, so we just go um (laughing) important learning.  But I never--until I got to college, I didn't have really kind of a distinguish between European Jews and Semitic Jews and all of that.  I mean just didn't have a context for it, and it was very enriching learning some of those differences.
Story_ID: 135909
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was [HM] Cleo Parker Robinson around then?
Speaker 2: Cleo, yes.  In fact, she was but not so--she came a little bit after me, but she was there when I was there, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Delightful woman.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Quite the champion for dance.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.  That's a big dance company [Cleo Parker Robinson Dance] in Denver [Colorado] right now.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Haven't seen her for a few years, in fact, there was a period of time that I used to see her at least once a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 135910
Speaker 1: So did you play sports--
Speaker 2: I wrestled.
Speaker 1: You wrestled, okay, so you didn't play football?
Speaker 2: I wrestled my first year, second year, the beginning of the year I tore up my knee, the knee which is just been replaced.  Between wrestling and the [U.S.] Marine Corps, the knee has been through a lot of stuff, and wrestled there [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado] for two years, then after that, I got an academic scholarship, so.
Speaker 1: Now this is, what year are we talking about now?
Speaker 2: '62 [1962] to '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you graduated from high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma], when?
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962].
Speaker 1: Sixty-two [1962], okay.
Speaker 2: Started college '62 [1962], graduated in '66 [1966] from undergrad.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.   So you were there from '62 [1962] to '66 [1966] and--anything else about the University of Denver [Denver, Colorado]?
Speaker 2: Well Colorado, I never thought I'd leave, to tell you the truth.  I just couldn't imagine a better place to live.  You know going to school there we had wine woodsys (ph.) that means you get a keg of wine, you get a group of folk, guys and girls, get a keg of wine and go up into the mountains and just great old time, or you get a keg of beer and you go up into the mountains and (chuckling) just hang out for the weekend, its great stuff man, you know.  Nothing like Tulsa [Oklahoma], I assure you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not only that, but interesting people came to town, the university attracted really interesting folk, and that was exciting, so great place, thoroughly enjoyed it.  Had good friends, place I could find jobs while going to college make money, help support my sister in going to college, so it's a great thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's radically different from a lot of schools around the country, especially then who were going through civil rights turmoil and demonstrations and other things.  So none of that was going on in Denver [Colorado]?
Speaker 2: Oh our demonstrations were more, in fact, there's an interesting picture.  Yeah, we had some demonstrations, but everyone was together in the demonstrations, there wasn't black against white kind of demonstrations.  We demonstrated blacks and whites together for a things, but--so it wasn't--we were--we didn't have the internal--it's not that they weren't because, you know there were inter-fraternity rivals and there were people who came with their own prejudices, but the environment--with a chancellor there who--Chester Alder, A-L-D-L-E-R, or E-R [sic, Chester Alter], was a great guy, I mean he created an atmosphere that made that place a comfortable place for all people, and I got to know him some years ago, after graduating.  I was president of the alumni association and got to know him pretty well.  And he was everything I thought he was, just a good human being, you know?  And that was a good thing that was a good time.
Story_ID: 135911
Speaker 1: So you graduated from the University of Denver [Denver, Colorado] in '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 1: With a degree in physics?
Speaker 2: In communication.
Speaker 1: Communication alright, I'm sorry.  So what happened next?
Speaker 2: Funny thing, question is what am I gonna do now, am I gonna get a job, am I gonna go to graduate school, there was any great recruiting programs on campus at the time.  I wanted to go to graduate school.  Interestingly enough my department, they went and offered me a scholarship to graduate school, interesting, don't know why.  I got a piece of original research as an undergraduate school student and Roy Woods [sic, Roy Wood] said why don't use this as a--and I hadn't taken graduate record exams, so I took that piece of research and I wrote a letter and I sent the study to a professor at the University of Colorado [Boulder, Colorado].  I was in, the research got me in, and the question was why hadn't I published it?  Well, because none of my professors at the University of Denver talked to me about publishing it.  Ah ha, so all this glorious stuff I thought about the place, race did play an issue (laughing) it's always some subtle stuff.  I'd remember suddenly came to me, I had this big fight with a professor over a grade.  He had wanted to give me a C, when I had aced the mid-term exam, gotten a B on a paper and I gotten a C on the final exam, I said that doesn't make any sense to me, by the way he changed that to a B, which was more appropriate.  I said hum, expectations, 'cause I knew something about expectation theory. So I went to school at the University of Colorado and I went there for a year and as I was work--going to school there, I talked to some folks at the Urban League and they wanted to know what I wanted to do professionally, 'cause they wanted me to come to work for the Urban League.  I said, that's not I really want to do, I'm really more of a business kind of guy, that's what I see myself as, and they mentioned to me IBM [International Business Machines Corporation].  So I read everything I could about IBM and went in for an interview and got the job.  So I went away and became a systems engineer for IBM, lot of training, wonderful experience.  It was a Ph.D. in a year, equivalent of, yeah, the kind, very rigorous, very rigorous.  We were just introducing Unit 360 [IBM System/360 Model 30] at the time, we're migrating from unit record equiopment, so I was in that--in that swash of having to learn all the unit record equipment, which meant wiring panels and boards.  And also doing the software coding for the 360's and how they integrate those systems.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You said [HM] Ed Dwight was there at time you were there.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Ed--when I got to IBM in Denver [Colorado], Ed Dwight was there; I was really recruited in Denver and assigned to Minneapolis [Minnesota].  But I met Ed in between trainings, I met Ed a couple of times, but Ed was much more senior.  He had been around, he had been an astronaut, he had done all the great stuff by then, and I'm just a rookie, I'm just a kid coming in.
Story_ID: 135912
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were transferred to Minnesota and where?
Speaker 2: St. Paul [Minnesota].
Speaker 1: St. Paul.
Speaker 2: St. Paul, Minneapolis [Minnesota], the Robert Street office [IBM].  Interestingly enough I'd been-I'd worked there for about--between Denver [Colorado] and St. Paul for a year-ish or so, I--interestingly--when I was a sophomore in college [at the University of Denver, Denver, Colorado], the Tulsa [Oklahoma], what do you call the recruiting board in a city, draft board.  Sent me my draft notice as a sophomore in college, I go please, so my college, kept me deferred.  By the time I'm with IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], I get another draft notice.  Now there are some people, who consider the technology jobs as kind of--you didn't touch people in technology fields.
Speaker 1: They're exempt.
Speaker 2: Exempt.  By not my draft board, so I had to a make decision, and the decision I made was to join the [U.S.] Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: Now, that is--now how did you come to that decision, I mean the Marines were the almost the toughest branch of the [U.S. Military] Service, and the branch service that is going to be engaged in the most fighting--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Remember I was a wrestler.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Come on (laughing) that's the same mentality (laughing). It's the same mentality, it was really a matter of coming down to if you gonna do this thing; you wanna go with the best.  My humble judgment was that the Marine Corps was the best.  If you gonna have to fight, you wanna be with the best and I never regretted that decision.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your feelings about the war [Vietnam War], you were not against the war or--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, I was against the war, but as I said, I had a choice.  I could've gone to Canada, I could've stayed in the [United] States, rightly or wrongly, I chose to go in the Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't think going to Canada didn't fit in my head or escaping the system, just didn't fit in my head.  And I thought about it, it's not that I didn't think about it.  I thought about all sorts of things, 'cause, you know you can--it was pretty popular in the circle I ran in.  This was a crazy--this war was not just, not fair, the history of it coming from the French.  I mean it was a long line of history there that said the interest here is simply again focusing on the theme of anti-communism and whatever we can do to--but it made no sense, and it was--so it was an interesting wrestle.  But once I made the decision that I wasn't going to leave the country--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Did you consider the [U.S.] Air Force or the [U.S.] Navy, they're more technically-oriented and they probably could've used your expertise a little bit more.  And they weren't like front-line--
Speaker 2: The Air Force wasn't right in the jungle there.
Speaker 1: Interestingly enough during that period, the Marine Corps was also recruiting very bright people for their technology because the Marine Corps also has technology, I mean every man's a rifleman but we also have our technical fields behind all of that.  And they're were really recruiting, they were getting cats who had been drafted into the [U.S.] Army who were very bright and bring them over to the Marine Corps side to be radiomen to be computer science kind of guys to do the more technical jobs in the [Marine] Corps.  I went to officers training school, I became an officer, so my life was a little different--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But still, you know every man's a rifleman.  I got injured, and I won't get into that particular, but ended up in the Navy Hospital [Naval Health Clinic Quantico] on Quantico [Virginia] and after I got rehabilitated, I--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: That's after coming from Vietnam?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I taught at the computer science school and got discharged from there for my disability.  I was--got a paralysis which I overcame, thank God.
Speaker 2: Where did you serve in Vietnam when you went over?
Speaker 1: Really rather not talk about that stuff, that's not stuff I talk about.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Okay.
Story_ID: 135913
Speaker 1: So you're back from Vietnam, you've been wounded, you're rehabbed, and now what, what do you do next?
Speaker 2: Interesting, there's an organization called Lehmans, and you get these notices around that the--these folks are recruiting former [U.S.] Military, particular Military officers to come do these interviews.  And I went on an interview, okay, I said, hum, this is interesting, I met some corporations--the questions then go back to IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] and I go back to IBM.  I knew the IBM world, so let me look at some other things, as well, 'cause I'd never remember--I'd only interviewed with one company, coming out of college, and that was IBM, and I went to work for them.  So for about three months, after I got out of the [U.S.] Marine Corps, the only three months I haven't worked in my whole work life the only one, I got shipped all around America by companies to be interviewed to look at jobs.  And I took a job with Connecticut General [Life] Insurance Company [later merged with Insurance Company of North America to form Cigna] in a management training program that would take advantage of my technical skills, my leadership skills and my communication skills.
Speaker 1: And now what year is this?
Speaker 2: That would've been 1968, '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, alright.  So you have a chance to realize your--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: The whole range of who I was then it was really--and what was interesting, very soon, and this became a pattern.  I became involved in some restructuring of the company reorganized some things internally, and that became a pattern.  In every place I worked from that point on I was always involved in some kind of change effort.  Worked there for a couple of years, then I went to graduate school.  I was getting ready to go to "B" School, I was gonna go to the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] and I was in New York [City] walking the street and I ran into Roy Wood, the guy who I had known in undergraduate school.  He's now dean of Communications School at Northwestern University [sic, Northwestern University School of Communication, Evanston, Illinois], and so we go and have a beer, happenstance, and I tell him what I'm planning to do, I'm wanna apply and pretty sure I can get into Harvard "B" School, he says, well, you're are going to have to pay to go there, aren't you?  I said, well probably, he said, why don't you come to Northwestern?  I remember the research you did, and we'll give you a scholarship.  Okay, I'm thinking about that, I go back to Connecticut and end up being introduced by one of the senior VPs to his cousin who is a professor at Northwestern.  And we start talking about Northwestern, and before I know it I think Northwestern's a pretty good thing to do.  Also Roy has another fellow, Al Goldberg, who had been one of my undergraduate professors who is now at Northwestern also send me a letter, asking me to come and be his research assistant.  So I applied at Northwestern and I get in, get a grant, first time, I said, my God I can just be a student, I don't have to really do any non-academic work.  'Cause in undergraduate school I always had a job, as well as in high school, so I'm pretty excited.
Speaker 1: So this is '69 [1969] right?
Speaker 2: This would be, no, no, no.  This is like '70 [1970], '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: By now, soon as I get there, Al is leaving, because Al has taken another post back at the University of Denver [Denver, Colorado], he's been recruited away, okay, so that's life, things happen that way.  After my first year there, I get reoriented being a student and it goes well, my second year, I meet a guy, a professor, Gil Cruelly [ph.], Gil is professor in industrial engineering, been former chairman of linguistics, chairman of computer science, chairman of industrial engineering, just one of the brightest people and very humble guy.  And we hit it off, and he offers me a research to work--opportunity to work on a research grant that he has, and I take it.  And we become fast friends, even now, and I do research with him for a year, which worked out very well and as I--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: What's the name of his organization that you--I mean his business?
Speaker 2: He's a professor.
Speaker 1: He's just a professor at Northwestern?
Speaker 2: He's a professor at Northwestern.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And it's in the--Northwestern had a number of institutes at the time, and industrial engineering had its own institute and, we were working through that, so it really worked out great.  Had a great period, then Roy was looking for an assistant dean and as I was working on writing my dissertation, he offered me a job as assistant dean.  So here I am, assistant dean and also doing re--I stopped--I finished the research and so I become an instructor, an assistant dean at Northwestern trying to write my dissertation.
Story_ID: 135914
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So well, how long you do that?
Speaker 2: Well, I do that for a couple of years, in the process of doing that, I'm recruited away.  One of the guys who knew the work I done at Connecticut General [Life Insurance Company; Cigna] in terms of some change agent stuff, asked me to come up to Maine, because for the first--there's a company there, Union Mutual [UNUM Life Insurance Company of America], for the first time in a 121 years, had lost money, and they were desperate to do something different.  So I said, guy's name is Bill, I said, "Bill, do they know that I am a black guy" that--he said, "It doesn't matter man, we got some challenges here and-- "How many black folk in Maine?"  "Well, if you're here that will be you, there will be a few other folk," you know, what the heck, I'm married by now.  So I go to Maine and going on the weekend, the president and the chief executive officer meet with me on a Saturday morning.  They tell me their story, I tell them my story and they make me an offer.  Now what I didn't tell you is that while I'm in graduate school [at Northwestern University School of Communication, Evanston, Illinois], I had my own consulting practice, I mean Roy Woods had turned some of his clients to me, and I developed my own clients, I'm making $50,000 a year as a graduate student.  To go to Maine, they're gonna pay me like $42,000 a year, I'm taking a substantial cut, but the challenge was interesting.  And so I move to Maine and I lived there for seven years, the longest I'd lived any place and it was a wonderful experience.  We took and reorganized the company together with the CEO, who's a very interesting guy.  I was the only black executive in the company, and for my first couple years, I was the only black person in corporate headquarters, always intriguing.  Though was able to get involved the community, you know.  House became kind of a meeting place for parts of the black community in Portland [Maine]; it was a good experience, yeah.  It's enriching, and Maine, like Colorado, was a unique kind of environment, I mean the winters were long but the summers were perfect and I enjoyed it.  I spent a lot of time in New York, but I always traveled so I traveled a lot, based on the work, because Union Mutual had a national presence and part of my job was to be out and about and looking at what was happening in the rest of the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anything happened in Maine that you want to tell us about, a note (unclear)?
Speaker 2: What a note in Maine.
Speaker 1: A lot of black people have not been to Maine (laughing) just a general observation.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think well it's in the far Northeast, you know, and you got through Massachusetts and New Hampshire to get there, and so that's the reason.  It was interesting, this is before, of course President [George H.W.] Bush put it on the map for Kennebunk [Maine], but we used to all--me and the family and I would go to Kennebunk [Maine] and Kennebunkport [Maine] and Algonquin [sic. Ogunquit, Maine] in the summer and hang out, and thoroughly enjoy what Maine had to offer.  I think one of the interesting things there was being the only black person in the company, I think, one of the interesting--I had a chance to impact opportunities for women in the company that were already there.  And I think we did some good work there, promoting and seeing that women got promoted.  And that later opened up opportunities in the field for black folk as well, I think.  There were black folk in the company, but they were in cities like Los Angeles [California], Chicago [Illinois], but not in Maine itself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I thought that was good experience, it was wonderful to be able to host the black community in Maine.  'Cause a lot of folks were multigenerational in Maine, you know, who've been there forever.  Or people who come up and the [U.S.] Military in the [U.S.] Air Force, there's an Air Force base in Maine [Loring Air Force Base], and decide they're going to stay.  Not a lot of folks, but a few folks like that, so it's really interesting to get to be a part of that and participate and supporting a black theater group that was opened to the broader community, that sort of thing, it was an enriching experience.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So your home becomes kind of a focal point for the community (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)It becomes a place where people can come and gather, yeah.
Story_ID: 135915
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you left Maine, what did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, when I left Maine, I was recruit--interesting.  When I was in Maine, I was still, I had still been working on the dissertation, the reason I left Maine, I had an idea, I used to--every year, over the Labor Day weekend, I'd have a huge gathering of folk from all over the country in the West Indies, particularly Jamaica.  And that would be a four or five day event, and one of those events, it was 1978, I was telling a friend that I had met in Connecticut, when I was with Connecticut General [Life Insurance Company, later merged with Insurance Company of North America to form Cigna], his name's Ty Grigsby, about this idea I had around voice and data communications and the merger of the two.  And this thing I talked about the networking or net--creating a network solutions company, and he challenged me to do something about it, so if you gonna do that, why don't you do that in Washington [D.C.]?  So he and I kept talking about that, we found a couple of other guys in Washington who had a similar been in interest who believed that the same kind of coming together voice and data communications are gonna be happening.  And by 1979, we had started Network Solutions, a company.  While starting that company, every penny I had in the world was put into it, including second mortgage, credit cards, everything.  We started in Tysons Corner, Virginia an office for two with four people.  Which meant two of us always had to be out on a call or something, if we weren't having a group meeting, it was difficult times.  We found that no one initially thought that networking was going to be a business.  We found a couple of clients; Boeing Computer Services was our first big client, we did for them what they later did for lots of other customers, we built their SNA [systems network architecture] network.  Developed some partnerships with IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], got--start getting a little federal work over the years.
Story_ID: 135916
Speaker 1: We're doing--while we were doing that, I was also--one of the guys had been with me in Maine who had seen the work I done on a term on there, had gone to the Allstate Insurance Company.  And he was a senior executive with them and had mentioned my name to, I guess the head of human resources or the vice chairman, I'm not sure which it, really.  But I was invited--they gave me a call, want to invite me to come and visit.  Well, I'm starting this company, come visit, but I'm broke.  Now it's one thing to start a company and have money it's another to start a company, not only not having money, but to be really in debt.  So I talked to the guys, and I think they wanted me to do a consulting gig, and I go and help them with this little deal or go up, you know, I can be doing that just another part of the business.  So I went to Northbrook, Illinois, met with the head of human resources, the senior VP and later met with his boss that went well interestingly enough.  I'm not looking for a job, I have a lot of ideas about the how the world of corporate America should operate, and so I kind of lay out my stuff, you know, my thinking about things, as a classic consultant might.  I go back--come back to Virginia, we're working; I get another call to come back again.  Now all of these meetings are on weekends, because I'm working in the week trying to get Network Solutions started, so as you know, anytime I'm meeting with someone, they got to be willing to meet with me on a Saturday morning.  So I go back to Northbrook Saturday morning, the vice chairman wants to meet with me, this is getting serious.  So we have the meeting, I remember very interestingly, I'm walking into his back office, he's getting ready to put his jacket on, I'm taking mine off, and I said, mind if we just take our jackets off.  And he--so we sit there, find out he's also former [U.S.] Marine and after the brief simplifies, we get around talking serious business.  They end up making me an offer to come and work with them 'cause they got some plans with things they need to do.  So I have to go back and meet my partners on this, I said look guys, none of us are making money, if I make a little money then I can put some money back into the business, and so I go, move to Northbrook to work with Allstate and commute back and forth to Washington [D.C.]. And I end up--this ends up initial engagement ends up being a seven year adventure where all of my vacation time, all of my holidays are spent here on the East Coast while I'm working with Allstate to do the reorg stuff, which was pretty exciting.  Allstate was the first place that I had been that had a corporate America, had a black community.  It had enough black people to have a community.  And I was like a kid in a candy store, I mean, you know, this was great.  But people who hadn't been where I had been didn't realize what they had, nor did necessarily realize the power of what they had.
Speaker 2: Took it for granted, huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah, took it for granted.  And the things that they saw as negatives, I said gee, this is just an opportunity to make something different happen, so.  So I had the good fortune of working very closely with the most senior management of the company.  During that period--when I went in one of the things I said, look I'll come but one of the things that I would want out of this relationship is that I want to head a profit center, if I do this, the one thing I hadn't done in my corporate career is really run a serious money based organization.  That's where real power is, is when you run a business or operation that generates profit.  Sure, so I came did what I was committed to do, we did some wonderful work, lot of reorganization stuff took place, made more money during the reorganization process, worked with some good folk.  Initially I would admit, when I first came in--the organization wasn't accustomed to black folk coming from outside at senior levels.  That was a real interesting challenge.  And so--not black even, they were kind of thrown a little off, like who is this guy, right?  It took a year to get through that; believe it or not, it took a year before I really could get some traction to begin a support having making some things happen, a participating in the road change process.  But over the next two and half to three years, we did great work, got great results and one day I was at a meeting and--
Story_ID: 135917
Speaker 1: One of the things I became an--as a corporate officer, you had a corporate cars and all, you had drivers, particularly in Chicago [Illinois] area because, that was just part of the system.  And one of the guys who was the senior executive VP [for the Allstate Insurance Company], Jack O'Laughlin, another former [U.S.] Marine, interesting enough.  Jack said, "Emmit, you mind if I share a car with you?"  I said, "No," great, so we'd been in a meeting, we share a car and he says, "You were made an offer; accept it, don't turn it down."  Had no idea what he meant, interesting enough, a few months before I'd been asked about a job, who should run the Seattle [Washington] Region, what my thinking was about that.  And I had made a recommendation of a guy who's a very close friend of mine, not because he's a close friend, but because he was just a dynamite guy, Chuck Martin.  I said, Chuck, Chuck would be good running that region.  I later found out that Chuck couldn't take it because his wife said, "We just moved to California from Denver [Colorado], I don't wanna move my kids again, I want them to graduate from school right here."  The offer he was referring to was to head up the Seattle Region.  The Seattle Region manages the states of Idaho, Oregon, Washington, Alaska and Hawaii, the largest region in the country, and that was the offer.  I had a meeting on some other matters with the president and the chairman and they said, "By the way, something we should let our boss talk to you about but we just wanna acknowledge the work you've done, you're gonna be offered the job as regional vice president for da, ta, da, ta, da," I said oh.  They said, "What do you think about it?"  I said, "Well I could be calm like it's not a biggie, but yes, absolutely."  So now, I'm in a conflict, this means travelling a couple hundred thousand miles a year, it's going to take the time I've been committing to Network Solutions away.  I said okay, I can do it, so I took the job, I went in took over region that was really in deep kimchi, we turned it around, we grew it, make it more profitable and I was getting ready to be promoted, now I'm there for seven years, and I go, my gosh, and I have an epiphany, you started this company, you got these guys together, if you take this next promotion, you can't ever go back.
Story_ID: 135918
Speaker 1: Yeah, one of the pieces that--we're talking about Allstate [Insurance Company], and it's probably worth noting, you know, often people in corporate America, particularly minority group folk, are nervous about promoting each other or working at developing each other or taking risks on each other.  We did something very unusual, because of my role, and the fact that I was involved in coach (air quotes) quotes, helping bring about some changes.  I knew a lot about what was going on and during the period I developed, what I called the twenty minute presentation.  There's nothing I couldn't present in twenty minutes, and if--and there's no meeting that people expect to end in twenty minutes.  So if I make a presentation to you in twenty minutes, I'm going to tell you the purpose and the desired outcome and the process for getting the outcome, basically.  If I do that in twenty minutes, following that then, there's a lot of other stuff for us to talk about.  And people tend to open up and talk about what's on their minds at that point.  So I was lucky to be in a position where I understood and knew the corporate strategy on the corporate issues.  Understanding that, I begin to observe that black folk who manage other black folk were rarely taking risks of promoting black folk beneath them.  I think in part the concern was that ooh favoritism, so I--
Speaker 2: So they went out to out of the way to be unblack actually?
Speaker 1: Well, not always unblack but I don't want to be that harsh, but cautious, cautious is the term I'd use.  Now remember that I got this other business [Network Solutions] that's going, that I'm spending all my weekends and stuff trying to do, so I'm pretty secure guy.  I don't know what would have happened if I'd been in a different position.  Though I think it would be my nature to do what I did anyway, I decided that it was time for some of the black folk who had positions of power to use those.  And I arranged to have a group--I got with my friend Chuck Martin, and told Chuck what I was thinking and he agreed.  And we arranged a group of black folk, managers from all over the country, to come and meet one Saturday morning in Chicago [Illinois] at the United Airlines Terminal in the executive area [at Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois].  And what we did was talked about what we could do, what our aspirations were and how we could work together and support each other and those below us in achieving.  And indeed almost to a person, I can think of only one person in that group whose aspirations weren't achieved.  And I can think of no one that we had identified that didn't get promoted in the next two years to a senior position.  We did it very quietly; in fact this is the first, second public discussion ever of it.  The first public discussion occurred at a retirement, because all the senior white executives had been involved in the process who were around at the time had already retired, and we kind of talked openly at one black executive's retirement about what we had done and why.  The fascinating thing about this, after I left Allstate, I went back maybe five years later and--three or five years later.  I was walking the hall and I'd run into these young black folk who didn't even acknowledge each other, didn't even speak and I felt, they felt that they've gotten here just on their own, not realizing that a lot of work had been down both tactically and strategically to create a place that would trap people like them, that would be open to that.  So that's one of the things I feel best about in my corporate careers, what we did at Allstate.   And if you look at the black executives at Allstate today, they really significant, and have real power and they use that.  Not probably even having any idea of what went before or the work that was done to make sure that could happen, yeah, interesting story.
Story_ID: 135919
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were some of the specific things you all decided to do to support each other?  I mean what--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was very simply that if you're in a position to promote someone and you got a black candidate that's good, promote 'em.  You don't have to be concerned about it, because you're going to get support from your peers for that.  That's the first rule; you don't walk away from that that.  The second piece is I, in my position; I was closer to the strategic issues.  I can tell you what the strategic issues are and what the strategic objectives are and now we need to work to make sure that you can help the company [Allstate Insurance Company] achieve those.  'Cause if you get that done, I'm in a position also to speak the word that hey, this guy's doing a good job, so I would take care of my part of making sure the things that I saw people doing got acknowledge at the most senior levels of the company.  Remember this time I'm really dealing with the president and the chairman of the board, which can make a difference.
Speaker 1: Right, so we're talking about levels-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Talking about levels of--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Intelligence.
Speaker 2: Of intelligence, moving up and down the organization, making sure that people are formed.  The other piece is if someone is screwing up, we don't ignore it, we acknowledge it, we're going to talk to the person that's screwing up, you know?  'Cause we had some guys who kind of took their positions for granted and got a little too carried away with their social lives on occasion.  We also acknowledge the things that white guys do we can't do, so let's just be clear about that.  The guy who runs a region who drinks too much who has a high alcohol budget, we can't do that, don't fall into that, that is not the way to get it done.  It is not looked upon favorably by anyone, they get away with it because they been around so long, we have not been around so long, we'd never get a chance.  So just basic fundamental things, we just talk very plainly about what was going on and what we wanted to do and what we had to do.  It was an amazing session, people opened up beautifully and I'm really honored to have said I was a part of that and that no one ever went public with it.  'Cause was the other piece, you can not go public with this meeting, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I understand now-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: And that worked, made a difference.
Story_ID: 135920
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, let's pick up where we were before we went back to that point at Allstate [Insurance Company].  We were talking about, where were we?
Speaker 2: I don't know, where were we?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: The epiphany I had was that if I took this job, what I'd be doing is fulfilling someone else's dream.  General Woods [sic General Robert E. Wood] who had started the Allstate Insurance Company, my dream had been starting Network Solutions.  And so I resigned, blew people's mind, they thought I was crazy.  Here a guy does in less than seven years--in five years what people spent twenty years to get done in a career at a major insurance company and you're leaving and a black person to boot, your leaving?  That was crazy, so I left.  In part I left for the dream and part of because my dream was dying on the vine.  Me and my partners, it took a lot of energy the three of them together, therefore the four of us, plus we were in deep trouble.  We hadn't been growing; business was going no place, so I came back and stepped back in.  And my buddy who had been the CEO, that wasn't really the job for him.  So I came back and became the CEO of Network Solutions and though we had good and bad years, overall, we had more good than bad.  We took a company that was going no place; we got involved in developing TCP/IP for packets switch network in the protocol set that the Internet runs on, the intraoperability of that software we championed.  Later went on to do things like beating the National Science Foundation in competition for domain name, domain name registration.  It ended up being a good run; it was--ended up being a good decision.
Story_ID: 135921
Speaker 1: Now, this is some significant stuff you're talking about, this domain name.  I think there is a story here; I heard there's a real deep story here--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well everyone focuses on--the story really starts when we [Network Solutions] win a--for one of the security agencies, we won a contract to do the equivalent of structuring domain name registration in the intel community for networking.  What we created at Network Solutions was really a boutique communication engineering company focused initially on data communications at the highest order.  And we got involved with that, and following that, we also acquired a small company that was in the intel community focused on servicing the intelligence agencies, we did good work for them.  Along the way, we did work for the National Science Foundation and when the domain--originally Stanford Research Institute [now SRI International, Menlo Park, California] was really doing domain name registration, they were--it was a small, relatively small effort at that point.  But the National Science Foundation wanted to compete that, to find other players and Network Solutions stepped up.  I mean it was surprising that a small company would even think that they could beat Stanford Research Institute in any competition.  I had been out to Stanford [University, Stanford, California] with the Research Institute when I had been at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], and really some smart guys.  But I'm a wrestler, so challenges like that I think, you take on, right?  As we said, let's take 'em to the mat, and we won, we won that and had the root domain at our headquarters, boom.  As we began to--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: So what is this mean in (chuckling) in layman's terms of--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: In layman's terms that we at Network Solutions were the central focus for registering people to get on the Internet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Worldwide, at that point.
Speaker 1: And so and, www and so and so.
Speaker 2: All the dot, everything.
Speaker 1: Dot, everything.
Speaker 2: Yes, at that stage.
Speaker 1: Had to come through?
Speaker 2: Come through us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  What we're probably should be noted for--we were the first people that I'm aware of, who spoke to the National Science Foundation about commercializing the whole domain registration process.  As you probably know, governments really were largely financing the Internet and Internet explosion.  The growth rate that we were achieving was such that we knew that was just, it's gonna overwhelm.  And so we talked to the National Science Foundation about fee for service.  Let's create a scenario where those people who want domain names have to pay for those, and by the way, we split that between the National Science Foundation and Network Solutions.  This is in '93 [1993], believe it or not.
Story_ID: 135922
Speaker 1: I start going to Wall Street trying to raise money, '93 [1993] and '94 [1994], I need to raise ten million dollars to reinforce our infrastructure for what we believe was gonna be the Internet explosion.  Couldn't raise it, could not raise it.  Now the team's been together for about seventeen years or so, wives are getting awfully squeaky about how long we to have live like this, you running this--you guys are running this company, why can't we have, have, have?  One wife in particular, I think, more than any was to spurred us selling Network Solutions. And the pressure came for us to do something, liquidate.  I went to a couple folks I knew in the black community to try to raise money, couldn't get anybody interested.  Couldn't even get them really to listen to what I was trying to say.  And you could tell within the first few sentences that this tech talk was just turning them off.  So I told my partners, I really think this is the wrong time to sell, but we sold.  I bought one small piece of the business myself and the rest we sold to SAIC [Science Applications International Corp, San Diego, California].  Well the story that you know is that the thing that we sold, one third of what we sold, one third of the intellectual property went public.  Went up to two hundred and forty something dollars a share, split went back up to--I guess went to three hundred dollars a share about.  Split and went back up to two hundred forty something dollars a share and was later sold for twenty-one billion dollars.
Speaker 2: That's a stunner there isn't it, I mean--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Well, it's a stunner but you know you can't predict what's going to happen that closely in the world.  And people often approach me like I should be upset or angry about that, anger only slows progress, it doesn't move you forward.  I mean it may motivate you but typically it gets in the way.  So I don't have any anger, I mean I was a CEO even after we sold it to SAIC, I was still senior official at SAIC, heading the group entity.  I found that the people that I was working with, they came over with were so damn manipulative and lying that--just wasn't the kind of culture that wanted and no longer wanted to be a part of, so I left.  And so I left lots of money on the table, I mean I left, I left probably thirty-eight million dollars on the table, forgetting what the stock would've done later.  And you can say that was pretty dumb, as I've gotten older, it does look kind of dumb, but I'm not angry about it, because didn't do the company initially focus on just making money.  We were focused on proving some other things; we were focused on creating a culture where diversed people could really work together.  Very much like that the fraternity I had been a part of.  We were focused on proving that this idea we had about networking really was the way to go.  'Cause so many people said there's no business there, no business in that quote, networking space.  We proved to be right on everything that we said and did, we just didn't make the big buck.  Good news is, for those who wonder, we're still creating stuff and still involved in evolving new ideas and who knows, maybe we'll have a second chance or third chance.  The key is that we're still in the game, and we survived probably the most difficult time in the history of telecommunications in the last three years.  And we've had customers go bankrupt owing us money, we had to take money out of our own coffers.  Thank God that we made some money so we can afford to do this, if we had never made any money, we'd really be in trouble, we wouldn't be in business.
Story_ID: 135923
Speaker 1: So well what have you done since--well since that--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well we started NetCom Solutions International, good news there in the first seven years, we grew that to over a quarter billion in revenue and highly profitable.  Then we had the last three years that caved in on us, it sucked up our profits.  To keep things alive and downsizing, we incubated a company called Visutel and that company is now out of incubation.  It's a NetCom Solutions is a communications engineering support services end to end infrastructure builder.  Visutel is a broadband company providing broadband entertainment to the home.  It's a research and development company which is first quarter next year we will be rolling out.  We have engineered a network architecture, created software.  Integrated some products that allow us to give you ten mega bits by directional over your phone line, which is a real breakthrough.  And those who know engineering, says it may be one of the most disruptive things to come to market.  Ultimately what that says, you don't need fiber to your home to get true broadband.  But our offering is ten to fifteen times faster than DSL and it goes farther than DSL.  So we think we are onto something big again, so there may be a second coming or a third coming, if this doesn't work, we'll create something else.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause that's what we do, I mean the story of my life as much as anything is being willing to take risk, do something a little different.  To have an idea, to explore it, to surround myself, or get involved with some good folk, you know.
Story_ID: 135924
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Hopes and concerns.  The major challenge we have is inspiring our young people, educating them, giving them the tools inspiring them as to what's possible.  More broadly than just music, more broadly than just sports, we are very capable of math and science.  We have to find people who know how to teach math and science in a way that fits into most of our bright brain heads, right?  So I'm very concerned about young people and what we're doing there.  Not just in the United States, but around the globe.  And it's not just black youth, but youth particularly is a major, major issue in the black community--inspiration, possibility thinking.  I'm afraid of what's happening in the job market in particular the impact that we'll have on our communities at the level of education that we have in the quantitative areas.  The traditional low tech jobs are leaving the U.S. and that frighten me for our community, it frightens me also for our country.  Though there are people who think it's the greatest thing since sliced bread, I'm not sure; I think we are in a very fragile situation.  Fifty percent of the world's manufacturing plus is going to take place in China.  Most of the software is going to be developed in India or code written there.  I mean that's not good news for my kind of myopic point of view.  My myopic point of view is focusing on theblack community, not wholly but clearly in part.  We need--leadership is always an issue, we need leaders, people who lead without necessary needing a mantle of being of being "The Black Leader."  I think a great danger is for us to ever believe that any one person is the answer to our problem as a community.  But we need a bunch of folks rising with ideas to help with making a difference.  As you know, one of the--I grew up in a black community where I saw the baker, the lawyer, the doctor, the wino, I saw all of that.  That is no longer the case, a whole bunch of factors lead people to migrate to their economic highest level in terms of communities versus any kind of organic racial based community or ethnic based community.  Happens to just about everybody, but it seems to have a more devastating effect on the black community somehow.  I don't know wholly what to do about that, but it's a real concern I have now.  History has been amazing though, the things that black folk have achieved given the conditions that we were in the '50s [1950s].  I'm not talking about the '40s [1940s] or the '30s [1930s] or the '20s [1920s] talking when I was a kid in the '50s [1950s].  The stuff that we had to deal with and survived and achieved and went beyond is really rather amazing.  And so I'm able to see tremendous economic change for large numbers of people.  At the same time, I seem to see a greater slide in the part of large numbers.  So the gap between the haves and the have nots in the black community are replicating what's happening in America in general, but even more so, it's bigger, bigger, bigger.  I was a poor child, I grew up being poor, didn't really know that 'cause I didn't know how good other things were 'cause I didn't have television.  Now we have so much television coming into our homes that we see outcomes without seeing process.  That we have folks thinking about what can be or what they want versus what can be.  And not recognizing what people do to get it.  Because there's not enough time on a TV show, to show the process that you gotta go through to make enough money to do A, B or C.  All people see is results, so people start trying to take shortcuts.  It happens in the community broadly, the white community the black community, but young people, black, white, red, brown, are more vulnerable to that.  In our community particularly given the history of its kind of isolation is very prone to wanna focus on outcomes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Kids say they wanna get paid.
Speaker 2: Yeah, wanna get paid.  I want this car, I want that car.  You ask the question how you gonna get it?  You know and the answer that you might get is not the answer you want (laughing).
Story_ID: 135925
Speaker 1: I started at ten years old working in fields, I asked my mother [Mary Thurman Barnett] to let me go to work.  I remember making three dollars a day, but--and that sounds horrible.  My sons and I were having this discussion recently about developing countries and labor laws and all of that stuff.  And my response was by our standards, all of that is really horrible, but we can't judge it by our standards totally.  The job that kid has if he's making a decent living and getting a decent meal, can change his life and his family's life.
Speaker 2: By the time I was sixteen, I was able to make enough money to pay for everything I needed for school and to give my grandmother some money for rent.  Worked at a country club, I had all of the--I was a paperboy (chuckling) I worked at a country club, I had--I did the painting in the neighborhood, whatever was required, I did, I did lawn, I did all of those menial kinds of jobs.  I remember when I lived in Maine, I had the president of the company came by the house and picked me up once to take me some place, and he saw the house and he was touring the art and all that jazz.  As the driver was driving us away I made the mistake of saying something about my life and he was shocked, 'cause he thought that I had been born with a silver spoon in my mouth.  Being born poor doesn't mean you gotta live like you're poor.  That's the difference when I was a kid, you could not have, but not having was not a reason to act poor.  I think today there's a lot of people who act poor and by acting poor, it's a mindset.  It a whole attitude, it's a way you carry yourself, you know.  And I see this in lots of places and it pains me because your external behavior represents your internal state.  You know what I mean by that?  I mean how you carry yourself, represents how you think about yourself inside your head.  And if I wanna change how I think about myself, I can change how I carry myself; the two will work well together.  I'm not sure the messages we're giving out to people, I'm not sure how--you know 'cause me to ramble here.  I get very frustrated when I hear--I used to get frustrated when I head folks talk about Africa for example.  Our community always wants to focus on Egypt as the birthplace of this or that or black folks in our relationship with Egypt.  Well, coming to this country, we're from West Africa, our black ancestors from West Africa, they're not from up North for the most part.  Now there happen to be a bunch of Ethiopians who came to North America in the South, got married to black folks and there black folks in the South who are of that Ethiopian ancestry, that's more North.  But most of us, slavery brought the whole tribes down (chuckling) from the West Coast of Africa, some from more inland, but mostly.  When we start doing those realities, the history of those places versus some romantic notion of Cleopatra and the history of something else, I think we're all the better off.  I'm hoping that this is the decade when we begin to tell ourselves the truth about who we are.  Aspire for what we want and try to communicate to our young people it's all possible, but none of it is cheap.  The purchase price for success is sacrifice; there are no doubts about that.  If you're not willing to sacrifice for your success, then you won't be successful.  Show me a musician who hasn't spent great hours practicing his instrument if he hasn't, he's not a master the instrument, no matter what his genius is.  Show me a mason who lays a perfect row of brick who hasn't laid hundreds before you see that perfect one, then it's an accident, it can't happen again, so. But maybe a little broader than the question you were asking, but those are issues that come to my mind that--when you asked about the community concern me greatly.
Story_ID: 135926
Speaker 1: What at this point would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Legacy.  To the degree that I touched some other people and inspired or supported them in achieving their dreams that would be the greatest legacy.  It's not the particular things that I done or not done, but the lives that I may have touched.  Or that may have been touched by the idea that this other person who similar background, similar ancestry did something that was outside of the norm or out of the box, so.  That's my--I guess that would be the legacy, the lives touched.  And I can't tell you all about that, 'cause those stories aren't complete yet.  I did have a meeting with someone the other day that said when he was coming up, I gave him a job, a task to do some work, and based on that, he was able to go forward and now has built a great company.  That's good, now the question comes, how many lives will he touch?  I told my boys as they were growing up, your price for being on the planet is to positively, positively, positively affect at least two other lives.  If you've done that, then you earned your right to be here.  Now why you trying to--you know, if you trying to help at least two other people the only way to differentiates them from others, you will probably gonna help more.  But all you gotta do is really make a difference in two other people's lives significantly and you earned your right.  Hopefully, I've earned my right to be on the planet.  My sisters and brothers tell me I have, so I guess that's probably enough.  Maybe that's the greatest legacy of all, is affecting your own family in a positive way.
Story_ID: 133263
Speaker 1: Remember I told you that I'm the oldest of nine children, my mother [Mary Thurman Barnett] reminds me that I'm the first since my grandmother on my mother--on my father's [Herman McHenry] side, first on her side of the family to go to college.  Five of the nine of us have degrees, advanced degrees.  She tells me and maybe it's true, that my starting the process, at least in my own family showed the possibilities.  And now I have nephews and nieces who are doing the same thing, so maybe that's the real legacy.  The first step is what you can do in your own family to make a difference and if along the way, you do the same for some other folks; then you make the planet a better place for everyone.  The technology stuff it's good stuff, and I feel good about it, I'm glad I was where I was.  I don't--it is not as significant to me as it is to other folks, 'cause if something's already happened, it's in the past.  I'm moving forward, I'm trying to figure the next thing to do (laughing), the next problem that I can work on.
Story_ID: 133264
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there anything that you do differently when you look back on the things you've done?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I wouldn't sell Network Solutions (laughing) or if I sold it, I would take the agreement that I had with the SAIC [Science Applications International Corporation, San Diego, California] and I'd live with the B.S. for a couple of more years, or I'd kick butt, make sure that everyone else backed away and got the crap out.  That's something I would do differently, hind sight.  It's been a decent run, I've have been blessed, given the place and time of my birth and the circumstances, one would've never predicted.   You know, I've been all over the world, I've worked in China, I've worked throughout Africa, had offices in those places and in Europe.  Built kind of an international business, I've also closed all that stuff down, and you would've never predicted that, no way, no insight. The things I worked on, didn't even exist in the human mind when I was born, so, it's been a good run.
Story_ID: 133265
Speaker 1: And the last question is related to legacy, but it's not quite the same thing.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: You know, it would sound corny probably but a loving guy; this was a loving human being who really had passion about everything he did, but at the end of the day, came from a place of love.  Not from a place of anger, not from a place of regrets and remorse, but a place of love.  I think that to me, that's what I hope people--you know if people get that, if I am that, then everything else is just okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: Indeed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 133266
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  All right, let's go ahead with the first one.
Speaker 2: Well, this is a picture of a group that we spend the last two weeks of August, some set--subset of this group at Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  It is really a big part of our annual therapy to go to the Vineyard for a week or two.  It's a chance for old friends to come back together and just spend some quality time.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And this one was taken around what time?
Speaker 2: This was probably taken 2001.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Here's a return to Colorado, Sing [HM Singleton McAllister] and I--for The Ron Brown Scholar's Program went up for a week to spend time with The Ron Brown Scholars.  A wonderful group of young people, this would've been 2002.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: And this is a group of friends that were there with us, we all went out hiking to the blue bells. Get a chance to see the splendor of Colorado which you probably know is near and dear to my heart.  And this picture again was taken in 2002.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, this is the clan; you see me and Sing there, on the left my son Kurt and Kurt Junior.  And to my left, your right, you see Michael, my youngest son and Renee, Kurt's wife, and Shea, my oldest grandchild.  I have two grandchildren, Shea and Kurt, and this would've been taken 2001.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: This picture's probably 1999 with then-President [William "Bill"] Clinton, Sing and I at probably at one of his fundraiser--a fundraiser or some acknowledgement.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Everybody looks good in that photo.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, this is what I looked like in high school [at Booker T. Washington High School, Tulsa, Oklahoma], probably 1961.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: And this vague photo is junior high school I'd say.  I think it's me, I'm told it's me though.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: Looks more like my brother than me.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: And here I am as a young, very young IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] systems engineer.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, very good, All right.
Speaker 2: Well, this is a summer, probably 2000, picture with me and my first grandchild, Shea.  It's a picture taken at the Vineyard.  You can see there that I got a little glow on my face.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  How should we spell Shea?
Speaker 2: S-H-E-A, Shea.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Go ahead Larry.  Start at the bottom.
Speaker 2: I'm giving a presentation to the National Minority Supplier Development Council in New York.  I think the year is 2002.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay and moving to the top photo.
Speaker 2: Here I'm receiving an award from the Minority Supplier Development Council for, I guess kind of a legacy as a business--as an entrepreneur.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, same year?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This was my first visit to Victoria Falls [Kazungula, Zambia]; I was on a mission to Africa, probably 1994.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Great, next.
Speaker 2: Here I'm introducing Sing to her first horseback riding in Colorado.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And year?
Speaker 2: Year, 1997.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  All right.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: This looks like 1996; it's a panel at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  Interesting group, to the far left there, the large man is [J. Bruce] Llewellyn who is just a real anchor of entrepreneurship in the black community.  [HM] Harriet Michel is next, and then I'm in the center and to my right is [HM John] Rogers [Jr.], the now well-known as an investment guru and next to him is the publisher and entrepreneur, [HM] Earl Graves [Sr.].
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Did you give this date for this?
Speaker 2: Probably '96 [1996].
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Oh, that's right, you said that, okay. Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Well, we're dropping my oldest off at college at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  He's in the background, my youngest is in the foreground, styling, as always.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is our true African, my grandfather, Emmit Thurman, whom I'm named after.  Started on the Rock Island Railroad [Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad] as a pickman and retired as a manager.  I guess you'd say supervisor.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, do you have an idea when this photo might've been taken?
Speaker 2: This was probably taken 1974.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's my father after he got out of training in the [U.S.] Army as a buck private.  And I would think that was taken probably 1942, oh, I'm sorry, probably '43 [1943] '44 [1944].
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  All right.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure you can use that picture, but this funny picture is my first week at working for IBM [International Business Machines Corporation].  You can see I got on my proper suit and tie, awfully buttoned down.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, good, next.
Speaker 2: What year would that be?
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967].
Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my son, Kurt, he was in college at the time and he joined me in Africa for a tour of Africa.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Approximate year?
Speaker 1: Approximately 1994.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Next.
Speaker 1: That's another picture of Kurt and I in Africa, happened to have been at the Grand Basilica [Basilica of Our Lady of Peace] in Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire [sic, Yamoussoukro, Cote d'Ivoire].
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay next.
Speaker 1: These are the boys in their youth; this is early '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Here's a picture of me as a little tyke with my grand aunt in the middle and my grandmother, the woman standing.  And this would've been taken probably 1946.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is my mother, her current state; she's aged and has been ill but that's Mama.  And this was probably taken '19, no 2001.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  All right, next.
Speaker 1: My son Kurt and I at a summit in Cote d'Ivoire.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Is he a [C] or [K] Kurt?
Speaker 1: [K].
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: He now runs our NetCom Solutions Business, he's president of that business.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Time has passed.  And this is Little Kurt and Shea, the grandbabies.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  All right, next.
Speaker 1: Well, this is the first time I really got involved in doing major fundraising for a political candidate.  I mean major fundraising for Mr. [Al] Gore.  My disappointment is that he didn't have more fight.  Election he should've won, small tactical differences could've made all the difference in the world.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, oh, year, obviously what 1999, 2000?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Now, this is Mr. [Nelson] Mandela, his first visit to the U.S., probably around '94 [1994] I think [sic, 1990].  It's what led me to open an office in South Africa.  Most impressive human being, emotional experience I ever had meeting a human being.
