Story_ID: 99591
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey, ma'am could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Jane, J-A-N-E, Marguerite, M-A-R-G-U-E-R-I-T-E, my maiden name is B-O-N-D, Bond and my married name is M-O-O-R-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 1, 1938, Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Gosh, right now I guess I'd say I'm a part-time attorney, a part-time professor and a part-time writer.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: September 14, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In Berkeley, California.
Story_ID: 99592
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now before I go into depth, there are five lightweight "People Magazine"-ish type questions that we are compelled to ask by management that only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Peanut butter cookies (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Not particularly, no.
Speaker 1: A favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yeah, any place that has warm and has a beach and an ocean, you know that you can swim in, sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, I'm sure my children and husband could tell you otherwise, (laughs) but as far as I know, I don't have any.
Story_ID: 99593
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay, Julia, J-U-L-I-A, Agnes, A-G-N-E-S, and then her maiden name was Washington, W-A-S-H-I-N-G-T-O-N, and her married name was Bond, B-O-N-D.
Speaker 1: Now and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Gosh, I don't know her date of--it's either 1917 or 19--let's see, 19--well anyway, it's around there the nineteens, but she was born in Nashville, Tennessee also.
Speaker 1: Yeah okay, now how far back can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Well, to her grandmother, my great grandmother, who I only knew her by her married name, Baby, well we called her Baby, that wasn't her name, Callie I think was her name, C-A-L-L-I-E, but we called her Baby and she married a man named Lishey [ph.].  She was from Kentucky and her, I guess her mother was around when I was a child, Washy [ph.] we called--no that was my, that must have been my maternal grandfather's mother was around and when I was a small child and her name was Washington, Washy is what we called her, but when I knew her she was very old and blind and didn't talk much so, actually I was rather afraid of her.  I didn't have much interaction so that's about as far back--.
Speaker 1: Now that your father's, that's on your father's side?
Speaker 2: No, no it's my mother's father's (simultaneous) mother.
Speaker 1: Your mother's father oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And they came from Memphis, I think, near Memphis [Tennessee], maybe it could have been Mississippi near Memphis, that's where those people came.  The great grandmother, Callie or Baby came from Mount Sterling, Kentucky or West Virginia, someplace like that and actually we went there and visited once when I was a kid.
Speaker 1: Okay, it was either Mount Sterling, Kentucky?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was either Kentucky or West Virginia, it was some hilly place.
Speaker 1: I know Mount Sterling is in Kentucky, that's where my ancestors are from so.
Speaker 2: Oh, maybe we're related (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) could be, yeah I've never been to Mount Sterling but my grandmother's people (simultaneous) was born there.
Speaker 2: They must have known each other, how many people could there be (laughter) in Mount Sterling, Kentucky you know?  Do you, oh you've never been there.  I was going to say do you know if it's on the hill or something--.
Speaker 1: It is kinda hilly from what I understand.
Speaker 2: Yeah and she always said that she came from the BlueGrass, but it was the steeper parts.  As I remember Mount Sterling was in the mountains, not in the flat BlueGrass part.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's not too far from Lexington, Kentucky about seventy miles east on Lexington.
Speaker 2: I'm just now realizing then that my father's family came from near there.  I wonder if they ever knew each other.  It's interesting, yeah, I hadn't realized that, but anyway go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's just now dawning on me.
Speaker 1: All right so your--Callie is your--she's your maternal great grandmother on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Yes--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah she's one of them yeah, and Washy was my mother's father's mother, grand--yeah mother.  So she was also on my material side, but she was my mother's paternal grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay now did they have--did these women--were they born during slavery or--.
Speaker 2: I'm not, I--Callie--Washy was, and I remember my mother saying that she had marks on her back where she had been hit, though I don't know if that's true or not.  I never saw them.  Baby, I'm not sure, you know I'd have to figure it all out (laughter) yeah how old she was.
Speaker 1: Yeah I heard the story about Washy before--yeah.
Speaker 2: She might have been a child you know like my paternal grandfather, he was born during slavery but he was only a slave for a brief period you know, they were emancipated soon thereafter, so it may have been like that with Baby, I don't know.
Story_ID: 99594
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, are there any stories from that side that they tell other than the whipping story and--?
Speaker 2: Well, I know that somehow Washy was related to that family in New York.  Do you remember those Delanys; Delanys those old ladies (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 1: Oh, really the two, the Delany sisters.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had a brother who was a judge, they came from, maybe it wasn't them (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: That's Hubert Delaney, was that the brother you're talking about?
Speaker 2: I don't know, somehow--forget that, maybe that's not it; it was Rivers is their name, it wasn't Delany, it was Rivers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And somehow she was--he was one of the first black judges in New York, and I think his mother may have been Washy's sister or something like that, and all I know is that she came from either outside of Memphis [Tennessee] or in--well outside of Memphis whether it was in Tennessee or Mississippi, I don't know and that she had a--the baby by my, I'm trying to get this straight.  My mother [Julia Washington Bond, HM] said, I think it was a traveling salesmen and Washy told my mother one time that she was so young when she got pregnant that she was still looking for babies under cabbage leaves, which then I guess is what they told kids at that time, and then she had my grandfather, my mother's father and evidently he was a very pretty baby because the woman who Washy worked for used to take him and play with him and dress him up in baby clothes, I don't know what happened, how she had baby clothes, why didn't she have children--who knows?  I don't know (laughter), but that's what I heard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then her son who was my mother's father and his name was George Washington and he--somehow they went from Memphis, he and his mother to Nashville and although he was pretty old, I think eleven, twelve or so he went to school maybe at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], I'm not sure but he went ahead, and he you know he finished college and he actually studied law.  I don't know if he ever passed the bar and he got some other degree, maybe a divinity degree and then became an educator and he was principal of the black high school, you know at that time they probably only had one black high school, the one that would have been in the area where Fisk was.  Washington High, of course, it was named after him eventually, after he died so I know that much about them.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and any other stories from that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Let's see what can I think about (unclear) a story.  No, Baby's husband had an interesting story, but he wasn't really our great grandfather, we don't know who our great grandfather is.  Baby had one child, my grandma Daisy, grandmother Daisy we called her, and but we don't know who the father of that child is, but Baby married a man named Lishey who was--he had an interesting background.
Speaker 1: His name, what'd you call him?
Speaker 2: Lishey, L-I-S-H-E-Y, or maybe it's L-I-S-H-Y, it think it was a German name, or it started off being German and his father had two families, a white family and a black family.  He had quite a few, you know more than one child, at least in the black family and he was one of them, and this man had, I guess he didn't have any sons, or maybe he didn't have any white children, but anyway he had a nursery for flowers and so when he died, his son, Baby's husband, got the property, you know this nursery, which was quite a bit of land on the outside of Nashville and then his siblings, his brothers and sisters, at least some of them were--as my mother told me, sent to California because they were darker than he was and his--their father who did it thought they would have an easier time of it in California and my mother actually met them and she had some place in her house pictures of her with the descendants of Mr. Lishey's you know, brother and sister.  So he kept this nursery and by the time I came along there wasn't a nursery left, you know the flower thing, but he had lots and lots of property, it was a big plot of land outside, well it was at the edge of Nashville by that time, and when he died, actually he had a fair amount of money and he left it to my--his wife, and then when she died it went to Fisk and at that time it was the largest amount any black person had given a college, so our family says, but one thing I've come (laughter) to learn through life is you know families have a lot of legends (laughter) they're not always true (laughter), but I know he gave something, she gave something to Fisk, however much it was or something. It was, it was--.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this land ended up being you know a gift to Fisk University?
Speaker 2: Well not the land, the actual cash, and then yeah and--.
Speaker 1: The cash from the liquidation of it.
Speaker 2: And plus I think he had other monies too, and the land was sold, you know and they're just tract homes out there now.
Story_ID: 99595
Speaker 1: Okay now what stories of growing up did your mother [Julia Washington Bond, HM] tell?
Speaker 2: Oh this, it's very interesting, well her mother and father were married, her mother had to stop teaching.  Her mother was teaching, her mother had gone to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and at that time they had two schools, the like a liberal arts school and then a normal school and the normal school was just preparation for teaching and that's what the course she took.  At any rate when she got married to her husband, my grandfather she had to quit and he either, I can't this right, I think my grandfather on my father's side married my grandparents on my mother's side that they knew each other, they went to the same you know the kind of church, I mean I don't think they were bosom buddies, but you know but they kinda knew each other.  At any rate they got married, lived in Nashville and he was teaching I guess on working his way up whatever kind of hierarchy there was and she stayed home and they had my Uncle Alvin who is a doctor, he's dead now, momma, my Aunt Joe who's alive and lives in Cleveland, Ohio with her daughter, Melanie and then Aunt Marguerite, who is named--I'm named after and who is named after our grandmother Daisy because Marguerite is French for Daisy and I guess they thought that was fancier, though I think Daisy is a pretty enough name (laughter).  So she had those kids and then I think my mother's father died when they were fairly young.  I'm not quite sure when he died, but at any rate at some point Baby's husband died, and actually that's how she came to be called Baby because she cried, she was crying a lot at that time obviously, so my youngest Aunt, Aunt Marguerite said, "Well if you don't stop crying, I'm just gonna call you a baby, you're just a baby cause you cry all the time" you know and so we--they started calling her Baby and I always called her Baby, I didn't call her grandmother or grandma or anything, we had just called her Baby.  So anyway her husband died, and my mother went to live with them and it was Mile End Avenue in Nashville which was far, far away from where they had lived previously, which was in the neighborhood around Fisk in that area.  So she had to get up and go to school, I think she walked to school, but I'm not sure.  Of course, parents always tell (laughter) their kids they had to walk miles to school, so somehow or another either by public transportation or walking she would go from where they lived which was all white you know, to where my--where she went to school, and I don't know if she went to see her siblings on the weekends or what, but she was living apart from her siblings at least during the week, and she's, she never said, but I do think it was hard for her as a young kid you know just to be sent off like that.  I'm sure they were thinking, you know, why me (laughter) you know, didn't they want--all those thoughts and I think what my grandmother must have thought was that her mother had money and you know, here she was with these kids that you know all these kids and not much money and it would make it--that my mother would have in some ways an easier life living with her grandmother, I'm that's--I'm sure that's probably what she thought, but I think, I think my mother may have felt abandoned.  She's never actually said it, but I just think that from just kind of observing her you know.
Speaker 1: Okay so your mother went to Fisk too then right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now did she finish at Fisk?
Speaker 2: Yes, she finished Fisk and actually she worked on her masters, my father, she and my father [Horace Mann Bond] were students at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]together.  My father was working on his Ph.D. and my mother was working on her masters, maybe on her way to get a PhD, and her field was English Literature, the--and she was--I think gonna write her thesis on the poems of Arnold Bennett.  That's what she told me as I remember, but my father finished first and then he you know started getting jobs and, so she went with him and she never finished until we got--we--my youngest brother was in high school, then she went back to school and actually she got two separate masters.  She got a master's in Education from the University of Delaware [Newark, Delaware] where she was one of the first black students there, but after she did her student teaching, she decided that, that was not for her and by that time we moved to Atlanta [Georgia], so she went to Atlanta University [now Clark Atlanta University] and became a librarian and she worked for the Atlanta University libraries up until her eighties.  I mean she wasn't a full-time librarian in her eighties but she was like a substitute librarian and she must have worked up until full time into her seventies and then became a substitute librarian
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think she worked until about ninety; she's age ninety-two I think, but she--.
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: You don't think so?
Speaker 2: Did she say that (laughter)?
Speaker 1: I think there is a--well, okay well it's--
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: But I think there's some evidence that she did.
Speaker 2: Maybe she did, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I thought it was only up until in her eighties, I'm trying to remember, well maybe she did, I don't know, but I know she worked a long time as a librarian.
Story_ID: 99596
Speaker 1: Okay, now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Horace, H-O-R-A-C-E, Mann, M-A-N-N, Bond, B-O-N-D.
Speaker 1: Now he was named after the--what they call the "Father of American Education"--.
Speaker 2: Yes, who--.
Speaker 1: Horace Mann?
Speaker 2: Yeah, who was connected to Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio] and my father's mother was a student at Oberlin College so I'm sure that's why she named him Horace Mann.
Speaker 1: Did she know Horace Mann?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I never knew my grandparents from that side, and now I'm thinking about it all my uncles and aunts from that side of course are now dead so I don't know if they ever did or not.
Speaker 1: Yeah it would be interesting, I--cause Horace Mann went on to found Antioch College in Yellow Springs [Ohio], right down I guess maybe a hundred miles away from Oberlin.
Speaker 2: I don't know, I guess we could you know it could be easy to find if we found out when she was there and if he was around or what.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was born in Nashville [Tennessee] too I'm pretty sure, if not that was in Louisville, Kentucky, but I'm sorry I don't know his date of birth.  He died in 1972 I think and he was in his--he may have been about my age you know or maybe in his seventies, I don't know.  So maybe he was born--if my mother was born in 1910 or, let's see, she's ninety-eight, that's almost a hundred, a hundred and six.  She was probably born in 1908, so my father probably was born in 1900, 1901, 1902, something like that, but maybe I might have those all off, don't take my word for it.
Speaker 1: Okay well that gets us close to it anyway, all right and what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see I know that his father was the son of a white man and a black woman.  His name was James Bond and he went to college in Berea, Berea College in Kentucky which is a college, do I need to tell all that about Berea?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah go ahead.
Speaker 2: Well Berea was a college in, still is, it's still there, is a college in Kentucky that was founded by a man name John Fee who came from a slave-holding family and somehow became a great egalitarian so he founded this college in Kentucky up in the mountains of Kentucky and it was, actually it was very remarkable, not only was it racially integrated but they, women were students too so and always this man was very far ahead of himself and then I heard I think the one time I went to Berea they were, someone somewhere there they told me that everyone around them wasn't happy (laughter), that they were there and they would, they kind of built the campus so that the homes of the black professors or people were on the inside so they could be protected by the people on the outside.  At any rate he went to school there and then after that he worked for the YMCA, and did a lot of work on race relations, things like that.  I don't know, I know Julian [Bond, HM] probably knows some more specifics about his--.
Speaker 1: So James Bond worked for the YWC--YMCAs?
Speaker 2: YMCA I believe, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, okay.
Speaker 2: He was also a minister because at one point he was minister of a small congregation with a church in Atlanta that's still there, it's very near the Atlanta University Center and my--where my father and his family lived in Atlanta for a while.
Story_ID: 99597
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so did your father [Horace Mann Bond], now he had--he went to--he got a lot of schooling himself, he ended up getting a Ph.D.  Did he have stories of going to school in Nashville [Tennessee]?  Did he go; was he raised basically in Nashville?
Speaker 2: I think they lived all over.  He had some interesting stories, for one thing he said that his grandmother, this woman who had the, you know his father by the white man that she wasn't much for reading.  She thought people should during the day you should be working, you shouldn't be sitting around reading (laughter) and that he would go up underneath the house to read and then she would come after him, you know she'd get a broom and stick it up under there and (laughter) you know try to get him out so that he could do whatever kind of work she had for him to do.  He told me that, he never said much about his schooling but his, all his siblings went to college too and at least one of them, if not two did graduate work and my Uncle Max I'm pretty sure he had a Ph.D., got a Ph.D. too which he may have gotten out here at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] or something or he did some kind of studies out here at UCLA.
Speaker 1: Is Max Bond?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Have you ever interviewed his son, he's a noted architect, he'd be very interesting and his wife would be really interesting.
Speaker 1: Well what's his name?
Speaker 2: [J.] Max Bond [Jr.] and his wife is Jean [Carey] Bond and I can give you their, actually I don't, I'll have to find their address but--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's Max Bond, Jr. or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah and he's an architect in New York City [New York].  He would be really interesting they lived in Haiti, he's bilingual, they lived in Africa, he went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], he's a noted architect, he redesigned the Harvard Club recently and he's and his wife has a really interesting story.  I think she has such an interesting life, Jean.  So they would be good people for you all to interview.
Speaker 1: Okay, you can give us their phone numbers after (laughter) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes I can.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause we'll call, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, so did your father talk about what it was like growing up?
Speaker 1: Not as much as, I'm trying to think of his stories.  I don't think I got as many stories as--from him.  He would talk about other parts in his life, but not growing up, but his brother, Tom who lived in Louisville [Kentucky] and his wife, Louise they would tell me stories about him, like one time, you know at that time boys would wear nightgowns and things, and one time he was standing in front of the fire and got you know his nightgown caught on fire and his--Tom put it out and he would say, Tom he would say something about you know had a little thing he would say when he told the story.
Speaker 2: Okay, go, keep going.
Speaker 1: Oh, he poked you (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I know, you're very observant (laughter) yeah; it means we have two minutes so we can (unclear) yeah.
Speaker 1: So he would tell me, so they would tell me that--.
Speaker 2: So his nightgown once caught fire?
Speaker 1: It did caught fire and another funny story they told me when they were living in Atlanta [Georgia], my Uncle Max liked a girl and he was a teenager then so at that time they got what they called charity barrels and people would ship, give you know poor ministers basically these barrels of old clothes, and so he got I think a corset, brassiere (laughter) or something out of it and he wrapped it up and gave it to this girl for Christmas and they were eating Christmas and they heard this thunk (laughter) on the porch and then when they went out she had, you know it was the corset that she had come by and thrown back at them (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) that wasn't a well thought out gift I guess.
Speaker 1: Well I guess he was only about fourteen or fifteen (laughter), you know a pretty young kid (laughter) at that time you know.
Speaker 2: Okay so did--now he and his brothers were very, were driven by education I guess I mean to--they were really all, you know, two PhDs and you know.
Speaker 1: And then my Uncle Tom who didn't get, I don't think he got a PhD but he probably, I'm sure he must have had a masters.  He was a long-time teacher in Louisville, Kentucky and then his, my Aunt Lucy I'm pretty sure she was a teacher too.
Story_ID: 99598
Speaker 1: Okay, now so you have a well-educated family on your father [Horace Mann Bond]'s side, we can say that.
Speaker 2: Yes, and on my mother [Julia Washington Bond, HM]'s side everybody finished college and they, I know my Aunt Marguerite, well yeah my Aunt Marguerite was a social worker and she had a master's in social work, my Uncle Alvin was a doctor so he went to medical school, and Aunt Joe taught.  Now I don't know if she got her master's too, but she probably had a master's equivalent cause she taught in LA [Los Angeles, California] and they give you more money just like they did in Oakland [California], the more graduate courses you take, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, now your father went on to become the president of at least two schools that I know, if not, was it three, two or three?
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: Fort Valley State [University, Fort Valley, Georgia] and--.
Speaker 2: Lincoln University in [Oxford] Pennsylvania, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then before that he was a professor or dean I think at other schools.  He worked at Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] and then he worked at, he may have worked at Lincoln in [Jefferson City] Missouri or some school in the kind of Midwest area, and then after he left Lincoln he was Dean of the School of Education in Atlanta University [now Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] which was his last job.
Story_ID: 99599
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now when you think about your parents' personalities who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I take after both of them, I mean they have similar characteristics, they both were--liked to read, were studious and so I take after them.  I think they were more analytical than emotional and I think I'm pretty sure I'm-- I know I'm like that.  My mother [Julia Washington Bond, HM] was rather quiet and withdrawn and I think I'm like that too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (BRIEF INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: (Laughter), okay so I was asking you which, you know you said you take after both your parents in a number of different ways and being analytical, but you are more quiet like your mother?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.
Speaker 1: Was your father [Horace Mann Bond] like a very take charge kind of person or?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, I don't remember him as that (laughter), I remember him as serious but he liked you know he liked jokes but he was, he was what you'd call a race man, he loved his race and he wanted to help black people and he thought black people were the most wonderful people in the world.  I mean he, our childhood was full of tales of all the extraordinary things various you know colored people, black people had done.
Speaker 1: Historically and stuff was he--?
Speaker 2: Historically, in the present, whatever.  He would just tell them, he was, you know people who, which was so often, you know people who came from, well you know black people have to overcome a lot of obstacles to get some place and I mean not uncommonly, I mean now they're more people who have more, who don't have to overcome obstacles, but there are still many black people who do, and he was very proud of everyone like that.  If he heard about someone he would talk about them, he was just you know historically and in the present, he was just very interested and aware of what was happening to black people and of course like most black families we got the, at least in the North, The Pittsburgh Courier and maybe another one, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: The [Chicago] Defender or The Norfolk Journal and Guide.
Speaker 2: I don't think we got that, it was another one--.
Speaker 1: [The] Afro-American?
Speaker 2: I don't know what it was, but I know there was at least The Pittsburgh Courier, we--it use to come to the house at least I would read which also contained a lot of information about that because I would, he would talk about stories in there and tell us basically I think he told, taught us that our role in life was to work to better our race, you know that was what we should dedicate ourselves to.
Story_ID: 99600
Speaker 1: Now was that like unusual talk in those days, or did--most people--most black people talk about what we ought to do to improve our race and--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I don't think it was unusual, though I have to admit that now that I'm an adult--it wasn't unusual in the circles I was growing up with, because mostly everyone I knew was an educator and educators feel, you know, a mission, most educators they feel a real mission to educate, to lead people and to tell them things so they think that's very important and, but I as an adult, I've met black people who have told me in their family they never talked about race which seems incredible to me.  I cannot imagine how you can be a black person in the United States and (laughter) and never talk about race, I--but I have a friend who said that's the way her, she grew up.
Speaker 1: Yeah it does, I've been told that by people I've interviewed for this project, who know it's an African American project, and yet they say they never talk about race in their household.  I don't know how they know they're black (laughter), I don't know, it's strange.
Speaker 2: Yeah, wouldn't you, I don't know, well at any rate so when something like Don Imus happens, do they just not talk about it or what (laughter), what do they do?  I don't know.
Speaker 1: And those are the days you probably remember The Courier and The Defender would cover the lynchings in the South, and we were the victims of those things.
Speaker 2: Yeah, all kinds of things, I mean this happened when I was a teenager, maybe even in my early twenties, but I'll never forget there was this black guy who was an officer in the [U.S.] Army and he was driving from someplace maybe Fort Benning to the North and he drove through Athens, Georgia or some small town a guy just shot him and they found out who it was.  I don't know, even know if the guy was ever prosecuted ,or if he was seriously prosecuted and he said, I mean he admitted as soon as they found him, "Oh yeah I was the one go out there and shoot some nigger" and it was two or three guys you know, all officers in the Army driving from wherever they were based to, or wherever they were going to and he just went out and randomly shot at them and killed one of them, I mean that was, if I was in my twenties, that must have been in the early '50s [1950s] and that's not the things I read about as a kid you know, and of course the other thing about the African American press is the picture of Emmett Till in the --in Jet which I will never forget, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's like 1955, I think, yeah.
Story_ID: 99601
Speaker 1: Well tell us now, you lived in several different places growing up, but do you have an--and you've got, well you've got two brothers right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Two brothers, James and--.
Speaker 2: Julian.
Speaker 1: Julian Bond [HM], and you are the--?
Speaker 2: Oldest.
Speaker 1: Okay so you came first, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes, I would say my earliest childhood memories are from Fort Valley [Georgia] which I really loved growing up there.  In fact, I just went back there with a friend of mine, someone who's been my friend, I just found a picture of us when we must've been twelve or fourteen months around there, she's been my friend all those years, but I love it.  I remember being in our school and there was a demonstration school for the--you know the students who were in education and that's where I went to school and I remember knocking a glass of milk on the ground, and on the floor and crying and then my friend saying "you shouldn't cry over spilled milk" (laughter), and I remember getting annoyed with her.  I remember all kinds of things from Fort Valley.  When we lived in Fort Valley my great grandmother, Baby, had a sled made for us, and then she had a dollhouse made for me that was big enough for me to walk inside, for a child to walk inside and someplace we have a picture of me walking inside and Julian's up on the roof with this big stick like he's going to hit me on the head, so I remember playing in that and the slide, some--the older brothers of a friend of mine for some reason tied ropes, you know they tied ropes around the swing and they yanked it and it came down but none of us were hurt, but I just remember that was a big deal and then some guy went off to the [U.S.] Army and when he came back he had a Husky dog that he brought with him from Alaska, and I remembered hearing some adult telling me that those dogs were vicious, and that you should you know they'll bite you and every time the guy, the kid when (laughter) the young man walked around near my house I'd run inside and hide (laughter) because I didn't want this, you know I was afraid of the dog, yeah those are the kind of things that I remember.
Story_ID: 99602
Speaker 1: What were, well what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, let's see, aw boy, I remember driving with my cousins and my parents [Horace Mann Bond and Julia Washington Bond, HM] from Atlanta [Georgia] or maybe it was Macon [Georgia], but Atlanta, to Fort Valley [Georgia], you know we'd be on a narrow road and of course there were no seat belts and we would fight to get up in that little part, you know over the--I don't know what they call that you know, over the back seat, that little part where we loved to sit there.  Fort Valley was hot, probably not as hot as it is now, piney, you always smelled pinewood, you know in Georgia there are a lot of pinewoods, there were peaches around, we had a pecan tree in our backyard and we liked to crack that open, crack, you know get the pecans, crack 'em and eat 'em.  We had a--well, one thing I really remember is that we had an ice cream maker, the thing you churned that you'd put dry ice on it on the outside and then churn it, and we would--the kind of ice cream I liked, that's where the peach ice cream and then peppermint, and you know you break, my mother would break up peppermint candy and put it in the cream and make the ice cream, I liked that a lot.  Some of the things I--let's see--and what is it--oh, I can remember riding my bike, it must have been a tricycle at that time, but riding, going outside and riding around on the campus which was a lot of fun.  I still remember the shock of looking outside and seeing the sun and running outside and then it's cold, I had to come back inside and get something to wear, you know thinking that because the sun was shining it had to be warm, so I must've been pretty young when that happened.  What else did we do?  I remember when we went to Nashville [Tennessee] to visit my grandmother and my great grandmother.  Let's see, my grandmother married a man named Mr. Bruinfell [ph.] after her husband died when she was--they both must have been in their fifties or so when they got married.  They both had families (unclear) and he had boxes of clothes of his first wife.  Now that I think about it why would he keep them, and they were stored in what we called the little house which was what had formerly been the office for the nursery on this property and then my grandmother actually had a bigger house that she lived in, but the little house was--had become a kind of a junk house and I remember going in there playing with her clothes putting them on and playing with them.  I mean it seemed great for a kid (laughter) to come across all those clothes there.
Speaker 1: So what was radio a big part of growing up when you--?
Speaker 2: Somewhat, I don't remember radio much until I was in Pennsylvania and I must have been eight and up, but I can remember listening.  My parents wouldn't let us listen to "Amos 'n' Andy" so I didn't listen to that, but we listened to the other things on radio (unclear).
Speaker 1: Did they know that "Amos 'n' Andy" were white?  I mean I guess they must've.
Speaker 2: I don't know if they knew or cared but it was, I think it was the way they spoke and the way they were portrayed that she thought--that they thought was demeaning to us, yeah.  Let's see what else, at Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] what did we do?  Lincoln was another fun place to live because it was out in the country and we rodeo our bikes all over and when we got up to about twelve, eleven or twelve we would leave the campus and go out in the country and ride, I mean for miles.  We really had a good time and there was a camp that a woman began for black children near us and we would, she let us come go swimming, in fact they recently had their fiftieth or something anni- or maybe even more--.
Speaker 1: What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: I can't remember, I can look on--it's on my computer some place.  Julian [Bond, HM] would know about it and they sent us pictures, you know they had a website and there were pictures of the campers and all.
Speaker 1: Is it near Lincoln University?
Speaker 2: Well it's in that general area, yeah.
Story_ID: 99603
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, now was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 1: No, not at all, my parents [Horace Mann Bond and Julia Washington Bond, HM] weren't particularly religious.  I don't, yeah they, you know sometimes we would say grace before meals but not regularly.  They certainly never talked about God.  I mean they never told me they weren't religious but I'm assuming they weren't since they never communicated to us, at least to me at any point anything about God or praying to God or doing this for God or--.
Speaker 2: Now did that make for some uncomfortable situations in public, you know because the South is so, you know, I mean even now when go to a lot cities in the South, people are so religious.
Speaker 1: Well, well, see when I, no I never remember being uncomfortable.  I'm trying to think did I go to church in Fort Valley [Georgia]? I can't remember.  I'll have, I can ask my friend and see if she can remember.  There was an Episcopalian Church like a mission right across from the school and then there was an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Church which is where my friend went and I don't know.  I have no memories of going to church in Fort Valley, at Lincoln University [Oxford, Pennsylvania] we went to the chapel which connected with the school because it was a Presbyterian school and I, actually my parents did go to church every Sunday and I went to Sunday school but we never talked about it much at home, and if we talked about the Bible it was sort of a historical thing, you know I might you know how they give kids Bible stuff and you are supposed to learn about the Bible, and my father was always, they were always eager to tell me about the Bible, but they--it was just like it was a book or Shakespeare or something that they were talking to me about.
Story_ID: 99604
Speaker 1: Okay, so now you must've encountered a number of notable African Americans.  I know out in the hallway there's a picture of Paul Robeson with you and your brothers you know, and you're quite small.  I mean who are some of the people you met and at the time did you know how big they were (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well I--the first one I met that was--that I remember was really big was Jackie Robinson which was amazing to me.  I knew you know he was in the--in the (unclear) everything.  Who didn't know about--what black person, what person didn't know about Jackie Robinson and he was, I think it was like an Urban League something in Pennsylvania--in Philadelphia and I went there with my parents [Horace Mann Bond and Julia Washington Bond, HM] and I met him you know, I shook his hand and it was extremely thrilling to me.
Speaker 1: That would have been after he integrated baseball.
Speaker 2: Yes, he may have even, I don't know if he had retired or what, it was, I know of course when I met him he just had a suit on (laughter).  He was coming, you know it was a kind of a luncheon or something so, I don't know if he was still playing or not.  I remember going to a baseball game, the first time I went to a Major League Baseball game and after that and I was sitting in the stands, I don't know if--maybe I went with this group, and there were a lot of black women, older probably around my age or younger now, but women sitting in the stands who obviously didn't know much about baseball because every time someone black came to the plate they'd say, "Is that Jackie Robinson" (laughter), that's not Jackie, no, no that's not Jackie Robinson yet.  Let's see who else do I remember meeting?
Speaker 1: So how old were you when you met Jackie Robinson?
Speaker 2: I must have been eleven, someplace between ten and fourteen I think, yeah, something like that.  I do remember Paul Robeson, I remember that and I remember--cause I remember the dress, you know that was one of my most favorite dresses that I wore.  I remember him, in fact we all, we loved Paul Robeson, my brother and I we use to play his records all the time.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite song of his?
Speaker 2: I don't know, well we liked that one "The House I Live In" that he sang and then there was maybe some of the spirituals, not necessarily "Ol' Man River", but some of the spirituals.  There's one particular record we had of him that we use to play, I mean and Julian [Bond, HM] and I would play over and over again.  We were really hooked on Paul Robeson.
Speaker 1: Okay, now who else, did you ever meet Dr. [W.E.B.] Du Bois?
Speaker 2: I met him because there's that picture of me with him, but I have no memory (laughter) of meeting him.  I have no memory of E. Franklin Frazier either.  Who did I know?  Most of the people, as a child who did I meet?  I met Bruce McMarion Wright, I don't know if you've heard about him.  He's a guy who went to Lincoln University [Oxford, Pennsylvania] and then became a lawyer and eventually a judge and he was infamous or famous, however you wanted to look it, as being you could say sympathetic to the accused and the fact that, I think the police in New York use to call him "Turn 'em loose Bruce", you know because he wasn't for locking up people and he was also a poet and I met him at some Lincoln thing, ooh, I don't know, Julian could remember all the people.  Philippa Schuyler, I don't know if you remember her, she (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Yes, Philippa Schuyler the piano prodigy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she came to Lincoln in a concert for a concert and played, and I must've met her but I don't remember meeting her, I remember hearing her you know, watching her play.
Speaker 1: Yeah she was a big--she toured the world you know so, a piano prodigy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a child prodigy.  Who else?  I met Marvin Gaye (laughter).
Speaker 1: That was a little later (laughter).
Speaker 2: But as an adult (laughter).  That was quite a bit later.  As a child who else would I have met?  I'm trying to think.  Dr. [Kwame] Nkrumah, I remember meeting Dr. Nkrumah.  He came to Lincoln University to get a degree so I met him, he didn't pay much attention to me (laughter), I know that, you know, it was sort up there.
Story_ID: 99605
Speaker 1: Who else could I have--?
Speaker 2: What about--did Eleanor Roosevelt ever?
Speaker 1: No, but Anne Morrow Lindbergh I did meet her--.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She had a brother Dwight Morrow who I guess would be the kid in the family who didn't achieve much.  You know she had married [Charles] Lindbergh, then she's--wrote--was a poetess, you she's pretty well known, and he never, he didn't achieve what she achieved, but he liked my father [Horace Mann Bond] and I think he may have given some money or something to Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania], but she came with him once, at least once and maybe when he was given a degree, and she was at our house and I remember she was interested either in our painting, some painting my parent had and I remember her writing stuff down in a little notebook she had, but I didn't, I know I didn't talk to her about her writings.  I'm thinking black people, gosh there were probably quite a few because people would, you know, the black colleges were kind of the place where a lot of black intellectuals and artists, you know, particularly if you're a classical artist would come and talk or perform.  Where else could they perform at that time?
Speaker 2: Marian Anderson, was she one or she--?
Speaker 1: She must've come there too because we were so near to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but I can't remember.
Speaker 2: Mrs. [Mary McLeod] Bethune, maybe, I don't know?
Speaker 1: I've heard--I remember my father talking about Mrs. Bethune, maybe we met her at Fort Valley [State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] or something.  I have this vague memory maybe, but I think--if I did meet her I think I was a pretty young child and Marian Anderson I must have been around her someplace, I can't imagine that she wouldn't have come to Lincoln or my father wouldn't have tried to get her to Lincoln or to you know, have her speak or sing there so I can't quite, I can't--.
Story_ID: 99606
Speaker 1: Okay, well how would you describe your personality as a kid?
Speaker 2: Oh, as a kid I was pretty outgoing, I would say I was a real tomboy and I liked to play outdoors.  I loved playing outdoors, that's why it was so great to grow up in the country.  Of course we didn't have television until I was pretty old so there was nothing like that to keep me inside, and we just had a good time, you know just I guess a regular kid, I was kind of mischievous.
Speaker 1: Did you like to--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked to read a lot, in fact I remember at Lincoln University [Oxford, Pennsylvania] I told the librarian I was going to read every book in the library and he said, "well you can do it, it's not that big a library", but I didn't (laughter).
Speaker 1: Every book, that's (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: And I had this plan I was gonna go book-by-book, but I tried it and I just couldn't (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now did you like the movies, did you ever go you know?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't go to movies much, at Fort Valley [State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] I didn't go at all.  I can't remember it all.  At Lincoln University they had movies for the students at the college and we could see, let's see.  I remember a movie with Ethel and Lionel Barrymore in which Lionel Barrymore was some kind of psychotic killer and Ethel Barrymore was his sister and or something and she stayed in, she was confined to a bed and oh, the thing was he killed disabled people, so the actress, the main actress has a slight limp and Ethel Barrymore had figured out that Lionel Bar--maybe or whoever the thing was going to kill her so he made the--so she told the girl to hide under the bed when he was stalking around the house looking for her, I can still remember that.  What else?
Speaker 1: Was there a problem going to the movies in those days, did you have a--well did you have them on campus at all?
Speaker 2: No, it's just that we lived out, yeah, we were just, Lincoln University, there were no expressway between Lincoln and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] so it was, it took a while to get to Philadelphia, it wasn't a place that at least you wouldn't go with a child, just to see a movie and come back that same night, you know it was too far to do that.  I don't know about Lincoln, about Oxford, it was a little town near us.  I don't know if they were still segregated, they might have been because when we moved to Lincoln the school was segregated; in fact I was, Julian [Bond, HM] and I were plaintiffs in this lawsuit.
Speaker 1: Was that NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Probably to integrate the schools and I mean so I don't know why, maybe they just, they probably didn't think it was very important, you know.  They probably thought that we got everything we needed right there at the college, you know they had concerts, they had speakers, I could read books, (laughter) you know, we had a radio and a record player, what more could we want?
Story_ID: 99607
Speaker 1: So, well, what, you start--did you start school at Fort Valley [University, Fort Valley, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes, at the Demonstration School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which was run by the college, so the students who were studying to be teachers you know would, could work there.
Speaker 1: Do you, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I liked English, I know most of my school until I got into, well after I stopped going to these small schools and I've gone to public schools I was actually kind of bored and I didn't like much of it at all, but I liked, I've always liked, well I've always to read, in fact up until I got to high school I would just read my textbook right away in the beginning of the school year and then sit there bored throughout the rest of the school year, where everyone was reading what I had already read, you know, but I like history and English, I think have always been my favorite subjects.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have favorite books in school, I mean as you were growing up what were your favorite books?
Speaker 2: What were my favorite books as a kid?
Speaker 1: Was there a particular book you read more than once?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I read a lot of adult books, well one book, now this is gonna sound strange, but I--I really liked it, it was called something "[A] Girl of the Limberlost," and it was an old book, it was my grandmother's book I think, and it was, anyway I liked it, it was about this girl who lived in Minnesota or something and she lived out--anyway it was her trials and tribulations, but what was interest--well I think--the hooked on it is that a mill for--that was milling Birdseye Maple was crucial to the plot somehow, and my great grandmother had Birdseye Maple furniture, actually she gave it to me and I've got it down in the cellar, so you know I always liked the Birdssye maple.  I don't know if you've seen it but it has you know little things with a dot in it.
Speaker 1: Oh, dot holes like (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sort of and it looks like a bird's eye, can look like a bird's eye.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they call it Birdseye Maple, and at one point it was very popular and fashionable, though actually I've seen, was beginning to come back, I've seen some Birdseye Maple furniture lately in magazines and stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So what else did I like as a kid? Oh--.
Speaker 1: Did you have--?
Speaker 2: I can remember as a twelve, thirteen but when I say that, then you'll say, well do you (laughter) remember?  I don't know, I really can't remember.  I think I've always been a person who just reads a lot of books, likes the books I'm reading about and then goes on.  Oh, I remember a book I read as a child that I was very impressed with, but it wasn't a child's book.  I must have been about ten, eleven or twelve, "The Street" by Ann Petry.  I--I--or maybe I was an early adolescent a little older but I wasn't an adult, I know that when that and that was, yeah, I remember reading that, I guess I don't know why--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they study that in college courses now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and why did I like it, because it was--you know this story of a young black woman and what she was facing in her life, I liked that. "A Tree Grows in Brooklyn," I love that book (laughter), but most of those I read as you know a fairly, in my teenage years, I just can't remember children's books.
Speaker 1: Okay, well that's (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I can probably remember the books my children--I've read to my children, oh, "Little Women", I loved "Little Women", I remember that because I tried to interest my girls in that and they didn't like that at all (laughter), they were not interested.  What else did I try to get them?  Oh, I don't know, I can't remember.
Story_ID: 99608
Speaker 1: Well did you have a favorite teacher in school at Fort Valley?
Speaker 2: I can't remember my teacher at Fort Valley, I don't remember, I remember liking my teacher at Fort Valley, but I don't remember her.
Speaker 1: About how many grades did you go through at Fort Valley?
Speaker 2: Let's see, I was about eight when I came to Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania], so what kindergarten through second, maybe or can you--?  How old are you when you're in eight?--
Speaker 1: Third grade.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I think I was, and then when I came at Lincoln at first I went to a school that one of the professor's wives ran, actually you may even interviewed, Dr. [Laurence] Foster was his name and he has his daughters married to a minister in New York named Sutherland, who's the--but any rate her name was Yvonne, so her mother [Ella Mae Gibson Foster] had a school in her--.
Speaker 1: Oh was, what do they call the school?
Speaker 2: It was, I don't know just a little school or something, it was just in her house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and all the kids on the campus which weren't many went to it, so it was like third through fifth grade I think maybe, and then after that I went to the Village School which is a one-room school with outhouses and then after I got through with that, I was bussed to another one-room school with an outhouse (laughter), that I maybe my eighth, seventh or eighth grade junior high and then I went away to boarding school.
Story_ID: 99609
Speaker 1: Okay, how old were you when you went away?
Speaker 2: Twelve I guess, in the ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're in the ninth grade at age twelve?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay that's about two years ahead of most people.
Speaker 2: You think so?
Speaker 1: Well most people are in ninth grade is like fourteen you know age (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, no I was twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay and you went to--?
Speaker 2: Cause I was 16 when I graduated--.
Speaker 1: Now what was this, name of your school?
Speaker 2: The Cambridge School [of Weston] and it was in Weston, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Now were you excited about leaving home or did you, how did you feel?
Speaker 2: Mixed, I think and I felt mixed about it the whole time, I really enjoyed the school, I thought it was one of the first places I was really intellectually stimulated in school, I mean once I left kindergarten and first and second grade (laughter), you know in between about third grade and high school it was a wasteland as far as school for the most part, I mean not a complete wasteland cause Mrs. [Ella Mae Gibson] Foster had nice things in her school, but once you got to public school it was horrible, but I really enjoyed it and I made good friends.  In fact I just went to my fiftieth Reunion to high school, Howard [Moore, Jr., HM] and I went up to--you know up to the school and visited, we went to that but--.
Speaker 1: So Cambridge, the Cambridge School is where you finished all four years?
Speaker 2: No, no I didn't finish, I left--.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: After three years and then I finished at Wilmington Friends [School], a Quaker School, The Friends School in Wilmington, Delaware.
Speaker 1: Okay, now why did you leave the Cambridge School, did it not go to?
Speaker 2: Well, no it went all the way up, I just got extremely homesick, I don't know why, I just didn't want to stay there anymore, and I think I refused to go back so then they, I actually was the first, I integrated this Quaker School, though it wasn't a great big thing, you know it wasn't a big deal, but I know I was the--in fact they've been--they called me and interviewed me; some students for their thing as the first black student.
Speaker 1: That's odd because it's a Quaker School, you would have thought that would have integrated a long time ago.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and especially in Delaware, it wasn't like Wilmington, Delaware like there were no black people around.
Story_ID: 99610
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, did you have a favorite teacher in high school?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah I had some really good teachers, we had a history teacher named Hans Birman [ph.] I think his name was, I just remember him as "Hans", he was really good he was like a history teacher.  In fact I can remember a lot of my high school teachers, we had a really good math teacher, I can't remember his name, but he was excellent.  I had a really good sort of history, political science, I don't know what you would call it in high school, a young woman who I remember her, her husband was at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and she was teaching you know in our school while waiting for him to finish and they would--like--sorry, I--.
Speaker 2: Pulled the mic--
Speaker 1: Pulled it off.
Speaker 2: Oh okay hold on a second.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay speak.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were talking about some of the teachers in high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah and then there was a drama teacher, Whitney who was memorable, I had really good teachers I think at that school I--and they were, many of them really striking people, I can remember them and when I think about them I can see their faces, see myself in their classroom, had an excellent French teacher, Mrs.--what was her name?  I can't remember her name but, yeah I had very good teachers at that school.
Story_ID: 99611
Speaker 1: Okay, so, and you graduated from high school [Wilmington Friends School, Wilmington, Delaware] in what '55 [1955] (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes, '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: Okay, at that time then did you kind of miss the black community in some ways, being the--were you the only black person in the school?
Speaker 2: No, no there was a guy there Fortune [ph.] I think was his last name, Bob Fortune [ph.], but unfortunately he died very young, you know soon after we graduated he developed leukemia and of course back then, I mean now he probably would--more than likely have a--be alive, but he didn't survive, he may have been in college but he was quite young when he died, so there was--oh, and there was another guy, Conrad White who I saw at our reunion, yeah.  He was actually in the class ahead of me so they were just two other black people; yeah, it was and that's (unclear) strange, there were no black people around whatsoever, everybody was white except me, Conrad and Bob Fortune.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, I mean so you spent the summers at back at (simultaneous) back at home.
Speaker 2: Yeah I'd go home and I'd go home for Thanksgiving and Christmas, so I was gone during the, you know just the academic part, yeah but it was, I think it was and I--hard and I think in some--although I enjoyed it and I made good friends, people I'm still friendly with now, I do think in a way it may have kind of stunted my social life, but it's over and done with.  You know I probably would have been a completely different person if I'd just gone to you know the local high school which had a lot of black kids, not a lot but some black kids.
Speaker 1: So did they kinda keep you at a distance or did they, was the socializing process, I mean, well, I know the time period so I don't you know--was it?
Speaker 2: Well it was, I would say, I would say they were pretty, I would say I was pretty friendly with every--with people, I had really good friends, but they weren't black and I didn't have a black community.  I think I would have had a different kind of life if I had had a black community.  I'm not saying that I hated it, I mean I just would have had a different kind of life and I certainly am glad I got the intellectual stimulation that, you know the learned the things I did at that school.
Story_ID: 99612
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Let's see, well what happened after you graduate, what did you, where'd you go next?
Speaker 2: Oh my gosh, I had a scattered career.  I started off at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  At that time they had a women's college, but--I think it was called a women's college but although it was a women's college, you actually took the same courses that everyone else did.  So I started off there and then I transferred from there and went to Lincoln University in [Oxford] Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Now why did you transfer, was there a--something that?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I just wanted to be closer to home.  I don't know, I think it was one thing, my high school was very small, you know.  I don't know if there were more than 150 kids in the whole school that was lot, and then I went from there to living in Philadelphia at the University of Pennsylvania.  I remember one of my classes, you know the big class with the professor with the microphone, you know teaching assistants, it was just, I don't know, it was a very hard transition for me.  So I liked Lincoln a lot better because it was a smaller school so I went there and then right in the middle of that we moved to Atlanta [Georgia] and I finished up at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] but I am proud to say that unlike my children who took more, especially my son who took a long time to finish college (laughter), I just went to summer school all the time so I was able to keep you know to finish in four years even though I went to all those different colleges.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated in--?
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959].
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959] okay, and what was your major?
Speaker 2: This is weird, it was psychology and my minor was math and that was because at that time I had this, I don't know why I did this, this strange idea that it wasn't kosher to major in an area you liked, that you were in college to learn and so therefore I should go into someplace I didn't know about, and I didn't know anything about psychology and I knew less about math, but at least I had enough sense to know I couldn't major in math (laughter) so that was--.
Story_ID: 99613
Speaker 1: Are there any teachers from the college that were influential or any people around that were mentors to you?
Speaker 2: I don't know but I had, I liked my teachers. I can still remember my teachers, the psychology--head of the psychology department, I can't remember his name, Dr.--at any rate he was a very good teacher that's probably one of the reasons why I majored because I liked him a lot.  I had a--two, one good history-political science person and her family was--her brother, her brother-in-law was president of--what was her name, of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] or Texas A&M [University, College Station, Texas] or something.  She came--her name is coming to my mind, it's gone, but at any rate she came from kind of a distinguished family, she was an excellent teacher, very strict, you know and she wore like the same--she always wore her hair the same way and you always knew when she got her done in a regular thing you could always tell you know (laughter) when she came in her hair had just been done because the style never varied it was just tight and rolled up, you know (laughter) she just got it done and then I had another English teacher, a white woman, I can't remember.  Well the black woman, what was her name, it wasn't Baycoat [ph.], what was that woman's name? At any rate she was like in history or political science, she was really good and then I had a very good English teacher who was a white woman but I have no idea what her name was and then the other person I can remember is a minister at the college, Reverend Wrates [ph.], or was he there when I was there?  I can't remember so forget that, my gym teacher at college who's still alive and (laughter) I think she is and still walking around everyplace, Miss [Marguerite] Simon.  She was very interesting because and I got to know her fairly well because at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] you had to have so many physical education credits to graduate and I put it off until my, I think the last semester of my senior year and I was, I put a lot of 'em off so I was taking like three or four gym classes in that semester, running up there you know.  I remember I took archery, modern dance, I don't know what, (laughter), I took a lot, maybe swimming too, I was, I took a lot in one semester, yeah, so that, I had really good teachers at Spelman, I thought I got a good education at all my schools that I went to and in Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] I had a good math teacher, Dr. [James] Frankowski who was actually black despite his name.  His father--.
Speaker 1: Frankowski?
Speaker 2: Yeah, his father was polish, his mother was black and he was a good teacher.  I think I had a good psychology teacher and that may have been why, I can't remember, that may have been why I was going in that area.  I don't know, but anyway.
Story_ID: 99614
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you participate in the sororities and, in a sorority or?
Speaker 2: Oh, Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] had no sororities at that time, thank God.  I think it was one of the worst things (unclear) ever did have.  Now I have to say, when I was at the University of Pennsylvania I pledged in one of them, I don't know, it must have been AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha] cause my mother was a Delta, but I found it really horrible, I didn't like it although I was too shy and to say it, I mean I didn't have the nerve to come up and say "hey, I don't like this, I think this is silly", (laughter), but luckily when I left and went to Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania]of course there were no sororities at Lincoln because I may have been one of the first women to go to Lincoln and there were fraternities but no sororities and I certainly wasn't going to high tail it back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] every week to do whatever I had to do.
Speaker 1: Okay so--.
Speaker 2: That wasn't the thing for me, sororities weren't.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it seemed kind of frivolous to you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah and, yeah they did, they did and I just, I--I, yeah, I--they seemed, I mean they say they're a social organization and a friend of mine's daughter is deep into the Deltas, she goes to Stanford [University, Stanford, California] and she's deep into the Deltas.  Her mother never belonged to a sorority and I never, we just laugh and laugh when we talk to her about it and say "how can you do it?"  She says, "well it's a social organization, we--not social, it' a you know a service organization, we do this and that", but of course she's only telling us about her parties and when she's driving here she goes to a step show here, a step show there (laughter) and she doesn't, of course she's a kid in college but, yeah, I must have been a pretty serious college student now that I look back at it (laughter), you know, probably unbearably so to others.
Story_ID: 99615
Speaker 1: So what had you projected as a career when you were a senior at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: You know now that's another thing, I had no idea and at that time they weren't encouraging--women weren't encouraged to do anything much, you know you could be a teacher which was really nice because you get your summers off and you can be with your kids, and that was--people were saying, "why don't you be a teacher, you can get your summers off and (unclear) with the kids".  I knew I didn't want to be a, work with children and so I just had no idea.  I thought about social work, I remember I took this you know the federal, civil service had this exam you take to get placed, and a guy actually came to our school and said, "oh you know Ms. Bond, she made one of the highest scores we've had, but too bad we couldn't offer her a job, cause I was a black woman, I would have had to go to you know, New York, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], someplace out of the South to get a job and I probably was--would have done that, I went to graduate school in psychology which I--actually it turned out I didn't like, I was too kind of chicken to (laughter) to admit it to myself or I felt, I felt I should, you know I always, I've always had this feeling that even if I didn't like something, if I started out I should just go through with it, so I started on that and then I didn't finish that and I came back and went to AU [Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and while I was at AU, this Civil Rights Movement started and then I quit that and I got a job and I got into the Civil Rights Movement, and that's how I did and eventually met Howard [Moore, Jr., HM], then I went back to the AU and Howard got sick of it.  He said, "I'm sick of (laughter) you never finishing, you keep changing."
Story_ID: 99616
Speaker 1: Well, well tell us how you got involved in the Civil Rights Movement, I mean what happened?
Speaker 2: Oh, 'cause through Julian [Bond, HM], through the--his friends because I was older than he, so I had already graduated and through Julian I got involved and then I got--.
Speaker 1: Now he was involved with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]--?
Speaker 2: With SNCC, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what specifically were they doing that got you involved?
Speaker 2: Well let's see how--actually I got involved not only through him but through my roommate [Dorothy Miller Zellner], and I'll explain how I got to the roommate.  I got a job, I stopped going to graduate school and I got a job at a place called the Southern Regional Council which is an organization in Atlanta [Georgia] that was founded by among other things a woman called Mrs. Tilley who was one of those white women who was trying to stop lynching.  I don't know if you knew there was a group of white women and they'd go to trials and just sit in the courtroom, and I'm sure they did other things, so she was one of the founders, but anyway it was sort of an early integration or fellow, you know integration organization, sort of a white organization, mostly white organization and they were supporting integration efforts, you know the efforts that were being made at that time and I think they did some work with voter education and education and different things, but anyway I had a very menial job there as a--what I would do is read papers including the Pittsburgh Courier which was still I guess pretty popular then, read those and cut out the stories having to do with race in the South and file them and a young woman from New York, Dottie Miller, came there and I met her and then we decided to room together, which all the secretaries who were black at the Southern Regional Council thought was scandalous, that shows how far--I mean they thought they couldn't believe that I was actually going to not live with my parents and live in this apartment with this other girl, and I wasn't married or anything, you know it's just like us being a complete wild person in there, I don't know what they thought I was going to do, but they, I remember they just keep--they were incredulous, they could not believe I was going to do that so we got an apartment and then she started working with SNCC, and I stayed at the Southern Regional Council and then soon around that time I met Howard, got married, had a baby and then he was representing everything.
Story_ID: 99617
Speaker 1: Now well tell us how you met Howard [Moore, Jr., HM]?
Speaker 2: Well this is how I met Howard.  I was walking down the street in Atlanta [Georgia] and there's this coming toward me this interesting, nice looking guy, black guy and he had (laughter) this big enormous afro (laughter), you can't believe it now, he has no hair (laughter), but he had a big afro and a mustache, I think a beard or something and so I thought, "Oh he looks interesting", and then we passed each other and I looked over my shoulder and he was looking over his shoulder at me, and then I went to court to see a trial involving sit-ins from Albany [Georgia] and who my, was aware of--knew because of my SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] connections and he was there sitting at the counsel table, and then later on he says this isn't true, but this classmate of mine at Spelman, oh, I can't--June Hector, she--poor thing is dead now, she told me one time, she says you know, "I met this guy and he likes me but I don't like him, I think you would like him, so why do you, I'm supposed to meet him at the Birdcage, why don't you come with me and you can meet", we--meet, and that's how I met him and we've been together ever since (laughter), so that was how we met each other.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right
Speaker 2: Of course his version is different from that (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's similar--I heard a version now, you have to wait to you get (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (laughter) he denies the June Hector comment, but how would he know, he wasn't there.
Story_ID: 99743
Speaker 1: Okay so, you met your husband [Howard Moore, Jr., HM], about what year was this?
Speaker 2: It must have been '62 [1962], '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's when my period of knowing famous people began, or people who became famous thereafter, personally knowing them as friends.
Speaker 1: Well who were some of the ones?
Speaker 2: Well, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Toure], [H.] Rap Brown, Marion Barry [HM], he was a member of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], Ivanhoe Donaldson who was one of the (unclear) people in [Washington] D.C.
Speaker 1: He became Marion Barry's campaign manager in D.C.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he went to jail too.  Let's see, right now I'm blanking.  Who else in that group, got--well Vernon Jordan [HM] who was a lawyer there in Atlanta [Georgia], what (unclear), oh the lady who, Marian Wright Edelman [HM], well actually I knew her at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] she was in my class at Spelman or started off in my class at Spelman.  Herschelle Challenor, I don't know if you know her, she is someone I knew, let me see, gosh, I don't know, let's just talk as it comes to mind,
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know all the Civil Rights--, Andy Young [Andrew Young, HM], [Reverend Dr.] Wyatt [Tee] Walker [HM], [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.].
Speaker 1: Yeah 'cause you had the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] office and SNCC office close by.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I worked for SCLC a very short time.  Oh, who's the minister in Cleveland [Ohio], [Reverend Dr.] Otis Moss [Jr., HM] and his wife Edwina, cause I worked with Edwina at SCLC.  I mean I didn't know, I knew of Otis, Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King of course, who else?  Howard Zinn, he was a professor at Spelman.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's the author of "The [sic, A] People's History of the United States"?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I mean there are a lot of really outstanding talented people, Maynard Jackson, you know it's just--.
Speaker 1: It does seem like just a whole legion of talented people.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was an amazing time when I look at about it and think back.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Judy Richardson [HM] we just talked to her in Boston [Massachusetts] last week.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Judy Richardson, I don't know if you know Daphne Mews [ph.], Courtland Cox, Jim Forman [James Forman, HM], [Constancia] Dinky Romilly you know, his--his partner.
Speaker 1: Cleveland Sellers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Cleve, Willie Ricks who unfortunately has died, all those guys from--.
Speaker 1: Do you remember--?
Speaker 2: Bernard Lafayette.
Speaker 1: Lafayette, yep.
Speaker 2: And his wife Colia and--.
Speaker 1: Bernard Lee is another one.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bernard Lee, just--C.B. King and his wife [Carol King] and then we met a guy who's still here, Dennis Roberts who worked with C.B. King, very close to him.
Speaker 1: Did you know Willie McCray?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know I knew Willie McCray [HM].  Green, what was her name, something Green, she same from Mississippi, Annette Ponder, I don't know she was active in the thing, her sis--one of her sisters was in school with me I think at Spelman or some relative of her, I think.
Speaker 1: Arnelle Ponder, is that (unclear) you talking about?
Speaker 2: No, Annette was her name.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: So, just anyway we can keep on talking but just so many people who became, particularly in politics and areas like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: The headquarters were there but a lot of these people were disbursed throughout the state and other parts of the South, right?
Speaker 2: Chuck McDew, Charles McDew, Chuck McDew.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Charles McDew, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the headquarters were in Atlanta, but they were always--oh, I met Harry Belafonte [HM] once, he came to the SNCC Headquarters, I met him, yeah they--they're-- a lot of the people were out in the field and I never met them and then they would come into the field, come into Atlanta.  I did, I didn't go out in the, you know where the real struggle was except I did go to Albany [Georgia] a couple of times and, also--oh, Bernice [Johnson] Reagon [HM] because she was from Albany.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know Sweet Honey in the Rock, I know her and then I went to Birmingham [Alabama] too and heard some of the things and that was amazing to go to those mass meetings, those were really mass meetings, I mean hundreds of people in the church and listen to the people (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was [HM, Reverend] Fred Shuttleworth's church [Bethel Baptist Church] right in Birmingham?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that was the church we went to.
Speaker 1: That was one of them anyway.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was being, it was--
Story_ID: 99744
Speaker 1: You know, I never --I was, I never took part in the demonstrations but I went with people, you know people would be going over there to work for SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] so I'd go along and then we'd go to these mass meetings at night.
Speaker 2: Now what was your role basically in the (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Well actually, I didn't much have a role, I was, I worked at the Southern Regional Council and then I stopped and I got married, or did I work for Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] for a while?  I worked for Spelman for a brief second, I can't remember how it went in and at one point I worked for SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and at SCLC I was supposed to do research for stuff, but I didn't work there long either, I think I got pregnant again while I was working there.  So at those, at the Civil Rights organizations I worked for I didn't have a particularly outstanding job, you know I was just a worker and then once I became a housewife and mother I didn't really have any role other than, or even before I didn't really have a role other than sort of hanger-on or stander-by, you know I had an apartment with my friend Dottie [Dorothy Miller Zellner] who worked for SNCC and people from SNCC were always coming over to our house, and doing things and then we would have parties.  I would go to the SNCC parties but I wasn't working with them in that sense.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I was doing things with them.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Like one time we went to the movies in downtown Atlanta, and this was during a period that was kind of strange, because some things were integrated voluntarily and others weren't, you just never knew, and we wanted to see "Lawrence of Arabia", I'll never forget it.  So before--we bought our tickets, it was you know, and then you had to come back to get in there.  So while we were waiting for the movie to start we went into a drug store that was there for nothing in particular, and just hanging, and the people freaked out, they started you know screwing the tops off of the seats at the counter, it was an integrated group, Tom Hayden [Thomas Hayden] was there with his first wife Casey Hayden, and I don't know just a bunch of people connected with SNCC and it was, so it was a mixed group and they obviously thought we were in there to sit in, but we were--but then once they started you know whirling the stools off, and then we thought, we have to stay here, so we just hung around a little till the movie started (laughter), we went and left and went back to the movie, but that's the closest I ever came to a sit-in I'll have to say.
Speaker 2: Well, it says something profound in some sense that people were keenly aware of what SNCC was doing and.--
Speaker 1: Yeah!
Speaker 2: And to the point where they were over reaction (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah they were paranoid, we had, we really weren't thinking of eating or drinking anything there you know, we just were hanging out till the movie started and then we wanted to see that and I think the movie may have been an integrated movie, one of the places that was integrated, I'm not sure, but the drug store wasn't so it was always funny during that period as to what you could and couldn't do.
Speaker 2: So Atlanta was going through a transition--.
Speaker 1: Yes--.
Speaker 2: In terms of what was (simultaneous) what you could--.
Speaker 1: Yes this is before 1964, before the Civil Rights Bill passed.
Story_ID: 99745
Speaker 1: And they [Atlanta, Georgia] were you know, they were trying to be the "city too busy to hate", Julian [Bond, HM] always says they're the city "never too busy to hype" (laughter), says he calls the--.
Speaker 2: That was the slogan of the--.
Speaker 1: Atlanta?
Speaker 2: --The Mayor?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What was his name, the Mayor of?
Speaker 1: [William B.] Hartsfield.
Speaker 2: Hartsfield, okay the airport's named after now.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The "city too busy to hate"?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and so he was pushing for voluntary integration, of some kind, but Atlanta's always been kind of strange in the sense that they were more willing to provide a better way of life for middle-class Negroes than for other people, for instance they had a part of the public hospital, Grady Hospital, that's called Hughes Spalding Pavilion.  Well I mean I'm sure the City of Atlanta didn't provide it on its own, it provided it under a lot of pressure from the black community, but I guess what my point is that the black community was important enough so that the white community would grant some privileges to the middle-class blacks if they pushed hard enough, but anyway for some, I don't know the history but they had this part of the public hospital that's called Hughes Spaulding Pavilion which was more of like a pay-as-you go, but anyway it was where I had my first child, Grace and I know it wasn't the regular, I don't think it was the regular, maybe it was in Grady, but I think it was, yeah, cause it was just a, you know if you're in a ward you just have one other person, it wasn't a ward, I was in a room with just one other women when I gave birth there.  So they had, yeah, Atlanta was kind of and had many in-between things and you weren't, you never were quite sure whether it was going to be segregated or not for a little period, I mean there's a period where everything was segregated, then there's this period where you weren't quite sure and then it became integrated.
Story_ID: 99746
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so well--now during this--you were having child--now how many children did you have?
Speaker 2: Three.
Speaker 1: Three, okay, and the third one was born when?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, the year '60--.
Speaker 1: Were they all born in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: They were all born in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964], '66 [1966], '69 [1969], I think that may be '64 [1964], '66 [1966], '69 [1969], I'm not quite sure.  I think that's when they were born, 'cause my son [Kojo Moore] was pretty young, he was--we came here in '72 [1972] so he was born in '69 [1969], he was just almost a baby when we moved here.
Speaker 1: Now--
Story_ID: 99747
Speaker 1: --Now did you go the March on Washington in '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: No (laughter), I was sitting in the office, Howard [Moore, Jr., HM]'s office, typing his brief while the March on Washington went on, I think we may have listened to it on the radio, but not too closely because I was trying to concentrate on what I was typing, and that was when you had actual typewriters with carbon copies, you made carbon copies and so that's what I was doing, working on some brief with Howard and never, never went there, in fact I don't think I, yeah, I never went there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you know [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah!
Speaker 1: I mean what are your impressions of Dr. King?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was, he was a very nice man I thought, he was really a mellow guy, you know he wasn't, I think many of the people around him were very stuck on, taken with being with Dr. King or even or they were very wanting him to have a certain place in society, but I don't think he cared anything about that, I mean he just seemed very relaxed, kind, very nice person, you know, just somebody you could chit-chat to, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, I've heard and read that there was a certain amount of tension between SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and SCLC [Southern Leadership Conference]?
Speaker 2: Oh, there was.
Speaker 1: The ministers, though I've heard that the SNCC students liked Dr. King a lot, but they, there was a--they use to call it, SCLC "slick or something (unclear) I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and--it was very different I know, for instance, now this really shocked me, [Reverend Dr.] Wyatt Tee Walker [HM] was very close to Dr. King, I don't know he had some big position, and I had known him because he worked a lot with SNCC people, and I had always called him "Wyatt" so then when I go to SCLC, I kept calling him "Wyatt" and then I noticed everything called him "Reverend Walker" and so I said, in fact I may have said it as a joke, "Reverend Walker", and then he said very seriously,. "Oh, I knew you'd get the idea sooner or later," and I thought "whoa" (laughter), so that was a real difference you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was Ella Baker when she came down she just thought that you know, the preachers were too, you know, were, I mean there was--everybody was a minister but they were there without their church so it was they were telling you know, other people that come in what do, it was just a different kind of atmosphere.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and then they regard (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It's like a lot of chiefs you know like too many chiefs and not enough Indians or something.
Speaker 2: Yes, I think that's definitely true and also I think in relation to SNCC because they were all older, they thought you know it was like they were talking to children or you know teenagers is how they perceived people in SNCC, I think.
Story_ID: 99748
Speaker 1: Okay, in Atlanta [Georgia] itself where it, also I mean I don't know I guess you'd have to tell me, but if this is true, but in Atlanta it seems as though SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] was not the cutting edge in terms of integrating Atlanta.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: They were more effective in other places.
Speaker 2: Yes, that Atlanta actually was, yeah, I--they had some--for instance the transportation was integrated to some degree through some professors at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] you know, I think Sam Williams and some other people had demonstrations on the, you know, buses. That was before, I mean I'm not quite aware of that, I mean I wasn't around to see it but that's what I understand, and so yeah, I think that, and black people in Atlanta seem to have had a lot of political power and none of those power figures you know that had--represented the black votes or could get blacks out to votes, I don't think they were big in SCLC.  So, you know SCLC was sort of irrelevant to what was happening in Atlanta, it was mostly affecting outside of Atlanta, but for that fact, SNCC mostly was the happening--was affecting what happened outside Atlanta.  Atlanta really got integrated through the student movement, you know when Lonnie King, Julian [Bond, HM] and I don't know who else, they organized kids and they started sitting-in and that sort of thing, so that's how Atlanta started getting integrated.  In addition to the--the you, know just black population had been pushing all the time.
Story_ID: 99749
Speaker 1: I know your mother [Julia Washington Bond, HM] expressed that she was a couple of times very concerned about the safety of your brothers [James Bond and Julian Bond, HM], you know, all of them at one point, being involved in the Movement.  Was there any time where you were actually worried about their safety?
Speaker 2: Well I was always worried when anyone--oh, there's my cat, (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter), we wondered where the cat was.
Speaker 2: Should we close the door, maybe we can close the door and keep him out.
Speaker 1: No it's probably all right, I would just keep on talking.
Speaker 2: Okay, cause he might just come and jump on my lap, but it might not though (cat meowing), that's his way of getting my attention.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well that's quite a voice there.
Speaker 2: Oh, what were we talking about?  Oh fear--.
Speaker 1: Danger.
Speaker 2: Yeah, especially during the time around his [Julian Bond] case [Bond v. Floyd], to me that was the most frightening because although he was traveling around and he was doing like public relations and news for SNCC and he was traveling around in the South, and of course anyone was liable to get picked up and really, really hurt if they suspected you of being associated with SNCC or anything like that, and so that was where something--particularly when his case was going on, when he was trying to get in the legislature, I thought that was kind of scary you know, because that was something that you know it's an important political post that sort of thing and they didn't want black people there and they certainly didn't want a young, you know progressive black person like Julian in there.
Speaker 1: It was like 1966, right?
Speaker 2: Yes. Uh huh.
Story_ID: 99750
Speaker 1: Okay, now when your husband [Howard Moore, Jr., HM] moved, well did he--he moved the whole family to [Berkeley] California--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In 1972 right, or--is it '72 [1972] or '70 [1970], '71 [1971]--?
Speaker 2: It was '70 [1970] must have been '71 [1971] or the end of '70 [1970], yeah.
Speaker 1: This is for the [HM] Angela Davis trial?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, well he didn't just, I mean I agreed to come (laughter) it wasn't that he moved us, and I came unwillingly, I was eager to go, in fact I was had been eager to leave Atlanta for a long time, and at one point he was considering working for the NAACP [Legal] Defense Fund in New York, and I was so excited because I thought I--boy, I wanted to live in New York, and he just wasn't interested, so I was thrilled to come to California, I was very happy to come, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, well why did you want to get out of Atlanta (laughter), were you just kind of tired of it or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I don't know everybody in Atlanta knows you, they know everything about you, it's--I found it kind of stultifying, and to me personally I felt that there were too many, and it's too many pressures on me that I would probably give in to, to have me have my life a certain way, that I didn't want my life to be like that, I mean I had no idea what I wanted my life to be like but I wanted to be more free form than I thought it would be in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay, so both of--you know your father [Horace Mann Bond] and your brother [Julian Bond, HM] having high positions; was that the pressure or what?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then I felt that the, Atlanta I mean during those periods, that period of time there were only so, I mean what kind of work could I have done, you know it's hard, there weren't that many options open if you were a black woman, what could you do and then I didn't have you know I was piddling I kept going to Atlanta University [now Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] working on master's, never getting them and I was, you know I never--I wasn't sure what I wanted to do and I just looked upon California as the way to you know, become a whole new me you know see a different way to live, a different--different things, so I was really looking forward to coming here.
Story_ID: 99751
Speaker 1: Okay so, so what got your attention here, and I mean once you got here?
Speaker 2: Oh, the thing I liked most of all about Berkeley [California] when I first came here, was you didn't have to get dressed up.  In Atlanta [Georgia], you know people--there are very definite clothes, you know you wear certain kinds of clothes to this, certain kind of clothes to that, everything was very you know, structured, whereas here it's always been you can show up to anyplace wearing almost anything you know, I always use to say they're just so glad you have clothes on they don't (laughter) care what else you have on, and so that's what I liked about it and then, of course there was the library was better because in Atlanta the libraries were segregated and then after they weren't segregated they still had the black library you know was, it was good but it didn't, wasn't as broad, then you--you know here in Berkeley I don't mind going to every branch and I'm sure if I lived in Atlanta now I could go to any branch I wanted to, but at that time even though they were integrated I-- people would have looked at me, asked me what, you know I would just, it would be uncomfortable, you know it was something that you had to gird yourself up, certainly would have thought more than twice, a hundred times before taking my child out to any program that wasn't in the black community, I would be really afraid.  I would--afraid to take her, no telling what people would say and so once we got out of Georgia, we didn't have those problems anymore.  I thought the schools would be better which they were.
Speaker 1: Okay now, when you came out here you moved right into this house, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah we've always lived here.  It was owned by Ron Dellums [Ronald Dellums, HM], at first we rented it and then he said he had to sell it and we bought it and we've lived here, the kids went to the school right down the block and yeah, ever since, it was a very nice neighborhood, in fact when I first came here, we used to have block parties where we block the block off and kids--our kids would play in the middle, but then of course all the kids grew up and moved away and so now the people who were my age when we moved in are dying, and so they're homes are being bought by younger couples with young children, so maybe they'll start blocking off the street, and the racial composition of the street has stayed the same (laughter)--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Our family, this house is a black family's house, there's nobody else black on our block.  Of course our street is just one block, there're not many in our neighborhood.
Story_ID: 99752
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you decided to go to law school--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: At a certain point in time, now that's--when did you go to law school?
Speaker 2: I started in 1972 right after I came here [Berkeley, California] because as I said I had been kind of wrestling with what did I want to do, you know and I thought at one point that I would go to school and eventually get a Ph.D. and I said I don't know if I thought I'd be a professor or what, that's about the only thing I could think of, I didn't have much enthusiasm for it, I was kind of changing, I'd go a little bit and stop, and so when we got out here I probably said something about you know, I'm going to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley] for something and Howard [Moore, Jr., HM] well why don't you go to law school?  You know I'm sick of sending you--you keep going, working on these master's and you never get 'em and you go to law school and it will take you forever to get a Ph.D., go to law school, you'll be out in three years and look, if you get a Ph.D. you have to work for a university, if you get a law degree you can work for yourself you know a lot of things you can do.  So I thought okay, and I applied to two schools, [UC] Berkeley [School of Law] and Emory [University School of Law, Atlanta, Georgia] and I got in both and for some reason Emory was for the next year, the next September, not the nearest September, but the September after that.  So then Howard said, "oh well Berkeley's the better school why don't we just stay here," cause we hadn't planned to stay here in the first place, and then I think that was when we bought it, the house, and then Howard took the, actually while in was in law school, he studied for the California bar and took it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then we've been here ever since.
Speaker 1: Now what was law school like for you, was what you expected or--?
Speaker 2: Oh my gosh if I'd know how hard it was I probably wouldn't have gone, but in some ways, it was a good place for me because it's very structured, I mean you have to learn how to be a lawyer, that what it's for and you take certain courses and then you get out so it's not like other things where could think, well maybe I can take medieval English instead of you know African American literature or I could Caribbean literature, you know where you have all these possibilities, you know, you just take it and get out, so in that way it was good, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay so did you have a favorite subject in law school or a favorite part of it?
Speaker 2: Well I had an un-favorite part (laughter) in my property, real property class which in the first year you have these big lectures and then at least at the time I was going, I think they've changed the curriculum a lot.  You had what you called a "small section" in which you met almost like a seminar with this subject and I don't know, unfortunately my small section was real property whoa!  I just have loathed that area of the law, and I didn't much like it then and--anyway I just didn't like it, I--it was, I hated it, but other areas of the law I liked, I liked constitutional law, I liked family law, my professor I see her around, Herma Hill Kay, I see my common law Professor Bob Coles [Robert Cole] who else, Professor [Stephen] Sugarman, my tort professor, he still teaches, I think Professor Kay does too, I think Cole has retired, you know. I liked law school and I made some good friends there that I still am friendly with.
Story_ID: 99847
Speaker 1: So okay we were talking about law school [at UC Berkeley School of Law, Berkeley, California] and the tail end of law school, now was the last part of it the easiest part?
Speaker 2: Law school?  I wouldn't say any of it was easier than the other and then I take the bar and it took--I took it three times before I passed it on the third time, that was excruciating, that was horrible, but I would say that law school was hard, the whole thing is hard because it's almost like a boot camp psychologically, they're feeding you and getting you to think like a lawyer and toughening you up and at the same time you have to learn all this academic stuff that's very different.
Speaker 1: Well was it difficult to do that with children?
Speaker 2: Oh my God, yes!  It was horrible, if I had known, I keep saying if I had known how hard it was going to be I'd probably never would have done it.
Speaker 1: Okay, well how's it been since you've--since you've finished, I mean is it--?
Speaker 2: Well I would say that law is an interesting--I think it's--I'm glad I went to law school and for several reasons, first place I think it really teaches you how to think and analyze which is good, I mean no one is ever hurt or hurt in that, and I like that aspect of the law that involves research, I love doing research and writing briefs and things like that, I love that, so I like that.   You certainly have--meet many interesting people, see many interesting situations, I mean it's amazing the things you find out about people and see people doing and it's interesting and then the whole procedure, the way it works you know, go into court and how the judges talk and how the other lawyers--that's always interesting to get around and, but I really don't like the practice of law.  I find it very stressful, first place, there're deadlines and you could have a vacation plan to "X" and the day you get on the plane you get served with a motion and if there's, if you, you know, if you can't get the other side to put off or you can't get them to agree, then you have to give up your vacation and stay there and do that motion, and I hate that, it's like you have no life and what else don't I like?  I hate the aggression, you know other lawyers, and I'm just not that kind of person you know, and I hate having to grandstand which I don't do, I'm not very good about that.
Speaker 1: So do you do any summations and such and--?
Speaker 2: Well I mean when you're like in negotiation and you say, "my client..." you know you just tell big tales, big stories about things (laughter), you know you try to beat down the other side and make the other side the other client appear just the scum of the earth, I mean why would you pay any money to that person, they're so horrible, I just can't do that kind of thing, but I guess that what people consider a good lawyer.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're forced to kinda take one side and to exaggerate the side, I mean or build it up---.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: At the expense of the other side.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it's yeah, it's not a win-win situation at all and I don't like that part of it.
Story_ID: 99848
Speaker 1: Do you think that you would, I mean have you kind of thought about ways you might you know, I don't know, change the whole judicial system if you could, I mean if you--philosophically, I mean?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know, I think one thing that would change the judicial system and make it better is if it were more integrated, if there were more women and more minorities than there are.  I think that, that would make a big difference and I that's, yeah I think if it were more reflective of the actual people who live in the community than country, it would be a completely different system and people would be a lot more conscious of things (unclear).   One of my classmates who's now dead I think thought of, became a judge in Contra Costa County [California] and thought of having, I think this was her or someplace, and thought of having a place in the courthouse for children to play you know, I think she may have been in family court and people had to bring their kids, they had no money, you know, no ways to keep 'em, there was no place for the children to stay or maybe she was seeing domestic dispute, at any rate children were showing up there because their parents didn't have anything, place to put them, but no one thought until she did that you could have a playroom in the court, you know where people could leave their children.
Speaker 1: Yes, something that is obvious, yeah, is needed, but (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah take care of the peoples' needs in the community, that kind of thing, the actual people who are there cause everything is geared toward the lawyers and the judges, you know, what makes life go well for them (laughter), you know. I think that would be good, more education, maybe if they went around and educated people more about the jury system and the legal system people would be more eager to serve on juries and they would understand what's happening.  I think judges could spend time--you know they have to spend a lot of time now going around, appearing in public places and building up support from people who are going to vote and there's a whole big community of people who are left out, and I mean they couldn't humanly have time to go to those communities, but maybe they should be required to as part of their job, you know, not just sit on the bench, but actually go into the community and do stuff.
Story_ID: 99849
Speaker 1: Now do you have any favorite cases, I mean what--I don't know what kind of cases you specialize in but--.
Speaker 2: I've done a lot of different kind of cases, I've done family law, I--I don't know if I can discuss all these (laughter) on (unclear), I really feel funny, I have lots of interesting things that happened and favorite cases.  Some of the things are public record, so I don't mind discussing it but some things involve what clients told me, and which made it interesting but I couldn't tell, but one case I had a family law case that was really, it's certainly interesting legally, it was a couple who got married in Louisiana then they moved, which is a community property state, then they moved to San Francisco, California, community-property state, they got divorced in San Francisco but continued living in the same place, in the same house so then they--the husband moved for a divorce but somehow they finally decided to get a divorce in San Francisco, or they decided to complete their divorce.  I'm trying to think what happened to this.  Yeah, they had gotten a divorce and, but continued to live together in San Francisco, but at any rate the thing involved learning about community property law in Louisiana and then figuring out what hap--.  No, this is what happened, they lived in Louisiana--married in Louisiana and divorced in Louisiana, then moved to California and lived together in California, so then they split up, the husband wants to leave, so what is the property that's owned in California?  What does that mean you know, that's the issue because they weren't living together and California didn't have common-law marriage so what was that and what was the relation of what happened in Louisiana, and that was kinda interesting.  Then I had a lot of interesting things when I worked for the school district, that was the most interesting place I worked.  One case involved a, my big victory, no one's going to think this is interesting but me, this, only a lawyer will think this is interesting.  This involved special ed [special education] children and the head of the Special Ed Department did, they removed the language teachers from the older children and only assigned them to the younger children because there's a shortage of speech therapists and they thought it was better to have the younger kids have it, but of course they didn't have any research to base it on, that was just their thought, plus there's a law that says you know once a child is ordered to get speech therapy, the school can't just decide to stop it, I mean that makes sense you know, you sign, you know your kid has a speech defect or a learning problem and they're getting therapy, they're in the eleventh grade, the school can't just say, "Hey, we're just not going to give your kid therapy anymore", so the--we were sued and the district had been so wrong, but I won the case because the other side forgot to do what's called in the law "exhausted its administrative remedies" and that means that before you go to file an actual suit in court, if there's some other procedures you have to follow, you have to do those first and get to the point where they don't work anymore then you go to court.  Well they hadn't exhausted their administrative remedies and in fact one of their clients had begun the state administrative remedy, and, but was waiting for the state, so it wasn't exhausted.  See they might, the state might have told them--us to put the therapist back.
Speaker 1: Okay, now when did you work for the Oakland Unified School District?
Speaker 2: I worked there for about eleven years, and I can't remember is what it's 2007 and I must've stopped working there about 2000, 2001 so from 1990 something like that, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, so about 1990 to 2001?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah about 2001.
Story_ID: 99850
Speaker 1: All right, and what are your responsibilities with Moore & Moore, do you just--?
Speaker 2: Well I've had different responsibilities, now I really don't have any responsibilities (laughter), I have a couple of cases I just do on my own and I don't do any, I don't work with Howard [Moore, Jr., HM] on any cases.  Sometimes I read stuff, you know I'll help him do things, I'll help him do some research but I don't really work on any big cases because I just hate that, there's always a rush, people are all upset, uptight, they yell and scream at me when I consider I'm volunteering my time and I feel, how dare they do that, (laughter) and so I just, I don't anything with Moore & Moore, you know interview clients, and you know I go to depositions, I do things to fill in, but I don't, I don't, I have my cases and Howard has his cases, that's how it (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, now you teach too right, you teach--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do teach.
Speaker 1: In a couple of places (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I haven't taught--sometimes I teach at John F. Kennedy Law School [Pleasant Hill, California], which is a law school for adults because John F. Kennedy is a school for working adults, so I teach there and I've taught civil rights, and the constitution and gender, no I've taught civil rights and the gender in the law and employment law at law school, yeah I have to get this correct.  I also teach at a small Catholic college in Belmont [California] which is Notre Dame de Namur University, and there I teach in the history and political science department, I teach the constitution it's called, I teach gender and the law, and I am going to teach history and the Civil Rights Movement starting in the fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so that sounds like something that you can really sink your teeth into 'cause you saw the whole thing unfolding.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I really think it can be interesting, I'm gonna use as a textbook a book by Clayborne Carson [HM], the guy at Stanford [University, Stanford, California], it's "A History of African American People" [The Struggle For Freedom: A History of African Americans], but I won't go through the whole history, I'll just have a little bit about slavery, a little bit about the Civil War and Reconstruction and then focus in on maybe on World War II 'til now, you know heavy on the '60s [1960s].
Story_ID: 99851
Speaker 1: Okay, now are you a member of the National Council of Lawyers or no?
Speaker 2: The National Black--?
Speaker 1: The National Bar Association?
Speaker 2: The National Bar Association, no I'm not, I'm only a member of the California Bar which I'm required to be a member of so I've never, actually and sometimes I've belonged to Charles Houston Bar Association which is the local African American Bar Association, but I have to say I don't go to any meetings, I've never, I've gone to maybe four meetings of that since I graduated from law school.  I'm not a big joiner, you know, that kind of person.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any causes that you are particularly involved in here?
Speaker 2: No, for a while I was involved in the Berkeley Public Library, Friends of the Berkeley Public Library which actually we have a terrific public library here so I was involved with that but interesting enough I just saw something on the Internet and I--about volunteer work and I always have wanted to work with children in school, you know, younger children or at least recently I've wanted to and so I emailed a group that's working the Oakland Public Schools, and the person emailed me back and hope to talk to them next week and become involved in that and then sometimes I belong to the NAACP and I sometimes attend the local Berkeley Branch meetings, but I cannot in all honesty say that I'm a--that I attend regularly.
Story_ID: 99852
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh, oh well I really am concerned about education in the African American community and I don't think that there's, although I believe this has been done by the white media a lot, this thing about "It's white to achieve," I do think kids are suffering under that delusion, but I think that's something that's being told, being put on them from the outside, the African American community I know of, wants people to be educated, I mean if you go to churches, any kind of organized group, everyone's always working to help people get educated so I think that if somehow we could reach these younger people and make them more interested in education and see how necessary it is and how it has nothing to do with being white or what may--they may be trying to say is not being black, it has nothing to do with it, you know if they knew more about their race, if they knew about what's happening, it's too bad, I think another sad thing about education, I don't know what to do about it, is there aren't many black teachers in public schools anymore you know.  I was thinking Berkeley [Unified School District, Berkeley, Illinois] when my kids were going down there, there were quite a few black teachers, excellent teachers and I don't think there's a single African American teacher at the school now, there are probably hardly any in the Berkeley school district now.  So I think this whole education thing.  Of course, economics, economic justice, what to do about people who have just a life of service jobs ahead of them, you know either they've got to be organized into unions so they can get better pay and medical benefits and we have to provide more education for them to get better education for them to get other jobs, that--those are the kind of things I think that, you know those are the kinds of things, and I think sometimes now maybe I shouldn't say this, but sometimes it seems to me there's a real disconnect sometimes between black politicians and the black community, or maybe the black community that votes is connected with the politicians and parts of the community that don't vote that the politician doesn't relate to, but that population is the population I feel we need to focus on and do something about.  I mean it's just when I sent to this meeting that I was telling you about that I just heard there were, there are forty-five black students at Boalt Hall Law School [UC Berkeley School of Law], and of those forty-five how many do you think are male?
Speaker 1: Out of forty-five, well, I kind of had some kinda hint today, but maybe ten.
Speaker 2: Yes, nine, and I think that's terrible, that's disgraceful, I mean why, what is happening, you know I mean you just know (laughter) by that 50 percent, there are just as many smart black guys out there, young men out there as there are young women, so why? Where are they and why aren't they in law school? And it can't all have to do with their--Well I don't know, at any rate, I'll tell (laughter) that's beside the point but I don't know where they are so that, those are the kind of things that worry me a lot. And I'm also, I really am concerned about how black women are portrayed in the media and that's what was so upsetting to me about that Don Imus, that whole Don Imus thing is it just played into this traditional stereotype of black women, you know that black women are prostitutes, that they aren't much, they are either prostitutes or criminals, I mean it's so and what got me is so little of the commentary focused on the fact that his statement was not only racist, it was misogynous, but because black women are seen as not really women, you know unless they look like Vanessa Williams or Halle Berry, but they aren't seen as women and not entitled to the respect and the kind of treatment that women get, so it' just seen as racist--I mean you can like--I mean what was the woman said, "Ain't I woman too" and we're still (laughter) struggling about that, that to me was the most disturbing thing about that Don Imus.  I mean I just read a few things. The National Organization of Women did see it as a misogynous thing and spoke out about it.  I read a article in the local paper in the sports page by a woman columnist who talked about it, but other than that, people you know they're just seen as racial, but it's also you know it's racial, its misogynous and it's attack on women as well as on black women.
Story_ID: 99853
Speaker 1: Now, tell me when you look back on everything that you've done to this point, is there any major thing you would do differently if you could do it again?
Speaker 2: Oh, I would think I would have been more focused in my earlier years, I think I spent a lot of my time just kind of wandering around thinking and not really focused on career or anything. I think I would have gotten further in life if I had been more focused on my career, the part of me that thinks that another part of me thinks I really should have gone into teaching and started teaching earlier, yeah, and then another part of me thinks that not only should I have been teaching, but I should have been teaching English or history and (laughter) I should have gone to, stuck it out with my Ph.D. and gotten it eventually, so those are the things I would change.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But just which one of those would I do, I don't know (laughter), I don't know.
Speaker 1: A lot of choices, and one lifetime (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, you don't have enough time to do everything you might like to do.
Story_ID: 99854
Speaker 1: Now, well tell us about your family, tell us about your children and--.
Speaker 2: Oh, my children oh yeah, my children are very interesting, very nice people I must say.  I like to be around them.  The oldest, Grace is a nurse and she works with doctors, physicians' organizations.  You know how physicians organize and then they contract with a PPO so she works with that, and because of her previous work, she worked in a lot of clinics with AIDS patients, well first with homeless patients, many of whom had AIDS and then with just AIDS patients.  So she works on AIDS issues. In fact she just called me and she was at this big health thing in San Francisco [California] that [President] Bill Clinton talked at and she talked to Bill Clinton, she went up and talked to him directly about his work on AIDS, so I'm very proud and she's really, really very warm, nice woman, and then my next child Constance is a art teacher, she teaches in a private elementary school, she teaches art and Constance, I don't know, I think that Constance she's very artistic, but she's--I think she's really an artist, but for some reason she's never been an artist, you know, she sort of does art on the sidelines and she does other things, like now she's taking design courses and then at one time she was designing and having baby clothes manufactured, and you know she had a little business going and all that, and then my son [Kojo] is a lawyer and he works in Fresno [California], he's a public defender and I'm really proud of him because he has dyslexia which wasn't diagnosed until he was in college, so he always had a difficult time in school and I was always  thinking he was--cause he was l azy and didn't work when a lot of it had to do with his you know, learning style, learning problems so he didn't do well in school and then he couldn't get into a top law school, he went to one law school and flunked and then he went to another one and he graduated, then he had a horrible time passing the bar, but he finally passed it and now he just loves what he's doing, he's really doing well.  I'm very, I'm just impressed that he was so, he just stuck with it, you know, he kept sticking with it until he got what he wanted, though I think if it had been me I probably would have given up before I got what I wanted, but I'm proud of him.
Story_ID: 99855
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there anything I haven't asked you before I ask my last question you think that we need to talk about?
Speaker 2: Gosh, I can't think of anything, well you asked me about my jobs, school district, no I can't think of anything.
Speaker 1: Well the last question is similar to, well some of the things we've been reflecting on, but it's a reflective one.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Gosh, well one think I'd like to be remembered by I haven't done yet, is I want to be remembered as an author, I haven't finished writing my book or even trying to (laughter) you know I can't get an agent or get it sold so I'd like to have written a book that was appreciated by some people at least, so that's the main thing I'd like to be remembered, I mean honestly.
Speaker 1: So you've written a book already?
Speaker 2: No, I'm writing it (laughter), I'm writing it and, I--what I like to be--I'd like to be remembered as well I don't know as a good mother, or at least a mother who loved her children, did her best if not a good mother, one who loved her children and tried to do the best she could. I don't know, as an interesting person, that's about it.  I don't know, you know I don't have any desires to be remembered as a particularly good lawyer, I mean I don't think I was a lousy lawyer, but I don't care about that part, so that's what I'd like to be remembered for.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you for spending the time with us.
Speaker 2: Okay, thank you.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 99450
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is a picture taken at Lincoln University [Oxford, Pennsylvania] and starting with the boy, that's Julian [Bond, HM], Paul Robeson, Sylvia Hill who was our neighbor and grew up to be an Africanist and worked with the Smithsonian African Collection and me.  Sylvia unfortunately died all too soon.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: A whole lot (unclear) pictures.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready?
Speaker 2: That's my grandmother, Daisy Washington, but she had just graduated from Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] I think, and she was not Daisy Washington at that time.  I've, what was her name?  Brown, I think she was Daisy Brown, her maiden name.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Mention that last part again.
Speaker 2: That's my mother's mother.
Speaker 1: With people in the high and collared dresses.
Speaker 2: Yeah, with especially that little trim.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my maternal grandmother again, I--it looks like maybe the same dress, but just you know closer up picture of her.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay ready.
Speaker 2: Okay, that is, the young man is my son Kojo and he was in a wedding in New Orleans [Louisiana] before [Hurricane] Katrina, then the groom was his friend.  The groom Stanley Scott is the son of Howard's good friend Stanley Scott, and I think it's nice that two generations are still good friends, and Howard was in Stanley's wedding, he married more than once, he was in both of his weddings, Stanley the father.  This is Stanley the son.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, that--.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay ready.
Speaker 1: Okay that was a picture taken in Oakland [California] and that's me--fairly recently, that's me and whatever black that is with white showing, and then the little face you see in there is Fonya Davis, Angela [Davis, HM]'s sister who's a--Fonya's is a lawyer, works with Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and then next to that's my daughter Constance, she's my middle child and my youngest daughter.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right ready.
Speaker 1: That's my mother and father and academia in regalia, it must have been Atlanta University [now Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], and I don't know whether it was any particular something or maybe it was just a commencement and since he was marching or maybe she had been awarded a degree and he was in the procession, I don't know when it was taken or why but that's who they are.
Speaker 2: That's Julia Bond and Horace Mann Bond, right.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, say it.
Speaker 1: Yes, it is.
Speaker 2: No, say their names.
Speaker 1: Oh, it's my mother is Julia Washington Bond, and my father Horace Mann Bond.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's me in probably Fort Valley [Georgia] or maybe Nashville and I must have been about two, two or three, I think at that time.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Can you turn it a tiny bit more the way you turned it before?  Just a tiny bit, okay; okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's me again, wherever we are either in Fort Valley or Nashville and that's my brother Julian Bond as a baby.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next one.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, that me and that's the same little thing Julian was in, I guess I ousted him or else they took me out and put him in (laughter) there for the picture, and again I'm not sure where it is, I don't know if it is in Fort Valley or Nashville, but those are the two likely places it would have been taken.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay ready?
Speaker 1: All right, this is a group of kids and mothers from Fort Valley, some of the people we know and some we don't and at my far right there's a little girl in a print dress, and she's in front of a woman who's holding a baby.  Who those three people are, I don't have a clue and I've showed them to people from Fort Valley and they don't--people my age and we don't have a clue, behind the woman that we don't know is Barbara Beasley, a friend of mine who lives in Atlanta now.  In front of Barbara Beasley there's an older woman with a baby in her lap, the older woman I think is Nanny [ph.], who was the Aunt of Mrs. Bryant who's the last person sitting.--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  The far left?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the far left, and the baby in her lap is Deloris Bryant, a twin, and next to Nanny is my mother with me in her lap, then next to my mother is Mrs. Bryant with Doris, the other twin in her lap, this is all at Fort Valley and the twins and I are almost the same age, I mean we're like week--days apart.  In front of them scooting down that little boy is Leroy Bryant, and to the right of his right, I guess is Barbara Beasley's brother who died soon after this picture was taken through polio because I have no memory of him at all, but he was, I knew he existed because my mother told me about him, that he had developed polio you know when before they had the vaccine and everything and he died.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next one.
Speaker 1: Okay this is a picture that was taken at Lincoln University and starting with me, I'm the kid on the far right with her hands on her knees.  I'm sitting next to Aaron Douglas and behind Aaron Douglas is my brother James who is sitting in front of my mother, and then down the woman with the holding the big bag is my godmother, Grace Goings and from Wilmington, Delaware who is my mother's friend growing up in Nashville, Tennessee and the rest of the people I don't know, but actually strangely enough Grace's niece lives in Detroit [Michigan] and actually is a friend of my good friend here and so I'm going to send her a copy of it and maybe we can identify those people.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is a picture of in Fort Valley, Georgia and it's my family, my siblings and my cousins and then a kid who's related to the Davis, the father John Davis, and I don't know if it's the brother, the guy who's the lawyer in New York or not, but anyway I'm standing there with my, you know sort of my hand on my hip, my hand on my leg and then the kids who are sitting on the step, the one on the bottom or the top (laughter) I should say the last, the person you can see the whole body is my brother James, behind him is my cousin George Bond who's a professor at Columbia [University, New York City, New York], an anthropologist, behind that is my brother Julian and behind Julian is the Davis kid, but which Davis, there were two boys in that family, I'm not sure which, and then there's my cousin Max Bond who is now an architect, is the other kid standing up.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: And those are my three children when they were little, there's Grace the oldest one, who we don't have picture of now, Kojo, he was, he wasn't, he was only about a month or so old, if that old, and Constance, the one who was in the picture with Fonya Davis.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a picture of my mother, probably painted when they were living in Nashville, though maybe it was in New Orleans.  It was painted by William Scott who my father says was a minor, characterized as a minor figure in the Harlem Renaissance and he said he came too, he was down on his luck and so he hired him to paint the picture, but the funny thing is that he wanted to paint my mother in the nude (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):
Speaker 1: Not my father (laughter) and she declined which would have been very odd showing of your mother in the nude (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay ready?
Speaker 1: Okay, again this is a picture of my father painted either in Nashville, I think or New Orleans by William Scott, and it's a companion to the earlier picture of my mother.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
