Story_ID: 439595
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Jose Julian Mapily [HistoryMaker Jose J. Mapily], that's J-O-S-E, J-U-L-A-I-N [sic.], M-A-P-I-L-Y.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August the 13th, 1941, Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Trained as an architect, recognized now I would say I'm more artist/architect.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you were pro- you, you are a retired professor of architecture.
Speaker 2: I'm a retired, retired professor of architecture from Howard University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay, and an artist.
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: All right, now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: April the 27th.
Speaker 1: Okay, I think it's the 26th, I think (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is it 26th?
Speaker 1: I think so, yeah, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 26th [April 26, 2007].
Speaker 1: --yeah, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, at The HistoryMakers office (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 439596
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask and they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: --only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Salmon.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) None. Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: A place that I haven't been, okay, that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, it's all--it's all, it's all Leslie's [HistoryMaker Leslie King-Hammond] fault.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: Inside joke.
Story_ID: 439597
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [William Mapily] side--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, including her maiden name?
Speaker 2: That's Gladys Mines Mapily and that's G-L-A-D-Y-S, M-I-N-E-S, M-A-P-I-L-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Born in Washington, D.C., Janu- no, June, July 28th, the year I don't know.
Speaker 1: What would you guess?
Speaker 2: Let's see, she was eighty- she was eighty-three when she passed and that was two years ago, so we got to go back, yeah.  Doing math in my head is not one of my favorite things.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, about how old was she when you were born, do you think?
Speaker 2: Twenty, I think.
Speaker 1: Twenty, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, around twenty, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so, okay, 1926, I guess, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about her side of the family?  What, how far back can you trace your ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side, I can go back to her grandfather, whose name was John de Freese, that's as far as I can go.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that last name?
Speaker 2: It's D-E-F-R-E-E, now I've seen it spelled two ways, C-S-E, and S-E, and he was from Goshen, New York, which is upstate.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's probably a Dutch name, you think?
Speaker 2: Yeah it is, it is.  On that side it's de Freese and de Groot, so, it's Dutch.
Speaker 1: Now, De Groot is one of the names given to, of, there's a group of people they call the Jackson Whites--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --are they, are they related to--
Speaker 2: They might be.
Speaker 1: Are they up in the Ramapo Mountains?
Speaker 2: Yeah, up, up around, what's the name of this, oh, Ringwood, New Jersey, is, is where I've been able to trace my, trace, you know, her grandfather too.
Speaker 1: Now this is the Jackson Whites, they're all over the Internet.  I mean, you can find them on the Internet now.  They're, they're a group that they, they talk about when they talk about the Melungeons in the, in Appalachia and other groups of people that they, nobody can pin down who they were, you know, where they, well they can now, you know.  Of course, they know that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, by DNA.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When I say they're a mixture, of course--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --black people--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --who escaped to the Ramapos, American Indians [Native American], I think--
Speaker 2: I've got American Indian on both sides of the family, primarily, you know, on my mother's side, up around, from New Jersey to New York, okay, and I haven't been able to find out as much history as I would like to, okay, but yeah, it's, it's Dutch and Native American and Jamaican because I have a cousin who indicated that somebody from the family came up from Jamaica.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I can't, you know, she's passed on so I didn't get that information prior to, prior to her passing.
Speaker 1: Now, now have you ever heard the term, Jackson Whites, or--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or Rock Jumpers, or any of that kind--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a new one on me.
Speaker 1: Is it?  Well, a friend of mine's been trying to investigate some of that and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and I think he's got probably similar ancestry.
Story_ID: 439598
Speaker 1: So at any rate, are there any, any stories from that side of the family about how they came to be in that part of the wo- have they been there--
Speaker 2: I can't, that, that part I can't answer.  I mean, it's the same thing on, on both sides of the family.  I get to a point and like most African Americans, you know, you can't find any information.  So I can go back and chase to my, my mother's grandfather [John de Freese] and that's it and on my father's [William Mapily] side, it really gets to be fuzzy because my grandfather [Julian Mapily] came from the Philippine islands and, and I don't know which island and his wife, my father's mother [Elnora Burns Mapily], died when my father was, he wasn't even five years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you know, I know very little about her side of the family.
Story_ID: 439599
Speaker 1: We'll get to him [Mapily's father, William Mapily] in a minute but just on your mother's [Gladys Mines Mapily] side, now did you--is there a tradition on that side of the family that, that the, your relatives have been enslaved or were they free or what?
Speaker 2: As far as I know, they were free.  However, it's been, well let's, let's put it this way, I never heard anything about slavery and always thought, up until six months ago, that if you were from the North, if you were from New York, that you probably were free until I discovered that the slave trade in New York was only second to what it was in Charleston, South Carolina.  So, I really don't know but my great-grandmother [Carrie Mines] never said anything about, you know, anybody ever being a slave.
Speaker 1: Now that's interesting that New York is second only to Charleston as a port of call for slavery, yeah.
Speaker 2: As a port, yeah.
Speaker 1: Most people who would find that, you know, boggling now to think of, but--
Speaker 2: It, I, it was boggling to me until I read it, you know, at the New-York Historical Society [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Right, I think it's well-documented now, that's the case (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes it is, yes it is.
Story_ID: 439600
Speaker 1: Did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: I knew my grandfather [Herman Mines] and my grandmother [Mabel Mines] on my mother's [Gladys Mines Mapily] side and my grandfather [Julian Mapily] on my father's [William Mapily] side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandmother, on my mother's side, was the first college graduate.  She graduated from Miner Teachers College [Miner Normal School; University of the District of Columbia] in Washington, D.C., however, she never worked.  If she had, she would probably have been a principal of a school in Washington 'cause many of her classmates ended up being principals.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she get married early (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She got married--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and had, you know, became a housewife.
Speaker 1: I think the rules around the turn of the century were that if you got married, you'd lose your teaching position.
Speaker 2: That, one of the things that I just finished reading is about Paul Laurence Dunbar and his courtship and it gave me an opportunity to understand what it was like for a female in that era, no matter whether she was college educated, had a job, she was supposed to quit and come home and become a housewife.  So I don't know whether that was the case with my grandmother but she never worked.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you know when the family moved from the New York area to Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was a Pullman porter and he moved to Washington, married my grandmother and then they never divorced, however, they separated.  He went back to Goshen, New York and she remained in Washington.
Story_ID: 439601
Speaker 1: What was your grandfather's, oh, you said, that, that was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's my mom (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) John de Freese.
Speaker 2: No, that's, no--
Speaker 1: No, that's, that's, he's a--
Speaker 2: That's Herman Mines--
Speaker 1: Okay, that's--
Speaker 2: --that's my, my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Herman Mines.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, M-I-N-E-S.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right, so your mother [Gladys Mines Mapily] grew up in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] then?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was she raised exclusively by her grandmother then?  I mean, your, your, her mother [Mabel Mines] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was raised exclusively by her mother.
Speaker 1: Yeah, her mother, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, and, you know, I mean she did spend time, summers, some times during the summers going up to Goshen [New York] but majority of the time she was right in Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay, does she talk about, about growing up and what it was like?
Speaker 2: Rough.  I mean, they, they, they were Depression [Great Depression] culture people with my grandfather having a job as a Pullman porter.  So, you know, times were hard and I, I know that my mother talked about living all over an area in Washington called LeDroit Park, which is right adjacent to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  So, you know, we're talking about somebody didn't, they didn't have a lot of money.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did her father leave when she was, I mean, how old was she when her father left?  Do you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know.  That part I don't know but, yeah, I had, that's, that was a conversation we never had when he left.
Speaker 1: Okay, but she did know him, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --every time they went to visit him in Goshen?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  They were very close.  In fact I think my mother was closer to her father than he wa- than she was to her mother.
Speaker 1: Now did she have a chance to finish high school and go to college too?
Speaker 2: She finished high school, she didn't go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Should have, you know, but didn't.
Speaker 1: So what, what did she do for a living?  I mean--
Speaker 2: For a living she was a clerk, first for the federal government and later for the D.C. school system.
Story_ID: 439602
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: That's William Edgar Mapily [William Mapily], W-I-L-L-I-A-M, and E-D-G-A-R, M-A-P-I-L-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was, he was October the 4th and when we finish this, I'll call and find the exact dates 'cause I know my daughter-in-law has 'em, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was, was he older than your mother [Gladys Mines Mapily]?
Speaker 2: He was a year older.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One year.
Speaker 1: About 1925, I guess, or so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: On my father's side, that's when it really gets fuzzy.  My grandfather came from the Philippine islands during the Spanish American War.  He and one of his best friends, whose name was Valencia [ph.], they worked for a couple of U.S. generals and that's how they ended up in Washington, D.C.  My grandfather's name was Julian Mapily and that's J-U-L-I-A-N, M-A-P-I-L-Y, well, let's put it this way, I recently discovered that my last name has been spelled wrong my entire life and my father's entire life.  There's no Y in the Philippine language and it should have been spelled, M-A-P-I-L-I.  So, you know. He worked, I think, building maintenance and, and menial jobs to support his family and my dad's mother [Elnora Burns Mapily] passed when he was about five years old so he didn't know his mother that much and, and, obviously, I didn't get a chance to know her.
Speaker 1: Okay, well do, do you know anything about her at all?  Was she from the D.C. area?
Speaker 2: No, she was from up around Carlisle, Pennsylvania and that's all I know about her.
Speaker 1: That's where they had the famous Carlisle Indian school [Carlisle Indian Industrial School, Carlisle, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: Yes, it is--
Speaker 1: --that Jim Thorpe played for.
Speaker 2: --which I thought, you know, up until two years ago, I have a cousin, both of us were trying to do research on the Native American part of the family, however, the dates don't, don't jive.  When my grandmother was born, you know, the Carlisle school was not, you know, established yet, so, 'cause at one point we thought that that's where, you know, how she got to Carlisle but it's not the case.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's been a dead end.
Speaker 1: Okay, so as far as you know, you don't know where she was before Carlisle or if she wasn't just all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No idea.
Speaker 1: --there for a long time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, don't, don't really know.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she passed when your father was five?
Speaker 2: Yeah my father was about five years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, did he, did he talk about what she looked like or--
Speaker 2: I have a photograph.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Finally, finally was able to get a photograph from a distant cousin maybe ten years ago but, no, he didn't talk about her 'cause basically he didn't know her.
Story_ID: 439603
Speaker 1: Did you know your grandfather [Julian Mapily]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah, I knew him.  He was a man who, who was a strict disciplinarian who--his command of English was less than minimal.  One of my friend's favorite expressions about my grandfather was, was, "They not home anyway."  That was the way my grandfather spoke and he would answer, he lived with us for a while and he would answer the door with that statement and shut it, even though he knew who Andre [ph.] was and he wouldn't even say that Andre had stopped by.  So, that was my grandfather, yeah, little man, barely five foot, I don't even think he was five foot four, okay.  So, knew him but didn't have many conversations with him.  I had more conversations with my grandfather [Herman Mines] on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your--were there any stories about your grandfather's life in the Philippines or, or, that were passed down or?
Speaker 2: Never, didn't say a thing.  I mean, I don't think, I don't think, in fact I know he never said anything about which island he was from and, because if he had, you know, I would know.  No, nothing.
Speaker 1: So I guess you wouldn't even get the sense that he missed home?
Speaker 2: Nope, nope, not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, did anybody in the family learn any Spanish from him?
Speaker 2: Didn't speak it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, he, was it Tagalog, was, is the language and, like I said, a little bit of English.
Speaker 1: Now Tagalog, is that like a--
Speaker 2: It's a dialect--
Speaker 1: Dialect of the--
Speaker 2: --it's a, it's a Philippine dialect.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  That's a, that's a native dialect of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to the Philippines?
Speaker 2: Yeah, here's an interest- you asked about stories.  The only story that I can relate to about my grandfather was, in the ninth grade, studying world history, we got to the Philippines and the teacher started talking about the number of islands, that there's seven thousand Philippine islands.  Prior to hearing that, at one point, I said, when I get to be older, I'm going to go to the Philippine islands and find, you know, which island.  Well, when you say seven thousand islands, you know, that made me pause and when you say that there's seven thousand islands and there are different dialects on each island, I realized that maybe my task was impossible.  So, you know, that's when I basically stopped thinking about going to the Philippine islands.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that sounds, does sound like a daunting kind of a--
Speaker 2: It's a, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --situation.  There's seven thousand islands.
Speaker 2: There's seven thousand islands.
Speaker 1: So that's seven thousand dialects before you get to the main island (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's before I get there, yeah, so, (laughter) you know, and then I don't, you know, I mean if I knew even a region, the closest I've come to even figuring out a region, when I was in the hospital in late '60s [1960s], I met a nurse from, a Philippine nurse from Pangasinan [Philippines] who said that my name on her island was, was as common as Smith is here and I've never even taken the time to look to see where Pangasinan is in the Philippine islands.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: No (laughter), I never asked her.
Speaker 1: Pangana--
Speaker 2: Pangasinan is what she said.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm going to try to phonetically spell it out in these notes but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's something.  Well, so, he never talked about the war or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: The Spanish American War?
Speaker 2: No, like I said, my grandfather, most of the conversations with him were, do this, don't do that.  You know, that, that was the, the extent of conversations with him which made my father [William Mapily], in many ways, a lot like his father and he became a man of very few words.  So, you know, it was either, you do this, or do that, but that's, that was it.
Story_ID: 439604
Speaker 1: Did your father [William Mapily] talk about growing up in, now he grew up in D.C. right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He grew up in D.C.  He grew up in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: What, what part of town did he grow up in?
Speaker 2: They, they, he grew up right adjacent to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My dad and my mother [Gladys Mines Mapily] were high school sweethearts.  They met in the tenth grade and were together the rest of their lives.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a, is there a story about their courtship, did they tell?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother said he walked in the class and she looked up and said that he, he's mine, to one of her girlfriends and they made a wonderful couple, highly supportive of one another.
Story_ID: 439605
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about their personalities and talents and proclivities, which one do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: That's a difficult one.  It splits me right down the middle because on one side I'm like my mother [Gladys Mines Mapily] and on the other side, I'm like my dad [William Mapily].  I'll start with my dad first.  My dad was a master sheet metal mechanic, trained after the Second World War [World War II, WWII], one of the first black apprentice at the Navy Yard [Washington Navy Yard] in Washington, D.C.  They had to accept him because he was a veteran.  He ended up working at the Navy Yard his entire adult life.  He was the troubleshooter within that particular shop and had the distinction and honor of working on John Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] presidential limo.  He was the one that crafted the compartments and the doors to house the machine guns.  So--
Speaker 1: So they had machine guns on the presidential limo?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, crafted in the door panels, okay.  So my dad made the panels to hold the machine guns in the doors.  He worked on the PT-109 mountings to hold that torpedo boat onto the trailer for JFK's inaugural parade.  He ended up as a supervisor within that shop.  Initially, he was the only person of color in the shop and spent his days working in silence because the other members of the shop didn't want to be associated with a person of color.
Story_ID: 440925
Speaker 1: You were talking about the tools and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my, my father [William Mapily] was a, like I said, a master sheet metal mechanic.  So, you know, he, he had all the tools.  In fact, one of the stories, my mother [Gladys Mines Mapily] said, he wanted a son so he could teach a son how to build stuff and from a very young age, you know, I had, either I had my own tools or I had access to his tools and probably by the time I was in high school [Joel Elias Spingarn Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], I had learned, you know, rudimentary sheet metal and I had learned, you know, a certain amount of woodworking.  You know, he made me understand the value of tools which, for me, has now become--my tools are computers, airbrushes, I have a full compliment of tools to build anything out of wood, metal or plastic and, you know, like my father, I value tools.  He, he was a highly disciplined craftsman and that's how I ended up practicing architecture and that's how I also paint because my style of painting is very precise.  So, precision, the precision part and being tenacious about getting a job done, comes from my father.  On my mother's side, my mother was the concept person.  She's the one who would come in and say, I think we ought to buy, you know, a house, car, this, that or the other and in her head would come up with the approach to, to buying it.  She was also the one who loved to travel, I think, the most.  So from my mother, I think I get the creative side and I also get the travel-lust side and early on, you asked about favorite places and I said, the place I haven't been yet.  So, from my mom's side, you know, I love to travel--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and for me, traveling is education.
Story_ID: 440926
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: One of the earliest childhood memories was--there are a couple, that I think were important to me.  One was when my father [William Mapily] was in the [U.S.] Navy and this is during World War II [WWII] and my mom [Gladys Mines Mapily] and my dad and I rode down to Union Station [Washington, D.C.] for him to get on a train to head back to, I think he was, he was, he was at Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois] at that point, and I was upset, my mom's, to try to calm me down, said, "Listen, we'll go over where I think the train is going to pass and, you know, we can wave at your father as his train goes past and after that I'll take you to get some ice cream."  Well, my dad ended up being on that side of the train where we saw him pass by and I could wave at him and then we went and got the ice cream so that was enough to calm me down as, as a kid.  The other important one was the first building that I wanted to draw as a kid, this is prior to me going to elementary school, I loved the Jefferson Memorial [Thomas Jefferson Memorial, Washington, D.C.].  So one Saturday my mother carried me down to the Jefferson Memorial with typewriter paper, pencils, a piece of cardboard and a binder clip so that I could sit there and draw the Jefferson Memorial.  Now, at that point in my life, I knew nothing about perspective and knew nothing about how to draw something in three dimensions but I sat there for hours trying to do it and as a tribute to my mother, I think in the '90s [1990s], I went down and sat there and sketched the Jefferson Memorial and gave it to her as a, a birthday present.
Story_ID: 440927
Speaker 1: So yo- your mother was very supportive of you as an artist?
Speaker 2: Th- my parents [Gladys Mines Mapily and William Mapily] were more than supportive.  I mean, they, they, they made sure that whatever it was that would pursue, that I wanted to pursue, you know, they, if there was a way, they made sure I was able to do it.  Give you some for instances.  I'm an Eagle Scout.  While I, I went into scouting as a Cub Scout and my parents were both involved in the Scouts.  From the Cub Scouts, I went into, went to Boy Scout camp, a couple of months prior to when I was supposed to.  So I started Boy Scout camp at age ten and they saved money so that I could go to the Boy Scout ranch in New Mexico.  They had a motto, send us a boy and we'll send you back a man.  It was the truth, 'cause after hiking fifty miles carrying a backpack with everything that you needed to survive for ten days, you learned to appreciate everything.  So, you know, they sent me there.  They sent me to the National Scout Jamboree.  They made sure, you know, I could go to college.  So, yes, my parents, anything that I said I wanted to pursue, they will always have my back and for that I owe them a debt of gratitude.
Speaker 1: Now, your, your, I think you're a little older than Togo, Togo West [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.], he told a, a story of going to Scout camp out in New Mexico (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Togo, Togo and I, Togo went, was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] with me, okay.  I know Togo.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, he was, he was, Togo was in engineering.  He was on the third floor and I was on the second, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well he went to New Mexico, too, and was an Eagle Scout.
Speaker 2: It, it, it, it defines you.  I mean, one of, one of the things that for me is fascinating, you know, when I got the e-mail about being selected by The HistoryMakers, it made me stop and think over my life and one of the things that helped make you who you are, and one very important component was becoming an Eagle Scout and there were, there are actually ten of us from the same troop that became Eagle Scouts.  Three, three initially, four, I was in a group of four who all became Eagle Scouts at the same time and there was a group behind us.  To me those were my original training partners because to become an Eagle Scout, it's not easy.  It's, it's, it's very demanding to get all those various merit badges and it helped to have somebody to go after various, you know, merit badges, especially the swimming and the lifesaving, those were not easy things to do but having, you know, having your buddies there to support and encourage you, you know, you learn that you could do things that initially you didn't think you could do.  So, you know, scouting to me was, you know, took a lot of fear away.  The, the kid last week at Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] who saved his own life because he was an Eagle Scout--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --and recognized, you know, I need to put a tourniquet on my leg, you know, and didn't panic, you know.  I know what that's like to be in a situation where, you know, your life's in danger but you don't panic and that's what scouting taught me.
Story_ID: 440928
Speaker 1: Did you grow up in the same neighborhood the whole time or did you move around a lot (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I grew up, I grew up, one of the things, after the Second World War [World War II, WWII], they built a development for returning black veterans so my family and many of my parents' [Gladys Mines Mapily and William Mapily] friends all ended up in the same, you know, new community and, and this, these were small semi-detached two bedroom houses that were designed based on modern architecture and, and that's, I was there from the beginning of elementary school [Richardson Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] up until two years before I graduated from architectural school, at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Now what's the name of that neighborhood?
Speaker 2: What was it called?  The Lincoln Heights [Washington, D.C.], that's one.  Gee, it escapes me, the name, I'll think about it in a minute and tell you.
Speaker 1: Is it, is it Northwest [Washington, D.C.] or--
Speaker 2: No, this is actually right on the border of Northwest, this is actually Southeast Washington [D.C.] at the border of Southeast Washington and Capitol Heights, Maryland.  I grew, that particular neighborhood, that was virgin forest that they took down to build this particular community.  So it was an isolated community, you know, for many years and, you know, at the time that my parents bought that house, many of their friends refused to move to Southeast.  I mean, that was considered, well it was, it was actually considered rural because right adjacent to our community there were people who were still raising chickens and had horses inside of the boundaries of the District of Columbia and there were people in the neighboring streets who didn't have electricity or, or running water.  You know, this was, this was a community right adjacent, called Marshall Heights [Washington, D.C.] and it was a black community, some people lived in shanties.
Story_ID: 440929
Speaker 1: Well what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Hm. So- okay.  But the--for me, growing up in that community, there was stratas.  Since it was a brand new community, everybody was new and everybody was trying to establish themselves.  I was the youngest of a group of guys that, I guess I was at the cutoff point.  You know, I look back now, four years difference in age was about all that my male friends would allow.  You know, the oldest was four years older than I am and they allowed me, I was the youngest.  The neighborhood had more boys than girls.  We were a tight-knit group because, you know, like I said, initially it was an isolated community.  The majority of the fathers worked for the federal government.  You have to recognize, I'm talking about a time in the history of this country prior to desegregation so the only place that, let's say, African Americans and whites worked somewhat side by side, was in the federal government.  So I had neighbors who worked for the [U.S.] Army, Smithsonian Institution [Washington, D.C.], the Navy Yard [Washington Navy Yard, Washington, D.C.], some worked for D.C. school systems, the post office and the Bureau of Engraving [U.S. Bureau of Engraving and Printing] and, (laughter) those were the, those were the jobs that we were allowed.  So, you know, those were the occupations of the individuals in my neighborhood.  There were a couple of cab drivers and two barbers and a couple of beauticians. And teachers.
Story_ID: 440930
Speaker 1: What was the popular culture like in your neighborhood growing up?  What kind of music?  Was TV big yet?  Was church a big thing, you know?
Speaker 2: Okay. Music, everybody, all the folks my age, obviously, were in the beginning of rhythm and blues and listening to people like Ruth Brown because she was from Washington [D.C.].  The TV, the first person to have a television in our neighborhood was Mr. and Mrs. Thompson [ph.] who lived about five doors away from me and they would invite the neighborhood to come, especially to watch things like 'Ed Sullivan' ['The Ed Sullivan Show'] when Nat King Cole was on.  If there was an African American or, at that time, Negro, on television, we all knew that that was going to occur because of Jet magazine and we would all end up at Sunday nights, you know, down at their house, you know, all over the floor and all trying to look at this little tiny black and white television, okay.  So, you know, that had an influence on me, television did.  Sound had a bigger influence on me than, than television because General Electric, what did they call it?  General Electric had these tours where they would bring new technology to the public schools and I saw a demonstration of high fidelity in stereo and fell in love with sound to the point where I bugged my parents [Gladys Mines Mapily and William Mapily] about purchasing a high fidelity system and the approach they took was to have somebody build a Heathkit stereo and they only had money for one speaker but after school I used to go downstairs and hook up a second speaker to the stereo system that they told me not to touch and I made a mistake one day, my dad came home early because I used to use alligator clips to hook up the second speaker so that I could have stereo and balance it so that I had stereo sound and I was on the telephone, had, you know, some records playing, I'm listening to stereo when he walked through the door and I'm on the telephone.  Now, I wasn't about to run downstairs and try to disconnect that speaker but I knew my behind was going to be, you know, in trouble when he came upstairs.  And my dad came upstairs and never said a thing and now I had a choice, do I go downstairs and disconnect this thing or leave it alone.  So I left it alone.  I said, well if I'm going to get my behind kicked, I'm going to listen to the sound.  About two weeks later, he asked, he said, okay, let's build a permanent set of speaker cabinets because he heard the sound himself and I have a feeling he took my mother downstairs and let her hear it so, you know, sound became very, very important to me.
Speaker 1: So you think he thought it was a good thing once he heard it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, once he heard, once he heard the difference, you know, he had this, okay, he's got an idea, let's leave him alone.
Story_ID: 440931
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you find it true?  Now in those days, I remember being admonished for touching the TV ant- antennas and for trying to tune things in and it seemed like the older people had a scarier--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he did, and--
Speaker 1: --attitude about electronic equipment in those days.
Speaker 2: They did and, and they had good reason for it but, but the other problem, you know, you asked about stories, you know.  One of the things that happened, they saved up enough money, my parents [Gladys Mines Mapily and William Mapily] didn't buy things on credit, okay, they refused to.  So they would save up enough money and then go buy something and, you know, from that era there was the television, radio and, and record player, combination, that weighed a ton and I know my parents went out one Saturday, I had watched my cartoons and while I was watching the cartoons, you know, the TV went out.  Well, I went downstairs, got a screwdriver, came up, took my little body, now I'm, I'm not even in junior high school when I did this, okay, pushed my little body between the console and the wall and pushed that unit out far enough for me to get onto the back of the TV and take out all the screws.  I took out all the screws, went and got a piece of paper and a pencil and I did a drawing of the chassis where all the tubes were, marked all the tubes on there, took 'em all out, put 'em in a bag, walked three blocks to the drugstore that had a tube tester--
Speaker 1: Now do you test them?
Speaker 2: You test them and I took about five or six bucks [dollars] from my dad's, you know, wallet, went around, tested the tubes, found the one with a short, bought the tube, came back around, put all the tubes back in, put the back back on the TV, console, pushed it slightly, said, I'm going to wait 'til he gets home 'cause this is a whole lot easier, put his change, you know, and the old tube on top of the TV, when they came home, I'm laying there on the floor watching some TV program that I wanted to watch and when my father and mother walked through the door, I said, "There was a problem with the TV but I fixed it." And they looked at me and, you know, my mom was upset initially, my father just looked at me, I said, okay, am I going to get my behind kicked or what.  They never said a thing, okay.  I mean, they, they, I think they both recognized that I was a very curious kid and I had been taught to fix things.  So, you know, why chastise a kid when you've ready raised one who, who you've taught to fix stuff.  So, you know, that's (laughter), you know, I look now and say, hey I could have gotten electrocuted, you know, if I had hit the wrong thing but I was, I was extremely careful.  So, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, yeah, that's quite a story 'cause--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: If, if they had been home, I, I have no doubt that they wouldn't have allowed you to do it.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, well see, it would have been me and my dad pushing it out and, and, you know, I probably, along with him, would have walked around the corner, you know, but he wasn't there and I wanted to see my TV program, okay.  So, you know, that's one way to see my TV program.
Story_ID: 440932
Speaker 1: When you look back on those days, don- don't you think that things were a lot of easier to fix then than they are now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you could fix things then.  Now, now, you can't.
Speaker 1: It's a little bit tougher to do it.
Speaker 2: You know, there's some things that you just can't fix.  I mean, with the printer circuits and all, you can't even test them.  I've tried (laughter) and it's just simpler to go buy a new one than it is to try to fix it.  So, yeah I've, one you had asked about my neighborhood.  I learned, I learned how to repair cars.  I learned plumbing.  I learned how to sew.  I learned a little bit about cooking, didn't like to do it much but I learned.  I learned, you know, how to take care of myself and that, that was one of the things that I think that everybody in that neighborhood was trying to pass on to their kids, you know, how to survive and that's something I've passed on to my kid [Etiene Mapily], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now what about school.  Now where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I started school right near Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  It was a school called Monroe [Monroe School, Washington, D.C.] and I completed the first grade.
Story_ID: 440933
Speaker 1: I started elementary school right at, right near Howard University [Washington, D.C.], at a place called Monroe elementary school [Monroe School, Washington, D.C.] and then my parents [Gladys Mines Mapily and William Mapily] purchased that house in that new community.  So at that point I started at Richardson Elementary School [Washington, D.C.].  Now Richardson was a brand new school, open for the first year when I arrived, stayed there for two years--
Speaker 2: Now was, was Richardson named after anybody significant in the black community?
Speaker 1: I don't think so.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I imagine--
Speaker 1: At least I don't know.  That one I don't know.
Speaker 2: Well, I imagine Monroe is named after [President] James Monroe, I don't know.
Speaker 1: It probably was.  You see, I, let's see the next school was Nash [sic. John Carroll Nalle Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] and I don't know whether that, I don't, no, okay, here, here, here's a historical point.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: At that time in history, in the Washington [D.C.] school system, the only school that I know of that was named after an African American, was Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], okay.  Then Dunbar was, at that point, the, there were only three high schools in Washington that you could go to, this is prior to integration.  There was Dunbar, Armstrong [Samuel Chapman Armstrong Technical High School; Armstrong Manual Training School, Washington, D.C.] and Phillips [Wendell Phillips School, Washington, D.C.], okay.
Speaker 2: So Wendell Phillips--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  After that, you know, things changed.  So, you know--
Speaker 2: I think there was a Garnet Elementary School [sic.]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Garnet-Patterson [Garnet-Patterson Junior High School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: --named after Henry Highland Garnet.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that was, that was right next to the high school that I went to but back to--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know, Richardson was a brand new school, I stayed there for about two years while they were building another elementary school that was closer to where I lived and that was Nalle, N-A-double L-E, finished the sixth grade at Nalle.
Story_ID: 440934
Speaker 1: Here's an interesting point and this is the first time that I'm going to talk about this publicly.  During my elementary school years, I discovered that I had a reading problem.  I carried that reading problem, still have it, all the way through high school [Joel Elias Spingarn Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] and college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], undergraduate, before I recognized and was, and found out what it was and I was in graduate school [Howard University School of Architecture and City Planning; Howard University College of Engineering, Architecture and Computer Sciences, Washington, D.C.] writing my thesis when there was a '60 Minute' ['60 Minutes'] program on, and it was a young lady who was in grad school from Pratt [Pratt Institute, New York, New York] who came on and, this was the first time I'd ever heard the word dyslexia.  So, you know, for the first time in my life, at that point, I knew what it was that had caused me problems all of my life and, you know, in, in elementary school, if you couldn't read, you were considered dumb and no one within that environment at that time knew how to diagnose or help an individual who was dyslexic.
Speaker 2: Now what exactly, how, how does that, how do you see the world then?  How do you see it?
Speaker 1: Okay, here's, here's, here's--there are many different forms of dyslexia.  Dyslexia covers a range of, I think, reading difficulties.  Some people see words backwards or letters backwards, that's not my case.  My case, you know, to explain to an individual in my case, was like, or is like, is as if there's someone pulling a shade down over your eyes where you see a word and then they pull a shade down so now you can't see the word and then, you know, after a period of time, the shade goes back up.  So you have a shade that's doing this (gesture), okay.  So to see, let's say the word, saw, you know, for a long time I could see that word and could not make the correlation between the word and, and what I was reading on the paper.  I, like I said, I went through all of my education without being diagnosed or having individuals who were really equipped to help me.  It is only through the grace of my mother [Gladys Mines Mapily] and the persistence that I had from my father [William Mapily] that allowed me to get through. And it was, it's all, it's been, it was a curse at one point in my life that I recognize it ended up being a blessing because there are things that I can do that other individuals can't do.  So, I had to learn to compensate for that problem of, of reading and writing 'cause writing at times, too, was, you know, if you ever saw my notebook from elementary school through college, there was very little writing on a page and but what, what I also had was an incredible memory.  The more I had been able to learn to read and write, the less my memory, or my ability to remember things, has diminished because of my ability to learn to read and write now.
Story_ID: 440935
Speaker 1: But being a kid in elementary school, leaving elementary school, when I left Richardson [Richardson Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], I made A's and Bs, okay, however, standardized test, phew, forget it.  I could write my name on the page and you remember, 'cause we're, we're within sort of the same general age group, you remember 'Welcome Back, Kotter' and the Sweathogs?  Well, based on test scores, I was put in a Sweathog class when I entered junior high school.  I'm in junior high school with the members of the gang, the clowns and I'm not sure whether I was the only dyslexic in the class but, you know, that was my beginning in junior high school, however, after a half a year of being with the Sweathogs and getting all A's, I was moved to the honors, you know, class of, went from 7-4 to 7-1 and the rest of my time in, in junior high school, I'm in the honors group, I'm in the honors society but I still can't read.
Speaker 2: Now, now what high--junior high did you attend?
Speaker 1: This is, this was Kelly Miller [Kelly Miller Junior High School; Kelly Miller Middle School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Kelly Miller, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Another funny story, if you'd like.  The science teacher that I had in the second semester of, of the seventh grade, when she gave a test, I flunked it and the reason I flunked it 'cause I couldn't read the questions and her name was Mrs. Chapman [ph.].  Mrs. Chapman called me up after class and she read the first question, you know, is bam- and I still remember the question, is bamboo a grass or a tree?  It's a grass and I answered that and she asked the next question, I answered that.  She asked the next question, I answered that correctly and she looked at me and she said, you know, "Have your mother [Gladys Mines Mapily] see me at the next PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meeting."  Well, take, add, add the time that it takes me to finish college and become a registered architect and I am working on a design of a new high school, or a, renovation and additions to a high school, and I go to a meeting at the D.C. school's office [Washington, D.C.] and I'm sitting there and this lady starts coming down the hall, coming into a meeting and I look up and it's Mrs. Chapman and I hand her a card and, you know, the lady looked at the card, she looked at the last name, she knew she knew the name and it took Mrs. Chapman about ten minutes to finally figure out, you know, why she knew the name and she smiled and I just smiled back and I hugged her at the end of that meeting but, you know, the, you know, she tried to get me help but, as I said, no one knew what dyslexia was and no one really knew how to teach a dyslexic kid.  You know, now there, you know the word is common and, and, and it's easy for a kid with dyslexia to, you know, get help but not then.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --so, so you had to, you know, we interviewed [HistoryMaker] James Cheek, he had a, he had like eye cataracts and had to memorize everything in class way back when.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 2: Similar kind of--
Speaker 1: --I just, I sat there and memorized, okay.  I mean I sat there and could listen intently and if you asked me questions, I could give you all the answers and I recognize then as now, I learned more from visual clues, you know, than, than anything else and I'm one of those kinds of individuals who can sit and figure stuff out, h- how things work and why.
Story_ID: 440936
Speaker 1: Now when you were in, in elementary and junior high school [Kelly Miller Junior High School; Kelly Miller Middle School, Washington, D.C.], now, Ms. Chapman [ph.] was certainly like somebody that took a special interest in you?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Were there any other people in, in, not just in school but in, did you have a special scoutmaster?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  The, the, the scoutmaster, the junior high school that I went to was adjacent to a public housing complex called Lincoln Heights [Washington, D.C.] and the scoutmaster was actually the plant engineer for that public housing complex.  Mr. Goodlow [ph.], the man was a saint.  I mean, that's the only way I can look at it.  He, he established this Boy Scout troop in the heart of a, a project that had a gang in it.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the gang?
Speaker 2: The Egyptians (laughter), I remember that, okay.  Well, if you had your Boy Scout uniform on, you could walk through Lincoln Heights and nobody would touch you.  If--once they knew who you were, nobody would touch you.  I think Mr. Goodlow is the one that inspired many of us to become Eagle Scouts and so, yes, he was important to me then.  I had an art teacher, Mrs. Robinson [ph.], she was important to me.  The band director, he was important to me because I was in drum and bugle corps.
Speaker 1: Did you play drum?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I played the drums.  There were a lot of people and one of the, one of the interesting things to me about growing up in Washington, D.C. in that timeframe, there were more individuals, adults, who were willing to mentor you and make sure you stayed on the right track than I think there are today, okay.  The neighborhoods were closer.  The churches were closer.  You know, I don't see that as much as I see today.  I mean, I have neighbors on my street and I've been there twenty years, I wouldn't, they're five, six doors away, I don't even know what they look like and when I was a kid, you know, people knew me six blocks away, you know, that's not the case anymore.
Story_ID: 440937
Speaker 1: What church did- was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, church was a big part.  I mean, there was a church called Chapel of the Atonement [Episcopal Church of the Atonement, Washington, D.C.] that happened to be walking distance away, it was an Episcopal Church.  My father [William Mapily] was raised Catholic, my mother [Gladys Mines Mapily] was raised Baptist, they had me christened in a Catholic Church, however, it took two buses and a minimum of two hours to get to the Catholic Church so--and especially in the wintertime, standing waiting for a bus was not the most pleasant thing to do.  So, we decided to go to that Episcopal Church and, you know, left the Catholic Church and many of my neighbors and schoolmates, you know, also went to the Episcopal Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Now did, did you have responsibilities in the church?  Were you ever an altar boy or anything like that?
Speaker 2: I was an usher, okay.  That's as far as I would go, okay.  There was, (laughter) there were a group of guys, it was as far as we'll go is be an usher, okay.  The pastor's, Reverend Gordon [Quinland R. Gordon], his son and daughter, you know, were good friends and my buddy Andre [ph.], who's my lifelong friend, we were ushers, you know.  You know, we did not want to be acolytes, okay.  That, it didn't go too well with your image, okay.  I mean, it was, a couple of guys, they were acolytes but that just wasn't us, all right, so, no, th- (laughter) that was as far as I went.
Story_ID: 440938
Speaker 1: Now where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Went to Spingarn [Joel Elias Spingarn Senior High School], that's Northeast Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay, so I--
Speaker 2: And it was a, it was a new high school.  When I got there, the school was four years old.  To give you an idea, some of the individuals who graduated from that high school, one of the first names that you will remember is Elgin Baylor.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the great Elgin Baylor.
Speaker 2: The great Elgin Baylor was a couple of years ahead of me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was the Michael Jordan of--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --that era, could do everything.
Speaker 2: The next, the next one behind him was Dave, David Bing [Dave Bing].  Dave was a year after me in high school and wasn't considered the best basketball player.  He, he was considered developing then.  The guy that taught David Bing was a guy named Bernard Levi and all the guys still tell stories about Bernard because Bernard was one of these showboat kinds of basketball players from the neighborhood.  So Bernard would go, he was a point guard and shooting guard, okay.  He would start down the field, down the, down the court talking to whoever was guarding him saying, "You just as well stand back," you know, "I'm going to get these points," you know, and Bernard would go across half court, you know, they didn't have three point then but he could go across half court and shoot the ball and hit his thing, he'd be standing and telling everybody, fall back, fall back, fall back before the ball got to the net and it would go swoosh and he'd say, "I told you to fall back."  Well, that's who David Bing learned to play basketball from.  Bernard never graduated from high school because he just couldn't stand class.  He wanted to be on the basketball court.
Speaker 1: Then he couldn't see, NBA [National Basketball Association] wasn't a big deal in those days.
Speaker 2: That was, that wasn't an option for him.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I mean, you know, you're talking about prior to Elgin playing, we're talking 1967.
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 2: I mean, '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: There weren't that many NB- African American--
Speaker 1: There weren't that many black players playing, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) black players.  That wasn't something to consider.
Speaker 1: That's pre- [HistoryMaker] Oscar Robertson--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --pre-Elgin Baylor.
Speaker 2: Elgin, Oscar and Wilt Chamberlain all played together and, in fact, they played, would play together on the basketball court right adjacent to Spingarn High School, okay.  I mean--
Speaker 1: So Wilt Chamberlain would come down from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Wilt would come from Philadelphia.  To give you another idea who was in that neighborhood, John Thompson.  John Thompson was not considered a good basketball player.
Speaker 1: He was 6'10" though, but--
Speaker 2: He was 6'10" but he was not considered a good basketball player but he learned from those guys and, you know, some of the best basketball players, you know, around, at that time were coming out of D.C. or Philly or New York [New York] and they all knew one another.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar High School for Health Professionals] is legendary for--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Overbrook [Overbrook High School] in Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Power Memorial [Power Memorial Academy, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: That's right, Alcindor, Kareem [Kareem Abdul-Jabbar]
Speaker 2: Yup, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 440939
Speaker 1: I take it that Spingarn [Joel Elias Spingarn Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] had some good basketball teams?
Speaker 2: It had, it had a good basketball team.  It had a championship cross country and track team.  I, I ran cross country for Spingarn.  I was a captain of the cross country team and I ran the half mile for them, you know, in fact had dreams at one point of going to the Olympics when I was in high school but we had, we had for about a four to five year period the best track athletes in the City of Baltimo- in the City of Washington [D.C.], primarily because of the coach, coaches that we had.
Speaker 1: Who were the coaches?
Speaker 2: Dave Brown and Ray Hammond, they, they trained us the way many folks in college were training runners and they, the sprint teams that we had were the only teams in the region who would do what's called a blind pass for sprinters and that's a pass where you don't look back, you only go by commands given by the, the person who's passing you the baton and they told you when to take off by saying, "Go," and you were supposed to take three strides and by three strides you're supposed to be near your full speed and you just put your hand back like that and that baton was supposed to be at your hand and your arm was fully extended and if in fact your arm wasn't fully extended, the coach would give you a fit.  So, you know, and anything from, any of the sprint races, you could see the advantage of people giving that kind of pass.  So, you know, our team was forever, you know, running away from other individuals and, you know, I owe, I owe Dave Brown and Ray Hammond a lot too because, you know, one of the things that I learned in high school, running track, you train hard, you know, put yourself in a position to win, you have a darn good chance of winning a race.  If you, if you don't train hard, forget it, and if you don't put yourself in a position to win, forget it.  So, you know, my entire professional career has been based on train hard and put yourself in a position to win and it's worked.
Story_ID: 440940
Speaker 1: What was your concentration in high school [Joel Elias Spingarn Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]?  Did you--
Speaker 2: In, in high school, in the ninth grade was the year that the Russians launched Sputnik [Sputnik 1] and was the first time I heard the term aeronautical engineer.  So, myself and one other friend, the one other Eagle Scout, Otis Young, he was, Otis is three years older than I am so he was already in high school and wanted to pursue aeronautical engineering so I asked him what do I need to take, you know, when I get to high school.  So, his, one of the courses he said was drafting and I started drafting, my drafting course the first semester in high school and it was taught by an architect who happened to be a classmate of my parents from high school.  Dave Brown, as soon as he saw the last name, he said, "I know you, Billy [William Mapily] and Gladys' [Gladys Mines Mapily] son," I said, "Yep."  Well, he gave me permission to come over to his office and that's when I changed from deciding to pursue aeronautical engineering to becoming an architect and from the tenth grade, I knew what I wanted to be.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now was the, I just wondered, was the, was the National Organization of Minority Architects (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not yet.
Speaker 1: No, yeah.
Speaker 2: It was around, I didn't know about it.
Story_ID: 439486
Speaker 1: --And found out about architects.  The only African American architect, I knew, was David Byrd [David R. Byrd] and (laughter) I don't know why, but for me, I thought David was the first black architect.  Little did I realize at the time, my high school [Joel Elias Spingarn Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] backed up, again, on a public housing complex.  The public housing complex that it backed up on was designed by Paul Williams [Paul R. Williams] and Hilyard Robinson.  Now Paul Williams, if you don't know, was considered the architect to the stars.  He was an African American who had clients like Lucille Ball, Lon Chaney, Frank Sinatra, those were his clients.  He did mansions for the stars.  Well, you know, he, he and a local architect, Hilyard Robinson, assessed the Langston Hughes, Langston public housing complex [Langston Terrace Dwellings, Washington, D.C.].  One of the first ones in the country was designed by these two African Americans and I'm right next door and don't know it.  It wasn't until I got to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] that I realized that there was a history of African American architects and that's a, that story is a long one because it ended up with [HistoryMaker] Leslie King-Hammond doing an exhibition about African American architects in the era prior to the end of World War II [WWII] and pointed out, you know, the accomplishments of some of these African American architects, most of whom I knew, and there were only a couple that I didn't know, okay.
Speaker 2: Who were some of them?  Just, just brief, some of the names?
Speaker 1: Louis Fry, Jun--Louis Fry, Sr. and Jr. [Louis Fry, Jr.], Howard Mackey [Howard H. Mackey], William Moses [William H. Moses, Jr.].  Who was the guy?  Those, those are the ones from the East Coast and to give you an idea how important some of these people are, Louis Fry graduated from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  He went back to get a degree from Harvard when he was in his forties.  He had already designed numerous academic buildings on Howard University's campus, Tuskegee Institute's [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] campus, Prairie[AB1] View's [Prairie View State Normal and Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] campus, and there are a couple of other campuses of black colleges [HBCUs] that this man designed buildings for.  He is the one who is credited with coming up with the term, family room, while he was working for Walter Gropius when he was at Harvard.  A brilliant man, a brilliant teacher who could explain things in the most simplistic terms.  Howard Mackey is the one who really was responsible for getting Howard University School of Architecture [Howard University Department of Architecture, Washington, D.C.] accredited.
Story_ID: 439487
Speaker 1: William Moses [William H. Moses, Jr.] was the person responsible for the architectural program at Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  He is also, has the following distinction.  William Moses designed the Virginia state pavilion for the World's Fair [New York World's Fair, New York, New York].  It was a competition open to architects from the State of Virginia.  William Moses graduated from Cornell University [Ithaca, New York].  He won the competition, the, I think it's the Richmond Gazette [sic. Windsor and Richmond Gazette] announced that Mr. Moses from Hampton, Virginia has won the competition for the design of the pavilion for Virginia.
Speaker 2: Now what year is this, can you tell me?
Speaker 1: This is, this is before World War, before World War II [WWII], okay.  They turned around the next day when they discovered that Mr. Moses was a Negro and had to print a, the following statement.  They would not, did not want to believe that Mr. Moses had the ability to design something so their statement was: "Mr. Moses, a Negro, drafted the plans for the Virginia pavilion."  They gave his drawings, his design drawings, to a white architect in Richmond [Virginia], to execute which, according to comments from his daughter [Michael M. Williford], I think broke his heart but, you know, understanding the timeframe when this was done, you know, hey, he's, as far as I know, he's the first African American to win, you know, a competition.
Story_ID: 439488
Speaker 1: So, you know, the--I was--we put this exhibition together at the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] that highlighted, you know, these individuals and, you know, I was supposed to do a, a lecture about six months later, you know, about what I call them a band of brothers, you know, because all of these guys knew one another and on occasion they worked together, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that is a hidden history and I--
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: --of, that, at least from the general black public, and the general public, period of blacks as, as contractors of, especially architects.
Speaker 1: They don't know us.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They, they don't know us and those who know the title have no idea what architects really do and it's one of the biggest problems that you still face as an architect of color, trying to work within an African American community.  They don't know what you do and think you charge too much, okay.  "Can't you do it for fifty dollars?"  Say, "I can't even get out of my bed for fifty dollars," okay, but that's, that's the problem.
Speaker 2: Okay, some people like John Chase [HistoryMaker John S. Chase] and [HistoryMaker] Charles McAfee and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, all of us, all of us have had the same kinds of issues.  John Chase, McAfee, myself, most of the African American architects that are, I'd say from fifty-five up, in terms of age, have primarily survived on work from public agencies or churches, that's it. Or mass transit.  There are very, very few of us who have been given the opportunity to design something like a high-rise office building because those commissions go to individuals who have bought part of the good old boy network and we're not part of the good old boy network. Okay, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, development is, there's so much money in development and--
Speaker 1: That's good old boy network.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's tied to people who really have what we call, wealth, and so--
Speaker 1: No, it's just, it's just tied to the good old boy network.  It doesn't really, you know, to do development work, doesn't require as much rigor as doing an elementary school.  You know, the typical office building that you see, right here in Chicago [Illinois], you design the exterior and you design what's called the core.  That's the elevators and the toilets and your egress stairs, you know, that's primarily in the lobby, that's primarily all that's involved there.  Where an elementary school, you know, just think of the different kinds of class rooms and support services and all of the things required plus you're showing tack boards, chalkboards, and, you know, equipment.  You don't have that with an office building but the office buildings go to the golfing buddies and people who were part of the same country club 'cause the deals are made on the golf course.
Story_ID: 439489
Speaker 1: In high school [Joel Elias Spingarn Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], did you, at any certain point, did your reading catch up with what you were learning (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My reading, my- to be very honest, my reading did not catch up.  My reading, my reading caught up, or has been catching up, since I was forty years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're in a position where you've got to memorize almost everything, or everything?
Speaker 2: I did, up until, up until, as my writing skills improved and my reading skills improved, then, you know, my memory started going down.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, how are your grades in high school?
Speaker 2: I, I was honor roll.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just couldn't read (laughter) which is, which is kind, you know, some folks who know me well, just sit back--there are friends, lifelong friends, who never knew I had a reading problem and as a youngster that's, that's something that I think you would want to freely admit to anybody.  As a person in business, that's not something that you want to freely admit.  You know, I would take a contract and go and have to find a very quiet place, you know, and sit and read the contract, okay, but once I read it, I knew what the heck was in it.  You know, the, the other, other funny situation was I'm the principal of the firm [Turner Associates, PC] and I'm the one doing all the creative writing and, you know, I used to come home and laugh about that but architects aren't taught to write, you know.  I learned to write and the importance of writing while I was in graduate school [Howard University School of Architecture and City Planning; Howard University College of Engineering, Architecture and Computer Sciences, Washington, D.C.] (laughter) but, you know, I had to have a dictionary and I had to have somebody always read over what I wrote and I owe a, a gratitude to a lot of secretaries who I would always take care of at Christmastime because they were the ones who made sure that any document that I wrote was edited.
Story_ID: 439490
Speaker 1: Now are there any teachers in high, high school [Joel Elias Spingarn Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] that really stand out as helpful or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they all--I mean, the--I went to, I think, a very unusual high school.  I mean, it was a new high school and, and the principal had the opportunity to select the individuals that he wanted.  So, you know, Dave Byrd [David R. Byrd], obviously, because, you know, he's the one that got me into architecture.  Earl Alford [ph.] was my homeroom teacher, he taught science but, but what he also taught more than science, he taught all of us who were ready to go to college some very valuable lessons. And one of the lessons that he taught us, you know, he used to give these little talks, you know, in the morning and one of them was, you know, don't be too proud to ask for help and he talked about being in college and out of money and Earl went to one of the colleges in the South where the, the, you had the college and then the faculty lived right adjacent to the college and he was talking about being very restless and he hadn't eaten in two days and the professor said, "What's wrong with you, Earl?"  He said, "Nothing."  He, "You're kind of fidgety and stuff," you know, he said, "You okay?"  And then he finally said to him, "My money," you know, "for food didn't come."  He said, "When is the last time you ate?"  "It was two days ago."  He said, "You take your behind right over to my, right over my house and tell my wife, you know, that you hungry," and he said, "Earl, from now on Sundays, you come over and have dinner."  Well, that taught all of us, you know, a valuable lesson.  You in trouble, you better tell somebody 'cause nobody can read your mind.  So, you know, the, the, to me there are lessons beyond formal education that, you know, the, the group of individuals that I had in high school, the teachers, they were, they were dedicated, they were dedicated to making sure that you were prepared for life and, I mean, I go all the way down to the, to the book clerk, Mrs. King [ph.], she wrote my applications to go to college and that's not something she had to do.  So, yeah, I mean, you know, each and every one of them, even the ones I didn't like, added something to my life when I was in high school, okay, and helped me be who I am today.
Story_ID: 439491
Speaker 1: Now, it doesn't seem that difficult to imagine how you choose Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] but, did you have other options?
Speaker 2: Yeah I did, I did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a track aid scholarship to go to Iowa State [Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa] and there were six of us who were given, you know, these scholarships (laughter) and I got a, the reason I'm laughing is once we were identified, the guidance counselor called all of us in to her office and she looked at my test scores, and she looked at my test scores and she said, "What do you want to be?"  I said, "I want to be an architect." And she said, "Young man, you know, why don't you go to Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] or A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] and learn a trade, you know, that's what my, my brother did." And I looked at her and I, and I'd been taught to be a very polite kid.  So, you know, I just said thank you and I walked out of her office and I went downstairs to the book clerk [Mrs. King (ph.)] and I told her what, you know, she said to me and I told her, I said, "I'm going to Howard." 'Cause by that time my parents [Gladys Mines Mapily and William Mapily] had looked at the economics.  For me to catch the train to go out to Iowa State at the beginning of the year, come back for Thanksgiving, Christmas, maybe Easter and the end of the year, cost more than it would have, than the tuition for me to go to Howard.  That decision, you know, was obvious, I'm going to Howard. But I made the book clerk a promise.  I said, "When I know that I'm getting my degree from Howard, I'm coming back here and I'm going to give her a piece of my mind."  I did.  I mean I came back with my letter saying I was graduating, not only did I have that, but I also had a letter indicating that I had a job with a firm in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] and she looked up, you know, "Oh, that's so nice," you know, and I said, "No thanks to you," she said, "What do you mean?"  I said, "You told me to go to Johnson C. Smith or A&T and learn a trade."  I said, "Don't you ever tell another student not to try." And I walked out.  When I got my master's degree, unfortunately, she had retired because (laughter) I was going back, you know, when I, when I passed the registration exam, it's a three, four day written exam that you have to take to become a registered architect, I passed that rascal.  I was going back to get her that, I was going back to get her when, when I got my master's degree but, you know, she heard me the first time and, and I really think, because of my experience of being a young person with learning challenges, it's one of the reasons I went into teaching 'cause I had to figure out ways to teach, you know, students who had all kinds of challenges and that was fun.
Story_ID: 439492
Speaker 1: Well let's talk about Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  What was the atmosphere at Howard when--now you graduated from high school [Joel Elias Spingarn Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] in 19--
Speaker 2: Nineteen--
Speaker 1: --fifty-nine [1959]?
Speaker 2: --fifty-nine [1959].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what was Howard like in '59 [1959]?  Who was on campus and was it exciting, you know, on the campus?
Speaker 2: Okay, I started going up to Howard's campus the year before I graduated from high school because it, I mentioned earlier, many of my friends are, are at least a year older than I am.  So I'm going to parties on campus and I'm still in high school.  The campus at Howard, (laughter) let's say, or let's start by saying that it had some of the prettiest young ladies that you ever want to see from all over the world.  That wasn't hard for me because Washington, D.C. at that time that I was in, growing up, had some of the prettiest young ladies, you know, that you ever want to see.  So it wasn't a shock to my system but it was to a lot of my classmates.  It was, it was a stimulating environment plus it was an environment if you, if you looked from 1960 and I came out in '65 [1965], we're talking about two things are going on within this country, simultaneously.  We're talking about people who are involved in the sit-ins, we're talking about Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] who was on Howard's campus, you know, we're talking about Rap Brown [H. Rap Brown; Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin], we're talking about the start of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], we're talking about sit-ins and demonstrations and also the Vietnam War.  We have individuals who are very socially conscious who are there to get the best possible education they could and to have a lot of fun.  So, it, it was, it, it, Howard has not changed as an institution or its mythology has not changed from the time when I was a kid and living, you know, adjacent to the university.  You know, what I saw then, I still see now but it's the clothes have changed and (laughter) the vocabularies changed but it still--
Speaker 1: So it's a similar dynamic of the social change, got the black well-to-do trying to, you know--
Speaker 2: You've got, you've got, you have students who come there with minks, Jaguars and Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz] and BMWs and you have those who have two sets of clothing.  You know, I had one young lady who came to Howard from South Africa before the end of apartheid, she came with two hundred dollars in her pocket, yeah, I mean, tuition, you know, tuition at that point was about three thousand dollars, she came with two hundred dollars in her pocket and a desire to come to Howard University, you know, so you, you have all these kinds of stories, you know.  I had to end up buying this young lady, you know, drafting pencils and erasers and stuff 'cause she didn't have it.  So you have those who have nothing and the sons and daughters of my colleagues, you know, like, like, give you for an example, [HistoryMaker] Dennis Hightower who was the president of Walt Disney TV [Walt Disney Television and Telecommunications], you know, his daughter could, could go to any university that she wanted to.  She wanted to come to Howard 'cause her parents went to Howard and, and what, what I started to see was, was those individuals plus those who have never been to college before, you know, those individuals that make up the population, student population at Howard and still to this day, make up that population.
Story_ID: 439493
Speaker 1: So, well, you said that Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] was on the campus--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --when you were there, Rap Brown [H. Rap Brown; Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin].
Speaker 2: Rap Brown, Rap Brown wasn't there--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but he would come on campus.  The infamous [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry--
Speaker 1: Marion Barry.
Speaker 2: --you know, would be up there passing out (laughter) flyers.
Speaker 1: Now he got involved in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], I know, earlier.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Went to Mississippi and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I think, he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's from, he's from Mississippi.
Speaker 1: --was chairman of SNCC at one time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's from Mississippi, okay.  So, yeah, there was, I think that we had a peaceful demonstration on campus right after, just before I got to graduate school [Howard University School of Architecture and City Planning; Howard University College of Engineering, Architecture and Computer Sciences, Washington, D.C.].  They took over the administration building and they're one of the first groups that never broke a darn thing, okay.  They were peaceful but they got what they wanted and that was fine.
Speaker 1: So that's, that's when James Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.], I guess, was president, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, yeah, yeah.  No, it, it, it's--Howard University [Washington, D.C.], I always make a statement to folks, there's no place in the world like it and that's a fair statement.  I love the spirit of the place, you know.  I mean, I love the individuals who head the place, okay, but I know the importance of, of that university and, you know, had the privilege of teaching there for twenty-seven years.
Story_ID: 439494
Speaker 1: So, we were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --talking about who was on the campus of Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in 1959 and those--
Speaker 2: Wait--
Speaker 1: --I guess those lawyers were all there.
Speaker 2: The lawyers are there.  They, what, what, what's interesting, the people, there are a bunch of individuals who came out of Howard in their timeframe that end up being the first.  Denny Hightower [HistoryMaker Dennis Hightower], I just mentioned. Otis Young, Otis Young was the one that I said, I asked about aeronautical engineering.  Well, he did, he graduated from Howard, in aeronautical engineering, went into the [U.S.] Air Force, went from the Air Force to Pan Am [Pan American World Airways] and he was on the inaugural flight for the 747 [Boeing 747] from San Francisco [California] to London [England].  He was one of the first African American, you know, commercial pilots.  There, there's a whole cadre of top attorneys, doctors, that were in school with me.  There's, there's one of 'em that's right here, a dermatologist, Rene Earles [HistoryMaker Dr. Rene Martin Earles], right here in Chicago [Illinois].  I mean, the politicians, gee.  Right now in Washington [D.C.], Washington metropolitan area, I mean, here's an interesting point.  The mayor of Washington, D.C., is a Howard University graduate.  The head of Montgomery County [Maryland] government, is a Howard graduate.  The other county right adjacent to Howard, I mean, right adjacent to Washington, is Prince George's County [Maryland].  Johnson [ph.] graduated from Howard.  The senator from Maryland, from Baltimore, Maryland, is a Howard graduate.  There, the, the, both governments, Washington, D.C.'s government and I know Prince George's County's government, is full of Howard graduates.  So, you know, the, the influence that that school has had has been phenomenal.  The mayor of Atlanta [Georgia], Shirley Franklin, you know, was in school with me from Howard.  I mean, it--
Speaker 1: So, is Williams [Anthony A. Williams] still the mayor of D.C.?  Is that who it is?
Speaker 2: No, no--
Speaker 1: No, who's in there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) he's been replaced--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --recently by Fenty [Adrian Fenty].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Fenty was elected, was it October, somewhere around there, Adrian Fenty.
Story_ID: 439495
Speaker 1: What classes did you enjoy aside from architecture, you know?  I mean, did you like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Art.
Speaker 1: Art, okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Everything else was, to me, just supportive of what I wanted to pursue as a profession.  I enjoyed, I mean, the, the curriculum for architects was heavily laden with just architectural courses.  We had very few liberal arts courses.  I don't, in fact I think we only had maybe twelve hours of liberal arts courses once you finished with the English and math requirements, so everything else was architecture, okay, and it still wasn't enough time.  Five years and, you know, a lot of sleepless nights, and it still wasn't enough time.
Speaker 1: Now were you ever tempted to, to volunteer for the Civil Rights Movement?  To volunteer for SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] or--
Speaker 2: Marched, but no.  You know, you didn't have time.  You know, the, when I entered Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I went out, you know, used to running track, okay, I'm used to running to cross country.  I went out for the cross country team, practiced one day, had a locker and, and a uniform and it took me two and a half weeks before I had time to go back and tell the coach, I don't have time.  You know, when you have practices when we have studio time, so you know, it, it, architecture, architectural education was and still is a very, very demanding pursuit because in addition to your normal course work, you're given various building types that you have to first research and then design and that's a, you know, that's a very labor intensive activity.  Our studio courses were three afternoons a week from two o'clock in the afternoon 'til five o'clock, that's just studio time, and then after studios, you end up spending a tremendous amount of time on your own working either on the design or the presentation of your design solution. So you didn't have a lot of time.
Story_ID: 439496
Speaker 1: Now you earned like a, your Bachelor's of Architecture, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In 1965, is that correct (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yup--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yup, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, and, and you went on to graduate school at Howard [Howard University School of Architecture and City Planning; Howard University College of Engineering, Architecture and Computer Sciences, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in city planning, city and regional planning.
Speaker 1: Okay, and why did you chose city and regional planning?
Speaker 2: A long story, which I'll try to make as short as possible.  One of the things that, that I recognized, I got out of school and was fortunate enough to get good jobs, first job working for a firm in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] on the new town of Reston, Virginia, fabulous experience.  Later, I went to work for one of the persons who started teaching at Howard, architect named Tony Johns, Anthony Johns [Anthony N. Johns, Jr.].  I was his first full-time employee.  We're talking in, about a timeframe right after the Civil Rights Movement where many government and state agencies were being forced to, at least consider, giving work to minority firms.  Johns was, at that time, I think, the only registered architect residing in, in Maryland, so, and especially Prince George's County [Maryland], so he had a few folks who were his supporters.  One was the mayor of a town, an African American town called Glenarden [Maryland] and that's where Tony lived and I lived right next to that community.  We ended up getting work from the state to do work on the campus of Bowie State College [Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland], which was a historic black college [HBCU].  We got to a certain point where the work that we were doing, we started out doing renovation work, now we have the opportunity to do the largest building on that campus, a new building, which was called a communications arts building [Martin Luther King, Jr. Communication Arts Center].  We selected a site, however, the state said, oh, no, we need to have the experts select a site.  So, they brought in a firm called Caudill Rowlett and Scott [sic. Caudill Rowlett Scott] out of Texas.  Their specialty was educational facilities.  They came in and put on a presentation, slash performance, and ended up selecting the same site that we had selected, the difference was that the individual putting on the performance had a master's degree in city and regional planning which was, in my way of looking at it, a union card.  So, Howard University was starting its graduate school in city and regional planning and I told Tony, I said, "Look, I'm going to get a master's in city and regional planning so that we don't ever have to face that issue again."
Story_ID: 439497
Speaker 1: Hence, I ended up going to Howard [Howard University School of Architecture and City Planning; Howard University College of Engineering, Architecture and Computer Sciences, Washington, D.C.] and getting my master's [degree] in city and regional planning, came back to the firm and stayed with Tony [Anthony N. Johns, Jr.] for less than three months and there were three of us, one, two, three, four of us then, who decided that Tony, you can go in that direction, we're going to go in this direction.  So, the four of us started our own firm [Turner Associates, PC].
Speaker 2: Now, what year was this?
Speaker 1: I started that firm in 1971 and, you know, that, you know, here's an important thing.  Most architects don't get the opportunity to start their own firms, if they do, they might be forty years old before they start a firm.  One, we had one individual, Lawrence Turner who was in his forties, the other three of us, I was the youngest, I was twenty-nine, John Carter was thirty and Al Edgecombe [Albert Edgecombe] was thirty or thirty-one.  So I went into corporate practice at age twenty-nine and I'm designing, you know, multimillion dollar buildings at age twenty-nine which in either the white or black, you know, community, is highly unusual, okay.  So, you know, that's, that's my start.
Speaker 2: Okay, now what are the highlights of, of working with your own firm?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Highlights were I got an opportunity to do a lot of different things.  I mean, I started out working primarily, we had a reputation, or at least Lawrence, Larry, had a reputation of working on educational facilities, from elementary schools to buildings on Howard University's campus, so we started out doing resi- doing educational facilities.  We went from educational facilities to doing educational and churches.
Story_ID: 439498
Speaker 1: Then we, I wrote a proposal on a whim to document a historic district in Washington, D.C. called, Logan Circle.  I wrote the proposal in the evenings.  I didn't think it was worth taking the time during the day away from the work that we were doing so I wrote this proposal in the evening.  Now, timeframe, I'm talking 1972, at a timeframe where most architects did not write proposals to get work, they only submitted photographs of their old work and said, hire me and I can do the job.  I wrote, I had a course in graduate school [Howard University School of Architecture and City Planning; Howard University College of Engineering, Architecture and Computer Sciences, Washington, D.C.] on proposal writing.  So I pulled out my old notes and sat and wrote this proposal and was shocked to get a call that said, we like your proposal and we want you to joint venture with a white architect who we liked his experience and Nicholas Sadley [ph.] had completed, at that point, a study on Executive Office Building [Old Executive Office Building; Eisenhower Executive Office Building, Washington, D.C.] and the Treasury Building [Washington, D.C.] for historic preservation.  So Nicholas Sadley and I joined forces and the Logan Circle report that we wrote won an American Institute [American Institute of Architects] award for first place in historic preservation.  We lectured at the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] and on Radio Free Europe [Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty] about the Logan Circle experience.  So I went from just doing work on educational and religious facilities to now I have credentials in historic preservation.
Story_ID: 439499
Speaker 1: Then from that we got involved in mass transit work.  I started out in Washington, D.C. and all of a sudden our eyes are opened up as young architects to new possibilities.  The possibilities are that you can get paid a full decent fee with nobody trying to cut your fee doing mass transit work.  So we started in Washington, we went from Washington to Atlanta [Georgia], we had work in Atlanta, Baltimore [Maryland] and Boston [Massachusetts].  For a period of time, I was running the office in Boston, working on two mass transit projects and making more money during--doing mass transit work than I could ever imagine.  You know, the, the thing that got me in architecture was to do residential but we never touched any residential work because it just wasn't economical.  There's only been since I've been primarily on my own, that I've gotten back to doing residential work and I'll stay as far away as I can from institutional 'cause it's no longer satisfying to me to do it.
Story_ID: 439500
Speaker 1: Well, it--okay, let's, I'll tell you the whole, whole truth.  When my partners and I started, or any of the African American architects who were involved in work for either local, state or federal government, the agencies were not interested in paying you top dollar, they were only interested in paying you as little as they could get away with and to stay in business, you had to be the most efficient architects on the globe.  The other problem was, and I know my colleagues are still facing, getting local, state and federal governments to pay you on time. (Laughter) It may sound like, you know, you got, yeah, you owe me forty thousand dollars and I submitted an invoice and where is it?  There were individuals that we all know let invoices sit on their, in their inbox.
Speaker 2: Now, I think, you know, some of us have, we, you know, when you're, you have a contract with the city government or state government, sometimes we suspect, I suspect, that politics has something to do with how fast you're paid.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Depending on who you are and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh--
Speaker 2: --in relationship to who's in power.
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, very much so.  So it, it, it, you know, there are a lot of architectural firms let's say, you know, that, one that comes to mind, it started right here in Chicago [Illinois], you know, Skidmore, Owings and Merrill [Skidmore, Owings and Merrill LLP], you know, they have been able to go through all recessions, you know, and never skip a beat.  The reason for that is that, you know, they are tied into corporate work and are, you know, people are willing to pay them top dollar just to utilize their name of Skidmore, Owings and Merrill.  Well, that's not going to happen for the little guy and, you know, so it, it, it, there's a different kind of architecture and a different kind of business.  Another one that you will know about, you know, Frank Lloyd Wright, you know, who has buildings all over Chicago, did not die a rich man, you know, he died in debt.  Louis Kahn, who was considered one of the, you know, leading architects of the modern movement, you know, he was darn near bankrupt, he died in debt.  So, you know, there's a dif- there's differences between the practice of architecture and running an architects office and looking at architecture as a business and most folks are not taught to deal with architecture as a business.  They are taught how to design something and that you must design the best but they don't, they don't look at how to do things efficiently and how you can save money and that's, that's one of the things that I, I had a, the oldest partner that I had, you know, he was very, very good at figuring out systems of, of how to get a project completed with the minimal amount of staffing and time and we developed systems within the firm for making stuff even faster and I think that's one of the reasons I ended up gravitating towards computers because I knew that once they improved the hardware and the software, I wouldn't need any employees and, you know, I don't have any employees and I haven't needed any employees because I learned to utilize the system myself.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So that way, you know, whatever fee comes in, you know, it, it stays with me a long time.
Story_ID: 439501
Speaker 1: Now I think we, we spoke of this off-camera during a tape change that you spent ten thousand dollars of your own money--
Speaker 2: Ten thousand, five hundred dollars (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to buy a mainframe computer or was that--
Speaker 2: No, on the first PC [personal computer], first prof-
Speaker 1: --on the first PC, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  It, the first, I look and laugh because the first computer that I bought, you had to spend a fortune to get a hard drive that had eighty gigs [gigabytes] of memory (laughter) and I'm laughing because you can now get a, a, I mean, even the iPods have six and eight gigs, well the, the software alone would take up forty gigs worth of your drive and you only had forty gigs left to, to do your work, okay.  There weren't many architects at that time, you know, especially, you know, African American architects, who had that kind of money to devote to new technology and, you know, if you had one computer, that was it.  Bryant and Bryant [Bryant and Bryant Architects and Planners, Inc.; Bryant Mitchell, PLLC], the firm where I was a chief designer, we had four computers and at least thirty individuals.  People were taking, you know, had to take turns, you know, utilizing the computer for three hour shifts to get work done. (Laughter) And they were advanced.  So, you know, it, it, I look now, when I came out of school, and when John [John Carter], Al [Albert Edgecombe] and Larry [Lawrence Turner] and I started [Turner Associates, PC], all we needed was pencils, architectural scales, erasers and triangles, you know, and a place to draw, we could call ourselves an office, you know.  If we had to have computers back then, I don't think we would have gotten started 'cause none of us had any money, okay.  So that's, that's, you know, that's how things have changed.
Speaker 1: Okay, things started to balance out some 'cause I think the computers are more affordable now than they--
Speaker 2: Still haven't changed.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You still have, you still have those hardware, well, you've got software issues and you have to buy it and the training is not easy and then the individuals who you think know how to truly utilize computers, you know, as a principal, most of the principals of architectural firms who are in my age group don't know how to turn the computers on.  The managers directly below them, don't know how to turn computers on.  It's the people coming out of architectural schools who know how to operate the systems but don't know architecture and the difference today is that a drawing that is produced, you know, utilizing one of these software programs, looks as if it's correct.  It's not sloppy looking, it looks very neat and you would, and, and precise so you would think that it would have all the information necessary, you know, on it and it doesn't. And most, you know, and many, in too many instances, you know, drawings get out of architects' offices today before individuals have had an opportunity to thoroughly check them.  Yup, and that's a big mistake.
Story_ID: 439502
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about some of the buildings you designed--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, well tell us about your favorites and what they were and--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Let's see.  I'll start, I'll start with one of the non-educational ones that I consider one of my favorite and that's Charles Houston Community Center [Charles Houston Recreation Center] over in Alexandria, Virginia.  As far as I know, the City of Alexandria, prior to Turner Associates [Turner Associates, PC], that was a firm that I was a principal of, prior to that project, I don't think they had even considered hiring a, an African American to do any work in that town.  The project, Charles Houston Community Center is named after Charles Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston], the attorney, civil rights attorney.
Speaker 1: He was the teacher of the, those great--
Speaker 2: And he taught at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) lawyers from Howard, Thurgood Marshall and all those--
Speaker 2: Right, and, and the interesting thing is that my last girlfriend was a principal in the firm started by Charles Houston.
Story_ID: 440941
Speaker 1: We were, I think the first African American firm that they hired and one of the reasons they hired us because it was in the African American community.  The community needed this facility [Charles Houston Community Center; Charles Houston Recreation Center, Alexandria, Virginia], however, it was one extremely tight budget and the individual that I had as a project manager, actually had, (laughter) had less experience than I did, okay.  He was a younger guy than I was and when I finished designing the building and we were submitting it for what we call, bids, that means that you're about to give the drawings and the written documents to a bunch of contractors to determine, you know, what they would build the facility for.  Well, this particular person looked at the square footage that we had and he went into a cost estimating book and looked at what was the average cost and came to me and said, "Jose [HistoryMaker Jose J. Mapily], your building is going to cost, you know, it's going to be over budget."  I said, "No it's not."  I said, "I've never designed anything over budget."  He said, "It's going to be over budget based on my calculations."  I said, "Well, my estimator says that here's what it's going to cost and it's below budget."  He didn't want to believe me and was going to hold up our pay request, said, you have too much square footage.  So, you know, being a problem solving kind of individual, you know, I'm looking at, I got, I have about twenty folks that are going to be looking for their paychecks soon and this guy's going to hold it up 'cause he doesn't want to believe me.  On the way back to the office [of Turner Associates, PC], I said, I know how to solve this.  I've got to get the square footage down.  So, there were certain build--certain parts of the building along the perimeter that, I said, okay, if I cut off one foot by the length of this element, I can get it down to the square footage.  I went back to the office and told my draftsman, "Look, change this dimension down by one foot, this one down by one foot."  "Why?" I told him what happened.  I said, "And then run a fresh set of prints and that tomorrow I want you to take these drawings, along with these calculations, over to this guy and turn 'em in."  We did, I got my payment and then a couple of weeks later when the bids came out, it was forty thousand dollars below what my estimator said it was going to be.  So, you know, you asked me my favorite, favorite is a nice great little building done for a community that badly needed this kind of facility and I was able to prove, you know, my point that, you know, no, I'm right, this is under the budget.  That's one favorite.
Story_ID: 440942
Speaker 1: The other favorite is one that was not built and this is one--phase three for the University of the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]. It's a project that Chase [HistoryMaker John S. Chase], out of Houston [Texas], had also worked on.  In fact, one of the buildings that was adjacent to this phase three was designed by Chase.  It was a very unusual shape, site, and the program was humongous.  I mean by that I mean it was a lot of square footage, a lot of facilities that had to be placed in this last building phase on that campus.  There was so much mass that the initial design I came up with was just big chunks and it wasn't attractive to me and one day on the way from the office, going to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] to teach, halfway between the two, I came up with a whole new concept about how I wanted to design the building and the next morning I went to the principal, the senior principal [of Bryant and Bryant Architects and Planners, Inc.; Bryant Mitchell, PLLC], Charles Bryant, and I said, "Charlie, I don't like the design, I have a better design, I need a couple of days to work on it," and he said, "Go ahead."  Well, I, you know, I'll show you the drawings for it.  What I ended up doing you will not know that this is a massive complex that below the plaza level, these two, what appeared to be two buildings, are actually connected together.  So we had one building that had physics, chemistry, biology, earth sciences and classrooms in it and then another built form that looks, the symbol of the University of the District of Columbia was a fire bird.  The building that I created, that part of the complex is shaped like a bird.  I mean, there's a office building complex that starts out like this and bends back like wings and has egress stairs at either end.  At the head of it where you would have the head of the bird, is the stairwell that goes up but on the top of that, is an observatory, okay, element, that's the cap of it.  Behind the office building, which is connected to a common lobby, is a little theatre.  So, you know, this is one of the most complicated designs that I ever had to spend time on yet the, the design elements look very, very, very simple and I had to get special permission from the university to come up with this office tower because historically, most institutions will have classrooms and then they want the faculty offices, you know, adjacent to.  Well, it really doesn't make a lot of sense when you're teaching English, you know, in any space that is available, your office could be anywhere.  The only offices that I left in close proximity to their educational components were the lab and where you had labs, where you have chemistry teachers and physics teachers, I left their office spaces, you know, close by.
Story_ID: 440943
Speaker 1: The other, other notion was that, you know, when you have a laboratory, or classroom space, you need a high volume, you know, for that room to function correctly and look right, you know.  You don't have a eight foot ceiling, you probably have a twelve foot ceiling.  For an office space on the other side of the corridor, you built a, you know, a four foot of volume that normally all you do is put an acoustical ceiling in and you're paying for a lot of perimeter wall that you really can't utilize.  So, my argument to the university that they bought was I said, if you will allow me to create this office complex, this office building, I can save you a tremendous amount of money plus, when it is time, if it's required to renovate, you're not going to renovate office space and turn it into lab space.  If you renovate, you're going to move partitions within the office space area, you know, so that maybe you can create another office or, or the department grows, you know, so this also makes a lot of sense. And they bought it.  There were a few other suggestions that I made.  The University of the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] is a commuter campus and individuals arrive before class or right after they go to work and need a place to study, you know, before going to class, or in between classes, so there was some areas at the end of one of the buildings that I could either turn a corner and not utilize the space or create little study halls at the ends and I created study halls with different furniture arrangement.  You know, some people liked to sit at desks and study, some people liked to sit in, you know, oversize chairs, other people would lie on the floor.  So, I created study halls that allowed for, you know, whatever kind of study environment you need.  It was the first design that I also executed thinking about the utilization of the computer and it was one of the first projects that we utilized a computer to do the construction documents for, okay, and it's one that, you know, I was still, at that time, building cardboard models to, you know, study things in three dimensions.
Speaker 2: Now that's not done anymore?
Speaker 1: Some people still do, I do it on the computer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean, I, I, sit down, I don't, I, one of the things that was in that portfolio that I brought up, you know, I started doing little tiny sketches and would never get any, go beyond small sketches and go straight from a small sketch and some notes to the computer and start building the design in three dimensions and in full color 'cause, again, you know, the quicker I got to three dimensions and in full color, you know, the quicker I could explain, adequately explain to a client, you know, even a client that could not read two dimensional drawings, could understand what I was generating on a computer.
Speaker 2: Now, can you give me the, the dates for those two buildings, the Houston [Charles Houston Community Center; Charles Houston Recreation Center, Alexandria, Virginia] building first and--
Speaker 1: Hm, the Houston building was done somewhere about '76 [1976], between '75 [1975] and '76 [1976].  The University of the District of Columbia was done about eighty- '87 [1987].
Speaker 2: Oh, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eighty-seven [1987], '88 [1988].
Story_ID: 440944
Speaker 1: Tell us about teaching at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  Now when did you start teaching at Howard?
Speaker 2: I started teaching, when did I start?  I started teaching at Howard in 19--1979, yeah, I started teaching part-time in 1979 and have the distinction of teaching more courses, more different courses than perhaps any other professor that has taught architecture at Howard University.  I taught design at three different levels from lower design to, lower, let's see, yeah, lower junior design to upper junior design to senior design.  I taught graphics for freshmen.  I taught architectural photography.  I taught architectural presentation.  I taught introduction of building construction.  I taught building construction.  I taught the utilization of the computer as a 3-D design tool.  I taught construction documents.  What else did I teach there?  That was enough.
Speaker 1: That's quite a range.
Speaker 2: That's quite a range over twenty-seven years.
Story_ID: 440945
Speaker 1: What are some of the, the highlights of your teaching experience?
Speaker 2: The kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The--you know, I recognized early on, somebody helped me to get to be where I am and the joy that, for me, was to help others get to the same place.  The, so those to me, those are the highlights.  I mean, one of the highlights today was to walk in here and see an old student.
Speaker 1: Yes, and she said--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as soon as--
Speaker 2: She started crying.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  She said that you saved her life.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  I mean, there, there, I mean there are individuals that I taught that if I saw them, I'd start crying.  There were things, let me, let me give you an example.  I had one young lady from Nigeria whose father was a high up official in the Nigerian government.  Her senior year, we--all architectural students have to do a design thesis.  In the middle of that process, her father died.  Now, the custom in Nigeria for a high-ranking official is that a funeral is a national event, generally takes a month to plan.  So she had to stay in this country almost an entire month, trying to continue to work while they prepared for her father's funeral.  She went home for the funeral, came back, I mean, it was, you know, like home, funeral, back on the plane.  One of the things that was a part of their ritual and ceremony is that the daughter of the deceased must shave your head.  Because she was going to an American university, her mother knew that, you know, no, you don't have to follow that tradition, okay, because you would have, it'd be too hard for you to explain why.  This young lady finished her thesis and gave a fantastic presentation.  She was around, she was in the same timeframe as Susan [ph.], and I used to give a party for, that's when I was teaching seniors, I'd give my students a party, and at that party, you know, I acknowledged the hard work and the profiles and courage that I saw that year.  (Makes sound) It still gets me.  I started crying.  I mean, I started talking about that kid, that's the kind of stuff that kept me at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] for twenty-seven years.  The, the young man who, from my first class at Howard, who I still hear from at least every two weeks, if not every other day, who has become like my little brother, I sold my parents' [Gladys Mines Mapily and William Mapily] house to him because of the relationship that we have.  The relationship that I had, I won't say with all students, but with enough to make teaching an addiction is the reason that I stayed there as long as I did and that's what brought the joy in my life: teaching. 'Cause it is a sacrifice.  I mean, you don't get paid a whole lot and many individuals teach the way they were taught and that, to me, is criminal because the world has changed.  So I spend a lot of time, you know, developing new teaching tools and methods and all and, and ways to motivate.
Story_ID: 440946
Speaker 1: What motivates today's students, do you think?  I mean, that's, that's different from the motivations of the past?
Speaker 2: (Makes sound) Some fabulous question and I wish I could give you a satisfactory answer.  The, here's, here's what I was encountering.  The educational system in the United States and the way it has been administered for, I would say, the past fifteen years, has done a total disservice to today's youth.  Most--no that's not a good statement--there are many individuals who now go into higher education and figure, I paid my fees, so I should get an A, without doing any work and the rude awakening for them is, no, young man or young lady, that's not how the game works.  I, I saw too many individuals who expected a special deal for them, especially males.  One of the things that, the only thing that I began to recognize is that the warrior class of young men, African American men, has disappeared from most environments.  The African American female is the one that is allowed to or is willing to excel. And it's been the rare African American male that I've seen in the past fifteen years that is willing to pay the price to succeed.  As a college professor, if someone is already bent in a certain direction, it is difficult, if not impossible, to change their perception of who they are and what they need to do to be successful and that was a dilemma that I was facing as I was leaving Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 440947
Speaker 1: We're in a, facing a different dilemma than we were years ago (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're facing, you're facing, we're facing a watered-down educational system.  We're, we're also, one of the other things that I began to understand was that you don't need to retain information anymore and many of them, you know, don't retain, okay, and you can understand why.  You know, if you stop and think back to 9/11 [September 11, 2001], how many times did you experience the plane going into that building in a twenty-four hour period?  Too much, right, okay.  All media, you know, all of the television, you know, Internet, you know, whatever, you know, kids recognized, I just need to go turn that on and I can, you know, I can get a snippet of information, just enough, but not in anything in depth.  So, you know, the, the, what I began to see and still see today is that individuals, you know, if it's not on the net, if I can't, you know, go to my cellphone and get the information you know, while I just sit here, you know.  I'm not going across the street or downstairs to the library which is sad but that's, that's what I've seen, I started seeing at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and I've I've seen it at other institutions.  They want you to hand it to 'em and everything is global now, so, you know, I used to tell my students, you either master these skills, you know, and become proficient, you know, or somebody in India or China or some place outside the United States, is willing to do the job that you are training for at one-tenth the price and be happy to do it and they can do it because they can use the Internet to transfer information.  You know, I said, if I had a large firm, or a large contract, you think I'd hire you?  No.  You know, I would, I would get one partner in Europe and another partner in China and in a twenty-four hour cycle, you know, I can ship that project from Europe to me here, to the partner in China who will then ship it to the partner in Europe and in the matter of a few days, we'll have the project finished.  So, you know, that was the only motivation that you could utilize, say, look, either you master these skills so that you are in control or somebody else will do your job and you just as well get a job, I hate to give, well I'll say it, I used to say, you just about go across the street and get a job at McDonald's and, you know, get out of my face 'cause you're wasting my time.  So I'm glad to be retired.
Story_ID: 440948
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I want to ask you like a philosophical question about architecture, I guess, but what is your, I guess, who--what architectural style, I guess, inspired you and what's your philosophy of architecture?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a good one.  Okay, the person who I initially followed is Frank Lloyd Wright, okay.  The, the beauty of the education that I received at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was that we were presented with all of the masters, you know, from Frank Lloyd Wright to Mies van der Rohe [Ludwig Mies van der Rohe], who was here in Chicago [Illinois], to Corbusier, you know, in France, to Alvar Aalto to, let's see, Paul- Philip Johnson, all of 'em, okay.  I came through school at a time where, we're talking about the explosion of modern architecture and we're actually talking about, perhaps, two different approaches to what architecture is about.  Frank Lloyd Wright, who's looking at it more organically and from the standpoint of designing with nature to Mies van der Rohe who I'm creating machines for people to live in, okay.  You know, I have a kit of parts, beams, glass, steel and no matter which you ask me to do, whether that's an office building, school, library or museum, is going to be steel and glass and it's going to be rectilinear and boxy.  Over here, we have somebody who's saying that I am going to design it based on function and in the environment and indigenous materials.  While I was in school, I left Wright, I went through Corbusier, I went to Mies, Philip Johnson, all of them.  For a while I dabbled in all of their styles, then recognized that I was more of an architect whose style was based on the environment.
Story_ID: 440949
Speaker 1: You know, went through Mies van der Rohe [Ludwig Mies van der Rohe], and then after getting out of school, you know, one of the things that became important to me was the notion of designing a building that fit within the urban fabric that blended within the urban fabric, that did not, you know, my ego did not require that I design something that, you know, if there are only redbrick buildings around to put one in there made out of white brick, okay.  So, you know, I, I, my style, you know, any building that you look at, there are no two buildings that I've designed in the same style, however, sensitivity to wind, light, the movement of people through a space, the element of surprise, you know, all of those components you will find in my buildings but, you know, you would have to ask who designed it.  It's not like a Mies building where if it's, you know, glass and steel and it's rectilinear, you can almost look at it and say, Mies van der Rohe did this, okay.  To a degree, you can look at a Frank Lloyd Wright building and say, you know, Frank Lloyd Wright must have done this.  You know, there, not everybody within my client base, you know, could live, or wanted to live, or work or be educated in a facility that looked like something designed by Frank Lloyd Wright or Mies van der Rohe and in many government contracts, you had an architectural review panel who, you know, had the responsibility for reviewing your design and if in fact they didn't like it, (laughter) for whatever reason, you would have to redesign the project at your own expense.  So, you know, here again, there's that issue between architecture as an art form and architecture as a business.
Story_ID: 440950
Speaker 1: Now, le- let me ask you about your art work.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now you picked that, that up now and dusted that off and now that's back out.  You do detail, very detailed art--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's not the only kind you do but you can--
Speaker 2: No, it's not the only kind I do.  I mean, the, the interesting part about the current series of paintings that I'm working on, that, that series started perhaps fifteen years ago.  I did a few paintings, and let me explain what they are.  At one point I got very fascinated by just rectilinear geometry and lines and color.  Can you create an abstract painting that conveys a mood, a sense of place or, or a theme only utilizing these line, rectilinear shape and color.  I did a few paintings and then I stopped and then I went towards realistic work and there was a period where I was concentrating on, on two kinds of art work, cute characters, almost cartoon-type individuals that you would see in 'Shrek' or any Disney [Walt Disney Studios] animated feature and then the other was African mask created using contemporary colors and African motifs and then I went through a period where it was very, very loose and abstract.  The painting, I did a painting in 2001 for a show at the Corcoran Gallery [Corcoran Gallery of Art], you know, in Washington, D.C. because [HistoryMaker] Leslie King-Hammond asked me, you know, "You want to be in this show?" And I said, "Okay, fine."  So she said, "I guess you better, you know, paint."  Well I did the first painting going back into this sort of grid style of painting and I've been painting like that ever since.  So now I'm, I'm back in the studio painting again.  The last series of paintings that I did were based on the music of Dexter Gordon, 'Around about Midnight' ['Round Midnight'].  I did a series of six paintings, they're all titled, 'Around about Midnight' [ph.] but the subtitle is a time, like "10:45" [ph.].  They go from "10:45" all the way up to "12:45" [ph.] or "11:45" [ph.], close to midnight, and it's an interpretative representation utilizing line, rectilinear shape and the punctuations of, between lines and, you know, I got an excellent review in, Baltimore Sun [The Baltimore Sun] paper about those paintings.  In addition to the paintings, I'm also doing sculpture and I'm also doing video and, as many as my fri- and jewelry, as many as my friends say, in a, in a day, I might be all over, you know, my studio and all over my house working on different things.  You can't paint all day.  You know, I can do architecture all day but a painting, you know, I have to let sometimes sit and as one of my friends tells me, it's got to speak to me and tell me where to go next.  So, you know, a return, I'm returning to an earlier part of me where I'm devoting more and more of my time to painting.  I've always, you know, painted from the time I was in elementary school.  So, you know, I'm just spending more time doing that now and having a ball.
Story_ID: 440951
Speaker 1: Tell us some--what about some of your collaborations with [HistoryMaker] Leslie King-Hammond.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh there is a--well let me start out by saying, there aren't many artists, I've discovered, have the nerve to even try collaborating with another artist.  You know, the architectural profession is one of collaboration even when, you know, I was designing, you know, chief designer, I've had other individuals that I have to collaborate with, engineers, landscape architects, interior designers, you know, just people in the office, so I'm used to collaboration but collaborating on art is difficult.  It's difficult, first, the person that you're collaborating with has to think very much like you do on some things and you have to have a level of trust, that trust as if your life depended on it.  If you can reach that level of trust with the person you're collaborating with, then you can have a working relationship.  If you don't, you can't.  Leslie, when I met Leslie, which was just prior to 9/11 [September 11, 2001], she asked me questions about African architecture and I told her I had a book that I would let her read.  9/11 hit on a Tuesday, that Wednesday, I went to class and I knew I did not want to go home and watch that plane go into that building one more time.  So, I took the book over to Leslie and she tells me, "Well, look, I can't talk to you much 'cause I have an installation that I need to do," and I said, "Tell me about it." And she said, "I'll get the drawing and show you."  I said, "No, I don't want to see a drawing, you know, you just tell me about it."  Now, at that point, I've gone back into my architectural professor mode to tell somebody, tell me what you're going to do before you execute it and that's the way I taught.  I didn't realize that artists do things differently.  They execute, then they'll tell you about it, okay.  Well, she told me about her design, the next morning I woke up and called her and said, "I have had some thoughts about your design and there's one component that you are about to execute that I think is inconsistent with the concept."  Well, if you ask Leslie, she will tell you, she held the phone away like this and said, "Who the heck is this, you know, got the nerve to tell me what to do about my design before I execute it." Okay, and then I came up, you know, and I gave an alternative and then I said, "There's one component that you really haven't taken a good look at and that's the ceiling piece," and she said, again, she held the phone away.  Well, she took the advice and executed the piece and when I saw it that Friday night, I said to her, "This is going to get you national press." And it did.
Story_ID: 440952
Speaker 1: When Leslie [HistoryMaker Leslie King-Hammond] and I were judging a NAACP ACT-SO [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People Afro-Academic, Cultural, Technological and Scientific Olympics] competition in Miami [Florida], we went to visit one of her friends who is, owns a gallery [Bernice Steinbaum Gallery] in Miami and she said, "I'm having a show next year," she looked across the table and said, "Would you two like to be in the show on a collaborative piece?"  I said, "What's the show about?"  And she said, "It's called, 'It's For The Birds'" and I looked, I said, "Okay."  She says, "I'm having architects, artists and designers, you know, come up with a birdhouse."  Okay.  Well I knew where Bernice [Bernice Steinbaum] wanted us to head.  She wanted me to come up with an avant-garde looking birdhouse and I decided I wanted to do something with a sense of humor.  So, before we got back to the hotel, when we got back to the hotel, I said, "Leslie, I got the name of the piece," and she looked at me like, I haven't had a chance to have an input yet and you have a concept.  I said, "Yes."  She said, "What's the concept?"  And I said, "It's called, 'The Magic Birdhouse' [ph.]."  "Okay, what's it about?"  And I said, "It's going to pay homage to Magic Johnson and Larry Bird." And I described, you know, this concept, she bought into it.  Leslie ended up doing the, the basketball court that went inside of this plexiglass birdhouse.  It was done in sequins and beads with the first half of the court in the colors of the Lakers [Los Angeles Lakers] with a, a top hat and a cane to symbolize Magic Johnson and the other half of the court, in the colors of, of the Celtics [Boston Celtics] with a white hat and bird, white bird, for Larry Bird.  We did the piece, shipped it to Miami, I took a couple of photographs and then the next week we were in Naples, Florida and I happened to show the photograph of the birdhouse to [HistoryMaker] Jonathan Green and he said, "How much for the birdhouse?"  "What'd you mean, how much for the birdhouse?"  "I want the birdhouse."  I said, "Well the birdhouse is supposed to be in a show that opens, you know, next month."  "Don't care, I want the birdhouse."  Now we had to call the dealer and, and, you know, establish a price for the house.  That house toured for three years.  Now, one of the people that saw the Magic Birdhouse was Lowery Sims [Lowery Stokes Sims] who, up until recently, was the director, then president, of the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York].  She was asked to be a co-curator for the New-York Historical Society [New York, New York] show and Lowery asked Leslie and I, "Look, you guys want to be in this show?" okay, well, you know, I already started looking at other house-type structures.  In fact, I have a whole file.  There's 'The Magic Birdhouse,' the, the birdhouse for Charlie Parker that I have a design for and then there's some, there was some praise houses that I began to sketch.  Initially, Leslie and I were going to do just a praise house for the show at the New-York Historical Society until we discovered this information about Seneca Village [New York, New York] and then it was how do you combine Seneca Village with this praise house and I ended up getting a Xerox copy of the only map that there was of Seneca Village, scanned it, brought it into my computer and then, you know, under close, you know, examination, I could begin to understand the logic of this drawing so that I could represent the ground and the farms and all of the things that were part of it and then I came up with a sketch about how to do the base and where the praise house was going to be and why and that was a collaboration for the Seneca Village, the praise house for Seneca Village, okay.
Story_ID: 440953
Speaker 1: In addition to that, you know, Leslie [HistoryMaker Leslie King-Hammond] and I started a jewelry business four years ago.  The fascinating part is that, you know, I never thought I would be designing, you know, jewelry for ladies until we went to Venice [Italy] and I saw the Venetian pearls and saw ladies over there with just white t-shirts on, jeans, sandals and these, you know, beautiful necklaces and earrings.  Leslie took me to a show to buy some, some gems for herself.  I got in there, I got fascinated with the turquoise and the amber and the agate and the colors and all and started thinking about combinations.  Hence, I'm the one that does the necklaces, Leslie does the earrings, okay.  So, there, again, is a collaboration.  Our collaborations have extended even as far as cooking (laughter) because, you know, I've given up my kitchen to Leslie, however, I'm the one outside on the Weber grill or, or the smokers and there are meals where she prepares one thing and I'm preparing stuff outside and, in fact, there's a group called, the Creative Alliance over in Baltimore [Maryland].  We did a benefit where we both cooked two years ago.  Last year they said, "Will you guys do it again?"  I said, "No, I don't, you know, it's too darn much work," but we've agreed to do it, you know, this coming year but I don't have to clean up my, my space 'cause we're going to use somebody else's loft.  So, you know, there's collaboration there.  When she writes, I'm the first person to hear it.  When I paint, she's the first person to see it.  It has become so engrained in how we both operate that I don't think we are the, either one of us thinks about it anymore but it's, it's one where the only way I know it works is it, you know, both individuals have to leave their egos at the door and be sensitive enough to, communication styles and passions that the other person has to allow, you know, them to, you know, fully present and explain what it is that they're thinking about and trying to accomplish.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, okay.
Speaker 2: All right.  Now that's, that's interesting.  So, a lot of people can't collaborate (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, they can't.
Speaker 2: A lot of talented people can't, really.
Speaker 1: No, they, they really, they really, really can't.  I mean, they're in, in the course of me being a designer.  There are only, there's only John [John Carter], Carl [ph.], Hector [ph.], Jim [ph.], Larry [Lawrence Turner]. There are five people.  If five individuals that I worked with that collaborating on architectural projects was easy, the rest of 'em, it was painful.
Story_ID: 440954
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this question.
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We, we always ask this.  What is some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: (Whistles) Education, education, education (laughter).  I mean, it, it, without it, I wouldn't be sitting here today.  You know, without it, I wouldn't have had the career that I've had.  I wouldn't have been able to provide for my son [Etiene Mapily].  The other thing that I- I'm very concerned about, there aren't enough individuals in the community who have been exposed to an entrepreneurial spirit, you know.  We've been taught to be nine-to-fivers and there are very few risk takers.  I know why, you know, you know, historically, I know why, you know, but I'm hoping that will change.
Story_ID: 440955
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any th- major thing that you would do differently in life?
Speaker 2: No, no, there, there, there were times in my life I would say, yes, but now, you know, it takes getting old to get wisdom and, no, there aren't any things that, I mean, everything that I've done has made me who I am today, good and bad.  So, you know, why would I want to take away any part of who I am, you know, and alter it?  It's not going to, it wouldn't mean, I wouldn't be me.  So, you know, there, there are things, you know, I wish there was less discrimination in the world.  I mean, I wish that, you know, yeah, sometimes I wish I had the opportunity to do a skyscraper, you know, but I've had a lot of opportunities.  I mean, like I said, there aren't many architects, black or white, who finish architectural school, who have the opportunity to work on designing buildings and especially multimillion dollar buildings and I consider I've been truly blessed to have had those kind of opportunities.
Story_ID: 440956
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look at everything you've done to this point, what, what today, as we sit here, do you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: (Makes sound) There's not just one because there's a part of me, because I, you know, I, I did--I taught architecture and I also practiced, you know, designing buildings and all, there's a part of me, there's a legacy as a designer and an architect, there's a, there's a legacy as an educator and there's a legacy as an artist, you know, I can't separate any of those because they all are part of who I am and each one influenced the other.  The art influenced my architecture.  My architecture influences my art.  My practice influenced the way I taught.  My teaching helped me to be a better presenter when it came to communicating with individuals who really didn't understand architecture but they needed, you know, someone to understand their physical need issues, their budgetary constraints and to come up with a built form that satisfied all their needs.  So, you know, there, there, there are a minimum three people residing (laughter) in this one body, okay, plus being a parent.
Story_ID: 440957
Speaker 1: Tell us about, now, now your son, now, I g- you have just one son?
Speaker 2: I have one son [Etiene Mapily].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was a single male parent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was, it was fascinating for me 'cause I never even thought about the issue of being a single male parent.  I just knew that my son would be better off, you know, with me than he was with my ex-wife and so I worked two jobs to make sure that he got the education he needed and the opportunities that I thought were important to him. And he's done well.  He went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], got a degree in robotics, you know, in the engineering school and unlike me, he had numerous offers when he finished college and for one period of time, he spent eighteen months with one firm and when he got tired of them, you know, he would just submit his resume to a headhunter and then in (laughter) less than two weeks, he had another job.  So, yeah, he's married.  He married a young lady who also has a degree in robotics and I have two wonderful grandsons, the oldest one who's already declared he's an artist (laughter) and gets up every day drawing.  So, you know, perhaps the legacy will continue through him.
Story_ID: 440958
Speaker 1: What I was saying that, you know, the way that architecture is changing now, you know, a lot of the large, you know, international firms, the ones that even the small firms are competing with, they are, the term would be jobbing.  They are jobbing, you know, architecture out to other countries.  You know, there, there was an article in Architectural Record, maybe about six years ago, and I know the principal of this firm, it's a large firm out of, in Princeton, New Jersey.  He wrote, you know, he was quoted in the article saying it would cost his, cost him a hundred and forty-some thousand dollars to produce what we call, construction documents, for this building, in-house.  He flew to India and got some, some firm over there to do the work for thirty-five thousand dollars.  Now even if you have to spend an additional thirty-five thousand dollars of, for your staff here to review that, that's four- that's seventy thousand dollars, that's still less than half of what it would cost him to have the same work done in-house, here in the United States and there are more firms utilizing, you know, high speed Internet connections who have work being done outside of the United States or, if it's done inside the United States, it's done in areas where you're not paying as much overhead, you know, or you don't have to pay individuals as much money.  So one of the problems that I'm seeing is that young architectural students coming out of school are no longer getting the kind of on-the-job training that they need to first pass the Architect's Registration Exam [Architect Registration Exam] or have the kind of experience they need to establish their own firms. And, and, you know, it's not just architecture.  I mean, you look at the accounting firms now.  They ship things out, you know, to India at night and it's back in the morning.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's an interesting concept and, well, yeah.
Speaker 1: It's a false concept.  It's really, it's really a situation where we, as a country, are losing a lot of our intelligent young individuals 'cause they can't afford--they can't get jobs in, in the professions like architecture.
Speaker 2: This is retarding the development of homegrown talent.
Speaker 1: Yes indeed. And if you look at any of the, you look at many of the architectural magazines now, you don't see work from the United States.  Architectural Record, this month, record homes, historically you would see homes designed by, you know, American architects in that magazine, that particular issue.  You know, the top residential architects in this country would always be in there.  This year, I think there's one house from Chile, one from Australia, one from Japan, there's all, I think there was only one from the United States, you know, and, and that's sad, that's real sad.
Story_ID: 440959
Speaker 1: Now is there anything that we have not asked that we need to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Shoot, give me your last question (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, well the last question is similar to legacy but a little different.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Makes sound) Somebody who tried to make the world better, that's, I think, all that we can be judged for, you know, nothing else really matters.
Story_ID: 440960
Speaker 1: That's the, one of the first baby pictures of me, taken by a classmate of my parents, who was a professional photographer and I look in the picture just like my youngest grandson.
Speaker 2: That's my father's [William Mapily] father, my grandfather, Julian Mapily, who came from the Philippine islands, and a man of few words.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, can you tell us about this one?
Speaker 2: Okay, that's, that's my father's, you know, mother, my grandmother [Elnora Burns Mapily], who I never knew--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next one.
Speaker 2: --graduated from college.
Speaker 1: That's your mother's mother [Mabel Mines]?
Speaker 2: That's my mother's mother, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's Herman Mines, my grandfather, whose favorite expression was: "Give out a hotdog, get back a ham," (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's Carrie Mines.  That's my great-grandmother, a little teeny woman, barely five foot two, smoked a corncob pipe who was great with a .22 rifle (laughter).
Speaker 1: --And me, looks like a year old or so but I know the area, that's LeDroit Park in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, I'm sorry, once again.
Speaker 1: That's, that's me in elementary school, probably first or second grade.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, now.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's my great-grandmother, grandfather, my mother [Gladys Mines Mapily] and myself in Goshen, New York.  You know, the car behind it is a Model T [Ford Model T] that I wanted when my grandfather died but my great-grandmother sold it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, 'kay, ready.
Speaker 1: Ready?  That's a photograph of confirmation at Chapel of the Atonement [Episcopal Church of the Atonement, Washington, D.C.], an Episcopal church, you know, with my parents.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.  All right.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's four Eagle Scouts.  Those are my original training partners, Floyd Grayson to the left, Brian Edwards [ph.] and Danny Nash [ph.].  Floyd Grayson ended up going to the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland], Brian Edwards retired from the [U.S.] Army Reserves as a colonel and Danny Nash is a doctor and I'm the architect.
Speaker 2: --Albums with any of those, you know.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Just let me know and I scan it and send you, I can either use my digital camera and photograph 'em and, you know, send them via e-mail.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, just let me know.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead and tell us about this one.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's, that's, I'm finishing high school [Joel Elias Spingarn Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] and one of the things that my parents and I did, we traveled a lot.  This is up in Bear Mountain, New York [Bear Mountain State Park, New York].  The guy to my left, shorter than me, is my lifelong buddy, Andre [ph.] and rather than just take me on trips, 'cause I'd get bored, they always took my buddy, Andre with me.  So, you know, that's one of the, one of the trips we took to Bear Mountain, New York on our way to go see my grandfather and great-grandmother in Goshen, New York.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: --Photograph of me with my ex-wife, probably about the time that, no, no, this is prior to me going to graduate school, just prior to me going to graduate school.  I can tell by looking at the clothing (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: That's my son, Etiene [Etiene Mapily], at my graduation when I got my master's degree from Howard [Howard University School of Architecture and City Planning; Howard University College of Engineering, Architecture and Computer Sciences, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: Ready?  That's a picture of me in my office at Bryant and Bryant [Bryant and Bryant Architects and Planners, Inc.; Bryant Mitchell, PLLC] when I was a chief designer and associate working on the layout for an office building.
Speaker 1: --Photograph, interesting thing about this photograph, you can barely see, but there's a black bag on, on a chair that, that would be all of my stuff for school. (Laughter) So, I would come in, sit down and work 'til the alarm in my watch went off and then grab that bag and run out the door to find something to eat for lunch and before I went to class to teach.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Picture of my, my parents, taken by the same photographer who took my baby picture when I was eighteen months old.  An interesting thing, when, when Dandridge [ph.] remarried, maybe fifteen years ago, I was the one taking pictures at his wedding.  So, you know, I was able to tur- return the favor.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me with my parents, probably around '97 [1997] and the only reason I can tell you that is by that, the sweatshirt.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: Ready?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Picture of my son and his wife, Carolyn [Carolyn Davis Mapily], the day that they got married in Tampa, Florida.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: Okay, the two people at the left are myself and [HistoryMaker] Leslie King-Hammond, the gentleman in the back is Floyd Coleman who teaches art at Howard University, the young lady, I can't remember her name, but that was a photograph taken at a lecture given by [HistoryMaker] Sam Gilliam at the Corcoran [Corcoran Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready?
Speaker 1: Yup.  Family photograph taken Easter weekend, two, almost three years ago and the reason it was taken 'cause we knew my father's heart was failing and wanted to have, you know, a family photograph so, you know, the lady that's leaning over the two, two boys, is my ex-wife, the guy behind my mother is my son, his wife, Leslie and myself.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  All right, ready.
Speaker 1: One of the most current photographs taken just before Halloween this year at my son's house, you know, my oldest grandson wanted a pumpkin.  He drew the picture on the pumpkin and I had to carve out the pumpkin.  So, Leslie took the photograph of me carving the pumpkin.
