Story_ID: 25327
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you spell--give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is James McLurkin, and the last name is spelled, M-C-capital L-U-R-K-I-N.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Four, 16, '72' [1972] [April 16, 1972].  I was born at the Long Island Jewish Medical Center in Queens, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm an assistant professor of computer science at Rice University.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: I think it's February 4th, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Room 1003, in Dunkin Hall, Houston, Texas, Rice University.
Story_ID: 25328
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we got into depth, there are five, lightweight questions we always ask as a warm up.  And they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I do.  So my favorite food--you know, it's a toss-up between burritos and pizza.  I'm gonna go with pizza, pizza.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Somewhere where I can scuba dive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Caribbean somewhere.
Speaker 1: The last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "Get it done" is good, "Make it happen", is my under grad's advisor's favorite saying.  I use that often.  My students and my wife, I'm sure, you know, "efficient", just that, just the phrase, "efficient".
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause it means something is great, "efficient".  It's fantastic.
Story_ID: 25329
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --your mother's side and father's side separately.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sandra Charlesia Lawson.  Oh, dear, you're gonna get me on tape misspelling my mother's name, S-A-N-D-R-A, C-H-A-R-L-E-S-I-A, I think--sorry, mom.  Lawson, L-A-W-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 23, 1944.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: Gosh, so she was the daughter of an Army, Army Air Corp, a Tuskegee airman, and they moved a lot.  I dare say she was born in Puerto Rico.  And that could have been my aunt who was born in Puerto Rico.  That's a question that we can, we can get an answer to that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I don't, I don't have it off the top of my head.  But, but she grew up most of her life in Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So after, after the War [World War II], their family settled there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing in history?
Speaker 2: Well, so you've got, now--man, this is no good.  So, I should have had a conversation with her before I got here.  So my mother's, my mother's mother, my grandmother, my maternal grandmother was a school teacher and college educated, and she taught for many years in Ohio.  My grandfather, my maternal grandfather was a Tuskegee Airman, Walter Lawson.  And he, well, he was in the Military until his death.  I know that my great grandmother, her husband I'm pretty sure was a doctor as well.  So I do know for a fact that I'm a fourth generation college-educated African American, which is not all that common.  So that--and that was something that I heard, you know, all growing up.  There's no issue, no doubt whether or not I'm going to college.  It's a function of what college I'm going to.
Speaker 1: Okay, how back can you take--how far back can you take your family?
Speaker 2: In my personal memory, I can't go, I can't go further back than four generations on my mother's side.  My uncle put together a glorious history of the family that he, and he went back, with original documents and state documents, he went back many, many years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What's your spot after this?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Where are you going after this?
Speaker 1: You mean--
Speaker 2: You and your crew?
Speaker 1: We're going, well, we'll be here in Houston.  We're going, you know, that's all.
Speaker 2: Do you have appointments in the day after this?
Speaker 1: No, I don't.
Speaker 2: Alright.  So, I wanna see if I can engineer a way to get that history book.
Speaker 1: Oh, that would be alright.  But I'm just--in terms of this conversation, just tell us what you know.  It's not that crucial that--I mean that's another document that can be provided later or something.  But this is, you have this long legacy of college life.  And I suppose, does it start like after the Civil War, you know, Reconstruction?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't wanna--
Speaker 1: It seems like it would.
Speaker 2: --my memory--
Speaker 1: So your grandfathers went to college?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Your, I guess your great grandfather went to college too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, both my, great grandfather for sure.
Speaker 1: And great, great.
Speaker 2: I don't know about great, great.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, your great grandfather.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) great, great.
Story_ID: 25330
Speaker 1: So the first one, the first college that you know of, what college did they go to?  Would this be your great grandfather?  And, you know, like--
Speaker 2: I wanna say--so my grandmother hails from, my great grandmother hails from Texas, East Texas, in fact.  And I wanna say he went, my great grandfather on my mother's side, went to school, I wanna say Fisk [University].  It could have been Tuskegee [University].  But it was obviously an HBCU [Historically Black College or University].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we're going back to the--you know, she was born in '44' [1944], I mean we're going back to the, near the turn of the century for this kind of--
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: --this kind of stuff.  And I--
Speaker 1: Yeah, if you're the fourth generation, it may have gone back to the 19th Century.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, I mean that's a legacy.  I mean it'd be good to write it down or something, but that's (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, my uncle, like I said, I'm feeling, there's a loss because I'd love to be able to hold up his book that he spent, he spent--after my grandmother's death, he went back, spent about two years, pulling together all the documents he could about the family.  He made this, this--I can't even describe how gorgeous of a volume it is.  It's a stunningly beautiful volume he made of all our family's history and tracing it back through generations.  In particular, it was difficult for him to get hold of a lot of these documents.  They're not digital.  He had to get to places.  He had to travel to get these documents and put it together.
Speaker 1: What's your uncle's name?
Speaker 2: Walter Lawson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Walter Lawson, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he put together a family--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and as I said, to say it is gorgeous, is an understatement.  He included, I don't know how many plates of photos that he had.  In fact, he made, he made a separate photo volume that's about maybe forty pages of just the pictures.  And then all the documents, the deeds, the property, the degrees, the birth, if he could find them.
Speaker 1: So your mother's side of the family, you think has an origin in Texas, I mean as far back as you can go anyway?
Speaker 2: As far back as I can go right now in my head, yes--
Speaker 1: Right now, it's probably Texas.
Speaker 2: --we go back to Texas.  I think, I forget the name of the city.  Now, I do remember coming out for a funeral.  I was maybe ten, and it was August, Texas, August, and it was, it was a whole nother thing, coming from New York, coming out here to Texas in the summer.  It's very special.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, where did your mother go to college?
Speaker 2: My mother went to Hampton University.
Speaker 1: Okay, to Hampton.  Okay--
Speaker 2: And back then I think it was, it wasn't a university.  I think it was Hampton--
Speaker 1: Institute, yeah.
Speaker 2: --Hampton Institute.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories from your mother's side of the family about end of slavery, Reconstruction and any of that, you know, that are passed down?
Speaker 2: Not that I can remember.
Story_ID: 25331
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The, I'm trying to be sure to keep the stories separate.  On my father's side, there's a bunch of doctors on that side too.  And they talked about the, you know, the segregation, and they had to be traveling itinerate doctors 'cause there were no hospitals, no facilities that they could use.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there are doctors on both sides of the family?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you've got doctors on your mother's side and on--and these are general practitioners, basically or--
Speaker 2: To my knowledge, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, okay, and it goes back like four generation, you say, or three, at least three generations, right?  You would be the fourth?
Speaker 2: On my--I'm the fourth.  On my mother's side, I'm definitely the fourth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And before that, yeah, I just don't know--the pictures I've seen are of, the pictures I remember are of country folk, the farmers and people on porches and looking very, very turn-of-the-century in terms of the construction and the attire.  And I dare say, I dare say they were free five generations ago.  So, not my grand, my great grandparents, but my great, greats.  And I wanna say owned property.  I have pictures, I've seen pictures of them on houses and areas where they're not, you know, there wouldn't be that kind of photograph of record if it wasn't, if they weren't living there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So that, so that would have been--gosh, we're going right to the end of the Civil War now.
Speaker 1: Right, right, 'cause the first black colleges weren't really established till 18--late 1850s just before the Civil War, and very few black folks attended them.  And it wasn't until after the Civil War that you really started seeing the influx of, you know, black people going to college and graduating and then a culture of black college life, you know, in the late, you know, 1800s.  So that's probably, and if you had ancestors that became doctors, and probably, they either had to go to Howard [University] or Meharry [College] pretty much.
Speaker 2: Meharry.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Meharry, okay.  So Meharry Medical College in Nashville.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: That's where we're talking about.  Okay, went to Meharry and became doctors.  Did they practice on your mother's side back in Texas here?
Speaker 2: I don't know where he practiced.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know where he practiced.  I know my grand, I know my great grandmother lived here, you know.  She died when I was ten, so all of my life, she was in Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We only visited, yeah, we only visited at her funeral to my knowledge, in fact.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So your mother was--was she raised, she was--your mother's mother was a Military wife, you say?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, and a school teacher too?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 25332
Speaker 1: And your grandfather was one of the Tuskegee Airmen?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Alright, so this is Walter Lawson?
Speaker 2: Walter Lawson.  He flew in the 99th and then the rest he flew the 332nd in Africa.
Speaker 1: Did he have any stories he shared with the family about--
Speaker 2: The one that I know the best was how he got his call sign, "Ghost".  So he was training, and two-seater, I think an AT-6, two seater, Texan.  And I think the way the story goes, he flew under a bridge, and caught a guard wire or something on the way out, crashed the plane.  And his, his co-pilot or pilot or passenger, the other person in the plane was killed, and he was dazed and wandered around for a while.  So they found the plane.  They found one body, couldn't find another body.  They assumed that he was dead.  And in actuality, he was just dazed and wandering around Tuskegee, Alabama.  He came to his senses, came, worked his way back to base and got the call sign after that, "Ghost".  He's also about my complexion which wouldn't, wouldn't hurt for the call sign "Ghost".
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So he flew in Italy with the 99th and all that (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't have a good memory of all of his, of his tour.  But I know he didn't fly in Europe.  He was North Africa.  Now, I'm pretty sure he did not fly in Italy.  I pretty sure he was, he was in Africa.  He was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in the early, in the early classes, before they went over to Europe.  He rotated out, I'm pretty sure it became the 332nd before he left.  But he was one of the original 99th.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, so your mother was born, I mean when your father was in the service, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And this was in '44' [1944] before the end of the War?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And so the family settles in Columbus, Ohio, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 25333
Speaker 1: And what did your grandparents do for a living in Columbus?
Speaker 2: So my grandfather died on the way back from Korea.  So he was in, yeah, he got through World War II.  He was in Korea.  He was in radio, some kind of radio unit. And the transport crashed on the way back.  And I wanna say that was '54' [1954], but I may have that wrong.
Speaker 1: That's probably before '54' [1954].  That would be like, I think we were out of Korea in '52' [1952].  So--
Speaker 2: It was about then.  So my mother was old enough to remember it.  But my uncle, now, which is the baby, he's eight--he was, they're about eight years distant.  Anyway, my mom and aunt are three years and my mom and uncle are seven and change.  So, so then she's a school teacher and she's got three children to raise.  This is my grandmother.  And she never remarried.  And, you know, just strong, smart, you know, she was, she was very sweet and very loving.  But you did not, you did not cross her.  She was a, she could get--she had steel in her spine.
Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Cleo, Cleo Larue Lawson.  And we have a great picture of my grandfather next to his, his P-40, and he named it Cleo Larue.  So it's written on the side.  I think that's my favorite picture that my uncle, when he went to find it, he found it.  We also have another one with her pinning his captain bars on his, or his two lieutenant bars, lieutenants bars.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he retired--he died as a captain.  He was a lieutenant during the War, I'm pretty sure.
Story_ID: 25334
Speaker 1: Okay, so your grandmother taught in Columbus [Ohio], and your mother was raised there.  Did your mother talk about growing up in Columbus or what it was like?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a little bit.  You know, it was Midwestern, right, so the values of, of home and family and hard-work ethics and be honest and do the right thing and you pick something up in the store, you put it back on the shelf where you got it.  You don't leave it somewhere else.  And, so those Midwestern sensibilities, they're all steeped in that.  There were, they lived in the section of town that's now, from what my uncle says--he went down there recently, it's now very, very rough.  But when they were coming up, it was the, you know, baby boom, post-War place where blacks could live in Ohio.  So it was, but it was a--she describes it as a nice neighborhood and kids playing.  It was not, it was not a--there wasn't a lot of crime.  But there were rules about what you could and could not do.  I mean segregation was real.  Jim Crow was real, and how you acted in public mattered, and what you did and what you said and she--I don't remember much about her high school.  I don't remember her telling much about her high school experiences.
Speaker 1: I'm thinking she might have lived in East Columbus and gone to Columbus East.  I don't know, I mean that seems to be like the big one during those days.  But I don't know.  It doesn't sound like--
Speaker 2: I have to give her a call.  That doesn't ring a bell.  And to my knowledge, I don't remember her talking about it.  I get the notion that the school was mixed, the school was integrated.  And, but when she talks about traveling, in the car--and that even lingered to when I was growing up, how she would approach and think about road trips, like, you know, you cannot stop.  You cannot, there is a guidebook, I think, that they could figure out where they could stop and be safe.  And, but they would drive the long distances.  They couldn't use the bathrooms, depending on where they're going.  I guess, I'm--I'm guessing down South to visit her grandmother or other family members who were down there.  And so I remember some of those stories.  Gosh, I should sit down and talk to her about high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the book you're talking about is what they called the "Green Book".
Speaker 2: "Green Book", yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that black people used to navigate their way through the highway system.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah,  I remember when I was driving across country, and we're going only back to 1990--well, when would I have been driving to Los Angeles, to California, '99' [1999].  And we stopped somewhere in West Virginia.  And it was, it was right out of a movie.  There was a guy sitting there with overalls and spittin' and no shirt.  And then another guy, a fat, a large guy, and then a skinny guy.  And we had to get gas.  We're in the mountains, and then we were on "E", and the car is not gonna, not gonna make it over the next mountain.  And that was the only time I put gas in my car with the engine running.  So my girlfriend at the time, she was in the driver's seat.  I was like keep the engine running, keep the doors locked.  I mean it looked real sketchy, and they're just staring through us as we put gas in the car.  So, and that was 1999.  This stuff, it's still very real.
Speaker 1: It was rougher when she was coming along.
Speaker 2: I would imagine.  I mean you wouldn't have gotten a chance to put gas in the car.  It'd been all over when stopped, I would imagine.
Story_ID: 25335
Speaker 1: But, so, but your mother, now, what was she interested in when she was growing up?  Did she have a career that she wanted to, you know, I mean was it something that she wanted to do that she didn't get a chance to do?  Or did she get a chance to do everything she wanted to?
Speaker 2: She regrets, somewhat, although I think she's at peace with it, not going to the medical profession.  She would have been a fantastic doctor.  And she--now, what put her to speech?  Oh, (laughter) so she's largely allergic to math and science.  So her medical career didn't get past the introductory classes in math and Algebra and Trigonometry and pre-Calc and all that stuff.  (Unclear) Some actually, she's a little better with, but the analytical, mathematical, logical stuff is a pill for her.  That being said, her intellect and recall and encyclopedic, you know, you don't wanna play "Jeopardy" against this woman.  She actually, she watches and she plays all the time.  And so that she's formidable.  And it wasn't until, it wasn't until I was much older, until I was in my 30s that I really appreciated how smart she is and how many things she has done and how, you know, being--again, she's a single mother too.  So her and my father divorced when I was four.  So it, you know, a chain of single mothers.  And the resources and the energy she had to bring to bear to make that happen.  And my grandmother with, you know, three children, it's--they were doing something.  She was, my mom tells the story, she was, she had some kind of Buick, and this was, must have been in the '50s' [1950s] 'cause they were, all of three of them were in the car.  And they were going to--name a store in Ohio in the '50s' [1950s], I don't know.  And she had to get this car into some kind of spot in front of the store.  Now, so the way my mom describes it, she was, my grandmother was parking this car, wheeling this big--this is not a small car, with three kids in it, around to get into the spot, got it in there, came out, and this man, white man had been watching her.  And he's like, you know, you drive that pretty well.  And through three kids following behind her, and my grandmother snapped sort of at him, and was like--oh, I forget the punch line.  You tell a story and forget the punch line.
Speaker 1: Anyway, we'll get to it.
Speaker 2: It was something about, of course, you drive it well, I had to drive two or something.  The punch line was that, she was quick, and if you--she was quick with her retort if she was in the mind to do so.  But the reality is that, you know, she had to make it happen with these kids.  So she made it happen.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so your mother went on to become a speech therapist, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, 'cause she finished Hampton [University] in--now, at the appropriate age.  She was one year ahead.  You know, she skipped a grade when she was maybe third grade.  She skipped third and fourth grade.  So she was chronologically one year younger than her class.  So--
Speaker 1: So, that would have been, let's see--
Speaker 2: You have to do the math on that, yeah.
Speaker 1: So she would have finished Hampton in, she graduated from high school, let's see eighteen, okay.
Speaker 2: Forty-four, plus eighteen is--
Speaker 1: She would have come out in '62' [1962] from high school, right?
Speaker 2: That sounds about right.
Speaker 1: Then college in say '66' [1966], does that sound pretty good?
Speaker 2: It sounds possible, right.  Nineteen forty-four, eighteen, minus one, and then four years of college.  It would have been '65' [1965] for her.
Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965], okay.  Alright.
Speaker 2: And then that means dad would have been, he would have been a few years ahead of her.
Story_ID: 25336
Speaker 1: So can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he would have been '63' [1963].  Um, dad, James, well, I guess I should have given my full name when you asked me the first time.  So, my full name is James Dwight McLurkin IV.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And dad's full name was James Dwight McLurkin III.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 9th, 1941, and he was born in Chester, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, Chester, South Carolina.  Now, is there a story behind the name, James Dwight McLurkin?
Speaker 2: There is, actually a few.  So you can trace that back to James Dwight McLurkin the first, and then, in fact, when--the first time I got some national media exposure, we got contacted by the relatives of the other McLurkin's, the slave-owner McLurkin's, who had settled in Nashville and other areas in the South.  And there are some still in the Carolina's.  And they were having, apparently at the time--oh, this was in ninety--this is '95' [1995].  So these discussions were above my pay grade at the time.  I deferred them to my aunt.  But they were having a reunion in Ireland, and they invite us all to come out to Ireland for their, you know, McLurkin's of the Clan McLurkin.  And we thought that was a little--we thought that was very sweet.  They sent us a picture, a family photo of them all in, yeah, in Nashville.  And it was, it was surreal almost to be reached out to by, by the descendants of the slave owners so many years ago.  I don't think I still have that information.  I remember having the photo.  It may be buried in my, in my stuff, but it was--that was very interesting.
Speaker 1: Now, did they realize that they were inviting--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --the black McLurkin's?
Speaker 2: My picture was like, 'cause my aunt was like, well, do they know that we're black?  I'm like, well, they know it's my photo in the magazines.  It's in 'Black Enterprise.'  It was in 'Ebony' [magazine].  I mean this is not, it's not that secret.
Speaker 1: No, I guess not, and I guess they probably know better than we do (laughter) to tell the truth.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, so the dropping of the second "C" makes the name so unique.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, I'm sorry, so what did you ask me?  You asked me something?
Speaker 1: No, I was just asking you about the origin of the name, and we were--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, it is, apparently, it is Irish, not Scottish, even though it does sound and read Scottish.  So the ancestry are, from what I understand, two brothers from Ireland came over here--I don't know the years and bought some land, bought up some slaves.  One settled in Tennessee, one settled in South Carolina, and started trying to have a farm, trying to be agricultural entrepreneurs.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And to hear my grandfather talk about it, you know, I'm son of a sharecropper, born in Chester, South Carolina.  So my great grand, on my father's side was a sharecropper, I guess after, at some point in time, you know, after the war ended, after the Civil War, they became sharecroppers.  He became sharecropper on my father's side.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that'll be your great grandfather, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my great grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then did your grandfather go to school?
Speaker 2: He did.  He stopped, but he stopped college at, he stopped education at, I wanna say the eighth grade, although he may have gone--he may have gone a little further.  He may have gone a little further, but he didn't finish high school.
Speaker 1: Okay so James Dwight McLurkin the first--
Speaker 2: The second.
Speaker 1: --was a sharecropper.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The second finished eighth grade.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: The third, Tuskegee Airman.
Speaker 2: No, no, that was my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right, that's right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: And so on my father's side, James McLurkin III finished Hampton [University]--
Speaker 1: Alright, finished Hampton, okay.
Speaker 2: --in, it would have been '63' [1963] for him.  So mom was sixty--if mom was '65' [1965], I'm pretty sure she is, dad is '63' [1963].
Story_ID: 25337
Speaker 1: Okay, so your dad finished Hampton, and now what did he study at Hampton?
Speaker 2: So my father?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Alright, electrical engineering.
Speaker 1: Okay, electrical engineering.
Speaker 2: Or maybe it was electronics at that time, but it was essentially electrical engineering.
Speaker 1: Now, did he--this was a Bachelor of Science degree, right?
Speaker 2: And, yeah, now--
Speaker 1: Did he--
Speaker 2: I'm 99 percent sure it's a BS degree.  But he started at Morehouse [College].  And he went for a year at Morehouse and transferred to Hampton because Morehouse didn't offer an electrical engineering program.  And he was, yeah, he wasn't happy with that.  And his mom wanted him to be a doctor, and Morehouse is where doctors went.  So my grandmother on my mother's side--on my father's side rather, my paternal grandmother, Marguerite, Marguerite Spann, she was a teacher as well, college educated.  And her family--there was a lot, if you go back another generation, Doc Spann, her father was a doctor.  And then once you extend out from that family tree, you find tremendous doctors and lawyers.  We have a Spann, we have our Spann reunions every other year.  And it's 50-50, doctor lawyer.  I'm an oddball being a technology person--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --very few of us, but it's heavy doctors and lawyers.  And that, you know, that was, that was--there were not very many paths.  There're not very many professional paths that, to pick back then, I guess.
Story_ID: 25338
Speaker 1: He's efficient.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's what I understand had an impact on the next generation.  The--and I use the word just in its pure, honest form, the "ignorance" of the potential career possibilities or life possibilities is among the most important, you know, their skills, there's basic recognition of what you, what your abilities are.  But then the recognition that, you know, I could do not "A" or "B" but, you know, A through Z. Alpha through Omega, you know, pick whatever alphabet you want.  There's almost an infinite number of possibilities.  And to get kids to realize that is important.  I digress.
Speaker 1: Right, that's true though.  Now, is there a story about--oh, well, I forgot to ask you if your, now, did your father have any stories about growing up that he shared?  Now, he grew up in--
Speaker 2: Chester, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Chester, South Carolina, which is much different--
Speaker 2: He's got, there're lots of stories from Chester.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, this is the South.  And he was the grand daddy, so grand mom was the school teacher.  I wanna say second grade, but she was a school teacher.  And grand daddy did odd jobs, a very smart man, but not an educated man so he didn't--he did janitor, he did cleaning, he did--dad would go along with him to clean the schools.  He would do some carpentry.  He did a bunch of driving.  So he did a bunch of chauffeuring.  So dad learned how to drive, like a chauffeur would learn how to drive.  So he, grand daddy would put a glass on the dashboard, and dad would have to learn how to drive without spilling any water.  And dad actually went on to drive a school bus--you know, this is South Carolina, so you could get a driver's license at age, I wanna say fifteen.
Speaker 1: That sounds right.
Speaker 2: So he was driving a school bus at age fifteen.  So, but this is the South.  They're segregated.  This is the rural South.  So, you know, dad would, "whites only" signs, "whites only" bathrooms.  The, the legacy of that injustice, you know, obviously will stay with him all of his life.  And he, the notion of--I guess the same on people that age of all generations, the notion of a truly integrated kind of world, could not get, couldn't fully, couldn't fully accept it because of the history of growing up in the segregated South.
Speaker 1: Okay, did your father talk about when he first became interested in electrical engineering or--
Speaker 2: No, well, he was always fixing stuff.  This is, so this is--and this is another contrast between--I'm not, I don't know if it's between country and city or intergenerational divide.  When something was broken, you fixed it.  There was no, there was no--now, if something is broken, it's just broke.  What's wrong with it?  It's broke.  It's a period into that.  It's a hard stop whereas in the country, there's no money, so you fix the things.  And you learned how to work on stuff.  So he was tinkering and working on cars and working on anything he could  get his hands on.  And at the time, you know, this was in the era of Sputnik, so electrical engineering was the hotness.  So when he went into college, mom was interested, my grandmother was interested in him being a doctor.  And he, he wasn't interested.  He wanted to go do, and be an engineer.  And he revolted, transferred to Hampton [University] and majored in electrical engineering.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Sputnik happened, I guess when he was entering high school, just as he was entering high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, '57' [1957].
Speaker 2: Fifty--yeah.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, that would have been, that made a, would have made an impression--
Speaker 2: So that was right there.
Speaker 1: --on him at that age.
Speaker 2: He never, he didn't talk about Sputnik.  I'm not sure how much he knew about it.  But there was certainly, you know, at that time the race would have been on, right?  The media would have hit all the schools, you know, science, science, science.  Let's push on this and make this happen.  And he would have been at the very, you know, maybe even right in the center of that, but certainly, if not at the late beginning, you know, at the peak of we need to, we need to fix this.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was, you know, he's a natural engineer.  He cannot, not work on things.  He cannot, not take things apart.  I'm very much like him in that way.  There are engineers who are born and there are engineers who are trained.  He was one that was born for sure.
Story_ID: 25339
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: I don't know that story.  They were both at Hampton.  Mom was the freshman class attendant.  Dad was on the swim team.  They were both popular in their early years.  Mom subsequently, after getting--I should say this on the record, but whatever, after getting a disappointing first year of grades, buckled down and became very serious academically the rest of her time there.  Dad would have been--I don't know what his grades were like, but he had enough natural intelligence to not, probably not to work all that hard and walk away with decent grades.  And I don't know how they met.  I think they married in '68' [1968].  It might have been '67' [1967].
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were basically both out of school when they got married.  So they didn't get married right away.
Speaker 2: No, they were both out of school.  I don't remember if they dated all the way through or if they, they met afterwards.  I don't remember.
Story_ID: 25340
Speaker 1: Well, did your dad go on to graduate school, 'cause he graduated first, right?
Speaker 2: He did.  He did not.  He (unclear) three--I think his first job was Sperry (ph.), yeah, I'm sure of this actually, Sperry, and he was supposed to be a radar technician on the ships docked in, across the nation.  In fact, he flew, he flew quite a bit when he first started working.  But they wouldn't, they wouldn't let him, new black college graduate, actually work on the radio sets.  So he did kind of odd stuff.  He helped out, but he didn't get to do anything really technical.  And he got, he got very frustrated with this.  And he left there--I don't know what year he left Sperry.  I think he spent two or three years there, and he went to IBM, I'm pretty sure was his next job.  And then he was showing these new things called computers.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, in those days, computers we're talking about like a huge--
Speaker 2: These are mainframes.
Speaker 1: --appliance that covers, you know, half a wall.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: So he was selling those to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was selling these.  He was a computer salesman, and he did, he started out rough.  And then he got the salesman of the year award, and (unclear).  He still has that on his wall.  And he stayed at IBM in technical sales for almost a decade, I think.  And then he left and went to AT and T.  And at some point in time, he was the group manager for their international 800 service.  I think that was his, I think that was his last, his last appointment at AT and T.  And he came, he became increasingly frustrated and disappointed with corporate America and the politics and the racism and the wheeling and dealing and all the silliness that goes on to try to get ahead.  And, hey, became bitter.  And the AT and T downsized so that after the, there was the breakup, and then there were the huge layoffs.  So he was one of the ones that were laid off.  And then he bounced from, to MCI, then to Time-Warner and then he was downsized from Time-Warner, and he just gave up.  No, he didn't give up, he said, screw it all basically.  And this was, he was, he was in his sixties at that point.  He was sixty three or so.  So late enough in his life that, going out getting another job was not something he wanted to do.  And he just--he did some handyman stuff, and he just settled into retirement and started dinking around the house, buying more electronic gadgets than he could ever deal with, calling me on the phone trying to figure out how to make Windows do "x", "y" and "z".  So it was, it took over a year, about a year for him to kind of get into the groove, but then he started having a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did he live in Columbus, in--now, you grew up in New York, right?
Speaker 2: (No audible response) [nodding, yes].
Speaker 1: So did your father live close by?
Speaker 2: New--yeah, yeah.  So, so, okay, so they, so he--so, let's see, he was at Sperry and he was working on ships in New York harbor, I do believe.  And then he would also fly as well.  And then, and then I think my parents, when they were married, I think they lived and moved to Los Angeles for a little while.  I think they lived in L.A. for a year or two.  My, my aunt lives there.  So his sister, Ms. Nelly, and she's been there--she, she went to--I think she went to Fisk [Fisk University], and she's also, she was also a teacher, I think.  And she moved to L.A.[Los Angeles, California] and her husband was a dentist, and they set up a practice in L.A.  Sorry, I laid that--they set up a practice in L.A., and they've been there since the '60's [1960s].  So, yeah, my dad was out there, my mom went out there for a few years.  Then they came back to New York.  Then they lived in Flushing, Queens, Corona, Corona (unclear).
Speaker 1: Right, so this would have been, what, about 19--
Speaker 2: We're getting to the '70s [1970s] now.
Speaker 1: Seventies [1970s], okay.
Speaker 2: And so I was born in '72' [1972], so they were in Queens [New York] when I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were in Queens when I was born.  He and--by then he was working now for AT and T.
Story_ID: 25341
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let me ask you, we always ask this question.  When you consider your parents' personalities, and their dispositions, their sense of humor, the way they walk, talk, look, act, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I am, I am so evenly split, I can't even tell you.  When you first get to know me, you would say that I look--that I act just like my father.  I'm my father's son.  But, if you spend more than about two hours or so with me, you can see the strong undertows of my mother.  And I resemble, if you put 'em next to each other--I've got a great picture of me, freshman year, flanked by both of them.  And it's a linear interpolation between, between the three of us.  So, they're both there, and the good and the bad is there from both of them in various degrees.  And I, you know, I spend--I'm forty now.  So the amount of adjustments I can make in my personality at this point are minimal.  But as far as I can tell, the settings are almost exactly 50-50.  There's, there's a bit of an edge towards dad with the technology and engineering, I'm here at--teaching engineering at a university.  So that, that's the obvious overshadow, but if you speak to my wife about the internal workings of my mind to what I worry about, what I think about, and how I feel about things, and that's almost 100 percent mom.
Story_ID: 25342
Speaker 1: So your memories of growing up are basically living with your mother or--
Speaker 2: And visiting father--
Speaker 1: Visiting your father.
Speaker 2: And it was almost every weekend, almost.  There were some weekends where I wanted to be at my mother's house so I could play with my friend or go riding or do something like that.  But it was relatively every weekend.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in regular contact with him, and so--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, it was--he's a very good father.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  So do you have a first childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Honestly, it is an apartment in Queens.  I am playing with an Erector set, I think.  And my parents are arguing about something, and I'm telling 'em to stop fighting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you had an Erector set when you were about three or four or is that--
Speaker 2: It might have been Lincoln logs.
Speaker 1: Lincoln logs, okay.
Speaker 2: It might have been Lincoln logs.  But now, I can't separate the onset of these various construction toys because they all--at the time I was old enough to remember anything, I can remember all of them.  So, so they spent, they spent their money wisely on toys.  I didn't have any GI Joe figures.  I didn't have any action figures to speak of at all.  I didn't have--I had, I remember, I remember I asked for--I don't know what year it was.  I must have been in middle school.  I wanted a GI Joe Sky Striker, little airplane thing.  It's probably, in today's dollars, probably a hundred dollar kind of piece of plastic.  And mom, mom's decision was, no, I'm gonna get you a toolbox instead.  So she got me a, not a little red toy toolbox.  She got me an adult, an adult size toolbox with adult tools in it.  And she got me a wood, you know, first wood carpentry building kit.  And I remember being, I was quite cross that Christmas morning.  I was grumpy.  This is not what I wanted.  So then I fumed for a day or so, and then begrudging I remember, okay, fine, let me open up this, this wooden kit and start building stuff.  And I obviously had a blast, had a little wooden airplane, a little car, a whole bunch of stuff to build, tools.  And then that, I started, in fact, I only retired that red toolbox 2004, when I had enough money to go buy a tool roll-away, and, you know, a standard, professional-level tool kit.  So that little red toolbox stayed with me--I still have it in the garage, not, I was not, I'm not getting rid of that.
Speaker 1: So did you get that, about how old were you when you got that?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was in middle school.  So I was seventh grade probably.  So '75' [1975] would--
Speaker 1: So about twelve maybe.
Speaker 2: What is that, thirteen?
Speaker 1: Yeah, about nineteen--
Speaker 2: And I had a power drill.  In fact, I used her power drill, I used her drill before that.  And then I bought--that was one of the first purchases I made, in fact, when I left the house and went to college.  I remember going up to Centerville Lumber, in Centerville, Massachusetts, up to street from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] , and bought myself a power drill because I didn't have a drill anymore.  And, you know, that was before even Home Depot was in Boston.  So, but you were on a different path though.
Story_ID: 25343
Speaker 1: Now, can you describe--did you grow up in the same neighborhood?  You were like going back and forth between your mother's place and your father's--
Speaker 2: No, we moved a lot.  So after, after my parents got divorced, they moved--then dad moved to Queens, a small apartment in Queens.  Mom moved to a place in Long Island [New York] called Freeport.  And she was teaching at Bellmore Schools, at the time.  So that was a better commute for her.  And then dad stayed in that apartment in Queens until, until I was maybe in the ninth grade.  And he moved out to Paramus, New Jersey.  He bought a nice house in New Jersey because his job he was commuting to--he was doing reverse commute all those years.  He said it was dumb, so he finally--I think he was working for MCI, and he was down in, somewhere in New Jersey where his headquarters was.  He bought a nice house with a pool, and it was great.  It was really good. Ross Road.  And then mom, mom remarried, and we moved out to South Hampton, and when you hear that you imagine, you automatically think of the coast of South Hampton, the richest place in the country.
Speaker 1: Yes, right.
Speaker 2: There's another side, there is another side of South Hampton that is semi--I don't wanna call it rural, but the roads are only half paved or they were at the time.  And it was, that's where we were.  And I don't remember what he did.  He was semi-professional, I think.  He wasn't doing labor, but he had, had a house and two kids, and they were older.  And that didn't work out.  It was a rebound relationship.  It was no good.  So she scooped me out of school one day and we moved to, back to Freeport, I think.  And then we moved once or twice more, ended up in Baldwin when I was in the sixth grade.  And that's where she still is, in fact, same house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 25344
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: So, all right, sights, sounds, smells.  Spaghetti-O's came to mind.  And there were a lot of Spaghetti-O's growing up.  The sound of Lego being spilled from the box onto the ground.  That was a common sound.  The, what sights?  So this is, so most of my memories, we lived--where did we live?  She was working for South Huntington Schools, or was she working for South Hampton?  We lived somewhere, we had lived in South Huntington for a while when I was young and on Lee Street, 40 Lee Street.  And, and I remember the big snow storm of '79' [1979].  This is not the ice storm.  There's an ice storm, there's the big snowstorm.  The ice storm was '77' [1977].  I don't remember that very clearly.  I was five.  But there was a big snowstorm in '79' [1979], and we had snow.  You know, to my memory, the snow is piled up twenty feet high.  The neighbors, the neighbors shoveled us out.  I remember mom remarking 'cause the neighbor was this low-income, Caucasian male.  There's no other way to phrase that.  It's not politically correct and had been giving, there had been some grief between my mom and him.  I don't remember the details, and mom, him and his girlfriend.  But in that snowstorm, he shoveled out our driveway, and that was a--it was--I'm sure the snow wasn't twenty feet high, but it was big enough for me to tunnel inside it and build a fort inside the thing.  So it was at least eight feet tall.  It was a (unclear) beginning (unclear) my work.
Speaker 1: So this is a heroic task this man performed?
Speaker 2: So, so, you know, looking back, maybe it was his way of, let's, let's reset this thing, some kind of--yeah, let's reset this relationship.  So, let's see, I remember that.  I remember the snow.  I remember my first bicycle was from Sears, oh, yeah, so Sears.  I should say Sears.  Everything we owned came from Sears.  So after, after my second, after my mom's second marriage, her credit was, was a wreck.  She couldn't get any credit cards, but she had a Sears card.  So, so, the phrase, "good", "better", "best", was one that was based into my head, and for the most part, we were, were better people.  We didn't buy a lot of "good", and we didn't get a whole lot of "best".  We were "better" people (laughter).  And, yeah, all my clothes came from Sears.  She learned that Sears tough-skinned jeans were the only jeans that I would outgrow before I would destroy.  So, so, if you're buying the jeans at Sears, you might as well get the whole thing at Sears.  And every, I remember growing up, she would always ask, we were somewhere, and she would always, "Can you take a Sears card?"  And the answer, of course, was always, no.  And, except at Sears, and to my knowledge, I didn't, I remember I didn't quite understand, I didn't quite understand the card wasn't very useful.  And now that I'm older, I didn't, I don't know why she kept on asking that?  But that was the only card she had.  And, in fact, I made her get, it was me that she had to finally get another credit card because I was ordering--I'd outgrown the electronic stock at Radio Shack, and needed more sophisticated parts than Radio Shack had.  And I had outgrown the local electronics store, which was more sophisticated, but still I, I needed, I needed, you know, a Rockwell 65-C O2 micro-processor.  But I needed the 65-C, O2.  I needed the C-MOS version because that would let me single step through instructions and debug my code at the assembly-language bit level.  And that had to be familiar and that was a company called JDR Micro Devices was my, was my--that was when--I remember I don't know how I got a hold of that catalog.  So that's the one that mom, you know, in that memories of childhood, mom was, for somebody who genuinely doesn't understand technology.  She understands it, kind of, you know, right.  But the nitty gritty, you know, she doesn't get that.  For her to be able to, for me to have the resources that I had access to growing up, and I can put that in context now as a university professor, some of it was through me being persistent.  Some of it was, but, but, you know, 85 percent of it was her getting me in the right location, even if she didn't really know what that location was, and stuff would happen.  And she didn't, realizing, and then to realize when something had happened and then capitalizing on that.  Case and point was this mail order thing.  So I needed parts you couldn't get locally.  I mean in order to get things, something over the mail, you've got to have a credit card.  This is, you know, we're going back to '85' [1985] kind of timeframe, '84' [1984], '85' [1985], '86',[1986], gotta have a credit card.  So mom had to get her credit cleaned up to the point where she could go get a credit card so that I could go and order electronic supplies on the, from a catalog, no Internet, took 'em from catalog.  So, so I remember packages coming to the house, and it was also very exciting.  And that, still, you know, all my packages have a swoop on it, but still I'm trying to convince my wife that, that brown cardboard boxes are, indeed, wrapping paper and that's sufficient for a Christmas present.  She's not, she's not buying it, but I love the sight of brown boxes to this day.  So that was important.  I remember music, and mom always had the music playing.  Dad always had the music going.  And we can put them in contrast, right.  So I go visit dad, you've got, you've got Chuck Mangione, you've got "Earth, Wind and Fire", you've got "Crusaders".  You visit mom, and it's Karen Carpenter, it's--who else was on the radio, easy listening station?  I can't remember the names.
Speaker 1: I get the picture.  It's easy listening and--
Speaker 2: So, and even to this day.  So I bought a "Best of the Carpenters" CD, a year ago, and I'm going through it in my car, and I'm like man, I know--not only do I know these songs, I know the words to these songs.  I can sing these songs.  And my wife was like, "Wow, you, you really did listen to this stuff."  So, and then as they both got older, they both converged onto the Smooth Jazz stuff.  Both of them, you know, modern jazz and the classy jazz is too--and for me too, I can appreciate that both of them--there's not enough structure.  There's not enough--it's too free form.  You can't, you can't enjoy it.  It doesn't bring the three of us--we all shared this, it doesn't bring us the kind of joy that kind of Smooth Jazz and modern stuff with, with a rhythm, and there improvisation, but it's not just, you know, Coltrane, just gone.  And I respect and appreciate that, but I can't--it doesn't, I don't enjoy it quite as much.  So I remember all the music, lots of music, both of them.  Mom didn't have the collection.  Dad, you know, he's the guy, right, he's got the records, and the audio system and all of the buttons and the EQ lines are going up as the songs are going.  And he spent years and years working on audio in his car, trying to get the best sound out of his--the car I remember the most was a 1979 Mazda RX 7 he bought off of his brother-in-law, and then he gave it to me, in fact, as a gift in college which was a very, you know, by then, it's still a very dear and moving thing because it was his baby.  But, you know, it had 245,000 miles on it by that time.  So I remember, I remember a lot of music, different music, and playing in the band and in every band my school had, and in all the plays and all the stuff.  So I was in the pit band and the marching band and the jazz band and the orchestral band and any kind of band there was.
Speaker 1: What did you play?
Speaker 2: Alto sax.
Speaker 1: Oh, alto sax.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, every now and then I'll play tenor.  And looking back, actually, I wish--I'm more of a tenor person than an alto person.  I wish the band people had pushed me more and stuck me in, and kept me in the tenor place.  But in Jazz band, the junior high jazz guy, always wanted me to play tenor.  I resented it 'cause I actually owned an Alto Sax.  I had to use the school's tenor.  But my personality is more of a tenor, tenor kind of person.
Story_ID: 25345
Speaker 1: Okay, I've heard that you did not like school.
Speaker 2: I did not like school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did not like school.
Speaker 1: And can you--do you remember your first school?  What was the name of your first school?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: My first school, hum, something, something, something, kindergarten something.  My dad sent me some great pictures of that years ago.  Little Red Riding Hood kindergarten.
Speaker 1: Is that it?
Speaker 2: Little Red Train House, I'll--
Speaker 1: Something like that, Little Red School House?  Was it schoolhouse?
Speaker 2: Nah (shaking head, no).
Speaker 1: Okay, it was a little red something, huh?
Speaker 2: Some kind of little, yeah, some kind of diminutive modifier and some kind of color with some kind of now and after.  And I don't remember a lot from kindergarten.  I guess my only real memory--you asked me my favorite color early on, right?  And at the time, you know, red was the thing, right.  You, if it was crayon time, you wanted the red crayon.  And, and my response to the whole rush for red was that, you know what?  This red thing isn't gonna work.  I'm gonna move to something else.  I'm gonna move to blue.  So, so I did not wanna be part of the competitive red, red crayon crowd.  And so I stepped to the blue crayon, and that, that stuck.  That sticks even now.  And I remember making a big paper airplane.  Now, it may not have been that big.  I think the reality, I was just small.  It may have just been a piece of legal paper.  We had free time, and we had the--I remember the Jungle Gym, but during free time one day, we made paper airplanes.  I made some nice big ones.  And mine flew well, 'cause I knew how to make good paper airplanes at that time.  But after that, you know, that's kindergarten.  My memories are spotty for kindergarten.  And I remember first grade, Mrs. Astrid (ph.) Meyers.
Speaker 1: Now, where was this?  Where was first grade?
Speaker 2: First grade.
Speaker 1: This was in Queens, right, I guess?
Speaker 2: No, no, by then we were in South Huntington.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So kindergarten was in Queens.  By then my mom had moved, and she was teaching in the South Huntington School District.  And she taught there for many, many years, until she retired, in fact.  She left Bellmore and went to South Huntington.  And I dare say first grade was in one of the schools in her district, although I don't remember exactly.  Second grade--
Story_ID: 25346
Speaker 1: Okay, so first grade, your teacher is Mrs. Meyers, and you were in like the South Hampton School District in--
Speaker 2: I think so, although I may have been in Freeport School District.  I don't, I don't, you know, you're in first grade.  You don't care what school you're in.  I remember letter, I remember she was a nice lady.  I remember that her name sounded like astronaut.  I thought that was cool.  Astrid, I guess that would be Eastern European.
Speaker 1: Astrid Meyers, that was her--
Speaker 2: Astrid was the first name.  Meyers was her second name or her last name.
Speaker 1: Like Astrid Joberto (ph.) who played with the Sergio Mendez, I think, you know--I don't know--
Speaker 2: Out of Brazil, '60's [1960s], yeah, I don't know.  So, yeah, I remember first grade.  It was, you know, I didn't dislike it at the time.  But it was pretty dull.  I remember second grade.  Oh, what's her name?  So I had built, it was a very nice model of an F-4 Phantom.  And I was building models.  You know, I was way outside of my age range for the models.  So I put this thing together.  I painted it, and now it's time to put the decals on.  And these were the decals you had to soak in water and apply carefully.  And, and I had taken a lot of pride in this, in this plane.  I put it together very carefully with the model paint and it, I remember, I remember--well, my memories are that I didn't know how to get--I remember the paint being too thick and not knowing how to do the paint properly, not knowing how to thin it, and the right tool was an air brush.  I didn't understand air brushes, so I hand painted it.  And I remember not knowing how to get the lines to be straight.  So, you know, the right way to do that is to mask it, but I didn't understand that as a second grader.  I mean, I guess you can't expect a second grader to understand that.  But I did know how to do the decals.  And I, and so she was talking, and she was going on about some kind of thing I was supposed to know about English or History or something.  And I was bored.  So I pulled, out of my bag, I pulled out a little Tupperware thing of water, and I had a lid on it because I'd put it in my bag.  And I had to open it up, and I pull out my decals and my scissors, and I started cutting decals and put them in the water, let them soak a little bit, and then put them on the tail of the plane.  And I thought, I thought nothing of this.  And she--and I remember she was still talking.  And apparently, this was, this was not surprising to either of us that I was doing this so she just casually walked back to my seat and picked up the plane by the tail, unfortunately, I'd just applied--I think it was the V-104, it was the checker, the checkerboard patterns, the famous squadron in Vietnam, to the tail.  And she didn't know that the decal was fresh.  She didn't know how to deal with it.  If she had picked it up by the edges of the wing, it would have been okay, and I didn't enough sense to tell her, "No, no, don't pick it up there, pick it up here", but she smudged the decal.  And once it dried, in the day, it was smudged and I could not, I couldn't fix it.  I didn't, I couldn't, I did not fix it.  So that was a big loss for me because I'd really tried to make this model perfect.
Speaker 1: Did she keep the plane for a couple of days or something?
Speaker 2: No, she kept it to the end of class and gave it to me and sent me home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was just, you know, it just--all right, James, you can't, you can't do this.  So she was patient.  Third grade, Link.  So now, Mrs. Link, so now we're in, we're definitely in South Huntington schools now.  I was in Countrywood.  She had less patience.  I didn't get sent to the principal a lot that year.  Fifth grade was the year.  Ms. McCann, yeah, that was the year--and Mrs.--in fourth grade it started as well, Mrs. Borshak (ph.), where it, there was more disciplinary action.  But, in fact, theirs was the worst.  And I spent a lot of time in the hallway in the fifth grade.  And it's just, you know, it's hard to be a smart kid in school.  It's boring.  It's slow.  You have the ability not just to be 20 percent ahead.  You have the ability to be done in a quarter of the time.  You know, you have the ability to finish the exercise, read through the next exercise, finish the reading, read through the next, material for the next section, do the homework, and then you're still in the first thing that you were doing earlier.  You can move--so, so, you know, I think, I hope, I think that, well, I don't do primary education.  So I don't know if we know how to do this any better.  I know my wife, when she teaches--she's a fifth grade science teacher as well, she works to make sure that everyone's got something to do.  And I know that when I teach, I mean you can't teach to the lowest and you can't teach to the best.  But you need to be able to teach above average everyone is challenged somewhat, but to not, not lose people.  You need to have a way so that you can keep people entertained and excited and moving at a level that they can move at, while still making sure people who are working hard, but not learning quickly, can keep up with--they're not gonna keep up with these people 'cause you're moving, you know, moving twice as fast.  But they need to keep up with the material.  And there's a magic in understanding how to stratify your teaching to hit that.  At any rate--
Speaker 1: Now, were they tracking you to an advanced group in the fifth grade or were--
Speaker 2: My mom said, no, they were not, in fact, right or not.  My discipline problems and my lack of academic performance--now, I see, actually, it was junior high that really put me off the bad track.  So, so I remember when they took me to, I think to the third grade, they gave me some tests.  And then I took it again.  And mom later told me that they gave me the test again because they didn't believe the scores that I got the first time.  They were, something clearly was wrong.  So they gave it to me again, and I'm sure I did equally good the second time.  So they, they--but, and they actually did put me in some honors stuff, actually in Young school.  I remember that.  The color computers, and that was fun.
Speaker 1: Now, were there students on some advanced track when you were in the third grade already?  And they were, and you were not with them?  Was that the issue, I mean--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  I don't, no, no, in third grade.  I--I was in the gifted, the gifted and talented program , matter of fact.  So I was in that program in third grade-ish timeframe.  And I remember, you know, they pulled, they pulled you out of class, and you'd go do some fun stuff.  And that, that really was quite nice.  That was, it wasn't every day.  It was maybe three, four days a week, and that was the highlight of, of the day.  We'd play computer games, "Oregon Trail", if you remember this thing.  (Unclear) you can't win the game.  Everyone always dies.  You can't, you can't ever get to Oregon.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 25347
Speaker 1: At any rate, that was good.  But then the discipline ramped up, and, yeah, and then I was no longer--in fourth and fifth grade, I wasn't in any of the--in theory, the different teachers, the students kind of could see the different teachers, there was some tracking going on.  I remember us talking about us.  Oh, you're in the stupid class.  And kids are smart, right?  You can't fool kids.  But it was not, you know, it was only a difference of, 10, 15 percent.  It wasn't the factor of two or three that, that the sharp kids in the class needed.  And then sixth grade, we moved again.  So this is when we moved to Baldwin from South Huntington.  So we were renting, and my mom bought a house in Baldwin, and now she had, and she--her primary reason to pick that location was the school district.  That was her Number One priority in picking a house.  Even now she tells me, well, make sure it has a good school district.  I'm like mom, it's a condo.  No one who lives here cares about schools.  It's not, it's not important.  So, but that, she can't--that was her--for so many years, the quality of the school district was her Number One, 'cause she couldn't afford private school.  That was her Number One concern.  So she still can't, she still can't shake that even now.  She's looking at retirement communities now.  I'm sure that she's gonna think about the school district when she looks at a retirement home.  So now, I'm in the fifth grade, and now, my behavior is--you know, and I'm doing anything bad, right?  I'm mostly just talking.  I'm mostly just bored.  And I made some friends 'cause it's the first time now in sixth grade where I had some black friends, Shawn and Mutah (ph.).  And that was good.  And then--
Speaker 2: Now, before, were most of these schools white basically?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, uh-huh, there was maybe, maybe one or two other black kids in my class, maybe, but not, yeah, there was very few, almost all white.
Speaker 2: Okay, so in this school in Baldwin is the first time you had like black friends?
Speaker 1: Schubert Elementary.
Speaker 2: Schubert, okay.
Speaker 1: Schubert, sixth grade.  Yeah, and mom liked it 'cause it was a good school district, and it had, it was integrated, had more diversity in the classrooms.  She was worried that I was growing up surrounded only by white kids.
Speaker 2: Okay, were these guys interested in the same kind of things (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Shawn kind of was, not quite.  I mean I'm, I was--it didn't matter where you put me, until I got to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology].  And we'll get to that.  Until I got to MIT, there was nowhere you could put me where I was gonna have people moving and thinking and interested in the things I was doing.
Story_ID: 25348
Speaker 1: Now, what were you doing at home, now, during this period of time?  When you'd go home, did you largely, maybe before you met these three guys, were you largely playing by yourself and doing things on your own?
Speaker 2: Largely, largely.  I had some friends in, I had one friend in, who I visited in grade school, Fred (unclear) actually.  In fact, I caught up with him a few years ago.  He was on "Jeopardy", in fact.  He's at that level.  Yeah, he won, he won for, I think he won for a good week or two.  He did quite well on "Jeopardy".  They brought him back, in fact, for the, the Master Champions, when Ken Jennings did his run forever on "Jeopardy".  So, but no, not so many friends.  And we're moving a lot so I was by myself almost all the time.  And that's, you know, Adar and I tried to start a family, my wife and I tried to start a family, and I didn't wanna have another one child.  And biology has caught up to us.  We need to hurry up and get it going now so that cannot, that can be a reality.  So what was I doing at home, sixth grade?  So sixth grade was when I got my first computer.  And this was a very big deal.  It was an Atari--
Speaker 1: Is this--
Speaker 2: --800 XL.
Speaker 1: And this is like 19, what eighty--what would it be?  What would this be?
Speaker 2: I gotta do the math.  I can't do that in my head.
Speaker 1: Seventy--born in '72' [1972], sixth grade, we're talking about 1984, '85' [1985], something like that.
Speaker 2: Let's see, six, five, plus, plus--'83' [1983].
Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983], okay.  So you got an Atari.
Speaker 2: Atari, no, no, not an Atari, an Atari 800-XL.
Speaker 1: Atari 800-XL.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, whole different thing.  So, so this was their top-of-the-line machine at the time.  My cousin, Roy--and between Roy and my father, the two of them are to blame as to why I'm an engineer right now.  So my cousin had an Atari-800.  So he had one of the very first gen Atari's.  And his school was a better school, and he had an electronics lab in his school, digital logic lab (unclear).  And so he was doing all this cool stuff.  I wanted to be like Roy, my cousin, Roy.  So I went to go visit him for Christmas, except he wasn't there.  He and his mother had gone to Disney World (unclear) Ft. Land, [Orlando], Florida, (unclear) world.  So, but he left me his computer, and he left me his games.  He said, you know, here's some stuff.  Here's my books on MASEC (ph.), and, you know, here are the games I got, and have a good time with this.  So I took his computer and went to my grandmother's house.  And so it was me, my mother and my grandmother and my cousin's computer.  So who do you think got most of the attention from me that Christmas?
Speaker 1: The computer (laughter).
Speaker 2: So I played "Donkey Kong", which was the game he had.  I played, he may have had "Space Invaders" , something like that.  And after a while, you can only play for so long.  So then I started programming it.  So I started learning how to program.  So I broke out his basic book, and thankfully, he gave me this stuff.  And, and it was really a lot of fun.  So I went, oh, this is great.  So I came back, and like, dad, we have got to get a computer right now.
Speaker 1: So were you able to program "Donkey Kong" and "Space Invaders" to do--or change 'em or--
Speaker 2: No, no, not like that (unclear) (simultaneous), you know, I was able to program things like Twenty Questions where you would--there's another name for it.  Maybe it's called Twenty Questions.  You ask "yes", "no" questions, and then you try to figure out what animal you're thinking of.  And then the game would remember your responses and learn different animals as you played it.  And that's actually a pretty easy program to write, and from a computer science point of view, now that I'm older, you know, you learn how to make a tree.  And it's a binary decision tree.  And if you do ask twenty questions, it gives you a database of over a million different things to discriminate.  So if you ask the right questions for your first few animals, then it can do a good job of figuring out any other animals you give it.  So I could do things like that.  I could make it--and that was a sophisticated program at the time 'cause you have to--the first few times I wrote it, because you had to write these things multiple times because you didn't know how to save and write.  I had to learn all this stuff.  I had to put it on a disk and stuff.  But I got better, and at the time, this was very much in the vogue.  So I subscribed to magazines, called 'Antic,' which was favorite and some other magazine.  Now, again, again, right, so here's a situation where how do I know what magazine to subscribe to, right?  How do I (unclear) get the subscription to happen, right?  Who is, who is--and to me, you know, it didn't, ever wasn't really aware of where'd this magazine come from?  Well, I don't know.  Well, this says mom.  Well, actually, one of the best stories from her is I used to read at night.  She'd put me to bed, and I would sit in my bed and read until late, until 10:00 or 11:00.  And I would use this flashlight that I had under the bed to read.  And I'd read all kinds of stuff.  So anything I could get my hands on, I'd be reading.  I would, I would start (unclear), and she bought 'World Books' at the time, and I'd sit down and read the encyclopedia.  I'd pick a letter and just read through that.  And never occurred to me that that flashlight never ran out of batteries.  Batteries, batteries never wore out in that flashlight.
Speaker 1: So you suppose your mother was monitoring and--
Speaker 2: She admitted to it years ago.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  So but you were reading under the covers presumably--
Speaker 2: I was undercover.
Speaker 1: --to, you know, as a clandestine, you know, activity--
Speaker 2: That's right, can't fool mom, can't fool mom.  I'm not sure if I ever have fooled mom, but you can't fool mom.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Story_ID: 25349
Speaker 1: Now, where were we?  We were talking about, we went up to the sixth grade.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sixth grade, and this--
Speaker 1: So--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and fifth grade was a really bad and sixth grade is--
Speaker 1: Yeah, so fifth grade, fifth grade, you know, the thing is Lego at that time.  And I remember in fourth grade, my aunt, my father's sister, bought me a Lego Expert Builder set, and this was new.  This was gears and axles and transmissions and this was good stuff.  This was real good stuff.  And my dad actually has videos of me.  And it must have been, I must have been, early--I looked to be maybe third grade, young, building--you know, I worried about acumen steering and gear rations, transmissions and differentials, and things like this.  So, so those toys were just critical, critical, critical toys.  So I was doing that mechanically.  I was--in fifth grade, I had a bicycle, so I was riding a lot.  I was trying to jump and, you know, be daring on bicycles.  I didn't really get good with that until I was in the sixth grade, as well as racing a little bit.  I hung out with a bunch of biker, biker guys, BMX guys in my neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the age of the trick bike, right--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --when it started really coming, the trick bike became a real popular thing, the long seat and the--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, so that, that, so, the long seat, the banana seat, they called, yeah, you didn't, if you were racing or doing tricks, that's not what you wanted.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm mixed up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You wanted a, for racing, you wanted a short, (unclear) called "Uni", a uni-seat, which was a thin, thin-wall, steel post, with a plastic, really hard plastic seat on it.  But it weighed a lot less than the big, bulky metal seats of the time.  So, you know, twenty pounds was the magic number.  You wanna get your bike under twenty pounds at the time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it was, you know, this was--there's no carbon fiber, there's no aluminum.  This is cromali (ph.) steel, and it was tricky to get your bike to be that light and be strong.  And there were big improvement, you know, mountain biking owes its history to these, to the improvements that happened for BMX, the [componentry?] (unclear) and the tricks and the style and the riding and all that, that happened in these '80s [1980s].  So, so at home, pretty much, it was either computers, BMX and I should say computers and video games, BMX and Lego.  And that was, and there were some other things that intervened, but that three was the termerent (ph.) (unclear) of activities that persists to this day, in fact.
Story_ID: 25350
Speaker 1: Okay, I think the mid-'80's [1980s], the Nintendo came out, I guess.
Speaker 2: I missed, I did have an Nintendo in late '80s [1980s].  I missed the beginning of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My cousin and I both had Atari's, and we stayed with Atari until the Nintendo was well into its, its dominance when both of us switched to Nintendo.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, yeah, and then, but, again, you look at my cousin.  I mean he, really, he was just--he's a year and a half older than me.  And he was about that far ahead of me in almost everything I've been doing.
Speaker 1: Is he an engineer now?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, he, actually, he left.  He was an engineer.  He went to UVA, electrical engineering as well, and then did that--what did he do as a first job?  I don't remember his first few jobs.  But then he said, no, he heard the call of the MBA.  So he went back to UVA [University of Virginia], got his MBA, and now he does--he's back in Virginia.  He did a bunch of different things, Kitchen-Aid and moved up the chain of brand manager.  Now, he's a head of a product, I wanna say it's a website, it's Internet website construction--I'm gonna get it wrong.  He's not gonna forgive me.  I'm gonna get it wrong, but it's in technology of Internet web development, and he's managing this product.  He's a product manager (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know, for Christmas this year, he sent me a raspberry pie which I'm very excited about.
Speaker 1: A raspberry--
Speaker 2: What is a raspberry pie?  So a raspberry pie is the new hotness in low-cost computing, and these people wanted to build a computer very much in concept, now that I've said it out loud, to the Ataris and the Commodores of the '80s, where you plug it into a television.  You plug in your own keyboard, and for forty bucks, you have now, you know, a modern computer.  It runs Linux, and it's fast enough to do all kinds of things.  But it's, but what makes it unique is that it is absurdly cheap.  You know, now, they're marking it up to 60, ooh, $60.00, but it's still, you know, frightenly cheap and very powerful.  So, so, yeah, so he's moving in, he's interested now in looking at this maker space where people are doing hobbies at home and doing things at home with computation.  So that's, that's where he's going now.
Story_ID: 25351
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, middle school, I guess like sixth, seventh and eighth, is that what it was?
Speaker 2: Now, for me middle school is seventh and eighth.
Speaker 1: Seventh and eighth.  Okay--
Speaker 2: So, in sixth grade, my teacher didn't put me in any advanced courses.  And I didn't realize what a problem this was.  And then in seventh grade, I started having fainting spells.  So it turns out I have a sensitive vagus nerve--I think I said that right, where it's the fight or flight, the opposite of that, the nerve that make you wanna relax.  So when I went through puberty, it would make me wanna relax unexpectedly.  Now, that I'm older, I understand what's gonna, what caused it, you know, hungry, sleep, sickness, yada, yada, yada.  But back then, we didn't know what was going on.  So I'd be places, and I'd just pass out, and that was no good.  So they put me on--and mom wouldn't take no for an answer, and went to a whole bunch of doctors.  Finally, she got one--and a bunch of them said, you know, some kids just pass out.  Just leave him alone and he'll be fine.  And mom wouldn't, wouldn't take that.  So this is where her determination actually worked to my disadvantage where she finally got me on some medicine, anti-epilepsy medicine to help control this thing.  And it, it slowed me down so much.  So I would just sleep.  I'd come home, watch TV and go to sleep.  I wasn't doing anything, and all my grades went to the toilet, except for, including math, except for science.  Now, science stayed high.  So this is the time when all of my cohorts are excelling and being put into honors classes and what not.  And I wasn't in any honors in seventh grade.  In eighth grade, my seventh grade science teacher said, you know what, we should put you into honors science.  You're, you're very good.  And then--
Speaker 1: So you're still taking this medication for that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we stopped in eighth grade because it was clear that, you know, I was getting D's and F's, C's, D's and F's.  I failed Health like four semesters in a row.  In Health, you know, honestly, now, there're two reasons you might wanna fail Health.  One is that it's minorly boring and two is that it's just not important.  But the real thing was that I just couldn't--you know, but even if I wasn't paying attention at all to the material, just the normal recall of sitting there all day long.  I should have been at least a "B" in Health without putting any effort.  So, so it was no good.  So got me off of that, and then all my grades were bumped up, and then, yeah, I remember--was I in eighth grade honors, Mrs. Yabakowski (ph.) was her name.  Yeah, she bumped me up to honors science, and that was a very big deal.  I must have been in ninth grade 'cause then I met Dr. Eugene Warasilla (ph.).  Now, this was, this was a very big, very important name in my life.  So he had--this guy taught freshman biology, and he also taught AP Biology, but he also ran a course--this is ninth grade now, he also ran a course called "Science and Research Skills".  So this was any independent project for any discipline.  You come to his classroom for, you know, it was always on the schedule.  So you could take this class, and then you would do an experiment.  So you'd have to do a proposal and set it up, have a structure, have a hypothesis and have the whole thing.  And actually, I was like, well, I wanna build a robot.  And he was like, well, all right, Jimmy, I don't know how to do robots, but, let's find an experiment somewhere.  And he went and found the Duracell competition and the Westinghouse competition, and some other regional science competitions for me.  And he, and that was a huge, a huge game changer 'cause now this stuff that I had only done at home was now being validated at school.
Story_ID: 25352
Speaker 1: So by then I was building robots, I was trying to build my first robot in ninth grade, didn't have all the pieces together.  I didn't have together until the tenth grade.  But this was a game changer for me.  And this professor, I took AP Biology, and I developed a love for biology that I still, I still have.  And I wanted to--now, and now, and he's teaching essentially at the college level, in this AP course.  And now--
Speaker 2: Now, was he a regular teacher--
Speaker 1: Um-hum--
Speaker 2: --in the middle school?
Speaker 1: --um-hum.  No, this is high school.  This is high school.
Speaker 2: This is high school.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: This is ninth grade.
Speaker 1: If we wanna go back to middle school, I actually don't have--I think the reason I don't have a lot of memories from middle school is because the mess was messing with me.  I remember the Jazz band and the Jazz band instructor.  And he was fantastic.  The middle school Jazz band and the middle school marching band would regularly shame the high school Jazz band and marching band.  The middle school Jazz band was fantastic.  My mom would go concerts, my dad would go to concerts, they always--anytime they had a concert, they'd be able to show up.  And they would leave saying, "That was, that was good".  Yeah, I remember the try-out piece was some Thelonious Monk thing.  And I remember asking mom, what, what does this mean?  And she's like, "You're playing this?"  And I'm like, yeah, I need to play it.  This is my try-out piece.  I need to know what this, so we--no, wait, no, no, no, no, it was Cannonball Atterly.  It was "Mercy, Mercy, Mercy".  And so she went and go--went and found the recording.  And it can't no, (unclear), man.  So there's no Internet, right, there's no CDs.  So she had to go find a record of Cannonball Atterly, "Mercy, Mercy, Mercy" to play it for me because this music was, was--I couldn't read it properly.  It was too hard for me to read.  Now, I'm a decent musician.  I'm not talented.  I'm okay.  I'm just barely okay.  So I had to hear it before I could play it.  And, you know, I didn't think about that.  All of a sudden, there--I was listening to Cannonball Atterly.
Speaker 2: So, mom, again, she's, you know--
Speaker 1: Oh, and she--I'm not sure she still appreciates how good she was at that.  So--I should tell her, I guess, write her a note.  All right, so that's middle school.  What else do I remember from middle school?  It was in Baldwin Harbor so there's a bus.  And I rode my bike there a few times.  It was a long ride.  It was maybe a four-mile ride.
Speaker 2: That's a long hike on a bike in those days, I mean for a kid--you're like--
Speaker 1: So back then I was doing BMX-ing so four miles wasn't that bad.  We'd ride that, we would ride ten miles a weekend to go and find good places to jump and ride.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So that, the distance wasn't all that bad.
Speaker 2: Well, I know today, I guess, not so long ago, riding, to think of your kid going four miles anywhere, you know, by themselves, you know, on a bike would--I mean it'd be scary for me (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: She didn't fully know--she knew kind of where I was going.  You know, I'd be two towns over in Oceanside or there was a good set of jumps in Rockville Center.  That was (unclear), that was the next town over.  Yeah, it's four or five miles from home, and we go to Taco Bell, but, but--was this seventh grade?  I think it was high school where she got the call from the Freeport, the Freeport Canal Constable called the hall because her son had put his bike into the Freeport Canal.  We had a lake jump set up.  And lake jumps are fun because you can hit it, you know, at your top--at the time, my top speed was about twenty miles an hour.  How do I know this?  Twenty-point-five [20.5].  I know this because I built the digital speedometer for my bike, installed electronics stuff that I was doing at home.  So, yeah, so we were lake jumping and then, and I got caught because I forgot to put the floats on my bike.  So my bike sunk, and then, and I was the guy looking around when the Constable showed up.  All my friends, of course, had scattered by the time.  I was, I was being dumb.  But a guy who was watching, a guy who lived next door, threw on his Speedos and jumped in.  And I was interacting with the Constable.  He jumped in and found my bike and pulled it back up, which--and this is a special bike.  This is, I had my, I had my Sturmey Archer.  I finally figured out how to do two speeds on the BXM bike.  I spent a lot of my high school career trying to figure this out mechanically.  And by then I got it figured out.  The right solution was a Sturmey Archie, 1954, I had, three-speed hub--this is an hub, well, it was, you know, the '50s [1950s].  And it was indestructible, which is what BMX needed.  And then I could use my, my right-hand lever to actuate the gears because the thumb things, at the time, there was no index shifting.  And the thumb stuff that we had for shifting was poor, and it would loosen up and it was not robust enough.  But a lever, I could do the left signal with the lever.  But then I had to route both my brakes to my right lever.  So I built, I built a dual brake system.  What I didn't figure out how to do--now that I'm older, I know why.  I didn't,  couldn't figure out how to get the bias adjusted properly, the front-rear bias because you want to--the reason motorcycles and bicycles have front and rear separate brakes because you need to be very mindful of what you're doing with them.  And you want more front than back, but you do, you want them to be able to modulate.  I didn't solve that problem.  And, and retrospectively, you can't solve that problem with cables.  You need hydraulics to solve that problem.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I didn't know that at the time.
Story_ID: 25353
Speaker 1: So, so now, let's--I don't, I really can't pull a lot out of middle school.  There's a lot of Lego.  There's, there's--my relationship--now, I actually know.  Now, actually, I can pull some more things out.  Actually, there's a social--I've been talking about technology because that's more comfortable for me to talk about.  But there's a whole social thing that's going on too.  So now, I'm in middle school, and there're enough black kids now that there's a black table at lunch.  But I am not cool enough to sit at the black table.  I'm nowhere near cool enough.  I'm still wearing clothes from Sears, in fact.  I'm still wearing my Sears pants and plaid shirts and, I am a dork.  I'm still a dork, I just look a little better.  So the black community was not, not welcoming, not welcoming at all.
Speaker 2: Now, did that bother you?
Speaker 1: Did it bother me?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, it was horrible.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, no.  Yeah, I'm not immune to that, that kind of--
Speaker 2: Well, I know some people, they'll get, you know, caught up in what they're doing, and they just take it for granted, well, I'm not--
Speaker 1: No, you can't--
Speaker 2: --gonna fit in then.
Speaker 1: --you can't have almost no friends and not notice.  You can't have, you know, you've got the athletic white guys trying to beat you up, you've got the black kids shunning you.  They weren't mean, per se--well, a few of them were, but they were just, were, yeah, this guy's a dork.  Yeah, no, you notice that for real.  So I didn't have a lot of good friends in high school, one or two.  One I still keep in touch with, and she is now some head muckety muck at Johnson and Johnson.  And I didn't really get to know her until much later, until the sophomore year in high school, during the second year of high school.  So middle school, my two friends from grade school, we were, we still would hang out, but we, we grew more distant.  They were accepted in the black community and kind of went off in that direction.  I kind of didn't, always in the band, always hanging out with these BMX guys.  So I, those guys were my friends, but they were--it wasn't a deep, meaningful friendship with them, with most of them.  There was one guy, actually, who was really smart.  And he ended up actually at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] undergrad.  I used to ride with him in Baldwin, Michael, Michael Schultz.  So, socially, yeah, not a happy, not a happy time.
Speaker 2: Now, what's the name of your school?
Speaker 1: Baldwin Junior High School.
Speaker 2: Okay, Baldwin Junior, okay.
Speaker 1: Yep, Baldwin Junior High School.
Story_ID: 25354
Speaker 1: Okay, and so did things change any when you went to high school?
Speaker 2: Academically, now, I was in honors science in ninth grade.
Speaker 1: And this is where?  At--
Speaker 2: Baldwin High School.
Speaker 1: Oh, Baldwin High School.
Speaker 2: Yeah, not very creative with the names.  So now, I'm in honors science.  I meet Eugene Warasilla, and then I look around and decide that, okay, these classes are boring.  I've gotta fix this honors situation now.  And I started to add more honors classes.  So most of my cohorts would show up to high school in full honors, math, science, social studies, English, and I showed up with just science.  And then I added honors as I--so in tenth grade, I added honors math.  And then eleventh grade I added honors social studies.  And I remember one of my classmates said, you know, most people drop honors as they go through high school.  You're the only one I know who's picking 'em, and for math, in particular, mom had to hire a tutor because there was a bunch of math I didn't know.  So she had to get me up to speed with 10th grade honor math.  And now, now school became a lot more interesting, in particular, actually, ironically, honors science and math you would think were my favorites, honors social studies, in fact, was the most interesting because it was, he would, you know, he would phrase these questions.  Then we'd have to think about these things and write about these things and put the history into more of a perspective and try to understand what these people actually did.  What was the political climate for real and, you know, after World War II?  What, what--and one of the reports I wrote was, you know, would I have dropped the bomb?  And, you know, get into the literature, understand what Truman [President Harry Truman] was wrestling with, what was the aft situation.  You know, it seems clear now, but was it clear then?  So that was good.  So then, yeah, I'm trying to think of highlights.  And maybe you should ask a question now.
Speaker 1: Well, did you run for any offices or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, no, [whispering] I was--office?
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Come on now.  No, I was still racing my bikes.  I was still building robots, even though I built my first robot in the 10th grade, between 10th and 11th grades in the summer.  That's when I got that working.  And then, but I'd been trying for about a year before that.  And--
Speaker 1: So I take it your sports interests revolved around the bikes?
Speaker 2: That was it.  That was it.
Speaker 1: And that was pretty much it.
Speaker 2: That was it.  Yeah, that's all.
Speaker 1: SO you didn't play any of the other--
Speaker 2: I tried out for soccer, but I'd played soccer--and to see me play soccer, the way my dad described it, you know, the ball would go by, and I'd be looking at the grass.  I'd be looking at an insect.  I'd be picking up clover and just, you know, I'd run after something, and then I'd get distracted by something around.  It just, I was not, I was not--so I actually, I remember trying out for soccer in--that must have been high school I tried out for soccer.  And I don't think I would have--the coach had something, you know, but I didn't even like all the running that they were doing.  This is no fun.  And it's like, I don't wanna do this.  And I don't think I would have made the team, although I was, I was fairly fast.  I was not, I'm not athletic, I'm kind of athletic.  And I can kick the ball.  So as a fullback, I'm a fine defensive, kind of play.  I don't have the agility for offense.  I was never, that was never something I was good at.  I'm the kind of the bipedal acrobatics of moving and dancing and getting the ball in between your opponents legs.  That's not, I can't do that.  So, but there's no (unclear), there's no love at all.  Riding was the only sport that actually, I actually liked.  It was the only athletic thing I actually liked.  There's something about two wheels and the lean and the carve and the big power, the big energy, and timing the trick right and when I was jumping, I was, I was always, for that kind of sport, I was always the worst of the good people.  So there were, and I say that, I should say it more carefully.  If you get me on a racetrack now, with a bunch of people, I'll be the slowest of the fast group, for the most part.  And that's pretty much how it was with riding.  I, some of my friends could see it.  I remember Alfred.  Alfred and Mike Schultz, both of them, they could see a trick and just do it.  And there was a mapping from their visual centers to their motor centers in a way that I did not have.  And that's, that's what athleticism is, right, to be able to see something or to visualize it and then understand how to make your body do it.  So I would have to practice and practice to do a good 360, right?  Even to this day, right, you've got your bike and you need to turn into it and jump and then straighten out and come down, but you gotta make sure to get your back tire down first, but you can't be--lean like this.  Otherwise, you tear your ACL, and I can attest to this.  You need to be more vertical so you can land and pivot and keep on going.  So you need to land almost like this.  So you come over, and you land on the straight and keep on going.  So I have actually dissect each part of it to do it properly and think about it and make sure that, all right, you're gonna get your--you're gonna take off this way so that you can get your back tire down first.  And I don't think that my cohorts who were good had to think like that, that hard.
Speaker 1: So you had the ambition and the heart to try these tricks--
Speaker 2: Over and over and over again.
Speaker 1: --but they weren't--so this means that you were hitting the ground a lot probably.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, so I didn't break any bones until college.  But there were some concussions and some sprains and some various, you know, a whole lots of scraps and scratches.  But athletes are falling all the time.  I didn't fall--I don't say I fell, I may have fell a little more than my cohorts, but not all that much more.  It wasn't out of--that wasn't, that wasn't the thing that I noticed.  The thing that I noticed was that, you know, they can hit a jump, do a 360 and land perfectly.  I can hit a jump, I'll do a 360 and I'll land it, yeah, half the time, and the other half of the time, either I bail or I land at 270 or 295 or 300 degrees, you know, close enough that I can kind of work my way out of it.  But it was not a smooth, not a smooth landing.
Speaker 1: Okay, but that's a, you know, it takes a lot of courage to do that stuff.  I see kids--
Speaker 2: No, it's not as much courage as it is naivety, stupidity and invincibility.  So I didn't lose the invincibility until I tore my ACL in '97' [1997].  And that was when, I mean I clearly remember.  I was sitting at the top of half, after surgery, after rehab.  I'm at the top of the half pipe.  I've got my brand new shiny titanium carbon fiber with knee brakes on, and I'm about to jump into a 12 foot drop, to do a half-pipe thing.  And I'm thinking, you know, I could fall and hurt my knee.  And that was the first time I had that kind of hesitation for fear or injury.  And I knew that I was in a different chapter.  But this is long past high school.  This, this is after college.  This is years and years.  So it wasn't until I had a serious injury that was a serious recovery that I started to slow down.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 25355
Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell Dr. Eugene's last name?
Speaker 2: W-A-R-A-S-I-L-L-A.
Speaker 1: W-A-R-A-S--
Speaker 2: --I--
Speaker 1: --I--
Speaker 2: --L-L--
Speaker 1: -L--
Speaker 2: --A.
Speaker 1: --A--okay.
Speaker 2: Maybe one "L".  Yeah, the last I heard from him, and I don't think I got back to him too.  Now, if he retired, he lives in Florida.  I don't know if he's still alive.  Big deal.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so he's the one now--now, he helped you with your robot project for--
Speaker 2: He couldn't help technically, but he helped with, you know, some structure, having a place to work on campus.  But, and that wasn't really all that useful, right, 'cause I had to drive all my equipment in from home, set up and then do something and then drag it all back.  But the real benefit was the affirmation that this is valuable.  You should continue to do this.  You should, you should devote significant resources to this.  This is an important thing for you to do.
Speaker 1: Now, what were you able to do with your project?  Were you able to build a robot that could actually do something in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it had--I put a wagon on it so I could make it drive forward and turn left and squirt the water gun like a, like the big track toy at the time.  It had a little keyboard on it so you could type things in it.  It could make a little music.  It had a few different, four different tunes it could play.  You could play a little song.  It could pull around a little, the big track transport.  I took that big track transport and modified it so it could jump things.  So it wasn't really, you know, I tried to put sensors on it, tried to build a body for it and put sensors on it.  But that was beyond my mechanical ability at the time, to get that kind of stuff working.  So I remember the springs would always break off.  I had these whiskers mounted on leaf switches, and as soon as they would catch anything, they would tear off.  And I didn't know how to, how to build that properly.  It wasn't until I got to college, I learned how to build those things properly.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Well, then after that, then I went to go build a laptop.  So I took the same kind of chips, 658516 for the people who are listening, and then I got memory.  And I stacked the memory chips up and I didn't win any science fairs.  The only science fair I won, in fact, was by NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: ACT-SO?
Speaker 2: ACT-SO.
Speaker 1: Yeah, NAACP (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And I, this is my last science fair too, in fact.  I, 'cause I was dejected 'cause you get to a science fair.  And I remember, I had a computer.  I remember for the last science fair, I had a computer.  I built a laptop, and the shop teacher, Ernie Sabilla (ph.) had a, had helped me bend and form steel and he spot weld the steel to make a case to my laptop.  I had a little screen, and you could print, or you could--it had a little word processor.  You could type some simple things in, and you could print them out, and you could connect the robot to it, and control the robot from the laptop with a little joystick.  And I was trying to make a laptop version of my Atari computer.  By now, I had an IBM computer, so I was using that.  I'd written a sims list so I could write code with my lap--I mean just all, this whole enterprise was all set up.  So I'm at the science fair, and I have, you know, probably four years worth of work sitting there.  I'm a senior (unclear) and the judge was like, okay.  What is your hypothesis?  I'm like, "Well, I don't have a hypothesis.  Hypothesis is that you can build a laptop and a computer in high school.  That's not a hypothesis.  Where did you apply a scientific method?  Well, I applied a scientific method every time (unclear) developed the problem.  Then I always have to, the fourth, conjecture what I think the answer is and then test it.  If it doesn't work, I have to find another thing.  So, didn't do well in science fairs.  I didn't, I didn't fit into the, "My pea plant grew more with more light--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --than your pea plant grew."  But at this ACT-So competition, they had a technology track.  And the judges at the time, two of them I think were from Digital Electronics Corporation, which I think had been a, I think they had a lot of minority engineers.  So they got to my booth, and I remember the long pause, and--because this is, looking back, this is not clearly my father or mother or somebody built this for me.  There's no way a high school student is gonna show up with this kind of hand-made stuff.  So they started asking questions.  One of them, in fact, one of them even asked me, you know, how are you doing (unclear) interrupt priorities on your inner (unclear) routines.  And I was like, well, I've got, I've only got two interrupts on the ship.  I have a non-mascavel (ph.) and a mascavel.  The non-mascavel is for the screen update.  The mascavel, I use that for different things.  But I have my own search team, blah, blah, blah.  And, and the guy's like, okay.  And then I said, I built it myself, really I did.  And the guy says, oh, I know that.  And I said, well, how do you know, like, 'cause at this time he was looking at my circuit board.  And he's like because no self respecting engineer would solder chips together on a circuit board like that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And I said, I was like, what's wrong with my circuit board?  (Laughter).  But that was, so I won that one.  That was the only one I won.  And it came with it, a scholarship from Digital Equipment to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology].  It was a small scholarship.  I was, I think $5,000 a year, and a new computer, which was very exciting because I get to replace--and it was a 16 Megahertz 386 computer.  Ooh, this was fast.  And, but the real thing was, I finally got a hold, I finally--I'd never met anybody who knew what I was doing.  So that was, that was a big deal.
Story_ID: 25356
Speaker 1: So what else in high school.
Speaker 2: Oh, my girlfriend.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I had a girlfriend in high school.  So I--she was in the band.  She played the flute.
Speaker 1: Now, this is better than a lot of high school students.  Not everybody has a girlfriend.
Speaker 2: That's right.  No, this was a huge deal.  And my mom and I were really struggling with our relationship at the time.  She, she wanted me to do things, and I wanted to rebel.  And we were at loggerheads.  It turns out we're still--we're both very stubborn.  We both don't, we have our very clear ways of doing things.  You know, I have friction now with my wife now because I'm very much like my mother in this kind of way, where I want things to be set up just so.  I know how I want things done.  I want them very carefully, and, and I did not want to subscribe to this.  So, not only was having a relationship powerfully important, but having--she, her family was where I could hide when things were not going well at home.  So it was a two-fer.  It gave me a place to vent and decompress, and it gave me the support of a significant other that, that--we stayed together for three years.  And we broke up when I was a sophomore in college, very, very big deal.  And just wonderful people.  She, she actually--she just got married a few years ago, and still I'm in contact with her every (unclear) year or so.  But, but in terms of me developing as a person, aside from technology, it was huge.  And they're form Trinidad, yeah.  So that was--
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  So many people never even talk about that kind of thing in high school, relationship.  And it seems it does affect whatever you do, you know.  So, a lot, I mean and maybe that's they don't even talk about it.  Yeah, there are some people I've interviewed that don't even mention their wife (laughter) and been married for fifty years or something, you know, but that's--
Speaker 2: No, it was, I mean I didn't--
Speaker 1: --it's important.
Speaker 2: I was, I was lonely.  And a random piece of context.   So Les Mis [Les Miserable], the movie just came out, Les Miserable, the movie just came out.  And I was going through--my stepmother came to visit.  She was up here after the holidays.  So we were going through the songs.  And I remember in high school, I used to identify so much with the character, "Ebony", unrequited love for the main, not the protagonist, the secondary protagonist character, Emerius (ph.).  And I remember I used to just really identify with her songs, and they're sad songs of unrequited love.  And now, you know, I'm forty, and when I listen to her music, I remember that I used to like it a lot, her part.  But I don't identify with it anymore.  So there was a sadness there that was big, that affected many, many things.  And that sadness didn't, didn't fade, until college really.
Story_ID: 25357
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you won an ACT-SO in high school, right?  So this gives you some scholarship money and--
Speaker 2: Well, a little bit of money and a computer.
Speaker 1: And a computer.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: A 386.
Speaker 2: And, and, you know, finally talk with somebody who knew what I was talking about.  So my dad, you know, his major was in electrical engineering.  But when I was working on, you know, I've got microchips and memories and latches and chip (unclear).  And he pulled out his books, you know, [blowing off dust].  There's a vacuum tube, and some other kind of, some other stuff.  I'm like dad, this is great.  So, but, you know, what he did take me though, is that, you know, I don't remember or I don't understand what voltage and current were.  I remember soldering to my model train rails--I must have been ten.  You know, who gives an 800 degree soldering line to a 10-year old, right?  What kind of parent is this?  I, I--so, you know, the need-- I remember I did an outreach program for, at the Smithsonian.  And we had two schools come in.  We had one school from the inner-city, the Madden School, and these kids were sharp.  They're all black.  So they looked and acted and sounded like inner-city black kids.  They weren't quiet, they weren't as quiet.  They had accents.  Their grammar was wrong.  But they asked hard questions, and they understood what we were talking about.  And then we had another school that was bused in from some suburb somewhere in D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia].  And they looked and they sounded like, you know, the smart, suburban kids that they were.  Both groups did equally well on the first half, the things that we demonstrated ourselves and talking about, as me and one of my friends were there, a cousin from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] was there.  And he had a virtual reality-pointing device, and he was moving around.  And I had my little robots, and we're talking about these different technologies.  And then we got to the second half, which was a radio take-apart.  We're gonna take these radios apart and ask questions.  The white kids were first, and they took theirs apart.  We got to all the parts.  We found the questions, we talked about radios, and here's a coil, and here's a sting, and blah, blah, blah, blah.  And then the black kids came, late in the afternoon, and after about ten minutes or so, they didn't have their radios apart.  And I'm like, what, this is--what's going on?  This is no good.  We can't, I was like this is--and I knew enough to know that, okay, these kids are smart.  My cohort was like, well, you know, the black kids, they're not that bright.  I was like, no, that's not the problem here.  There's something else wrong here.  So going around and looking at them, I remember this clearly.  There was this, there was this guy, this boy, and he had a screwdriver, and the screws were recessed. So it's a little plastic radio, and the screws are recessed.  You had to put your screwdriver in this hole and screw it.  And he was, he was unscrewing it.  He had it going the right way.  He was unscrewing it, and I was like, it's gotta be done by now.  He was like, no, I'm still turning it.  And what was happening is that he had unscrewed it, and he expected it to come out.  But it was a recessed screw so it was turning and just skipping up and down on the thread.  And he, he did not know that it was done.  When some of them, they were putting it down and they were turning it, and I could hear it skipping on the, across the threads of the screw.  So it wasn't engaging.  Like, you have to push down.  Like well, I want it to come out.  I know, but you have to push down to have enough force so that tactile knowledge of how to engineer, how the world is put together and how to disassemble the world, that group of students just didn't have it.  And that was, as an educator, that was a profound moment.  Why don't you have the experience?  Because you have no garage.  You have no lawnmower, you have no, you have no tools in the house.  You have no father who's taking apart his car every five minutes.  I told you that Mazda he gave me was a great gift.  It was on engine Number three.  He would come up on a regular basis.  We'd change the starter.  We changed the alternator.  We swapped out the grace disk (unclear).  We, we, you know, we did all the stuff.  I hated every moment of it because it's Boston [Massachusetts], and we didn't have a garage.  It was cold in February and March, and trying to change our starter motor.  In fact, we gave up on the starter.  We swapped one out, and then that one developed flat spots.  And then for the last six months of its life, the car is push start only.  I got quite good at bumping a, bumping the car for it.  So, I can't give, you know, we can give mom a lot of credit for the resources and the intellectual stuff.  But dad laid the foundation of engineering from a very, very early age.
Story_ID: 25358
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well, when you were graduating from high school, was there any doubt that you were going to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology]?
Speaker 2: Middle school.  I was watching TV.  NOVA had a special on.  This class at MIT, they built these mechanical mecatronic (ph.) things.  They would drive and collect bottles.  And middle school, I was like, mom, I'm going there.  That is fantastic.  The class was 270, 2.70 (unclear), a famous, famous class, Professor Woody Flowers on "Introductory Design".  And his observation was that, you know, these students don't building of stuff, they don't do design until later on.  Let's push this down to the sophomore level, and now people are pushing it maybe down to the freshman level.  But let's make a hard design challenge.  Let's give 'em a box of junk.  It wasn't junk, it turned out.  It was very carefully selected components, but it looks like junk to an undergrad.  So I saw that in middle school.  So I'm like, I'm going there.  My mom goes, James, that's MIT.  It's like okay, I'm going there.  Where is MIT?  What's this place?  It's, if you see the movie 'Stand and Deliver,' and he goes up and he puts calculus, Edward James Olmos writes "Calculus" on the board.  And I forget the name of the actor, Lou Diamond Phillips, he says, oh, Hey, great, teacher, what's Calculus?  And I was like, yeah, what's, what's MIT?  But that's, that was the first time I, I said, actually those words.
Speaker 1: Okay, by the way, you had calculus in high school, I'm sure, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, all right, so you knew you were going to MIT.  There was no problem getting in or anything.  You're, 'cause you're taking--
Speaker 2: Got in early, in fact.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, all right.  So you graduated from high school in--
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety [1990]--
Speaker 1: Nineteen--
Speaker 2: Ninety [1990].
Speaker 1: Ninety [1990], okay.
Story_ID: 25359
Speaker 1: So you start MIT, fall of 1990.  Okay, so, now, what was MIT like in--
Speaker 2: Ah, so there was--you asked about sights, sounds and smells, but I can, you can--to this day almost, you could put me in most of the rooms, most of the buildings on the campus, close my eyes, and I can identify it by smell and sound.  So the place was just alive.  It was electric with, cracking with technology and innovation and intellect and creativity, and for me, in particular, there was finally now social acceptance because now, here's a community of some 300 African Americans, my age, who are all at least as smart as I am, at least moving in the same thing I'm doing.  I mean I fit, I fit right in.  Actually, among my black cohorts, and among the community in general, I stood out in my ability to actually engineer, my ability to get things built.  I, I was off the scale in terms of getting things built.  And I remember one of my friends, Thomas Massey, a white guy from rural Kentucky, who's now a Congressman now--life is [making swirling wind sound].  He met me.  He saw my room.  He was like, well, I've gotta take you to my lab.  I've got to introduce you to people in my lab.  You've got to come work here.  You can't, you can't go do this other stuff 'cause to him, the way he phrased it, you know, the big disappointment, he expected to get to MIT and find everyone just like him, building stuff all the time.  And it turns out that a large portion of the people there are really good students.  And they're not natural engineers.  And that's when I began to realize that some are natural engineers and some people just take classes.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay, so you say some are just good students that know how to get good grades.  And, but they're not necessarily inclined for it.  Okay.
Speaker 2: They learn it, you know, they do okay.  But then often they go and get MBA's in other stuff.  But some, I have no choice.  I had to be an engineer.  I can't go get an MBA and do that.  That--some part of me would just explode.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, but socially though, I've got these cohorts now.  And they are as good as I am and they're as brown as I am if not browner.  And this was, this was a big deal, right?  I had people, as opposed to making fun of me, about how to get a haircut, say, you know, you should get a haircut, James.  Let's, here, let me go help you out.  We're gonna take you to the barber.  We're gonna get your hair cut, right, and people saying, and what are you wearing?  You can't wear that.  Here, let, no, hold on.  Let's, let's--
Speaker 1: How big was your Afro or the--
Speaker 2: Oh, it wasn't, it wasn't that big.  It was just--so mom, mom would cut it, right?  Mom would cut it, and she would (laughter), so mom wants to be careful, right?  So there're no clippers, they were scissors.  And then she had to keep track of where she had cut.  So she'd put a little hair clip in it, and cut it and then leave the clip in and put--cut something else and put a clip in it.  And this, so undergrad, we get there to undergrad.  And we're good, a guy takes me to a barbershop.  I keep forgetting him, but down at Central Square, Danny's Barber.  And I got a haircut.  Now, it's better, and then sophomore year, one of my friends took me shopping, said we have to get some clothes.
Speaker 1: So he didn't take you to Sears, I guess (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, no, who took me shopping?  Was it Tracey?  I remember shopping for my first apartment with my friend, Tracey.  She was at Wellesley [College].  I don't remember where I got the clothes from.  And then, and then, yeah, so but that was a big deal.  And that was--I wanted to go visit.  I was there for a conference, two years ago, and ran into the Dean of Minority Affairs, Dean Blanstaiden (ph.).  She saw me in the hall and gave me a big hug.  And she said, "Welcome home".  And, and that moved me.  I had to think about that.  I was like, well, you know, I think she's right.  I think she's right.  That place became my emotional base at some, at some point.
Story_ID: 25360
Speaker 1: Yeah, so when I got there, when I got to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] as a freshman, I didn't even realize, I couldn't even imagine what it would be like to be around a cohort that was essentially just like me.  I didn't even know that I was missing it because I couldn't even conceive of what I was missing.  I couldn't, couldn't imagine what that would be like.  So that was, again, you know, they have these dual--just like high school, you have these dual kind of memories where there's this, the obvious huge technology boost showing up.  But then there's this social support, and also what's going on at the institute that I didn't, wasn't aware of, is that they had been aggressively pulling in more minorities and more women.  So my class, I think we got to forty one women, which was the high at the time, I think.  And minorities were pretty on par with the national distribution, and they had, you know, in decades prior, installed a set of powerful administrators, this cabal of minority administrators at MIT that had broken down huge walls, you know, decades ago.  We have a program called "Interfaith" that pulls in minority students before their freshman year.  And essentially, it's a program to provide structure and support for academics and cultural awareness.  In reality, it's the beat-down before freshman year.  So when you get there, it's an abrupt expectation adjustment, is a way to phrase it, where you show up, and you would just get your butt handed to you for the summer.  And that program at MIT, I think just entered its 43rd year.  So that's four decades where they've been identifying that we have to fix this.  We have to address the problem of minorities in science and engineering.  So I show up to this culture that had been layers upon layers of culture of minorities in science and engineer and Black Student Union, National Society of Black Engineers.  My floor was half black in my dorm.  I mean it was just, it was a whole nother thing.
Speaker 2: I've seen the Black Student Union.  I shot a picture of it when I was there a couple years--last Spring, you know.  And it's serious.
Speaker 1: And, you know, the fact that there was a whole building, there was a building, a whole lounge, the BSU Lounge was a place.  We'd go there and eat lunch, you know, three times a week, four times a week.  We'd get the lunch at "Walker" which was the dorm, and then we'd just walk thirty feet over the (unclear) [track?].  I think, they may have moved since then.  But when I was an undergrad, it was a conveniently located, walk, and it was a, you know, the center of the community.  I, I know when I go visit schools, if I have the ear of, you know, senior people, like your black students need to have a place where they can put up, you know, Martin [Martin Luther King, Jr.], Malcolm [Malcolm X] and Obama [President Barack Obama] on the wall and paint it red, black and green and eat lunch there ideally.  Some schools have that place.  Some schools don't.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and it was something that was fought for years and years ago.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: It's been maintained by some and not by others.  You know, I was glad to see MIT still hanging in there with (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: The place gets, and, again, you know, distance gives you a better perspective, the place gets a frightening number of things right.  They misstep, but then they correct.  And then they--and they're honest, and they go, yeah, well, oh, let's go this way now [fast].
Story_ID: 25361
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, who were some of your mentors at MIT?
Speaker 2: The biggest in that space is Dr. Anita Flynn.  So she was, at the time, she was staff in Rodney Brooks' robot lab.  So I mentioned my friend, Thomas, Thomas Massey, he saw me freshman year.  He was like you've got to meet Anita.  So he took me to his lab, and he was working for, he was working--he must have been working for Ken Salisbury at the time.  I don't know who he was working for.  So he introduced me to Anita.  And Anita's response is, of course, we're not hiring 'cause that was her standard response because every student in the school, every (unclear) person at school who's interested in robotics had been, is trying to work in that group.  So then I went to go work for Professor William Daley.  I didn't do a good job.  This is my freshman, my second semester of freshman year, and I was building a clock de-skewer circuit for the J-machine.  This is a 65,000 node parallel super computer.  So my job was to build a circuit that would keep the clock signals within a few nano-seconds of each other.  So I built a little card that plugged into a PC, and, and started working on the circuits for that.  And, but it was, it was nothing.  On the side, I was building my little robots.  I was trying to get a little robot built and stuff like that.  At the time, I was working on now, a much smaller robot built on, built on the chasse of a Stomper 4x4, a purple Stomper pick-up truck that had motors and stuff.  And I remember doing my interview.  They were like, whoa, this guy is doing robots.  We should introduce him to Anita.  It was like, nah, we'll keep him for ourselves.  So, this is (unclear) in the J-Machine.  But it didn't work out.  And I was too immature to end it professionally.  I just vanished, which is, now that I'm older, undergrads do that all the time.  You expect them--but I felt very bad about that, and I didn't wanna do that anymore.  So I wanted to make sure that the next job I got that I would like it, and would do things I wanted to do.  I also changed my major from computer engineering to electrical engineering 'cause I decided that computer engineering was boring.  I didn't, I didn't understand what computer science was at the time.  I didn't, I was too ignorant to know what these things were.  So the second time I went to meet with Anita, I brought my robots now, and I had this half-finished small robot, and she had been working on--I didn't know that, she had been working micro-robots for six, seven years now.  But she wants to build micro-robots.  So I show up with the small robot, and it turns out, it was about the same size as a robot she and her colleague had built the year prior, but it was better.  It was more capable, it was way more capable.  And she was like oooh, we can't hire you, but we can't pay you, but maybe you can work for parts.  Maybe you can finish this in our lab.  And I was like, well, with no pay.  And like no, we can't pay you.  We don't have any money.  But you have all the parts.  You have parts?  Sign me up, free parts?  Whew, I'm--who needs money when you have free parts.  So that was--and I still am so close to Anita.  We talk all the time.  And that was, that was a break through.  And she got me in the lab with Rodney Brooks, who was a pioneer in robotics.
Story_ID: 25362
Speaker 1: Now, what's--there's a movie about him called 'Fast, Cheap and Out of Control,' right?  Well, what is that about?  What, I mean what is it?
Speaker 2: So, that was a producer finding crazy people doing crazy stuff.  And Rod really was crazy.  I mean he was out there.  He, he--and also, like MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], correct a staggering, large percentage of the time; makes lots of mistakes, but for the most part, he's moving in the right direction.  And he saw in artificial intelligence in the '70s [1970s], growing out of the culture from the '60s [1960s], but he was publishing his work in the '80s [1980s].  He was like, this is wrong.  We've been on this path for twenty years now.  It's formal reasoning, classic AI, where you make a model of the world.  You reason about the models, and you do something to--that, what you do matches the model.  And the problem is that it's very difficult to model the world.  The world's messy.  When you're walking across the street, you know, there're cars coming, there're things moving.  There's a squirrel running.  You know, you have to prioritize and you have to have quick reflexes to be (unclear) these things.  And if you have, if you have to construct a 3-D model, and then reason about that 3-D model, the first problem is that, well, it doesn't really simplify your understanding of the world because you just took something that's complicated, you made and (unclear) show representation that potentially was (unclear) complicated, and then now, you still have to reason about this complicated thing.  So you've taken the problem, you just moved it down a level.  Okay, fine, we'll make a model that's basically a model, and then reason about the simplified model.  And, and you can play these games and spurred on by--well, success is, it turns out things like chess and checkers are pretty easy calculus, pretty easy Algebra.  You can get computers to do these things pretty easy.  It turns out, these are not the hard things.  The hard things are tying shoes.  You need to have a plan 'cause these laces have to move at a particular top, logical plan to form a knot, and they need to have mechanical dexterity to move them in this thing.  You have to sense force, you have sense--as you pull the lace through your finger, you have to sense slippage.  You have to get a notion of how tight you're making it.  What side of the lace to pull on to make it a knot as opposed to pull the knot out.  So there are no robots right now who can tie shoes.  It's too hard to (unclear).  But his big breakthrough was to say, you know what?  Let's not model the world.  Let's use the world as its own model and we'll just sense the world.  So essentially, (unclear) we'll just bump around into stuff.  And if we bump into something, well, there's a wall there.  We'll go another direction.  So really getting down to simple stuff.  So when I showed up, they're studying carrier pigeons and crabs and cockroaches and other kinds of simpler animals, who seem to have more reflexive behaviors or more rot behaviors.  So the movie that you're talking about is him on kind of this lunatic fringe or (unclear), talking about--and it was out of a paper that he wrote.  It's how a paper he wrote years ago about sending robots to Mars.  You know, you don't wanna send a big fancy robot.  You wanna a whole bunch of fast robots.  They're gonna be really cheap, and largely, out of control.  You can't control a thousand robots on Mars.  So they were talking about, he was thinking about this stuff, you know, a decade before I got there.  And so the movie puts him in contrast with this guy (unclear) who was (unclear) rash, and this other guy doing something else, I can't remember.  It's an enjoyable flick.  And he looks, he looks crazy, he looks goofier.  He is as crazy as he is, but he looks odder there than he actually is.  He's a normal, well-adjusted kind of guy.  But it tells the story of him, you know, let's just--here's this whole thing.  Let's just go sideways, and that's what he did.
Story_ID: 25363
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, now, you developed there, from what I understand, something called CLEO, which is a--well, what was, explain what CLEO is?
Speaker 2: So CLEO was the first, the first, small robot I built that had, that was fully autonomous and had enough processing and sensing to do some tasks.  And the way the money works, right, you have to spin this picture of these future applications.  And we were gonna go into the small intestine.  So we had some money from doctors to do this.  So I took a Domino's pizza box and cut out--I made a little maze, looked like the large intestine (unclear).  And CLEO would drive through it and get to the thing and then come back out.
Speaker 1: How big was CLEO?  About like that?
Speaker 2: It was a little bit bigger than a cubic inch.
Speaker 1: Okay, but small enough to go through intestines?
Speaker 2: Well, no, no, small enough--small enough to go through an intestine model, made out of cardboard on a Dominos's pizza box.  So real intestines, we actually--then we actually went and we hired two undergrads.  So this is my, I guess I'm a junior now.  So I was kind of the senior undergrad and Dean and Art, and these guys, mechanical engineers, were trying to figure out how to move in a large intestine.  So, so I remember once the purchase order lady, the email hit my inbox first, like, you bought ten pounds of chicken skins?  And I was like, I guess we did.  Why are we (unclear), gotta get a hold of Deano.  Yeah, I got chicken skins 'cause we have to build intestines because we have to build something that has some kind of, some kind of mechanical properties that are similar to what you get inside a large intestine.  So they decide chicken skin was the best way to do it.  It turns out moving in a large intestine is really fiendishly difficult.  Animals do it with cilia and hoofs and grippers and things that you really can't employ as a robot.  So getting things to move.  So we built--we, they built these clever mechanical devices with, you know, threads on all sides that would kind of rotate, and then, like those kind of squishy toys that roll through your hands, except they had the robotic, (unclear) except put threads all the way around.  And that could make a little bit of progress, but it couldn't pull any weight, and he had to always worry about ingestion of the--you don't wanna ingest someone's colon into the machine.  And you couldn't make it small enough and the complexity, it'd get gummed up.  And it's just a fiendishly difficult problem.  So now, they're looking at using magnets to move things around or as micro-robotics get more mature, and we can build little micro things and work on a micro level, then there's more possibility of moving these around at that scale.  But on the macro-scale, it's--it forces, it--I don't, I'm just not clear if there's a good solution to it or I don't know, I don't know of one.  And we may have viable micro-level things before we solve the macro (unclear) problem.  So, but that was the whole point of CLEO, but--CLEO.  And CLEO was the precursor--actually, the first robot I built, the first small one was Goliath.  And Goliath actually was smaller than inch on all sides.  But Goliath didn't have a good center payload.  It just had bump centers.  That's all it had, and light centers.  CLEO was the first of the ant robots.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I decide that, okay, let's understand ants, let's understand how to, how to use--you know, I'm marinating in Rodney's group, with all these grad students talking about biological systems, talking about artificial intelligence.  Mya Matrique (ph.) was there.  She is now I think a dean at USC [University of Southern California].  But she built twenty robots, toaster-sized robots to look at collective behaviors.  My mentor, Anita, was working on micro-robots, micro-motors, in particular, for micro-robots.  So I'm surrounded by all this stuff.  So people always say, you know, you have this breakthrough.  I go, yeah, yeah, yeah.  I can't take all that much credit for it, really.  It was the environment I was in, and the obvious thing to do, well, let's try and build some ants.  Let's try to understand insect behavior with enough fine grain detail to try to get the robots to do some of these things.  That's what, that's the task I set out for my Bachelors' thesis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the program you were working with Anita was the Undergraduate Research Opportunities program?  That's what it was called?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: I just wanted to get that in the record.
Speaker 2: UROP is how it's pronounced.
Speaker 1: UROP, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no one ever says, "Undergraduate Research Opportunities program".  It's UROP.
Story_ID: 25364
Speaker 1: All right, so, let's see, now, you were--I guess, now, you got your undergraduate degree, what?  In '94' [1994]?
Speaker 2: Class of '94' [1994].  I actually didn't get my degree till '95' [1995].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I fell behind in electrical engineering, and I picked up a minor in mechanical engineering.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And between the two of them, I got myself an extra semester.  So then I, so then I--yeah, I think I was about two classes over.  So I had, and then I committed to the minor, and that put me into the next two semesters.
Speaker 1: Okay, you and Tom Massey appeared at the Information Age Theater at the Smithsonian?
Speaker 2: Smithsonian.  That was the workshop I was talking about.
Speaker 1: That's '95' [1995].  Yeah, the one you alluded to earlier with the inner-city kids and the suburban white kids coming to--yeah, okay. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so 1995, you were talking about, well, that was, seemed to be a very, like a milestone moment.  Now, you--Tom Massey won the--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Limelson (ph.) Award one year, and you won it too at some point.
Speaker 1: I did.  Yeah, he--and both of us actually were up for it the first year it was offered.  I think it was '95' [1995], I dare say, either '95' [1995] or '96' [1996].  And he won it that year.  And, and I really couldn't, I really didn't have any hard feelings.  He had a strong, he had a strong application, and he'd done some really cool stuff.  So if you're gonna lose, you know, lose to your friend.
Speaker 2: One of the best, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so I came back and put together a strong application in '03' [2003], and then I won it in '03 [2003], and this is back when I was in grad school, now.  So I'd gone out, built (unclear) robot, I'd done a bunch of stuff--was at UC-Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley].  I left UC-Berkeley and came back and applied in '03' [2003].
Speaker 2: Okay, now, your display had to do with robotic ants, right, I believe, is that true?
Speaker 1: (No audible response).  [Nodding, yes].
Speaker 2: Okay, and these robotic ants were, they're not like small as ants, but they're (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: They're--
Speaker 2: About like that.
Speaker 1: I think if I remember correctly, it's 1.2 by 1.1 by .9.  So they're the, they're the biggest cubic-inch robots that have ever been built in that they're a little more than a cubic inch.  So, so but the thing that made them distinct was the sensor capability.  So you've got your, your bump sensors, light sensors, tilt sensor, infrared communication, and then some lights on them so you could tell what they were doing.  So that was a lot to get into that form factor.  And that let me try to do--okay, so now, let's do some science.  All right, let's try to do some science.  And what I realized that I don't know enough to, I haven't learned enough to do science properly.  I needed, it turns out I needed a PhD to do science properly.  I didn't know at the time.  I just had a Bachelors.
Speaker 2: Well, get, just kind of explore that a little bit.  Some people say, well, if you know what you're doing, then why--I mean but why would you need a PhD to do it?
Speaker 1: Oh, you don't--I didn't know the math.  I didn't know the algorithms.  I didn't know how to do a proper, I needed to do a good solid controller, when to reach for what particular software tool, language, what is the--what had been done.  I didn't know how to get into literature and do proper scholarship.  I didn't know how to put together a good solid (unclear) work section.  I didn't know the importance of publishing, why you care to publish.  I didn't know, I mean just, it goes on and on and on.  I mean so the notion that ignorance is the generator of good ideas, generator of--there is certainly indoctrination can kill good ideas.  But ignorance does not enable technology and, in particular, if you wanna do good work, you need to know enough to know how to do the good work.  You can come up with some clever ideas, but almost anything that you come up with--'cause there've been a lot of clever people around for a long time.  People have been clever for, well, people have been clever since there were people.  And the odds, if you come up with a clever thing that has never been done at all, it's possible.  It happens.  It happens all the time.  It's just slim.  And circumstance favors the well prepared.  So if you know what's going on, you know what's happening, when you see something clever--now, there's a tension, you know, getting in a rut and still having the ability to know enough that when something, ah, this is good.  Right, you see it, you recognize it and now you've got the toolkit to capitalize.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Opportunity favors the well prepared.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 25365
Speaker 1: So, now, after you got your Bachelors degree, you stayed at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] to work on your Masters, right?
Speaker 2: No, no--
Speaker 1: No, you didn't--
Speaker 2: --no, I stayed on staff.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was just staff.
Speaker 1: Just staff, okay.
Speaker 2: No, I'm thinking with my Bachelors, I was all done with school.  I was all done with classes.  I was all done with school work.  I was ready to do some engineering.  And I stayed at MIT as research staff in the lab, working for Rodney Brooks.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And it was fun.  It was a good time, but by the end of that, I was trying to do science again.  And I didn't know enough to do science.  So I decided, I realized, gosh, I'm still too ignorant.  I need to go to grad school.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you went to--
Speaker 2: Berkley [University of California, Berkeley].
Speaker 1: --U-C, yeah, Berkley.  This is 19--
Speaker 2: Ninety-seven [1997].
Speaker 1: --97, [1997], okay.  All right, we've got your graduation date.  We don't have the other date.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm Class of '94' [1994].  So if you're gonna put something for, now, for MIT, be sure it says Class of '94' [1994] 'cause that's the class I came in with, and that's the class I identify with.
Speaker 1: All right, all right, so, now, did you--how far did you take your project to the point where you went to graduate school?  I mean how far did you take your project working with Rodney Brooks.
Speaker 2: At the end, so I was, so I was staff.  So my job was, my first and foremost thing was to get the lab under control, get the parts (unclear) organized, get the grants, (unclear) support, build the circuit boards with the grad students, you know, staff stuff.  This is not, my job was not a research job.  But there was time to do stuff.  So the, the limit that I got to was trying to build an ad hoc communications network.  And I remember not understanding why I was getting cycles in my graph.  It turns out I didn't have unique ID's and I could not guarantee--I couldn't guarantee what I now know as self stabilization in my distributed (unclear) breadth first search algorithm.  I didn't have unique ID's, and because of that, I could not break, several things.  I couldn't tell where measures (unclear) were.  I didn't have any ID's.  So I couldn't tell where measure (unclear) came from.  So I couldn't guarantee to build in acylitry, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  So that was, that was the height of the software, and then the--I started an abstract of a paper on robot density.  And I remember Rod looking at it, it's like well, you know, it's some stuff here, but this isn't very good.  I'm like, well, how do I make it better?  He's like, well, you need--you have to go to grad school.  You need to learn how to do this.  You can't, you know, you can't do this right now.  You just, this is not, you know, this is not--this is the beginning of a long path to write a paper on something like this.  So I went, so I went to grad school.  And I went, then decided that I wanted to be an electrical engineer 'cause that's what I had been in undergrad.  So I went into electrical engineering at U-C Berkley [University of California, Berkeley].  And then I realized that, gosh, I don't really wanna be an electrical engineer when I grow up.  I wanna be a computer scientist.  But there's no one at Berkley in the computer science department who was doing robotics kind of stuff.  So then I left there again and went to i-Robot and had a great time there working on this form that got me, got me so--that I'm most known for right now.
Speaker 1: Now, you stayed at U-C Berkley long enough to get a Masters degree?
Speaker 2: Masters--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Ninety-nine [1999].  So you left there in '99' [1999] and went to iRobot, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 25366
Speaker 1: Now, what is iRobot?
Speaker 2: iRobot was--
Speaker 1: Other than a movie we saw (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: That's not it.
Speaker 2: That's "I", comma-robot, and--
Speaker 1: "I", okay.
Speaker 2: --then there's little "i", big "R" Robot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess I just did it backwards, I'm sorry.  That's "I", comma robot as opposed to little "i", big "R" robot.  So iRobot, very much like the iMac and the, all the I's that were hot back then, was then at the time I had joined, just emerging from its start-up mode.  They'd been around in one form or another for almost a decade at that time, and they were largely, you know, a boutique, government contractor, looking to make moves to the consumer sector and to be a heavyweight defense contractor.  So they were simultaneously pursuing two paths to, you know, bulk up their defense presence and then also move to the consumer sector, both of which they accomplished plainly.  I'm unashamedly biased of the success of the company.  But they, they, you know, they were the first big robot company that really, truly tried to do this.  At the time, it was a trifecta of research where I was and government work, contracting for tactical robots and consumer products.  So that was, it was a lot of fun being there with good engineer--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A whole bunch of MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] alums, but just powerful engineers who knew their crade [sic], knew their traft [sic] knew their trade very---knew their craft and their trade very well, and would do things to extraordinary high levels of workmanship.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there from '99' [1999] to 2003?
Speaker 2: That's the best, that's the best way to phrase it.  I was part time for a--'cause I also started back at MIT in 2001.  So the first thing I did at MIT was take a semester off.  So I deferred first semester.  Then I came back for a semester, took two classes.  Then I went back to iRobot.  So I wasn't really full time at MIT until '02' [2002] and a half, half of the '02' [2002].  And then I had to make a decision.  Now, okay, I can't--there're not enough hours in the day.  So I had to leave iRobot formally in 2003.
Story_ID: 25367
Speaker 1: Okay, in 2003, you received Limelson MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] Student prize, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, that's the $30,000 prize.  And now, what did that enable you to do?
Speaker 2: Well, it enabled me to get a lot of media attention and enabled me to be sitting here talking to you right now ostensibly.  It enables me to get burnt out and get grumpy with it because it was taking up a lot of time.  The money enabled me to build a workshop at home.  And then the rest of it, yeah, I bought a bunch of power tools and some shop equipment so I could have a workshop in my spare bedroom in my condo in Summerville.  The rest of it, I invested, and I still have not, I still have not spent it yet.  I didn't go do a start-up, but, you know, having a workshop was important.  But the real value there is that the community and the innovation--not the innovation, the community and the media attention.  Their mission is--I phrase it as the rock starfication (ph.) of engineers, and innovators and inventors.  So this is distinct from scientists.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, this is 'Time Magazine' recognized you--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: 'Black Enterprise'.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  Yeah, it blew up.  Yeah, I've got a box, I've got several boxes of press clippings from that, from that era.
Speaker 1: Now, this was before Robert Crewledge (ph.) interviews you, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That's before Robert Crewledge.  He interviewed in what, 2007?
Speaker 2: Approximately, because Adar and I had been dating for a long time then.  In 2003, we had just met.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 25368
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell me how--tell us how you met your wife?
Speaker 2: I was at a barbeque, in fact.  I went to a barbeque, and I wanted to play cards.  And there were three sitting there, and there was a very, very attractive woman on the other side of the card table.  (Unclear) I can play cards with her.  We were playing Spades, so she is my partner.  And I think we won.  She did a pretty good job.  Afterwards, we talked, and I was, I guess I was twenty seven.  So I guess she was twenty two.  And I was like, oh, she's far too young for me, twenty two, that's a baby.  So, so, I did not, I didn't call her back.  And then subsequently, after spending two years on the dating scene, when I met her again, I'm now twenty nine, I was like, hey, I remember you.  Let's go out right now.  It was a whole different, whole different approach.  And that's, there we go.
Story_ID: 25369
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  We were talking about how you met your wife and we were talking about the worms in the Robert Crowlitch (ph.) (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So, so, all right.  My wife is not as crazy as she may seem.  So I actually do have--at least until two years ago when they died, unfortunately, I did have pet ants.  And they were just pets.  She had worms for a purpose 'cause she teaches, at the time she was teaching informal science at the, at the time at the zoo, at the Boston Zoo.  And then she moved on to the Boston Science Center.  And worms are for composting.  So she (unclear) went to write about composting, and she had a bunch of worms bins (unclear) that she would manage, and she went to put things in, and then they'd come back later on and see what had happened to the things they put in there.  She actually still uses them heavily in her--she's a fifth grade science teacher now.  So she uses them in her classes.  They have worm bins that they keep throughout the year now.  They've got, yeah, a few years ago, we were in the garage until the wee hours of the morning cutting and drilling worm bins.  It turns out, it's not as simple as you think to make a worm bin.  But so, yeah, so she's not as loony as she sounds.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I knew there was a purpose for those worms.  I wondered if she was a science--involved in some phase of science too, some, a biological science or something.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she loves biology.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's in fifth grade science which covers a lot of stuff.  But she, and she's good at all this.  She's developed appreciation particularly for earth science and atmospherics.  And, but when the biology comes along, she just comes alive.  And that's, that's her love of nature and going thing, and that's--you know, when we travel together, you know, it looks like we're going to expedition with her packs and her boots and her stuff and her scuba gear.  And, you know, our job is to get--you know, we'll go see the cities, and we'll go to dinner.  But during the daytime, we're trying to get out into the woods or the water or somewhere and see what's in there.  And we're not, we're not, you know, going off by ourselves.  You know, we have guides, and we have packages.  But, yeah, we're not interested in the urban tour.  We're interested in the natures.
Speaker 1: Now, one thing that I learned from the Robert Crowlitch (ph.) piece was that you had devised a system at some point for dating.  And this was a scientific system, systematic system of--
Speaker 2: I'm not allowed to talk about the dating system.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: I can say that there was an alleged system developed that would perhaps let somebody have a better understanding of the numbers involved in the dating process.  And the numbers being, how many potential partners do you encounter, and what's their likelihood of getting to a first date.  And this was a problem that allegedly, if you solved it, would help you at the very least position yourself to be likely to get a certain number of first dates per year.  So the real motivation--well, there are two.  One, try to real, alleged motivation was to--it was an interesting thing to think about, what, how does this actually work?  What's the process here?  The other motivation was to separate the emotions from the dating process, to have a more dispassionate view of the dating process 'cause otherwise, it gets pretty painful because as the male in the dating in this country, there's a lot of rejection.  You have to put yourself out a lot, and you get a lot of no's or you get a lot of silence, is what actually get more of than no's, it turns out.  So making it analytical, freed me from--freed, making it analytical would free somebody, potentially, from having an emotional, showing emotional connection to the dating process which is good.  You take more risks, it turns out.  You do things you wouldn't otherwise do.  And you open yourself to more opportunities and more chances and more adventure.  So it was, it was the right way for somebody who is technical, but still gets their feelings hurt, to deal with the dating, the dating scene.
Speaker 1: Right, because I--it's clear, I think, to most people that we do not meet enough people in life really to make a good decision most of the time.
Speaker 2: I mean statistically, your soul mate is in (unclear), right, if you wanted to look at the numbers on this whole thing.  Okay, fine, so then, so how are you gonna find them here in Boston in a place that is not very diverse, and is sharply segregated and doesn't have a strong, young black, educated scene?  How do you find these people?  Young black professional scene.  How do you do that?  Well, you gotta think about it a little bit.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, but meeting your wife was not a result of this system, I guess at all, in terms of--
Speaker 2: I'm not allowed to talk about--
Speaker 1: Not allowed to talk about (laughter), I see.  I see, the alleged system, yes.
Speaker 2: The alleged system--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and the alleged influence in meeting my wife, nope.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Story_ID: 25370
Speaker 1: Okay, so, let's see, so MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], now, you were trying to push the frontiers of micro-biotics, I think, is that true?
Speaker 2: Kind of, so that, that's what I went to Berkeley to do.  And that's when I realized that I don't, I'm not as interested in building the critters, as I am in programming the critters.  And that's why I had to kind of do a deep think as to, all right, so I'm in this PhD program for electrical engineering.  I'm not really liking it.  I've run out of classes to take, and I don't wanna take the classes that are the high-level classes in electrical engineering or control theory or process control and all these other things.  I'm not really interested in.  Have I made a wrong turn?  And I remember as an undergrad talking with Rod [Rodney Brooks] and I was an electrical engineering student.  And I was like, you know, Rod, I--how come none of these people are electrical engineers?  And he said, well, the hard problems in robotics computer science problems.  I was like, no.  So then I went through the list of professors that I knew who were doing stuff in robotics.  And I'm going, yep, he's computer science, and he's probably, yep, he's computer science, yep, he's computer science too.  And that wasn't enough to convince me that was the wrong major.  But, but I reflected upon that at the time, like, well, gosh, I guess he was right.  I guess, and now, you know, I can see it clearly now.  The hard problems are in computer science.  They're algorithmic.  They are in state estimation and reasoning and planning and these areas that computer science has the right tools to deal with, to deal with better than electrical engineering often can.  Now, that's not entirely true, and there's gonna be a whole bunch of engineers who are gonna hear this and get their--get all up in an uproar.  But for the way my brain works, the computational approach was more interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, what was your--who was your dissertation advisor and what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: My advisor at MIT for my PhD, you mean, I presume.  I presume you mean for my PhD?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: My PhD advisor was Leslie Kaelbling, K-A-E-L-B-L-I-N-G.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And what was my thesis title?  I don't remember.  Maybe it was something like 'Analysis and Implementation,' 'Analysis and Implementation: Distributed Algorithms for Multi-Robot Systems.'  That's a very vague title.  I thought I had something more tight than that.  Nah, that may have been it.
Speaker 1: So what basically was it about?  What--
Speaker 2: The, since the core of the thesis, the thesis of the thesis, was that mobility, communication and algorithm accuracy are all linked, they're related, there's some global conserved quantity of something that, if you want more accuracy, you have to add more communication or remove mobility.  So, so mobility, communication, accuracy.  And these things are linked in a way that if you push on one, you've gotta give with the other.  You can't just make them all bigger.  Ideally, well, you'd want Pi accuracy with high mobility and low communications.  Communications are expensive.  You have to build radios and make 'em talk fast.  It costs money and time to build communications.  And you can't have that.  So if you have low communications, you gotta crank down your speed or you have to have compromised on your accuracy.  You get more communications, oh, then you can have more stuff here.  If you want more accuracy, you need to either crank this, these two up, crank this one up, crank this one down or so, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  So that was the thesis, that these things are linked.  And what I wanted to do was figure out some way to relate them.  Now, that's, that's the answer to the question.  And, you know, if you read my thesis, you'll find a little equation, and you'll find that there're terms for communications bandwidth and robot speed and algorithm accuracy.  You'll find that, there's a little discretion there.  Okay, but that's looking backwards.  Looking forwards--and I remember during my defense, one of my classmates, maybe two years behind me, and he came up to me like, that was a fantastic defense.  It was beautifully rendered, you had gorgeous slides.  There was a story.  Everything came together.  It made sense, it was great.  You know, you must have know what you're topic was for years.  How long did you, have been working towards these goals?  I go, actually?  It wasn't really clear until about six months ago at that point in time.  And that's not untrue for many PhDs.  You get about a year out, and you can now begin to see clearly the path you have been working on.  And the path that I had been on was, building and developing a collection of algorithms to solve, kind of low-hanging fruit problems in robotics, in multi-relay (unclear) systems.  Algorithms to divide 'em into different tasks, algorithms to find boundaries, algorithms to--simple motion control, moving them around and (unclear) with each other.  These were all just, okay, you've got 10,000 robots.  What are the first two steps you're gonna take to make these 10,000 robot do something useful.  S I took those steps during my PhD.  Near the end of my PhD, I wanted some way to talk about them in a unified sense and some way to compare them.  And, you know, they really are apples and oranges, but at the core, I realize that they--this notion of communication, and at the time, also Centernet (ph.), which were all the hotness, big rays, and, you know, sprinkle the robots in forests and look at micro-temperatures.  Sprinkle the robots across the ocean and look for great white sharks, yada, yada, yada.  The goal for Centernet Work is to not communicate, not use power to delay communication until you absolutely have to.  And then coordinate with your neighbors so that the centers can be off most of the time, 'cause if they can be off most of the time, then they can be sustainable in the environment for a very long time.  And this was, this was not the right way of thinking for robots.  And I knew it wasn't the right way of thinking, but I didn't know how to articulate it.  And this relationship between the realization that, you know, if you're gonna move, you have to talk.  And if you talk less, and I'm, and, you know, the core of the theory is, you know, really pretty minimal, right?  If I'm talking to you, and I zip right past you because I'm moving too fast, we're not gonna exchange information.  It's not gonna work properly.  So, we have to slow down so I can communicate a little better to go by it.  That's, that's basically it.  You can only move as fast as you can talk.  But, you know, she signed it.  I left.  It was good.
Story_ID: 25371
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your pet ants have anything--did they inform your research on some level?
Speaker 2: Well, not at the PhD level, right.  So the insects are really, they give you an existential proof of that, of the fact that these systems do work, and they do solve these problems.  And they do them in ways that are, sometimes surprising, sometimes unexpected.  They use far less information than we think.  They have less mobility, they make all these mistakes.  They, they sometimes communicate in very subtle ways.  They leverage tremendous variation between individuals to their best advantage.  So all the ants don't make decisions, do something at the same time.  Some ants do some things, some ants something else--I'll wait until it gets five degrees warmer before I leave the nest, right.  So you have this natural smooth, you know, the temperature increases and the ants colony responds slowly.  Then the temperature decreases, and they respond slowly as each individual worker gets to their different threshold.  So you have all these, you know, honey bees, when they go out and find their new nest sites.  They come back, and they need what's, they've figured out, is a quorum to make a decision.  They don't vote.  It's not a majority thing.  They need a certain number of bees to like something and then off they go.  That seems to be the model.  And so now, algorithmically, how are they doing this?  And, you know, one of my favorite professors at Cornell tells us--he's only (unclear) been studying this for many years.  He just wrote a book on the honey bee.  They actually have been by my bed for a year and a half now, and not made it past the preference.
Speaker 1: Did you say 'Honey Bee Democracy'?
Speaker 2: 'Honey Bee Democracy' is his latest book.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And it's really about how they make decisions and how they share information to make group decisions.  And I wish I'd read it because I can't speak too intelligently, but the core, he was talking to us, and I spoke with him about it.  He was looking at this notion of quorum, where there's a certain number you get to, and then it's time to go.  I mean that lets you--'cause you can guarantee to get to a certain number.  You can't guarantee to break a tie.  Look at our current government, right?  You can't guarantee to do that.  And if you're a honey bee community, and you're sitting on the side of a tree waiting to move to a new site, you have to guarantee to end this decision-making process.  You have to guarantee to go somewhere at some point in time.  So, you know, maybe this is why they do that.  I have to read the book.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay--
Speaker 2: But that kind of, you know, high level, you know, these things have to work, right?  These insects use them.  That's where the inspiration comes, looking at the kind of sensors that the animals use to solve their problems.  And one of the guys (unclear) Zurich, E.T.H. Zurich, Ruder Revanner (ph.).  He's studying dessert ants and looking at how they navigate.  And he's looked at it in every which way.  He's just phenomenally, phenomenally good.  And he comes with, okay, well, here's--turns out, they count their steps.  Now, it turns out they have solar compass.  They know not only where the sun is, but they also have an, accurate clocks.  They know what time it is, and they can now compute their compass angle based on the sun and their clock.  I mean it's just like, whoa, really?  And he's done experiments in the wild.  He comes back to the lab.  He's gotten down almost to the neurological, almost the neuronal level of where these information interests are, where they're storing the landmarks, and how they're doing the navigation.  So that kind of, that kind of field, low-level stuff--I mean it's the same problems I have to solve with my robots.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: I can go on, by a lot, (unclear)--
Speaker 1: I know, and I want you to.
Story_ID: 25372
Speaker 1: In 2008, you did post-doctoral studies at the-
Speaker 2: University of Washington.
Speaker 1: --University of Washington.  Okay, with Dieter Fox.
Speaker 2: Dieter Fox, that's right.
Speaker 1: What was he doing?
Speaker 2: So, the goal there was for me to learn--I left my Masters--I left my PhD without understanding of inference, (unclear) largely, is that machine-learning (unclear) invasion inference kind of (unclear) a stochastic approach to robotics.  And he is the master of that, the grand--he's one of the grand masters of that kind of approach to robotics.  So my plan was to go there and do that.  And I gotta say, this was one of my real only professional missteps.  I only had a year there, and at the same year, I was getting married and had a honeymoon and also applying for jobs at the end half of that year.  So I didn't give myself any opportunity to be successful at this job.  I didn't give myself the time.  I should have, as soon as I got off the plane, I should have driven right to the lab and found the top senior grad student and said, "Hey, Ms. Senior student, we are working together.  We're gonna make this happen."  I don't know your math.  You don't know my robotics.  We're gonna work it out.  I didn't do that.  So the, professionally, yeah, that was my, to my career to date, that was my, my first real professional failure, where I--and Dieter and I talked about the project we were gonna do.  It made sense.  I tried to use the software system that they had going.  I couldn't get that to go.  The grad student who wrote it gave me some support, but I really needed him to just do it.  I, it wasn't enough for him just to support me on it.  And then I was trying to get this math into my head.  I couldn't get it in my head.  And it just, it just all--it didn't, it was a bad--
Speaker 1: It's not often where people say that, say this, but so, now, Dieter Fox was working on artificial intelligence, and problemlistic state estimations.
Speaker 2: That's right.  So what does that mean in English, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 2: So you've got a robot.  One of the classic problems he solved very well, early in his career was, you've got a robot.  And you put it in the building.  And you, let's say you give the robot a map, the map.  So this is called the kidnapped robot problem.  So the robot has a map.  You put it somewhere in the building.  It has no idea where it is.  Can it figure out where it is?  So you and I would look at the map, and look around us and say, well, I can see that door.  I can see that thing.  I must be, well, I must be here.  I could be here.  Let me walk a little bit and I'll get some more information, and I'll figure it out.  Robots couldn't do that.  And his, he did a whole bunch of really influential work.  One of them is, estimating where you are in a building given center estimates.  And the robots do it very much in the way I described.  They take a bunch of senor readings.  In this case, the sensor measures distance from where it is to any wall.  And then it matches that geometry so that you get like this puzzle piece and you try to fit it everywhere on the map.  And everywhere you try to fit it, you get a place of score.  And then you get a likelihood, well, I'm likely to be here.  I could be here though.  I could, I can't tell.  I could be here, I could be here.  Likelihood, so that then what you end up with is for every place the environment, a likelihood of where you, likelihood of how likely you are to be in that place.  As you move, well, I move one foot forward.  Now, I wanna know, given where I was and where I am, and the sensor reading previously, the sensor reading now, now, I've got two readings, separated by a foot.  Now, I take that and try to fit that.  And as you move and take more readings, the number of places that match this chain of history gets small to the point where it's only just one.  That was when, that's, for example, in the way--and at the core of that is a bunch of problemistic probability statistics about, you know, what's the likelihood of you are where you say you are or where you think you are, yada, yada, yada.  Powerful math, and for his, for that particular problem, solved it completely.  There're few things where you can point to where, yeah, you know, we kinda made a step or we kinda--but crushed it.
Story_ID: 25373
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, now when did you join the faculty at Rice?
Speaker 2: Two thousand nine [2009].
Speaker 1: Two thousand nine [2009].  Okay, 2009, and how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Oh, I applied.  It was at the end of my post-doc.  I'd only planned to be there for a year.  And I was there, largely because my wife, Adar, was there, getting her Masters.  So Dar was at the end of her two-year Masters program in education.  So I wanted to be at a university in Washington.  So when the opportunity to work with Dieter came up, I jumped at it.  And I only wanted it to be a year so that we would be leaving at the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So essentially, I followed her to Seattle.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I applied to jobs in the standard academic job application process with the only asterisk being that it was 2009.  So that was after the crash.  So there weren't a lot of jobs running around.  It was a very bad year to be interviewing.  I'm very fortunate.  I had two interviews and an offer at Rice that was a good offer, and I took it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't know anybody here ahead of time or anything like that--
Speaker 2: [No audible response].  (Shaking head, no).
Speaker 1: --so you just--
Speaker 2: Not at all.
Speaker 1: So you were just trying to get a job at this point.
Speaker 2: Trying to get a job.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So Rice University seems to have a very nice science set up.  We--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, (unclear)--
Speaker 1: We were out here in the summertime, and it looks like it's--so, and well, one thing I know.  I found out from just talking to your assistant before you arrived was that building robots is expensive, extremely expensive, and so are you, do you have the resources you really--
Speaker 2: Kind of, so I've got--they give all young professors a start package to get you going.  And I got an NSF [National Science Foundation] grant last year, two years ago.  I'm now in the process of trying to get more money because that's, you know, the job of professor is, you're always chasing after money.  You spend a third of your time chasing after money.
Speaker 1: About how, what proportion of your activities are, I guess research as opposed to teaching?
Speaker 2: Ninety, well, almost all research.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Teaching is a, even at a school with the strong educational history that Rice [University] has.  Teaching for a university professor is a very small part of his or her day.  So, 15 percent, 10 percent kind of commitment.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, oh, how much does one of your little robots cost?
Speaker 2: The new robots cost about $250.00 each, although we're now doing price--we're in the middle of right now doing price projections at a thousand robot quantities.  And we think we're gonna be at maybe the $150.00 point per robot which is very exciting 'cause we're getting close to that magical $99.00 point.  If we can get them to the $99.00 point, we think that, you know, the notion to have robots for everyone could be real.  I've got this vision of robots as a--they're not gonna be as end--I'm not gonna delude myself into thinking that they will be as indispensible as the scientific calculator, but the notion of robots being an extraordinarily common academic tool, you know, it's just--robot lab is not--there's just a box of robots in the classroom.  It's not a big deal.  That's kind of what you wanna get to.  It's not ROBOT (emphasis on robot) lab.  Yeah, you know, it's okay, it's 2:00 o'clock.  Okay, let's, we're gonna do the robots for half an hour, and then we're gonna come back to the rest of our physics.  That's how it should be.
Speaker 1: And not, as you said, ROBOT lab, you know, like--that is the way it's, people like approach it.
Speaker 2: No, it needs to be, I mean cell phones and mobile technology has pushed the prices and the performance and the capability of these, of mobile electronics to a very high level.  It's, I won't say it's easy to build a robot, because you still have to--there's still issues of integration that mobile devices don't have to worry about, mobility and other things.  But it's, it's, you know, the same kind of robots that we built at iRobot for about two and a half thousand dollars [$2,500] each, you know, ten years later, they're 250 and falling quickly, each.  And there's no reason why they can't be even cheaper.  There's nothing fancy on these things at all.
Story_ID: 25374
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you still, you're doing something, I think the terminology has changed to "Swarm", right?
Speaker 2: No, I, so--I say "swarm" when I'm talking to public kind of, doing a public lecture.  I'll talk about "swarm" and tech stuff.  But the real world is multi-robot systems.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: "Swarm" stuff conjures up a whole bunch of images and different ideas that it may not be appropriate or relevant in a professional context.  And if you want, you know, distributed algorithms, multi-robot systems or distributed algorithms for multi-robot systems.  So algorithms that run, algorithms are, it's a theoretical procedure that you can run on your computer and do things like plan your route on your GPS from A to B, search the Internet with Google, correct--make spelling suggestions from a database.  So, you know, some algorithms have to give you the top five corrections for your thing.  It has to search them, weight them, present them to you.  And that's an algorithm.  Distributed algorithms run on mini-computers.  So not just one computer, twenty or in my case, several hundred computers.  And multi-robot systems are exactly what it sounds like, a whole bunch of robots trying to solve a problem together.  So the magic is the software that makes them all work together.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, the demonstration I saw on the Crewage (ph.) piece was a bunch of small mobile robots, and they had, all had color-coded lights.  And they could, some of them could make one sound or another or two or three sounds.  And if you put 'em all together, they would, they provide an entire symphony of robotics, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, just form a choir.  So, the goal there--that was actually a--I took a class, I forgot the name of the class, and I think, you know, robots have audio.  We should be able to do this.  And we had to solve a temple signalization problem, and we had to solve a division of labor problem.  We had to get 'em split up into groups and then get them physically split up into sections.  So those two things made the problem interesting in robots.  You didn't just want a, you know, Group 1, Group 2, all mixed up.  You wanted them physically clumped.  And then that was a lot of fun, actually.  And then on that particular piece that you're talking about, the song crashes.  You know, it sounds great and then it dies.  And the problem was way down deep in the software.  There was a counter that was keeping track of the robots' place in the song and how long a note should be held.  And the counter was limited to be only 4 billion big.  Now, that's all I can remember, and the way that mini-files keep track of time stamps, yada, yada, yada, it turns out I over flew that particular counter, way in the innards of this thing.  So, you know, two or three months later, I found that, fixed that and now it's gorgeous.  And so now, I'm trying to do the same thing on the new robots.  The new robots are similar.  They have the same kind of audio stuff, but we don't have the software just yet to make 'em do that yet.  We're getting awfully close though.
Story_ID: 25375
Speaker 1: Okay, there's a couple of terms here, maybe I'll ask you about in terms of what you're working on.  We talked about multi-robot systems, I guess, multi-robot computations is a part of what you do, right?
Speaker 2: It's part of it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So the, ultimately what you want is you want a group of robots interacting in the physical world to get something done.  You want them to surveil an area.  You want them to gather all the resources from some environment to one spot.  You want them to build something.  Maybe they build a little termite mound for your house.  So, the term we're talking about, this notion of essentially, I'll rephrase that as one of physical computations, is the acknowledgement that the things that they need to do, need to happen in the physical world.  And you can compute things a little differently in the physical world than you can in just the algorithmic virtual world.  And the classic example is, if you're building something, the way termites do it, is that they wanna build an arch, the termite climbs up to the inside of a termite mound and drops a piece of goo there, and says, okay, there it goes.  That's a good place for an arch to be.  The next termite comes along, oh, there's a piece of goo here.  Uh, well, the next step is to put a piece goo right here.  And the next one comes along, oh, look at that, uh, we have an arch here.  Okay, I can just put my goo right here.  So now these three workers have communicated to each other indirectly through their work.  And it's call Stigmergy.  And actually, physics--it means communication through work.  So you wanna understand that, those kinds of effects where there is this environment and the robots are moving to each other and--communicating and moving--their modified environment.  And through that modification of the environment, you get, you can infer what the intent for the people coming along.  Now, so right now, we're working on a manipulation experiment where the robots are trying to move an object.  So if you and your 10 friends are trying to move a car, you'd all reach up and grab it and pick it up, and someone would say this way, and you'd all go off.  If everybody but one person was blindfolded, you could still get this job done.  You'd all pick up the car, and then the person who knew where they wanted to go would pull on the car a little bit, and you would all sense that and then just follow it.  And that person would be able to maneuver the whole car pretty easily just through force and your sensing it through force.  So that kind of, you know, that's not quite explicit.  It's not quite implicit communication through the forced feedback on the object is what we wanna study, one of the things we want study right now.  So the notion that the physical world is part of the computation is key.  If you're exploring a maze, if you're exploring a building, well, how do you keep track of where you've been?  Well, you've got a thousand robots, let's leave some behind as bread crumbs.  Let's have robots mark junctions and say hey, we're all gonna go explore this way now.  And then when they finish over here, okay, let's all go this way, and you leave your robot behind to indicate what direction you're currently exploring.
Speaker 1: Okay, so boundary detection is a part of what you're doing in terms of--
Speaker 2: That's, so boundary detection is one of the, I'm gonna call them toolkit of algorithms that I've worked on that, that let us do--you can use that now as a foundation to do more complicated stuff.  So boundary detection in and of itself is cute and clever, but boundary detection gives useful--let's say, for example, you have a lot of robots spread out.  And this robot says, hey, I'm part of a boundary.  This one says, so am I.  So they share and then that continues and then it stops, and it says, hey, there are 10 robots in this boundary, but I--and we can tell, based on our angles that this boundary is an internal boundary.  We are on the inside of the network. W We are not an external boundary 'cause the external people do the same thing.  And they can tell based on their angles that they're on the outside.  So I found an internal boundary, there must be something here.  You know, I think that we may have an object.  So let's all aim our cameras at this thing and look at what we've got.  We can see, well, it's an object, yes.  Well, there're 10 of us, so now we can estimate the perimeter.  We know the geometry of this thing.  We can now estimate the medial access and the minor access, and we can say, hey, there's major and minor access.  Hey, I have an object that occupies an (unclear) ellipse of approximately this diameter.  It's at this location in the network.  We should dispatch 10 big, heavy-gripping robots to move this thing.  So boundary detection now can be used for object classification and characterization.  You can do things now if you know you're out of bounds that you couldn't do otherwise.  And furthermore, you can do things that are far larger than any one robot can do by itself.  And the object is, you know, this object is the classic, you know, blind man and elephant problem, right?  If you've got, (unclear) are you familiar with this parable?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what is this?  And he pulls the tail and he says this is a donkey or something because of tails like this or it's got a--
Speaker 2: You know, that would be a good topic for a paper or (unclear).  Yeah, but that's the problem that we can solve with simple things like boundary detection.  Now, of course, you know, the boundary may be whole.  It may be that robots have been falling into this thing for the past ten years and you don't want it--you can't move it.  Or the boundary is a pillar or who knows what it is.  But that's the first step, right.  You wanna classify this thing as bigger than you can sense by yourself.
Story_ID: 25376
Speaker 1: I guess the--okay, dynamic task management is--most applications require subgroups of robots to perform different tasks.  You were just describing that, basically.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, so in the case of that paper, imagining instead of--imagine that somebody else said, hey, I want 50 percent of the robots to do the Task A, 30 percent to do Task B, and 20 percent to do the other tasks.  And how do we get them to do that.  I don't know how many robots I've got.  I don't know where they are.  I don't know what the network looks like, but I still want them to get into these allocations or assignments, I call it, task assignment.  And we, me and my collaborator--he was Harvard [Harvard University] then, and he's since graduated--came up with three really elegant and complimentary algorithms to solve the problem in different ways, using different resources.  It was, that's probably still my favorite paper when-- because it's just, it's so well balanced.  It's a very, we had enough time and enough leisure, you know, we were grad students, its' all we do all day long, to really do it well and really think through it deeply and, you know, get it from all dimensions, and get rid of the, get rid of the extra stuff.  And we had a solid kernel, a solid thing when we were done.
Story_ID: 25377
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what are some of the practical applications of some of the work you do now in terms of--
Speaker 2: So robots are everywhere, and they're gonna be even more common as we get, you know, cars, planes, they're all essentially robots now.  And the whole--every morning I hear the radio, there are three or four accidents in Houston [Texas] every day, right.  We are terrible drivers.  We need to get out of the driving business, you know--when I say "we", the human race.  We need to get ourselves out of the driving business just as soon as possible.  Robots will save us from ourselves.  So, there's a whole bunch of applications that robots are good for.  Anything that involves mapping or surveillance or searching.  And when we get into these tasks, large numbers of robots can do these jobs better than any of us (unclear) robots.  And when you start talking about, you know, thousands of robots being able to centrally control them is not feasible.  There's not enough communications to give them all their instructions, and if you could get, you know, all the sensor data back, you have to analyze thousands of robots and say, that's not gonna work.  So you have to give them enough autonomy so that they can do these things by themselves, so mapping, search and rescue, surveillance, construction, manipulation, move things around.  We just our first glimpse at a giant squid, all right.  These things have been washing up on shores from the, forever, for eternity.  We just saw our first one in the wild.  That's crazy talk.  And it took, I think it took her five years to find this thing, crazy talk, right?  There's no reason why we can't have robots all throughout our ocean.  The great white sharks.  How do they breathe?  We don't know.  I mean we just--it's crazy that we don't know this stuff.  So robots are the best way to study a large area.  Right now, at this instant, we have two robots on Mars.  And we have a third one's gonna be on its way soon.  I respectfully submit, Mars is big enough to handle more robots.  So I wanna figure out the right way to send thousands of robots into places like Mars so they can do useful, good, useful science and engineer them to do that, and get them, get them all through, to their job.
Speaker 1: Now, are you in favor of smaller robots, but more or is it--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so my preference is to crank up the population number.  So let me put my academic hat on right now.  I wanna extend the population--so you've got the system, right?  You've got complexity of robot, how hard the software is, what kind of sensors they've got, and then you have this other dimension which is, how you've got.  And I wanna understand, if we go far down this population dimension, can we simplify these other things?  So, for mapping, if you have 10 robots in the building--and they're in different places in the building, they're never gonna get a good idea what the building looks like.  If you have 10,000 robots spread across your building, now, just they're on a robot network, they can find doors, they can find hallways.  They can identify the geometric features of the building just by talking to their neighbors.  So that's a transition that you transform this mapping problem from one of large complicated robots with laser scanners and expensive sensors to a large number of small robots with local communications.  Now, of course, you have to ask the practical question, well, you know, 10,000 robots is a lot of robots, right, and this is--practically, it's just not practical.  Well, if they cost, you know, the robots I've got now, you know, that cost $250.00 each, we can see to $150.00 a robot, it doesn't take a lot of imagination to imagine that you could--fast forward a few years, will be under a hundred dollars a robot.  So if we're talking about my colleagues at Harvard, they've got $14.00 robots, right.  Now, their robots are very limited.  So it's not--but it's a real-life robot, $14.00, right.  So you can imagine a $10.00 capable robot.  Nanotech is coming on line, micro manufacturers is coming on line.  We're continuing to get standard components smaller and smaller.  Mobility for flight, and is showing some real promise for micro (unclear) vehicles.  So all the indicators are pointing towards, you know, small, powerful robots.  So, okay, maybe it's not silliness.  It sounds silly now, right, but this is academia.  It's their job to sound silly and be, you know, 20 years out.  So, let's take my academic hat off and let's put on my engineer hat.  So the engineer in me knows that if you wanna deploy a large number of things, you have to justify every single one you're putting on the ground.  And you have to a problem that you just cannot solve with a single robot, explain more or looking giant squids.  There's a classic example.  You cannot solve that with one robot.  You've got to have a gazillion of them.  And you've gotta now figure out the right blend autonomous distributed, local interactions, centralized control, GPS, some (unclear) joystick can get.  There's no black and white, right.  You have to find, in this field of gray, you've gotta put your marker, here's the right solution, right.  Maybe we don't need 10,000.  Maybe we need fifty, and they're not really dumb.  They have to be capable enough to do "x", "y" and "z".  So we can't afford to build 10,000 of these capable ones, but we can still get some of the benefits.  So understanding how that population, if you have ten, okay, you can do these kind of things.  If you have a thousand, you can do these kinds of things.  If you have a million, okay, well, now, you can do this kind of stuff, you can't do this anymore because a million robots is too many to coordinate.  If you have a billion robots, you know, this is a reasonable thing to talk about with nano engineering.  You can talk about anagoges (unclear) number of robots if you want, moles of robots, really simple robots.  Well, now, even simple things like how do you even talk to them.  Well, you can't, it turns out because there're too many of 'em.  So anything you say to any of them, is received by all of them, all right.  So can you drive them around?  Well, yeah, but you drive them all around.  So my post-doc is doing just really cool work on unsolvable control.  If you've got anagoges number of robots and you've got one joystick, can you control them?  And his thesis was on this, and the answer is, yes, with some surprising mathematics, some interesting results, and he's taking it to the lab and doing some really cool experiments with our swarm.
Story_ID: 25378
Speaker 1: Okay, who would you consider--now, we've interviewed some other black folks in robotics, Ayanna Howard and--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --the fellow at Johns Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University] who worked on opportunity and curiosity, you know--
Speaker 2: I don't know him.  Ayanna, I know well.
Speaker 1: -he's, I can't think of his name right now.  I'm just sorry, I can't think of it.  But who do you consider to be the leader, I guess in robotics today?  Who would be the scientist considered a leader?
Speaker 2: Well, it was Sebastian Thrun.  He went off to Google, then to Audacity.  He was the 800-pound gorilla in the room.
Speaker 1: His last name is Thrunt?
Speaker 2: T-H-R-U-N.
Speaker 1: T-H-R-U-N.
Speaker 2: First name, Sebastian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So who is next?  Well, you know, I live in a biased world, right.  I like multi-people.
Speaker 1: That may be the best way to look at it.
Speaker 2: The head of the multi-robot pack--oh, yeah, I know.  The new 800-pound gorilla is at Penn, University of Pennsylvania.  His name is Vijay. Kumar, V-I-J-A-Y, K-U-M-A-R.  And he does quadrotors.  He does helicopters.  He's done a whole bunch of other stuff, but right now, he's doing helicopters, and he's no joke.  In the multi-world, Daniela Rus at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], D-A-N-I-E-L-A, one "L"--I think Warisila also has one "L", as a random aside--Ruse, R-U-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I put her at the top of the multi-robot pack, and I put Vijay Kumar at the top of the robot, in general.  I mean she's the one who's got serious (unclear).  And then, you know, Deeter is still very active, right.  He's doing phenomenal work with image recognition and space recognition.  Nicholas Roy at MIT is doing really cool work on autonomous helicopter navigation and--
Speaker 1: Okay, so are you working with any young people here at Rice in terms of--
Speaker 2: Students?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in terms of--
Speaker 2: I've got, I've got--you can't get anything done as a professor without having a whole pile of students working on it.  So I've got two grad students.  I've got a post-doc, two grad students and at any given time, you know, ten to fifteen undergrads buzzing around the lab.
Speaker 1: Okay, are any African American students involved?
Speaker 2: Right now, there's one.  So in my career here at Rice [University], I've supervised two.  I mean it's a tough thing to do here.  It's a small campus.  The numbers aren't large, so I try--and I've learned the hard way that you can't reach out and pull people in 'cause you'll get people who may not be committed to it.  It's too hard.  If you don't wanna do it, it's hard to do it.  You have to wait until someone comes to you.  Then you knock down all the barriers in front of them.  But for my mentoring on this campus, I've learned I have to bide my time and be in the community, be available, be accessible, be known, and then when somebody's interested, once they approach me, then you pick them up and carry them to the next level.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or point them toward the next level.
Story_ID: 25379
Speaker 1: Now, you alluded to one kind of a mistake at, in Washington.  You said, you know, but we always ask the question, if you could do something over again, what would it be?  What that be the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that would definitely go in do-over, definitely do over.  I would, I'm not sure what I would change.  But I would, either have shown up as an instructor and not tried to do research or I would have had two-year time or I would have showed up and identified the right grad student to work with so that I could get up to speed on the material in a timely fashion or I can't say I would have gone back and learned more of it as a PhD because I was pretty busy as a PhD.  But I could have learned more of that, that math as a--during my grad school time so that I wouldn't show up quite so ignorant when I got there.  And there's a bunch of ways I could have, I could make that better, you know, if I had the ability to go back in time.
Speaker 1: At this stage in your career, what's our goal, I mean do you have a goal set to accomplish something, to get something done that's--
Speaker 2: Well, tenure is the big, sort of (unclear) is over every assistant professor.  And tenure, you've got, you've got six years to get your act together and show that, you know, you've got world-class results, world-class research, world-class productivity.  You have to be able to generate more publications per minute than the next guy or at least as many as the next guy.  And so that's the goal now is to get tenure.  And everything, everything in my life is bent towards the tenure thing.  And anything that is a distraction from it, this interview, for example, takes me one step back from getting tenure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's, yeah, that's the job of an assistant professor.
Story_ID: 25380
Speaker 1: Okay, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: So, we have go to--the first thing we have to do, and African Americans are well aware of this, is that 500 years of slavery has ended.  I forget the date of that, and then there was two generations of segregation and Jim Crow and all kinds of silliness.  And we are not, we're now--you know, we have a black president.  It's, things are absolutely better, but we're not done, and we have--the challenges that's set before us now are, I can't put them in enough historical perspective to know if they are harder to deal with, but they are certainly multi-generational to fix in terms of academic opportunity.  They talk about the technology gap, and that's, that's a very real thing.  When I talked about my example of screwdrivers earlier, we're way past screwdrivers now.  I mean if you can't program, if you don't understand how to move information around the Internet, you can't do anything now.  But, let me zero in on engineering education.  So we have become a shrink-wrap, kind of bubble-wrap society in terms of our technology.  You know, the phrase, "No user serviceable parts inside" is largely true these days where there are many, many things that you can't, you can't hack on them.  You can't hack.  You can't get into them, change them, modify them, repurpose them, fix them, understand them.  And that's a national problem that's acute in the African American community.  On the national level, there has been, you know, in the past ten years or so, I've seen a resurgence, and up-surgence in what's called the "Maker community", people who are building stuff as hobbyist in their free time, building interesting, clever, crazy stuff.  It's not research.  It's engineering, it's hard--and sometimes it's very hard engineering.  It's engineering design.  There's a community now that's very active.  And that's very exciting.  So getting that into the African American community is powerful.  So I said earlier that, you know, tenure is a single-minded thing.  There's a guillotine with my name on it, you know, two years hence.  That being said, it is irresponsible of me to not engage in the community to some level, to not, you know, when the dean says there's a hundred schools, from black a black school--black kids showing up to campus, can you give a demo?  The answer is "no, I cannot give a demo".  I cannot talk to these students.  You know, I can force you off on my students and gonna have to, and muddle through it.  But I know that I need to have my brown face in front of them saying the stuff that I say, talking about robots and answering the questions.  I know that that is critically important.  The school is trying to put down an infrastructure program to recruit more minority students here and get them into STEM careers and keep them in STEM careers, trying to do, you know, the three triple things of recruitment, matriculation and then retention.  And these are, this is the core of academic opportunity at the university level.  And they asked me to participate in that thing, and the answer is, well, I really can't, but boy, I--it would be, I don't know the right word.
Speaker 1: If you just have to do it that--
Speaker 2: No, there's a word--it's a responsibility, but there's a word if I don't.  It would be shameful for me to be where I am, to have had the help that I have had, to have had the number that we've talked about all through my life who've been pushing me to the next level, and to not be where I am and to not turn around and try to, try to leave some doors propped open or knock down some barriers.  It would be, it would be, yeah, shameful is the right word.  It would be remiss of my responsibilities.  It would be, "To whom much is given, much is expected", and, you know, with, the asterisk to that, if I compromise my path to tenure, then I can't do anything for anybody.  There needs to be a balance where I need to be participating to some degree, at the right degree.  And as I get older, and I get more senior, then I can start to figure out what's the right way to have impact on a national scale?  What's the right way to really make some good, make some good changes, as in big changes that can affect a lot of people.
Story_ID: 25381
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us about your family.  Now, we talked about how you met your wife, and do you have children yet?
Speaker 2: Not yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Hopefully, soon.  Yeah, this is one of the wake-up calls of last year, two years ago, and this was, (scattered sound), yeah, I'm thirty nine, thirty eight, thirty nine is when it happens.  Like, where are the kids?  And I never made a conscious decision to put career before family.  It was never something like, okay, I'm gonna wait until--but I've been busy, and my priorities are such that I need to get, you know, "x", "y", "z" things done and starting a family was not on that list.  And now that, that now has changed.  I'm gonna be to enjoy my children if I keep this up.  So we need to make this happen.  That's--I hope that that will not be, if you talk to me, you know, five years from now, I hope that that won't be, you know, my biggest regret, that I didn't-- waited too late to start a family, and we weren't able to do it.
Story_ID: 25382
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything I haven't talked about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: So, I mean you've covered--I guess the theme that I hear myself talking about is this path through technology and also this path through, social awareness, right?  Who am I?  How do I fit in?  What is, you know, what is gonna make me happy?  What is life?  How can I fulfilled?  What is my highest calling?  Why am I not happy?  Where have I miss-stepped?  Why are these people good to have around me?  Why are these people bad to have around me?  And identifying that.  And that's been as much of a process so living as my path through technology.  I don't, usually, people usually talk to me about that.  It's all about the technology and the science.  But there's--I've spent a lot of time trying to understand other stuff, with, you know, I'm analytical, right.  I can't get away from my spreadsheets and my flow charts and my equations and algorithms.  But I do wanna be a whole person.  I wanna understand all of life, as much as I can understand and to, you know, talk to people, my students.  The students show up in my lab are visibly distraught.  It was pretty clear we weren't gonna get a lot of work done this day.  So, all right, let me take my advisor hat off.  Let's put my, you know, Currente (ph.) Temporaneous (ph.) hat, you know, or incompetous (ph.) hat on and say, what's going on?  What's has happened?  And some boyfriend, blah, blah, blah, something.  But the ability to engage at that level and, you know, you have to be careful.  You don't wanna get too deep into personal issues, but there needed to be--I could have not addressed it, but there needed to be a discussion.  Something was clearly wrong.  There needed to be an acknowledgement that something was wrong and some offering of, listen, I don't know the path that you're walking.  I have walked different paths in my life.  Maybe something, maybe--we got into a good conversation.  Some other students showed up, and we had a, what turned into a good conversation about, you know, undergrad relationships and what that means and what's, what to look for and not to look for, and putting it in perspective as somebody who's not in undergrad anymore, looking back at, yeah, I thought this was a big deal.  This wasn't a big deal, but this was really important.  And the case--in my case, knowing when a relationship wasn't gonna work was a lesson that took me a very long time to learn.  And, and so we talked about that a little bit, and that was good.
Story_ID: 25383
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: So, what do I want--I had the, I can't say pleasure, but I found some pleasure in eulogizing my father last year, and putting together the right set of words and experiences that would convey what he meant to me.  And I'd like to be remembered first and foremost as a formidable engineer, as somebody who could get into any technical problem and walk away with--walk away from a working device, right.  You know, you show up to a room and something's on fire and smoke and things are running around.  People are pulling their hair.  Some poor intern is crying in the corner.  And you walk away, and there's this gleaning piece of technology on the floor.  It's purring, it's working beautifully.  That's, that is so central to the core of who I am.  I don't wanna even say it's my job, right.  It's not my job.  That is my calling.  That's why I'm here.  That's why I'm on this planet.  I am an engineer.  So, and then I'd like to be remembered as somebody who was nice and helpful and looked around and could commiserate and empathize and then imagine how to solve the problems of other people around me, in particular, for the next generation, in particular for the next generation of minorities, in particular for the next generation of minority engineers.  So if I could have a legacy of outreach and adding some level of coolness to engineering so that it was an attractive--it was an option that's on the list of options, first of all, and furthermore, it is an attractive option for the next generation, that would be--and that would be, I would like that.  And I, you know, I said I eulogized my father, so family has to come in this place as well, right.  I need to have, there needs to be a next generation, starting right here of minority engineers.  There needs to be time spent with, you know, I talked about the influence my cousin had on me.  Well, you have to go visit your cousin.  You have to get you and your kid on a plane, haul yourself down to Virginia to be with these people.  So having a strong connection with my family which is something that I've actively re-prioritized in the past two or three years.  It started with my father's illness, but then continuing on.  It's just like, okay, this is--I didn't have a prioritization for a family.  It wasn't, I didn't appreciate the power of just sitting there and listening to my aunts talk, listening to my cousins or hanging out with my cousins and my nieces and nephews and how they run around and talking about whatever we're talking about, even if we're not doing something.  There's no agenda.  There's no item, there's no task, there's no--there's nothing that I can look at my list of things to do and check off.  But there is a real value in being there with them.  Now, of course, people will hear this and say, of course, James, there's a real value in being around people that you love, and who love you.  But remember what I said first, that I am--I want to be a formidable engineer.  And engineers often lose sight of the soft squishy things that surround us.
