Story_ID: 127790
Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Denise Gines, and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer. Anthony Pool is the interview--interviewer observing.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me including any middle name?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My name is Yvette Jackson Moyo. That's Y-V-E-T-T-E, J-A-C-K-S-O-N, M-O-Y-O.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: 12/8/53 [December 8, 1953].
Speaker 1: And the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is August 19, 2013.
Speaker 1: The location of this interview?
Speaker 2: At The HistoryMakers offices in Chicago.
Speaker 1: And could you state your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a socialpreneur [social entrepreneur] and I guess a marketer.
Story_ID: 127791
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  Now I'm going to ask you a few People magazine-ish type questions, okay?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well last night I had ginger broccoli with rice--brown rice and I would think that would be one of my favorites this week.
Speaker 1: Okay and your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: What about your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Turquoise, orange.
Speaker 1: And where do you like to vacation?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation is St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands] and anywhere with water.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: That which you share will multiply. That which you withhold shall diminish.
Story_ID: 127792
Speaker 1: Great.  Now let's explore your family background.  So let's start with your mother and tell me her name and where she was born.
Speaker 2: I can hardly say her name without smiling.  My mother's name is Pauline Jackson and she was born in Chicago [Illinois] and she's got quite a jovial personality, so I can hardly say her name without smiling.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories about her growing up in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yes she did. She was an only child and she grew up a daughter of my grandfather and my grandmother, Pauline--I mean Paul Clay and Izetta Clay. And they--my, my grandfather was quite a entrepreneur.  He owned a variety of businesses from grocery stores to real estate companies to scavenger companies and I can always remember him doing--when we used to heat our houses with coal my grandfather would come in and shovel the coal and he seemed like such an overpowering individual with the shovel.  And he seemed to-you could see his muscles and my little sister would say, "Maybe he's Paul Bunyan," (laugh) because he was just that big and just that much of a figure in our lives.
Speaker 1: Are any of the stories that she might have shared about going to school?
Speaker 2: Yes, she attended DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois].  One of the stories she would tell us that she never learned to swim because in those days I think the instructors would throw you into the pool or something and it frightened her so she never learned to swim and that's an interesting story because we are--everybody in my family we call ourselves water babies because we like to be where the water is.  And my mother is the only one in the family that can't swim.  So that's a story about my mother (laugh).  The school days she was more of a personality than a student and she always tells us the story, "I was never that interested in learning anything but performing or being funny or being nice." That's what she did and really to this day people say--they call her Polly and they say, "Polly is your mother. Oh my gosh she's so funny and she's so much fun."  And so I try to put some of that into my life.  The older I get the more Polly I want to be.
Speaker 1: And how far did she go in school?
Speaker 2: She completed high school and she went to-I think she went to Peters Business College [Cortez W. Peters Business College of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and she could do--you know type and do secretar--had great secretarial skills but she didn't work until I was about thirteen years old.  So she used her skills--oh she did take home economics in high school which always fascinated me because I think that's something missing from our schools today.  But she talks about learning how to budget and to make a grocery list and our house was always very organized.  She is an immaculate housekeeper and she just tells me about those days going to school. Those are some of the things she mentions.
Story_ID: 127793
Speaker 1: And tell me more about your grandmother [Izetta Clay] and grandfather [Paul Clay].
Speaker 2: My grandmother and grandfather were wonderful people, just wonderful.  They were very generous. They made sure the people in the neighborhood that came to their grocery store got a little something extra if they didn't have enough.  It was a time when people had big families and you know five to ten children and with them having only one child they really reached out to make sure the community had what they needed.  Very generous, I remember growing up and Operation Breadbasket being formed.  My grandmother already had a history with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Izetta Clay, my grandmother would sell at least one hundred NAACP memberships a year, every year until she was ninety-two and if you knew her you would have a NAACP membership and she did that through her church.  My grandfather would work on these garbage trucks and pick up garbage from the Jewel [Osco] Food Stores and once Operation PUSH--Operation Breadbasket opened up opportunities for black people to actually do little things like pick up the garbage.  My grandfather was first in line because he was already supporting that movement.  And I can just remember my grandmother having everything she wanted from my grandfather.  If she said, "Oh so and so came in and had a fur coat," he would say, "Get you one Daught".  He called her Daught, short for daughter. "Get you one Daught. Why don't get you one of those fur coats." And then sure enough maybe six months later my grandmother would say, "I saw a fur coat sale and I'm going to get me a fur coat."  So it was Paul and Izetta, and Izetta was the homemaker, generous grandmother. Did, if we wanted--my sister was interested in playing the organ, my grandmother got her an organ.  If we were interested in taking dance lessons she made sure we had dance lessons.  If there was--my trip--high school trip to Spain my grandmother--there was no conversation. I was going to that trip and my grandmother was underwriting it.  She also was very active in Breadbasket which was the predecessor to Operation PUSH [People United to Save Humanity] and then also in Operation PUSH. We had those very, very early communications and actually access to [HM] Reverend Jesse [L.] Jackson and [HM] Reverend Willie [T.] Barrow. Reverend [George] Ed Riddick who was a historian and researcher for Operation PUSH and Operation Breadbasket, the Noah Robinsons, just in that early movement, I as exposed to all of that through my grandparents, Paul and Izetta Clay.
Speaker 1: And you said that your grandfather owned a grocery store?
Speaker 2: Yes he did.
Speaker 1: Where was his store?
Speaker 2: Somewhere around 48th [Street] and Langley [Avenue], somewhere around 48th and Langley.  There is a home that they lived in that's been torn down and I can't place the exact--or maybe it was 47th and Forrestville. I don't remember maybe that's it.  Because I think 48th and Langley is more residential now but in that area is where his operations--he purchased real estate whenever it became available and made kitchenettes which were a big huge apartments cut up into smaller areas where there might be one shared bathroom between five families in a single, you know what was originally a single room apartment.  So that people--black people coming to the Chicago [Illinois] would have more affordable places to stay.  So he was very enterprising and very much interested in finding a way for other people to find their comforts and care for their families.
Speaker 1: Do you know where your grandfather was from?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was--where was Paul Clay from--I don't know.  It doesn't--I'm sure I know. Someone in my family is going to be appalled (laugh) but I can say they--he had about seven or eight brothers and sisters and all of them were born here in Chicago as far as I know.  My grandmother was born in Atlanta [Georgia] and her father and mother, Willie T. Moore and Maude Moore came to Chicago from Atlanta, I believe in 1920.  I think my grandmother was born in 1910 and they looked for their A.M.E [African Methodist Episcopal] Church which was number one on their list.  It had to be an African Methodist Episcopal church.  And someone saw them standing with seven children and my grandmother and grandfather standing on a bus stop taking the bus to a church.  And that person informed them that there is a church right around the corner and my grandfather said, "Oh no we have to go to the African Methodist Episcopal church," and he said, "By the way it is an A.M.E church."  And for eighty-two years my grandmother served in that church in various offices as Sunday school teacher, as the pianist for the Sunday school and she died at ninety-seven years old and I took her to church in those final years, every Sunday for about the last three years of her life and she was the mother of the church, Izetta Clay.
Speaker 1: And do you know your grandfather's parents?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's parents I didn't know them.  They were gone before I--before I was born but I do know that they did love my grandmother very much.  They very much approved of Paul and Izetta Clay's union and they stayed together from the time they married until my grandfather's death.  So I believe that they were married fifty years.
Story_ID: 127794
Speaker 1: So now let's talk about your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me your father's name and where he was born and raised.
Speaker 2: My father's name was Rudolph Sherman Jackson.  He passed away in 2007 and he, his grand--his father was named Willie Jackson and his mother was Opal Jackson and he had seven brothers and sisters.  And they--he was the second oldest--second youngest of the group.  No, second--oh well I don't know the-second oldest male child.
Speaker 1: And did you know your aunts and uncles?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did know all of them actually, all of them.  And they are still--well his brother is still alive, Walter Jackson and his sister, Eva Mae Jackson is still alive and those are the only two brothers and sisters that are still alive.
Speaker 1: You can still let us know who the other brothers and sisters were.
Speaker 2: Okay, you want me to name those brothers and sisters.  Let's see there was Gertrude, Rudel [ph.], Rudolph, Eva Mae, Estherlene [ph.], Walter and I might be missing--oh and Rudolph. And that would be everybody.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 127795
Speaker 1: So you were born and raised in Chicago [Illinois] and let's talk about your neighborhood in which you lived in the early years.  What's the first house, where did you live, what's the first house that you remember living in?
Speaker 2: 7425 S. Michigan Avenue and that was 1953. We moved in when I was two months old.  And my grandfather [Paul Clay] upon learning that my mother [Pauline Jackson] was having her second child, assuming that the place would be too small for my mother and father [Rudolph Jackson] to stay in started to look for a two flat.  And by the time I was born my mother, my father, my brother and I and my grandmother [Izetta Clay] moved into the two flat with my grandmother and grandfather on the first floor and me and my family on the second floor with me as an infant.  And we lived there--I lived there for forty-two years of my fifty-nine years and actually purchased it after my grandfather died.  My husband and I purchased the house and I stayed there and everybody was raised there and lived there at some time or another and it was just a great opportunity to live there.  It was called Grand Crossing, Park Manor area right to the south of--no to the north of what is known as Chatham which is a much more widely known area in the City of Chicago.
Story_ID: 127796
Speaker 1: And tell me about your siblings.
Speaker 2: My brother, Steve was three years older than me and he taught me to sing, play, laugh, run, read, write and live.  He was wonderful. He is deceased now and passed away in 1990--no 2000.  And he was wonderful, smart. He was an artist, not much on sports when we were growing up but we went to day camp together and being the first two we were--his name was Steven Dwayne Jackson and we were Evie and Stevie.  So Evie is short for Yvette and I don't like people to call me that anymore but we were Evie and Stevie for many years.  Probably until I was about thirteen and still that to my cousins of course that we grew up with.  So that's the first sibling.  The second is Sherry, Shery King and Sherry and I were very close and went away to college--when she went away to college, she went away to college when I went away to college.  She is now a gifted teacher at Senn High School [Chicago, Illinois]--no not Senn at Curie [Metropolitan] High School [Chicago, Illinois].  She started out at Senn and has two daughters.  And my sister Cynthia Denise Jackson, now Cynthia Stringfellow is a--works for a nonprofit-a very large nonprofit and does a lot of training in early childhood, in the area of early childhood development and she has three children. Sherry has two children.  And my brother Steve had three children, Jamal, Tyra and Amita.
Speaker 1: Okay, your brother he died fairly young then.
Speaker 2: Yeah he died at forty-nine years old.  He was a fire fighter. He was a committed father, a very committed father and got sick and once his children were of age, adults on their own, he just died.
Story_ID: 127797
Speaker 1: Now, before we go forward is there a story about your mother [Pauline Jackson] and father's [Rudolph Jackson] marriage?
Speaker 2: Yeah well, yes.  My mother is about 4'11". She is a little smaller now as the years go pass.  My mother, I think my father loved my mother at first sight.  He saw her legs and she was standing on a balcony and he saw the legs and she was with her best friend, Bernice Connor, and my father was visiting Bernice's brother and my father looks up and sees those legs and says something.  My mother and my father was extremely handsome and my mother is beautiful.  So they sort of connected at that first time they ever saw each other and my father was a man about town.  He had a job. He worked for the railroad. He had been in the army so he had things.  My mother's previous boyfriend or this guy she went on the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] bus to here or there maybe three times that was the extent of her dating.  They, you know, had to pick her up and they went on the "L" [elevated railway, Chicago, Illinois]--on the bus or the "L."  My father who had, you know, this worldly exposure, you know, was saying, "I'll just pick you up in a taxi and we'll go downtown and eat."  So he really swept her off her feet and he treated her differently from anybody else because he knew with her family background and her parents that were devoted to her and her manners and style that he had to bring it in a different kind of way.  There are love letters from when he was on the--what we call he was on the road.  He would write love letters to my mother and recently we were, you know, doing some things that would buy my mother jigsaw puzzles just to help while away the time and she began to tell me that the love letters were in the basement where we were doing the jigsaw puzzle.  And we took the love letters out and we began to read the love letters from my father that he wrote and would, talked about his excitement about the upcoming marriage and how devoted that he would be to her.  Sure enough they stayed together from the alter to the--he passed away and I believe they would have been married, well they were married fifty-six years and he died at the age of seventy-eight. A real, a real love story.
Story_ID: 127798
Speaker 1: Now tell me more about your relationship with your dad [Rudolph Jackson].
Speaker 2: Well it was rocky. It was rocky.  He was a true disciplinarian. He also was a participated and competed in Golden Gloves competitions which is boxing and he was an amateur boxer but that's probably the height of amateur boxing when you can get into a Golden Gloves competition.  And he was in the military and he had certain ideas about how his children were to be raised.  So he was a strict disciplinarian and you know, there were some family things that I did not like and I was strong--and he was very strong willed and people say that I'm very strong willed.  And we didn't get along most of the time so I learned to keep my mouth shut, keep that eye contact, you know, be polite and get out of his way.  Thank God that as I got older I began to forgive him for what I thought was just some incorrect things in how to raise a child.  And took a class called 'Landmark Education' where I learned that to live the life that you love and to live it powerfully you would have to get rid of the things that would, you know, tend to pause you and have you say that wasn't right.  Get rid of it so you can move on and I went to my father and told him that I actually heard you for the first time this week telling me that you're sorry and that you know that some of the things that you did were over the top and I never heard you really because I was so concentrated on just getting the eye contact, say what you need to say and get out of his way that I never heard what you were saying.  And we became very close in the last couple of years of his life while he was ill and thank God he went to his, you know, maker knowing that his older daughter loved him unconditionally.
Speaker 1: Wonderful and your relationship with your mother [Pauline Jackson]?
Speaker 2: My mother, she is so funny and she is just hilarious and now I'm living with my mother and she was sick last year and we were very worried.  She had one of her vertebras resting on a nerve which is a very, very painful situation.  And all I could think to do to help her was to be funny and it was really out of character for me. I'm really serious minded.  I've got a funny side but I brought funny to the table every single day and it really made me a happier person just to have the privilege to be there with her during her difficult time.  Since then I've moved in with her and we have breakfast in the mornings and I usually--I'm the one that cooks and she brags about how well I cook.  She can't believe she's eating fresh fruits and vegetables because I'm a pes--pescetarian and I only eat fish and that's the only flesh I eat.  And she can't believe that she's eating less meat and eating some type of fruit or vegetable or even a green smoothie every day there is something different and so my mother has brought life to every party, every party all of her life. That's just who she is.  There is a rhyme, there is a saying--we grew up at home with all kinds of sayings.  We knew--somebody asked me when I was an adult, do I know what the Golden Rule, and I would say, "Of course. Do unto others as you would have them do unto you."  Somebody said, "My you knew that really quick," and I'm like, "My mother would say that to us over and over and over again."  Even to this day she rhymes.  If I'm dating she would say, "Oh you are a fine piece of leather, well put together" to whoever--whatever guy that she meets and she has been doing that since I was in high school.  And so my mother is a card and she is the life of the party.
Story_ID: 127799
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now let's go back to your elementary or your youngest--your younger years and is there an early childhood memory, what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My brother [Steven Dwayne Jackson] and I--my brother and I playing.  You know when--he passed away at age forty-nine. He never got to be fifty and I'm fifty-nine and I think about that a lot.  So smart and he would read to me and just--so the single memory is us in the backyard digging worms because he said we needed to dig worms (laugh). I don't know any other reason.  I mean big fat worms, big fat worms and me saying--you know being all dirty and him saying, "That's really good, you're doing good."  And so, in challenging moments I can hear my brother say, "You're doing good Yvette. You're doing really good."
Story_ID: 127800
Speaker 1: Now tell me about the neighborhood in which you lived.  If you can do a, say a square block, who lived on your street, who were your friends, who were the merchants, where did you go to church?
Speaker 2: The square block around-oh that's really, that's such an excellent--our neighborhood including our church which was on the corner across the street from our house and our church had a bowling alley in it.  (laugh) So not only did my mother [Pauline Jackson] and father [Rudolph Jackson] sing in the choir, we could go to the church and bowl.  We had to go for all kinds of things which seem we're at the church all the time.  But that's one distinction that our church has a bowling alley.  At the other end of the block was a real bowling alley and we couldn't go there because we had our bowling alley at the church.  The people we played with were wonderful.  Nikki Zollar who is one of your HistoryMakers lived on the end of the block and she is an attorney and her father [HM Dr. Lowell Zollar] became--we watched her father go to school and become a physician from right there at the end of the block.  We watched her mother, [HM] Doris Zollar support his career and work and support while he went to school and he became a very, very widely respected physician, [Dr.] Lowell Zollar.  They lived on the corner with their family and this is blended families and extended families helping each other move up.  Just as in our two flat my grandmother [Izetta Clay] and grandfather [Paul Clay] were on the first floor and the four kids and my mother and father were--we became four kids--and my mother and father on the second floor.  Some other friends, Everett White was the guy that I would look out the window at and say, "He's so cute," when I was only like maybe eight years old.  And he became a physician and his father was a professional.  He was in an organization of African Americans who sold alcoholic beverages.  And at that time--this was first--after the milestone of blacks being able to sell soft drinks and other kinds of things to the consumer market which was totally closed to us by major corporations like Pepsi, Coca Cola, etc.  His father became one of the merchants and a salesperson that would wake up and wear a suit to work.  And that was very special. His son became the physician.  Down the street were Sheryl Ross and her brother Ronnie.  Around the corner a little further than just a one square block about four blocks away were my cousins, the Bowens [ph.] family and it was four of them and it was four of us.  So we would get together with Tony, Lamont, Jeffie and Corby on a regular basis. Those were our cousins. Let's see, we would--who else was across the street. Mostly we played in our backyards and we played with Carol Ross who was Nikki's cousin who lived in the same house.  We played in our backyard and Nikki interestingly and I always tell this story because Nikki became very widely respected and she is a stately, beautiful, tall woman, and was always--she was three years younger than me--but always bigger than me.  So Nikki was a bully. She would knock you around.  I would always get caught hitting back by her mother who thought that I was the bully and so that was just always hilarious now when I look at Nikki and she is such a sweet person.  But we played together like we were the same age and she was always a very, very fun and intelligent person.  So but mostly I played with my sisters, my two sisters, Sherry and Cynthia.  Sherry is three years--almost two years younger and Cynthia is five years younger.  So they were paired together all the time just like my brother and I were paired together.  But we spent a lot of time in our backyard and we use to call it the back-e-yard.  We would say, "Where you going," and "We are going to be in the back-e-yard." (laugh)  We would play in the alley.  There were pieces of coal in the alley and one of the things we did with the people across the alley.  My middle name was Patrice so Yvette Patrice Jackson. They would call me Evaneeda Patricia (laugh) and this went on forever.  And I was even crossing the street one day recently and someone screams out the window, "Evaneeda Patricia" (laugh) and I would throw coal at them and say, "My name is Yvette."  So those are just some of the things and some of the ways we played on our block.
Story_ID: 127801
Speaker 1: Okay so continue telling me about the community [Park Manor, Chicago, Illinois].  Who were some of the merchants in the--in your area?
Speaker 2: Let's see we had a drugstore called Sapstein Drug Store and we had a Dr.--what was her name--it was a black woman who was a physician who was a pediatrician that lived in the area.  Let's see, we've had a grocery store that I think was called Daly's Grocery Store on one of the corners and I remember somebody took my milk--you know milk used to be in a glass.  So you would have to get a glass gallon of milk and you bring your change back to your mom.  And I just remember somebody broke the--tried to take the milk and it broke and I remember wishing I had let them steal it instead of break it because I would have had a better story (laugh).  But you know, it was pretty pleasant and that was just an unusual thing.  I do remember walking to Baldwin Ice Cream.  Baldwin was a black owned ice cream company and we could walk from our house on 74th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue] to around 83rd [Street] and King Drive, which at that time was called South Parkway and we could walk up there as a family on a summer night.  This is like a wonderful memory of mine and to this day some ice cream at night time, eating it outside is like a great thing for me to do.  That was Baldwin Ice Cream and we would walk up there on summer nights.  And one of the things--a childhood memory of mine was that my mother [Pauline Jackson] would put the crushed, you know can crushed pineapple.  She would put the can crushed pineapple in ice trays, the cubed ice trays and it made cubes of this crushed pineapple and we'd hear the ice cream truck and we would be like "Oh ma can we have some ice cream," and she would be like "Here it is. This is your ice cream," and we would say, "Ahh."  But it would be so good and we'd all sit on the porch.  Neighbors next door, Thelma Gales and her guy--I can't think of his name--he had a weird name but Thelma Gales, her son, Michael who was my brother's best friend and they would all come over and sit on our porch at night and we'd just eat the crushed pineapple and have a ball.  Now my father [Rudolph Jackson] worked a lot of different jobs because he was a welder and he worked what we called on the shipyard so he weld ships in the steel mill and in auto plants.  So he was--if you know anything about those businesses back in the '50s [1950s] there were many times when shifts were on and then there was no work and then they'd call him back to work again.  So he always had either three jobs or one job all the time.  And we would always remember having to wake him up.  There would be certain times we would have to wake him up and he slept really, really heavy.  Now I'm understanding why because he always needed a lot of sleep.  When my mother wasn't there, Thelma the neighbor across the street, would come over and she'd scream, "Rudolph, don't let me come up in your bedroom." (laugh)  And we would say I never understood the meaning of that you know like a woman in a man's bedroom but it struck me like in my teen years.  Oh that's why Thelma didn't want to come--she kept saying, "Don't let me have to come in that bedroom."  So Thelma Gales was our like well she was my sister's godmother, my sister Sherry's godmother. She was also the next door neighbor.  And you know, those are just some memories of the kinds of pastimes that we had at the house.
Speaker 1: Did you belong to any organized groups like the Girl Scouts?
Speaker 2: Yes I was a Brownie and a Girl Scout and I was the girl who when somebody asked for a volunteer it seemed like my inner voice would be like "You're going to have to do it if nobody else does it."  So I would always be the first person to raise my hand to volunteer for something and I got all the medals for sewing and for cooking and for whatever Girl Scout medals were for.  And I do remember selling Girl Scout cookies in the neighborhood and being pretty good at it. You know and I remember families or somebody small would come to the door and then somebody here would come to the door--this is what I remember about Girl Scout cookies selling that eventually you got to the tallest person and they would say yes or no and that's the person you had to sell but everybody wanted them but hands down there was a decision maker to say yeah or nay, you can have those Girl Scout cookies.
Speaker 1: Were most of the people in your neighborhood did they have two parent households?
Speaker 2: Yes most of them did and I remember being I would say I went to Deneen Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois] and I remember one of our friends, I think Michael Dunston who used to come over to our house after school who--I think he was probably the only guy that didn't have a parent and I remember being even in high school and having a friend who would go for summers to be with his dad and I would think that, wow that's so sad that he's got to go all the way to another city to see his dad.  But yes most of the households were two parent households.
Story_ID: 127802
Speaker 1: Okay so now tell me about your elementary school and some of the teachers that are memorable to you.
Speaker 2: Charles S. Deneen [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] was the name of the school and all of the teachers were memorable to me.  I liked school and I liked the teachers there.  Like the principal, loved the playground (laugh) more than anything I think.  I left Deneen when I was in sixth grade and more than the teachers, I remember my best friends Donna Pittman and Andrea Adams and we were just all "E" students. At that time it was excellent. You got an "E" or a "G" or an "F" or a "U" and "U" was unsatisfactory and "F" was failing.  And we--and Michelle Robinson is another friend who is best friends with my cousin who lived a few blocks away.  And I saw her recently and she is related to my stepdaughter's husband--no my stepdaughter.  So she was right around the area and my stepdaughter and her mom and I call her really my bonus daughter.  I don't like to use the word step so I'll say my bonus daughter, Angela lived three blocks away from us.  Of course, she was much younger but her mother's house and her mother lived with her mother were just two blocks away all the time.  And Michelle Robinson who was one of my best friends in high school was related to her and who knew until like we were fifty-eight years old (laugh).  They say, "Michelle Robinson," and I say, "Michelle Robinson" and they are like, "Yeah, she was just here," and I'm like, "I think she was my best friend in grammar school," and there she shows up.  But Andrea Adams and I have stayed very close.  And we--when I moved away what I remember is that my girlfriends wrote me letters and I wrote them letters and we were just at 74th--we moved like maybe a mile away but we had to write letters because it wasn't like we were going to get on the bus and visit somebody at ten years old.  So those were just some fond memories of the school Deneen.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that you remember?  Do you remember their names?
Speaker 2: I don't remember, I don't remember.  I just somehow remember my brother [Steven Dwayne Jackson] being this great artist and having more-his relationships were closer.  I think I was quiet and I did what I supposed to do and I stayed under the radar mostly because I was light and that was not-that was like kind of weird to be this light and my brothers and sisters were all brown skin.  My father [Rudolph Jackson] was brown--dark brown and my mom [Pauline Jackson] medium brown but I was like the white sheep of the family (laugh) and that was not in a good way.  All the brunt of the jokes, et cetera and then I got a complex about being--well, when you have brothers and sisters, cousins or whatever people go for whatever your distinction is and go, low blow you with it.  And so playing the dozens or talking about your family and they talked about me being--and I was heavy so I was a big, fat, heavy, white cow.  You look like a big, fat, white cow and I would be like, "Ugh."  And now I'm already this light person and now I've got this image of these dozens and I can't comeback because I'm so hurt to the core.  So I don't--I'm thinking that the reason that I don't remember that many teachers is that I was very--trying to play it under the radar.  Don't get noticed, get good grades and have a few girlfriends.
Speaker 1: Well what was your favorite subject because you said you got all "Es" but what was your favorite subject?
Speaker 2: I did. English, English, I was a good writer, a good writer and had good penmanship.  I really liked all the subjects. I wasn't as good in math and I had no art skills.  My brother got all of my art skills (laugh) but I was a good sidekick. I think that's what I did best.
Story_ID: 127803
Speaker 1: Okay so we will go on to when you moved you go to a different elementary school? Or are you going to--
Speaker 2: Yes a different elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay what--think of that time and what sounds, sights and smells take you back to that time?
Speaker 2: The second school--should I talk about the second school?
Speaker 1: Go ahead, yes.
Speaker 2: Alright the second school was Bryn Mawr [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and there were a lot of different sights, sounds and smells that come to mind there.  Because I was going into--I was going into sixth grade and I--it was a totally white neighborhood and so the look of the people and the expressions of the people, phraseology, words, everything was just different.  And I remember sitting in my--I would always sit in the front in Deneen Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois]. Somehow Bryn Mawr I was like further in the back not by choice but maybe it was alphabetical order. I don't know.  But I remember just looking at everybody's hair like how do they get their hair like that, how did they get that color?  This is like weird and I--so that was a sight that I would like miss the lesson concentrating on how people looked different and sounded different, said words differently in the early days.  Then the other part in that neighborhood right around the school a couple of blocks away was just a bustling community with bakeries and shoe stores and clothing stores and all kinds of things where you can just get anything you wanted.  And it was a bowling alley that was a lot different than the bowling alley on our corner. It's just a different cultural thing.  And just remembering that this is a different place and there was no different behavior because we had great behavior.  Well the only thing different is we might have screamed each other's name out of the--you know like it was dinner time, you know we would say, "Steve it's time for dinner."  My father [Rudolph Jackson] was like "No more screaming out of the window. We are in a different kind of neighborhood." (laugh)  So we would have to walk down and find Steve to bring him to dinner.  But my family tradition was always have dinner at six o'clock PM and I grew up cooking from about-once we moved to that other neighborhood which was the South Shore neighborhood I was the oldest daughter so my brother started calling me his big sister because I would cook, I would watch his back, I would you know, whatever needed to be done, the foundation of things I was right there for him.  But every day I had to cook for a family of six and the dinner had to be on the table at six o'clock PM. No question about it.  So I learned how to multi-task. I also learned to negotiate boy company on the porch only because I knew I couldn't have boy company in the house so I would have like hoards but I couldn't have one boy company so I had hoards of boys because my parents would not want me to be with just one guy.  So I had hoards of boys and girls on my porch that I convinced to be there because I had to be at home cooking dinner.  So we would have a ball and I was a specialist at casseroles and long cooking dishes and I would put them in, time them and close the door and be on the porch having a ball and that's just how it was.  I really got in trouble for not having dinner on time. My father didn't play.
Speaker 1: So your mother [Pauline Jackson] was working outside of the home now?
Speaker 2: She started working outside of the home when I was--I guess about twelve, eleven or twelve it was before I went to high school [South Shore High School, Chicago, Illinois] and I started helping once my youngest sister was born when I was five probably--so around ten when she had to manage a lot of stuff at home she would tell me you have to step up to the plate and do the things that need to be done.  By--she started--I think she started work when I was thirteen so that was really when it--all my high school years was when I had to get that dinner on the table.
Story_ID: 127804
Speaker 1: So you moved from one community [Park Manor, Chicago, Illinois] to this now predominantly white neighborhood and was this because you all needed more space?
Speaker 2: Yes it was because we needed more space but it was always--it was predetermined that we would integrate a neighborhood and that was--my father [Rudolph Jackson] was very much a race man.  So he was involved with the Civil Rights Movement as well. He went to the 1963 March on Washington [for Jobs and Freedom] and took my brother [Steven Dwayne Jackson] with him.  We met [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] in the park and I remember why we were there and knowing that it was a man from the South. Dr. King--I think we called him Reverend King at the time.  That was coming in and he was going to make sure we could bust open Jim Crow and [Benjamin] Ben Willis and the Willis Wagons which were mobile units that kids had to go in--over crowdedness in schools and they would put children in mobile homes to learn without many amenities at all.  And so the Jim Crow must go. I remember walking in the streets of downtown with that.  I remember my brother making all the signs for the picketing and protesting and this was a regular thing.  So we were going to integrate a neighborhood and we were looking in the south suburbs at first and my grandfather [Paul Clay] said absolutely not.  I remember my father being mad at him and he was like "He can't tell us what to do."  And he [Moyo's grandfather, Paul Clay] was like "Wait a minute those are my grandchildren and I'm supporting you guys as much as I can and they would have a better life if you stay in the city [Chicago, Illinois]."  So we found a place in South Shore where we were the first black family on that block.  And my cousins, Michael and Gregory Jackson and Walter Jackson my father's brother were the first black family on their block one block away.  And so we were being very close with them as well.
Speaker 1: So did you have many friends in that neighborhood as well?
Speaker 2: Oh yes we had a million friends.  Black, white whatever and mostly Jewish.  It was a Jewish neighborhood and so mostly Jewish and Polish people and we--it was a time when The Beatles were coming and I can just remember singing "She loves you yeah, yeah, yeah," and having this--all these people from--that we would have never been with had we not moved into that neighborhood and just having fun.  Swooning over I hate to say it Elvis Presley and people like that.  But then soon after the Motown period came in and we were fully engaged with that but--or maybe it was before that but music was a great part of what we did and dancing.  I should have said that in my childhood--dancing was just what we did. We just danced. Music was it.  So yeah we had a variety of friend on that block, Jerry Shortall [ph.] and Sky Stephanopoulos [ph.] was across the street.  I guess that was Greek and my brother was starting high school that year in 1964 when we moved over there so he was about ten percent other population at South Shore High School [Chicago, Illinois].  By the time he left it was probably seventy-five percent African American or black or Negro whatever we were saying at the time.  By the time I graduated it was just about all black, and the [Black] Panther period, and the hippie period was right there upon us.  Well we had just passed it actually in--by 1970. I graduated from high school in 1971.
Story_ID: 127805
Speaker 1: Well, let's just go back a little bit and talk about your-so you did go to junior high school or in middle school.
Speaker 2: We don't have junior high school in Chicago [Illinois]. We only had elementary school and high school and high school was a four year institution from twelfth--ninth, ninth grade to twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: Elementary is from first grade through eighth grade.
Speaker 2: First grade through eighth grade. That's elementary school.
Speaker 1: So was there anything else you wanted to say about the new school.  Tell me the name of it again, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Bryn Mawr [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Yes culturally it was just different entering but all through that first school year black people kept coming in, coming in and it would be like "Wow we are getting some more."  And then it was a cultural magnetism that we all had just in terms of what we ate and we listened to and what we talked about.  And so it was really wonderful and some of those people that I was in sixth grade with Richard Laudermill [ph.] and Dennis Pierson [ph.] and Rafer Carter [ph.] and I just remember Martha Sylvane [ph.] and Deborah Harper [ph.].  We became very, very, very close and to this day still keep in touch.
Speaker 1: And so did you have any dreams or aspirations of what you would do later in life during that time?
Speaker 2: I thought I was going to be a teacher. I thought I really was going to be a teacher and then, I think everybody really expected me to be a teacher. And then when I went to high school [South Shore High School, Chicago, Illinois] I realized that I really liked to write and perform.  We were in all kinds of talent shows.  I didn't really have what I think talent. I was sort of like with a group that was very talented but I was their friend so I could be with them, dancing in the talent show. That's my story.  And my sister [Sherry Jackson] though was very talented, she could--Sherry she could dance, she could play the piano, the organ. When we went to dance class and they told my mother [Pauline Jackson] "The little one is wonderful but that big one (laugh) she is not ready." So I took my sister to music lessons and I took my sister to dance lessons for many years and felt like I just you know, didn't have--they said I didn't have rhythm but when it came to parties I could jam meaning that I could really dance.  So I don't know where the disconnect came but once I finally realized that I also had some musical interest and talents and I'm in the women's chorus today at my church and I love it.
Story_ID: 127806
Speaker 1: So what were some of the other activities in high school [South Shore High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I was a swimmer. I started swimming.  One of the things that my father [Rudolph Jackson] insisted was that all of his children learn to swim and he was the person that taught us to swim for the most part.  And then we would take more advanced lessons at the Grand Crossing Park District and at the South Shore Y [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association] and so we became--I got a lot of awards from swimming and we would vacation in Paradise Lake, Michigan. In a place called Paradise Lake.  My godfather, Mr. Pickett [ph.] owned a house on the water in Paradise Lake and a cottage next door which was probably the size of a garage or smaller.  All six of us would go up there for like two weeks during the summer.  And you know we would get up early in the morning before our parents even got up so we could go swimming. We could check a boat out with my brother [Steven Dwayne Jackson] rowing the boat and have toast cooked in the frying pan and really experience nature and hike, et cetera.  That was a truly a benefit to us and our family and to this day my favorite vacation spots, like I said, is anywhere near water.
Speaker 1: Then, just to go back a little bit, you say that your mother [Pauline Jackson] started working when you were about thirteen what type of did she do?
Speaker 2: She went to the Internal Revenue Service [IRS] doing clerical work and then from there I think she went to Illinois Bell [Telephone Company]--oh her first job might have been at--with a physician, [Dr.] Lowell Zollar, the gentleman that got his credentials to be a physician became a pediatrician and my mom worked for him in his doctor's office and [HM] Dr. Billie Adams who was a renowned pediatrician in Chicago [Illinois].  And my mother worked then in the pharmacy with the pharmacist [Robert] Bob Ireland and from there I think she got a job at Illinois Bell from there and retired from the phone company many years ago.  But it was a short run in terms of career but she did alright and always kept her coworkers laughing.
Speaker 1: So back to your high school did you have anyone who influenced you or inspired you in your high school as far as your teachers, or counselors?
Speaker 2: Oh yes many, many but I will mention Ms. Bailey [ph.] who was my biology teacher and when I went on to college [Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, Illinois] the life science class that everyone was crazy and afraid of I just went straight in and did very well and coached people on it because of Ms. Bailey's good teaching.  Also Mr. Latronic [ph.]--no he was actually my grammar school teacher at Bryn Mawr [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  He was math and he made it possible for me to manage to deal with math and not be afraid of it which served me well later, in later years.  Ms. Bailey, Mr. Mitchell was my English teacher and he's the person who said, "You can really write.  The crowd you are with they probably are not going to do anything but you need to go to college.  So here you go take this and present it to Silas Purnell" who ran the college placement office and "You are going to go to college."  And I went and filled out the application and Silas Purnell was credited with sending like maybe over five thousand people to school just that way.  Referral, he filled out the applications, he'd tell you to get your mother to sign it.  My mother was like "Well why do you have to go away. Steve didn't go away and he went to a junior college."  I was like "Mr. Mitchell says I need to go away and so it's going to be free and it's going to be whatever. You know as long as you fill out these papers."  And it wasn't free but my mom and dad came up with the dollars but they didn't fully understand why I had to go away.  And it was Mr. Mitchell who had another vision for me to see the world in a different way and not stay in Chicago.
Speaker 1: And he was the English teacher and you were ready to leave?
Speaker 2: I was ready. I was really ready.  By the time--it was close to graduation I was more involved with the Black Power Movement and I didn't want to go to the prom because I thought that was, you know, why are we going to prom. Why are we emulating what other people do. We have things to do right now with our community.  So I didn't go to my prom and I had signed up for a program where I could go away to college in May and graduation wasn't until June.  So I went away and was a college student. That's what I, that's what I wanted to do.
Story_ID: 127807
Speaker 1: Okay now just a little bit more about the Civil Rights Movement and your family's involvement and maybe even your brother [Steven Dwayne Jackson] and yourself's involvement.  Where, do you remember where you were when [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed?  You were younger but do you remember that?
Speaker 2: I remember my brother telling me that King was killed and I was at home.  And I remember when Kennedy was killed; I was on the schoolyard with friends.  Someone said it and we were all torn up about it.  With Dr. King my brother was mad about it and he was like this is what Malcolm [X] has been saying, "You don't get anything from being nonviolent."  He had been--my brother's cycle was nonviolence first and he was leaning towards [Black] Panthers and I also went to the Panthers' office and did a little volunteer work following them.  And then he, before he graduated from college--I mean high school he became the first black hippie that anybody had ever heard of or seen.  We didn't even know that we should call him hippie until we saw it on TV but he was definitely pretty raggedy and had hair that wasn't exactly approvable by my father [Rudolph Jackson], which mine either.  And but so Steve went through every cycle of the Civil Rights Movement and from nonviolence to violence to picking up arms if we have to to feeding the youth breakfast with the Panthers to being a stoned hippie and moving to Haight Ashbury [neighborhood, San Francisco, California] with a blonde by the time he left high school.  So he was a good model of what was happening.  He was a poster child for what was happening during those times.
Speaker 1: So what was your involvement or your feelings about it?
Speaker 2: My feelings--well I was very much--we went to [Operation] PUSH [People United to Save Humanity] meetings on a pretty regular basis.  My grandmother [Izetta Clay] went every single--my grandmother and grandfather [Paul Clay] went every single Saturday to Operation PUSH meetings and to this day they still have them every single Saturday and I continue that tradition by going at least once a month and writing a check at least once a month to say, you know this is where I come from and this is what matters to people and this is how you make a difference and how you make a change.  I was involved with school politics. I ran for treasurer of our class and lost to another girl named Yvette Brown [ph.] who I see all the time and I am always thinking and she is like "Actually I was the secretary," and I'm like "Well didn't I run against you." She couldn't remember but I remember I lost to another Yvette how could that be and there was not even that many Yvettes in our school.  But I was active but I was also very social.  I loved to dance and there were many places that we went at night and just had a good time and I watched my brother go from Brooks Brothers to a Gouster [style of dress] look to--which was a sign of the times.  I watched him and understood what boys were about.
Story_ID: 127808
Speaker 1: Okay so you were talk, we were talking about civil rights and right before you go to college [at Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, Illinois] and we're in about 1968 and you talked a little bit about the [Black] Panther Party. What else do you remember about that time?
Speaker 2: I remember--that was the year-- '68 [1968] was the year my brother [Steven Dwayne Jackson] was ending high school [at South Shore High School, Chicago, Illinois] and I was going into high school.  And my brother would let me hang out with him for a variety of reasons.  The Evie and Stevie thing was slowly--the word, the moniker was going away but we were still Evie and Stevie.  And so he took me to--he let me hang out with he and his friends and said, "Let's go down to the convention [Democratic National Convention] because we're protesting.  The convention being here [Chicago, Illinois] when black people don't have any rights and black people don't have any rights and they are hosting the convention and [Mayor Richard J.] Daley's try to control everything going down. We're going to go down."  So we went down there and by the time we got there it was already a protest and police lined up and it started to get dark and people had protest signs about what about rights for negroes in Chicago [Illinois], isn't America, America for everybody.  And then we heard the announcement that said, "Back up or we are going to launch the tear gas canisters."  So there were instructions as to what to do, to take your t-shirt put it over in front of your mouth, spit in it so that you would be able to breathe and you can still walk with the tear gas canisters.  But you know, people are saying they are probably not going to do it, we will just back up a little bit and next thing you know it was like you could hear the firing of the canisters and them landing and nothing but smoke.  And I know my brother got hit with one of them and we got separated after a time. It was about four of us maybe six of us and he got separated from us.  And he said--we could hear a commotion and he said, "Meet me in Old Town."  Old Town [neighborhood, Chicago, Illinois]--okay we are downtown. We are about--Grant Park [Chicago, Illinois]--let's just say its zero, point zero.  Old Town is like 1900 North which is nineteen miles [sic, about 2.4 miles] to the north and so we knew that we had to catch up with him and we travelled to Old Town with a crowd.  People were screaming and screaming things at the police and all this was for blacks to have a say so and a voice in what was happening in Chicago at that time.  Right after that so my brother came back. He had previously been hit with a brick near a country club called South Shore Country Club [Chicago, Illinois] where blacks weren't allow to come anywhere near even the fence and he was hit with a brick for coming near the country club and that set off a number of activities where in other cities they were burning down things--in Detroit [Michigan] and some places on the east and west coast.  And Chicago was just having these small race related activities but everything was beginning to fester.  [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] came into Chicago previously and stayed in one of the Chicago projects and called Chicago more problematic than many of the other cities he had ever been to--probably the worst city he's ever been to.  Very segregated and the rights of people were you know people being disenfranchised.  And so that night we did catch up with my brother in Old Town amazingly and we got in some crazy time of night and had some kind of story if my parents [Pauline and Rudolph Jackson] woke up but they never, they never woke up.  But I think my father would have been all for it because--but he was definitely for the nonviolent part although he was this prize fighter and believed in corporate [sic, corporal] punishment of his children.  On second thought I don't know, I don't know. He was aligned with Martin Luther King but I do remember many stories of my father told during that time of coming back from the steel mill.  You can imagine the racial slurs and things when black people were actually trying to take into their hands their own future, what it was like to work as a union worker, one of few union workers with a non African American--all white employee body or coworkers is what I'm saying.  My father would talk about how he had to fight to die, he had to fight at work but sometimes you got to show people blah, blah, blah.  So, you know, while he was aligned with King there was this other side of his life where you know, he taught us to stand up and defend ourselves.  I hadn't thought about that sort of strange sort of dichotomy until right now telling this story about what it was like between '64 [1964] and I would say '68 [1968] when and by that time my brother graduated like in '69 [1969].  The Panthers--the police had surrounded the Panthers' house while they were asleep and drugged and shot an amazing amount of times into a building to kill people.  Mark Clark and Fred Hampton and that was a turning point where we just knew that--well I knew from myself that I had to devote a lot of my life to another story about black people other than what we were getting everyday and that's kind of what I did.  But that was--my brother, my father and my grandparents laid that foundation for me to do what I have done professionally.
Story_ID: 127809
Speaker 1: So now let's go on to college.  And you put in your application and you know through your, the teacher [Mr. Mitchell] who insisted that you go away.  And what college did you attend?
Speaker 2: I went to Eastern Illinois University in Charleston, Illinois which is southern--near the southern tip of Illinois.  And I went there in the summer of '71 [1971] in May of '71 [1971] and chose not--came back to--actually for a graduation--I had to come back to Chicago [Illinois] to actually graduate and walk with my class.  So that was pretty exciting taking a step on my own behalf and getting started early in college and got involved in the--I was totally known as somebody that knows about black history and knows things that I eventually became a black history major and I only went to school three years.  I came out in three years because I--me and some of my best friends that remain my best friends three of us would meet in the library to study but to talk and socialize but somehow I figured out the numbers that, hey if we go every summer, which we were having a ball in the summer, so why would we want to go home, if we go every summer we could actually walk in '74 [1974] and get out in three years.  And so we created a pact that we would do that and that's what we did.  And the whole, we were--those three-those two friends, Marvinetta Woodley [Penn] and Leslie Logan [ph.] are still some of my best friends today.  I just cooked dinner for Marvinetta and we went to a movie together this weekend and so those--that college relationships lasted that were built around our appreciation for literature because we were--we took English classes. We took history classes.  I became a black history major. Marvinetta became English and theater minor and I believe that I got--my minor was in theater and I became the president of the Black Student Union.  Did a lot of poetry every show--every time we had something and I planned a lot of events in college and just created the newspaper after some people graduated.  I just said like I did in brownies, in Girl Scouts. Nobody is volunteering so I'll do it and that was really good exercise for me because one of the teachers, his name was David Brownridge and he was an adviser to the African American Studies Department and he said, "You gonna have to sell advertising."  I didn't know anything about that but I sold ads to the local record store and the local--maybe the shop with the--maybe fraternity items in it and I sold the souvenir shop, I guess it was.  And to a bar to get enough money to publish the black newspaper to distribute it to the three or four hundred students we had on campus.  I was also a member of the Student Government Association not the black student government but the Student Government Association that approved funds for activities and speakers.  So we had a variety of speakers that were culturally astute.  We had [Richard] Dick Gregory come down. We had groups like War [music group] and things like that and I sat in those meetings to say this is what we need as a population that goes to this school. This is what we need.  So I found my voice and how to be assertive.  You know, my brother [Steven Dwayne Jackson] was not around. My sisters [Sherry and Cynthia Jackson] weren't around and I became Yvette and that's when I think that I realized that I wasn't you know, a black sheep. I had a few things going on for myself.  And I had a ball in college as I did in high school [South Shore High School, Chicago, Illinois] and but it was all around things that would make a difference.
Story_ID: 127810
Speaker 1: Who, how was the school [Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, Illinois] made up?  How many black students (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We had about ten thousand students and about four, three or four hundred African American students. It might have been less than that.  In the summer I would say probably five thousand in the summer and maybe 250--250 blacks.  All the fraternities not all of them but most of them were represented but the good thing we would go to a lot of parties at the Alpha [Phi Alpha] House, the Omega [Psi Phi] House and the [Phi Beta] Sigma House which were right in the same block.  And so as a new entering freshman sometimes you didn't know which you know you don't have a context for that so you don't know which house it is.  You have no affinity for either one of them and except that who has the best party.  And so we had a lot of fun and the students we socialized together. We socialized together.  It started in a dormitory with hours we had to be back and of course the older students would tell you what the secret was to get you around that.  But that is part of college life, right.  So we just had a great time but there was a social consciousness woven into the fun part.  And I always could--I found out in college how I could have it all.  And that was to get up earlier than anybody and to go to every party, never missing anything socially.  But when I got up early--in those early mornings that's when I would type out the newspaper. That's when I would go into my, you know, mode where whoever went to eight o'clock classes would see me and I would say, you know, we have three hundred, four hundred students and I'm on student government.  Last time the homecoming queen won, she only won by three hundred votes and if we get everybody to vote, everybody to vote we can win homecoming with a black homecoming queen.  People would say, "You're kidding, all these people," and I'm like "They don't really care, they don't really care and not everybody votes. It's a big thing on that day."  So we got the people ready and kept saying the numbers, the numbers and everybody, everybody has to vote.  And we won that black homecoming--a black homecoming queen won [Diane Williams].  The Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi] were the organization that said they would put up the person to run and she won.  But if you access the 1974 yearbook you'll see that the page is totally black and the narrative is that the homecoming queen was the first black homecoming queen in history but due to protest about how the election was run that she was not crowned and that we stopped the actual crowning of the queen.  But the black page symbolizes that if we have no--if you are going to take this away from us then there will not be a queen and that's the only way we can get satisfaction.  We won that election and so that was a political step that came straight out of my family background to say that we can make a difference, numbers do count and unity.  When you do something together it was a big lesson, big wonderful lesson for everybody who was attending school at that time.  If we stick together with something that matters, we can do anything.
Speaker 1: Well who were some of the--who was the president of the college at that time, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Fite, William [sic, Gilbert] Fite, F-I-T-E. I think that's how you spell it.  And I don't know how I remember that but I quess being on the student government makes you remember certain things.
Speaker 1: Were there any professors that might have been inspiring?
Speaker 2: Dr. [Jimmie Lewis] Franklin, he was a black history teacher, an African American teacher. Dr. [Bill T.] Ridgeway who taught in the science department, chemistry and biology.  There was a, I can't think of the English teacher but he was non-African American but he taught american history but he also taught a black history class, and he was wonderful.  He also encouraged me to take more theater courses.  He thought that I had a way to express myself that I would go on to do other things and I loved to be in theater which served me well later on in my profession of sales.  You aren't afraid of anything if you are a theater student. You learn that you can be whatever you need to be to make the difference you want to make.
Story_ID: 127811
Speaker 1: So what were your thoughts about what you would do after college [at Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Oh that's funny because once I claimed this African American, Afro-American History, you know, degree which is what it was called Afro-American history--I mean Afro-American Studies degree that was a bachelor of science and African--Afro-American Studies.  You know, people would say, "How are you going to get a job," and I would say, "Maybe I don't want a job," and I think my brain would say, "Well what is that suppose to mean."  And sure enough I really never worked a traditional job for more than maybe three years.  I own my own businesses and enterprises for twenty-five years and just recently the first time I had a job that somebody else other than me signed it.  So that's, that is I think really that self determination to choose the major to study who we are--our cultural history to honor that and to be an expert in it.  And then to go build a business that would say this is who we are, let me show you who we are.  Those college days and what my grandparents gave me combined set the platform for my accomplishments and my career.
Speaker 1: And before we go on did you ever pledge a sorority?
Speaker 2: No I didn't. I was much too black (laugh) to be in a sorority.  And you know, once I got in a leader position of being the head of Black Student Union and the editor of the black newspaper I didn't feel like I could align myself with any certain group because it was all about unity.
Story_ID: 127812
Speaker 1: Did you think more about the fact that you would maybe start your own magazine after college [at Eastern Illinois University in Charleston, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At that time?
Speaker 2: I did, I did.  I really thought I was going to be a writer and again this college friend, Marvinetta Woodley Penn told me that when we got out of college, we, Marvinetta and I saved up our money and I used to work in the kitchen in college and I used to work in the kitchen so much so and the kitchen work was really challenging.  I had this big afro and by the time I got out of the kitchen it had shrinked like this big because of all this steam (laugh) and I'd have to like run somewhere and hide out before the students saw me and pick it out, you know, really, really pick it out so I could be the Black Power woman that everybody knew.  But Marvinetta is the person who wanted--we both wanted to be in writing.  Creating something with the written word and we went to Atlanta [Georgia] together on our graduation trip that we gave to each other--to ourselves and we talked about the future and what we were going to do. We were going to travel, we were going to write and we were going to be creative, we were going leave something that lasts, et cetera.  So I came back and soon after I worked for the City of Chicago [Illinois] for awhile. Model Cities, a program to get people off welfare and into jobs.  That was what forty years ago and today we are still doing the same thing and not very successfully but I got really frustrated because they weren't--once these women came off welfare and went to training there would not be jobs for them just like today.  So not much has changed in that area but I knew that that was not a profession that I could continue because--with integrity because I wanted to do something to make a difference.  So I went from working for the city to actually--I had my own apartment in Hyde Park [neighborhood, Chicago, Illinois] and I decided to have a baby and I said I can't have this baby and work this job.  So I quit the job and started doing things with political campaigns.  And an African American man ran for mayor, A.A. [Sammy] Rayner and he ran interestingly enough as a Republican and I helped with that campaign and after that campaign was over I worked for Black United Fund, which is an organization that raised money to help nonprofit organizations and so that was my kind of independent contractor kind of thing even though I didn't have a word for it at the time.
Story_ID: 127813
Speaker 1: And after that [work with Black United Fund] I worked for Marvinetta Penn my girlfriend from college [Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, Illinois] which called me to say I've got this great job that I know you would want but I've got it and they only hire ten people and I'm going to start Saturday in training.  I was like "What is it. What is it?"  She said, "I'm working for a magazine."  And I was like "Oh my god that's my dream."  And so she said, "We have to be casual. We're going to this black owned restaurant," and I just dressed up in a three piece suit and went to the restaurant that Saturday.  I told the man, "You don't have to hire me. I just want to sit in on the training," and he was like "I really can't allow you to sit in on the training," and I said, "Just let me sit in. I won't say anything unless something comes up and you can call on me if you want.  I just want to get the training."  So he said, "Okay," and so I sat in the back.  And, you know how you are in training and some people don't want to answer questions and somebody would say, "Well to get the training everybody has to participate. We really need questions," and I would say, "Well (raising her hand) I have a question."  So I asked my question and then he'd say things like "Well what would commission be if it was fifteen percent of one hundred dollars because you are going to make fifteen percent commission on this job."  I would say, (hand raised) "Fifteen dollars," and he would say, "Thank you Ms. Jackson but I would like for you to just hold it for minute until we get done," but by the end of the day he said, "You know I think there is going to be some people that aren't going to continue and we want to start with ten trainees.  So if you want to stay on you can stay on."  So I had my first job in the magazine and Marvinetta had moved on to something else.  She did the work for a little bit but it was door to door sales to black businesses and I was working for the 'Blackbook Business and Reference Guide.'  I could do that because I had sold advertising for our black newspaper and so--which wasn't much other than a copy to sort of mimeographed thing--back and remember when you mimeograph copies and hand them out to people.  But I knew how to talk to people about the value of their business being included in something that mattered and that the consciousness of the people--the mindset of the people reading it would see their ad and think of them in a certain way.  I knew how to say that and so that's what I did for that, the rest of the year and it was at the end of the summer whoever had the most sales got a full time job at this magazine and I was the one. I was the last man standing (laugh) literally.  And I remember most of what I sold were ad, listings and out of every fifty dollar ad listing which was the name, address and telephone number of the business I got my commission was seven dollars and fifty cents and my goal was to make seventy five dollars every day.  Now you had to really, really talk to whole bunch of people to get ten people to give you fifty dollars.  A lot of the days I made it. I still I have my book where I wrote down every single sale and still have people that say, "I know you from somewhere. Aren't you that little girl that came to my office talking,"--you know and they may--people would trick me. One girl, woman who goes to the church that the guy that I date now, she goes to the same church and so I visit the church every once and awhile and she'll say, "I never will forget when you came in looking like you were still in high school telling me about this business and my girlfriend and her boyfriend own the business and you werer telling--I asked you a whole bunch of questions and I asked you if you knew them and you said 'no I don't know them but does that matter'." (laugh)  And she said, "I called before you got back to the office and told them how wonderful you were and how committed you were and you didn't care if you remembered their names or not, you just wanted to do this black thing."  And so that was the beginning of me knowing that I'm an entrepreneurial type and that selling gave me the opportunity to set my own schedule and to count my own money and to know that if I didn't do something, if I didn't make enough money it was on me.  And I really stayed there eleven years.  I left as vice president, director of sales and marketing and built Dollars & Sense to be a competitor with Black Enterprise through events and activities to raise awareness.  We had a different slant at Dollars & Sense and it had a lot of editorial--I actually had a pseudo name, Sharon Redgrave because I couldn't be in sales and editorial at the same time but it was a small shop so I had to just come up with another identity.  So I would sell ads during the day and meet people at bars and close deals.  My mother [Pauline Jackson]--after six months my mother and I would say, "Just keep them from eight to ten because this is a big bar and they're going to give me a big ad," and she's like "I just don't understand what you're doing. Why do they have you out in the street like this and going to bars."  Because my--the women in my family did not go in bars and but I would come back with my ad and started to earn money. Moved out-at that time I moved back in with my mom with the baby who was about three--well really when the baby was an infant that I moved out at five back to my own place which was the second floor where I grew up.  So I had lived over my grandmother [Izetta Clay] and grandfather [Paul Clay] with my young son [Rael Jackson] who went to Deneen [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] which was the school that I went to.  And when my grandfather got sick and passed away I put a new roof on and put new walls in and a new staircase in the front and cared for that house for the next, the next thirty years.
Story_ID: 127814
Speaker 1: Okay, you said a lot. It's wonderful, wonderful, wonderful--
Speaker 2: I know. I went all over the place (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, no, no, it's wonderful, wonderful information. But just to go back just a little bit with your degree in Afro-American Studies, what was your concentration there?
Speaker 2: It was history and English.  It was a multi--the Afro-American Studies degree was a what do you call it a multi departmental degree.  So there was--you put together your own this might be my entrepreneurial endeavor because you put together your own schedule of classes at the last and your final year of college because I had all the basics, I had all the English classes, all the everything else I needed.  So to have this degree I had to select certain classes that related to African American Studies, economics, social science, there was some math in there, a lot of history and a lot English and psychology, psychology and sociology.  You had to present that and have it approved by a department head and someone from the president of the university office to say "This together creates the degree."  I was the first person from Eastern [Illinois University, Charleston, Illinois] to graduate with that degree.
Speaker 1: And who were you reading at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh Zora Neale Hurston and [James] Baldwin again because I had read all that in school, in high school [at South Shore High School, Chicago, Illinois] but I read it with different eyes. Countee Cullen, Claude McKay, [HM] Margaret Burroughs, just everybody.  I was hungry for their teachings and, of course, [HM] Lerone Bennett Jr. and what he was doing with 'Ebony' magazine and I don't think the 'Ebony' book series had come out yet.  But those were some of the things and during the summer of there is a combined black publishers organization that I would come from Chicago [Illinois] to--from Eastern in Charleston, Illinois to Chicago on a weekend to sit in and be on this conference of combined black publishers which was at the Institute of Positive Education [Chicago, Illinois] and Third World Press [Chicago, Illinois] which is what [HM] Haki Madhubuti who was at that time Don L. Lee.  When I came it was Don L. Lee and Carol Easter [ph.], I believe his wife's name is.  Now their Haki Madhubuti and Safisha Madhubuti who have brought four charter schools under their belt and a number of other institutions and Third World Press still remains, I think they are one of the oldest black publishing companies in the country.  But I volunteered there and the first summer that I came home I actually continued to volunteer there.  And that was a black owned, very African centered place.  Then I coupled my Negro history and my Afro history stuff with now the African side for the foundation of everything that our family lived by from then on.
Speaker 1: And who was the chair of the department [Afro-American Studies Department]--you said you got the first degree in?
Speaker 2: I believe that it was Dr. [Jimmie Lewis] Franklin and Dr. [Bill T.] Ridgeway that were chairing, maybe co-chairing that committee for the degrees in African American Studies and again it was pretty new and some of the teachers and some of the students had lobbied to have that be a option--a degree option.
Speaker 1: And so how did you develop your writing style or what style do you think you have?
Speaker 2: Well I am still a little ticked because I wrote a lot about the celebration of who we are as a people.  That was my style, to celebrate love and life and goodness in the black community and to reveal that because sometime it gets overlooked in the media or in our day to day struggles towards equality.  And what I wanted to do was to spread a good news and a good message and actually my son's father has a scrapbook of plays and productions that I created at that time between the ages of eighteen and twenty, maybe eighteen and twenty-one here in Chicago [Illinois] and at Eastern Illinois University.  And my, my career goal, isn't that something you put on a resume, says that I want to, I want to share and contribute to the positive things that black people do and spread the news about our culture and community.  At, I probably wrote that at maybe twen--nineteen years old and still it is true to who I am.  So that's kind of how that evolution came about.
Story_ID: 127815
Speaker 1: Okay so, alright so is there anything else that you want to talk about Dollars & Sense because you were there for how many years? Eleven years?
Speaker 2: Eleven.  Yes I think I should talk a little bit more about that.  Alright at Dollars & Sense magazine--well first of all when I got my job it was the Blackbook ['Blackbook Business and Reference Guide'] and then the Blackbook was the precursor to Dollars & Sense magazine.  Dollars & Sense was actually the quarterly publication of the 'Blackbook Business and Reference Guide' and that was first--that was the original Blackbook.  It was the first Blackbook and after that there were black pages in other cities and things like that.  But this Chicago [Illinois] Blackbook was true to Chicago's depth in terms of black business ownership, the Johnson Publishing Company, the Johnson Products [Company] which was SoftSheen and AfroSheen and UltraSheen.  So we all know those back in the day products that had us come into our own as who we were as a people and that is the commercial business side that are always a coming of age for us too.  Like the 'Soul Train', when I was in high school we could go to 'Soul Train' and dance and be on TV.  My mother [Pauline Jackson] didn't want me to be there and I couldn't figure out a way to do it anyway and still be on TV so I didn't do it.  But my classmates went to 'Soul Train' to dance on 'Soul Train'.  This was our culture in a whole new way. It lived, breathed, it did something great.  So the Blackbook was when we could actually find out, who we could buy something black from.  So by the time I came the Blackbook had been around for a little while.  I was sort of reinvigorating the sales area and then Dollars & Sense though because I wanted to be a writer I was like ah-ha now I can write because it was really a magazine and so I started to make some suggestions and I got an offer--a job offer from Ebony Jr! and Ebony Jr! was a dream because it was the Ebony for children and I went to the publisher [of Dollars & Sense], Donald Walker and said to him, "I'm going to leave because I'm going to now work for Ebony," and he's like, "That's not a big deal," and I'm like "But why. It's Ebony magazine."  He's like "No it's Ebony Jr!," and I'm like "But I would love to write children's stories and poetry."  That would have been really in my zone.  But he said, "Well let me show you what writers make and let me show you what you could make in commission if you worked with Dollars & Sense Magazine.  Don't you have a son [Rael Jackson], aren't you a single mother?"  And I was like, "Yes, yes but I really want to write."  "Of course, you're going to be working for a magazine, you can write."  So I bought into it and I actually shined but I lost my angle in terms of what my sweet spot was in terms of writing because I was writing a lot of sales letters and sales proposals and packages and I was on the road a lot.  By the time I got to well by the time I was twenty-eight, I started there at twenty-three, I was a vice president of the company and I was senior vice president by the time I was thirty. I had the company car. I had you know, the [Mercedes] Benz that the company was paying for and I was in my thirties making fifty thousand dollars a year.  And still not satisfied because I was like but the people at Essence I heard they make like seventy thousand dollars a year.  So he would give me--the publisher would give me all of these things, well here's a car, here's a trip, here's a whatever and then he gave me events to do.  Like one of our events was a salute to the one hundred top business and professional women and I could put together that and put together the list of women to be honored.  And then we did that a few years and then it was the international women which we had this event in the Bahamas and I could put that together.  And it was just a great, great time and then I ran into my husband [Karega Kofi Moyo] and--well soon to be husband but I ran into this guy who was the icon of African consciousness and I would see him at these cultural events all the time and I remembered when we worked at the publishing company he was a kind guy and very smart.  And we started to date, he had been separated from his wife and had lived in Africa for a while very much culturally involved and we started to date in '85 [1985] and by '88 [1988] we decided to get married and to have this huge blended family and start a business.  And Dollars & Sense really set the stage for me to have the corporate connections because I was selling to Pepsi, Coke, Black Enterprise. You know, just you name it.  We had those kinds of business contacts so it was easy for me to convince someone that I could do an events business, a marketing business and always in the Afrocentric way to own my own, to have institutions that would live beyond me and my life time.  Those were some of the things from the African centered platform that paved the way for what I did after Dollars & Sense Magazine.
Story_ID: 127816
Speaker 1: And you say very meekly a blended family but how many children--
Speaker 2: [Karega] Kofi [Moyo] had eight children and I had one so there were nine children and one was graduating from--one was going away to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] at the time.  And I remember him giving her his car, not getting her a car but giving her his car to drive and I thought that was like the most generous thing that he could do and one of the things that I pledged when we got married--I always wanted a big family and having been a single mom for eleven or twelve years, I didn't--I had already said that wasn't going to happen.  So it seemed like okay, this is divine intervention.  I love this man like I'd never thought I could ever love anybody and he's got this huge family.  And I had talked it over with friends and they were like are you crazy and I would be like you know I know who I am.  This is what I stand for. I stand for the family. I stand for doing the thing that looks impossible to do and making it work.  And we were married, we stayed together twenty years, the kids all went to college, the kids--we have a chef in the family.  We created Real Men Cook the brand.  In the first year of marriage we did the shows at the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois] which is a traditional like would be the Apollo in Chicago--I mean in New York [New York]. We had the Regal here and it was the new Regal Theater and it was put back together by the Gardners [Ed and Betty Gardner] who owned Soft Sheen beauty products and they renovated the theater and we had a client that was giving back to the community by doing music shows, comedy shows and musical competitions and we ran the competitions.  And we discovered people like Adele Givens, the comedian.  First time she was ever on a stage was at one of our promotions on the West Side that discovered her and doing that competition.  At the end of it her prize was to be on stage with Sinbad [David Adkins] and to win twenty-five hundred dollars and to have a portfolio of photos so that she could promote herself and we did--it was our company that put all that together and did the initial promotions for Adele Givens.  After Adele it was George Willborn that--who was a syndicated TV personality and most recently with Michael Baisden as Michael Baisden's co-host.  And George Willborn too was discovered and performed for the first time professionally in our showcase--our comedy showcase.  So that's some of the legacy from the things that happened in the first three years of this business that we started which was a marketing firm called Resource Associates International.
Story_ID: 127817
Speaker 1: And Resource Associates International owned the brand name Real Men Cook which we incorporated.  Well the first time it was called Men who Cook which is a concept that came straight out of New York [New York City, New York] and the former director of special events of the City of Chicago [Illinois] travelled around-he was African American and he travelled around looking for events that could be re-produced in Chicago because for a while we had a drought.  After the movements, after the protests and the Democratic National Convention the city was on shut down--lock down.  We didn't have anything that we could do on a large scale in the city.  Everything was neighborhood and so when another mayor came the idea was to bring more culture and bring ideas of things we can do in Chicago.  And so [HM] Michael Scott, [Sr.] was this director of special events in Chicago and he came--we were at a banquet and we're sitting at the same table we start talking about food and how we cook and how we have this big family and how we love beans and greens and cornbread and he says, "God you really need to see this event in New York and you need to go and attend this event.  It's called Men Who Cook," and so we--I followed up with him and got more information and I knew I was not going to see the event because with all the children and the business it's like you're not going to go to New York to see it. We'll communicate with this person.   So we found out who the founder [Lana Turner] was and it was a woman who was originally raising money for her child to go to an art program and she invited single men to her house to cook and to raise money and she invited her girlfriends to pay for the dinner.  And so that was the beginning of Real Men Cook, I mean Men Who Cook which then evolved into a huge event in New York where Uniworld Advertising clients AT&T and Kodak and companies like that sponsored it.  So I called Lana Turner who was the founder and said, "Look Lana I do events in Chicago and can I license this idea from you," and she was like "Well what do you mean. What's your idea because people have stolen this idea and without my permission and you're the first person that's ever called me."  I said, "It just means that we do the same event as you but I want change it a few times. And send me some packages," and she said, "Okay I'll send it to you."  And I called her said, "Okay now this is what I want to do."  I called her again and I said, "What about this," and she said, "You know what don't call me anymore. You can do this and thank you for asking me but you can do it in Chicago anyway you want."  And so the first year we did this Men Who Cook event and we had the former mayor of Chicago that cooked with his sons. We had television personality John Coleman who was a weatherman, non-African American weatherman who did oatmeal cookies and he brought in Quaker Oats as his sponsor because the president of Quaker Oats loved his oatmeal cookies.  We would have never gotten that sponsorship without that.  And then we had Stedman Graham who was one of our first cooks in the first Real Men Cook. We had a variety of business owners.  We had the mayor's press person, [HM] Monroe Anderson, just really personalities in Chicago.  All the men, real men, we had [HM] Darryl Dennard who used to host 'Ebony-Jet Showcase' in the first one, just great, great people.
Story_ID: 127818
Speaker 1: And so that--the second year we changed the name to Real Men Cook because we felt that that had more movement. We had, we heard that there was some movement like that in Los Angeles [California] called Real Men Cook but they hadn't incorporated the name and it wasn't--and we, we had our first event on Father's Day and that was what I was telling Lana that what I wanted to do was have something that combines--creates a new tradition and if we claim Father's Day now we can talk about the responsible African American fathers.  Not fathers that have left their children or the media making it sound like any man that left his children wants to. We can talk about the heart of men and why they--maybe they might not be in the same household with their children which was our goal with our own children to show them that Father's Day is important.  Being a father is important. It doesn't matter that our family is blended and looks different than other families but we are a family. We are cohesive and we'll all get together on Father's Day.  So the kids, their moms, my son's [Rael Jackson] father would all be at Real Men Cook every year and that continued and we are now entering our twenty-fifth year of Real Men Cook.  Next year 2014 will be the twenty-fifth year.  But over the years we've been able to--with the proceeds of that event and the years--the early years was just wonderful because we could tell someone at a corporation this story and this vision that black men love their children as much as any other man.  That black men don't leave their children because they want to. They leave their children because of social, economic conditions that would preclude them from staying in the home.  Now we know forty years later that those conditions include mass incarceration of African American males with little infractions of the law. Little things like possession of a controlled substances and small amounts of them where other populations in the country get a pat on the back or get told to drive home and be careful.  Our men, our fathers went to jail and that became the beginning of the breakdown of the family.  So we knew twenty-five years ago there was something wrong and we knew it wasn't because men wanted to leave their families.  We also knew that the social structure with public aid and we've been in a lot of economic depressions like we are experiencing now, really experiencing long run.  But in those other times the social systems were set up so that women were better off if they didn't admit that they had a man in the household because they could get money to buy their groceries for their children.  So and sometimes it would be like you have to leave, man and this is the story of 'Claudine' the movie, you have to leave the house because I have to take care of the children.  And when the jobs were hard to get the man would say, well I'm not a man because who I am in the capitalistic system is so tied into what's in my wallet that I can't stay here and raise my head high without a job, and he would leave.  Thinking that he would come back. That he would work things out. Something would change but nothing changed because the situation just got worse with this mass incarceration and with the economy and the inequality.  Never getting where we thought it would be during [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King's, [Jr.] time.  And there was a subversive movement to take away the African American male out of our family.  Women could work but it created a situation where women were angry and left alone and their children were without a father.  So Real Men Cook--the food is the hook, the food is the hook and the reason people come and the transformation that takes place when they get there is they remember that men care.  They remember that if they didn't grow with a biological father that there was somebody on that block that reached out to them or maybe it was the coach, or maybe it was the minister and maybe if they didn't have that experience two generations down the road with this infraction this situation that's come up where we don't know why at this point, why black men aren't doing this around stepping up to the plate.  They can get that feeling that they're cared for and that there are brothers in the communities that go invisible every single day of their lives and it is an opportunity for men to donate, to pass up Father's Day pampering to make a difference.
Story_ID: 127819
Speaker 1: Well let's make this a little personal and talk more about your, your family situation.  Here you are with this man [husband, Karega Kofi Moyo] who has eight children.  He is the man in the house taking care of these kids so he didn't disappear.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He was there and then with your union talk more about your family dynamic.
Speaker 2: Well the blended family and how it worked?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know personally how it worked for you and let's talk about some of the other, the children.
Speaker 2: It was a wonderful experience for me and I'm not sure if it was as wonderful for my son [Rael Jackson] who was twelve at the time who I told, "Okay you've had everything. You've been travelling, you've been in limousines with me, magazines. You've flown planes. You've been all over and you have been all over.  So I'm getting married and Kofi has a lot of children and we're going to care for the children and everything is going to be split kind of evenly.  So the lots of things that you've been getting from me you're probably not going to get anymore because we're launching a business [Resource Associates International] but it probably won't be that bad."  Well into like the third year, as most business owners would know, it was like well it's not bad. We're doing pretty well but there is really not a lot that I can give.  So you, when he was on his way to high school I said you're going to have to get a scholarship. You're going to have to be a serious student and you're going to have to get a scholarship because we've got four people that will be in college at the same time that you will be.  Even though his bonus brothers and sisters weren't living in our household all at the same time, some were staying three years here and two years there but all of them were with us all summer except the one that were like over sixteen. They weren't having that.  But all summer for ten years we had all the children with us and so he understood that and he did get a full degree--I mean a full scholarship to Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] that he kept. He had to keep a "B" average and he was pre-med and he did it and he heard it.  I think that it was difficult for him because he was a reader and he was kind of quiet and then when the kids got together who had been brothers and sisters for a long time they had a certain way that they communicated together.  So it was difficult for him.  But he's very close to those children now and they consider him their brother and they lived in another city, most of them lived in another city but most of our weekends--at least once a month we were on the road and then my husband's family had a summer home and we would have the kids there for two weeks during the summer.  So we still had trips and events and everything was around--a celebration around food and we ate very well.  We are most all vegetarians except my son who was--when he would come home from school and had worked long hours in the early years in sales he would come home to my house where my grandmother [Izetta Clay] lived downstairs and my grandmother cooked for him.  So he wasn't--by the time that blended family he came he was not going to be a vegetarian.  But interestingly enough, when he went away to college one of his first calls home was like, "These people don't eat salads mom.  I must have spent all of my money buying salads," and to this day if we're ordering something he will-Rael [Jackson] who is now president of the Real Men Cook Company will order a salad.  So our lifestyle was about good eating, healthy eating.  I'm almost sixty years old. I've written a book on healthy cooking because it's just what we believe in and you know, what you put in is what you get out and I think it's the same thing with our Real Men Cook brand.  We put in such good stuff, good true stuff about our families and what real men, men really wish it could be like for them if there was fuller employment.  If there was a even playing field, if they had an opportunity to have a voice in the media and tell who they were rather than having a report about who got shot last night. There is so much more, so much more to be said.  And so I think what we did with Real Men Cook building that brand is so reflective of the way we build our family.  Our traditions, Kwanzaa every year and Kwanzaa celebrated with [Karega] Kofi [Moyo] as head of the family, lighting a candle with the kids saying whatever one of the seven principles were we really could say.  Collective work and responsibility or ujamaa which is unity, ujima which is collective work and responsibility or kujichagulia those are words that we can say and we know what they mean.  As a result during this family period when we had this blended family we would go to the Indiana Black Expo or we would go to events here in Chicago [Illinois].  People would be like wow when are these kids going to stop?  But they respected us for being a unit like that who could have that kind of vision and there was no conflict between me and the mothers.  They loved me and they trusted me to have their children during the summer.  It was an honor to do that and they went to school and got their masters degrees.  One has a doctorate degree, very accomplished women, very cultured women.  I take my hat off to Kofi who just chooses good women and sometimes marriages don't work in America and when they don't what will you be, who will you be, who will you be to create something after the first thing doesn't work or the second thing doesn't work and what will it be like for those children who call me mother, who call me mama Yvette.  And I can't get around as much as I would like to because I have to admit the economy has stifled the way I used to roll.  But our company [Resource Associates International] got to be a million dollar company and our children went to college and we were able to contribute some money to all of them being able to do that, and they all appreciate who we are.
Story_ID: 127820
Speaker 1: Now their professions, Rael [Jackson] as I said is the leader in the Real Men Cook organization and on the board of Real Men Charities, the nonprofit.  We have Yoshia [ph.] who is living in Cincinnati [Ohio] and he is a welder.  My father [Paul Clay] taught him how to weld because Yoshia lived with us for about three maybe four years during his high school years and on Saturdays, he would go and weld with my father who had by that time started his own company.  And so Yoshia is in Savannah [Georgia] welding wrought iron which of course--it's the Savannah motif from the French culture influence and Spanish culture influence.  So he is welding. He is studying design welding so he can do more designs with the welding.  Gabriel [ph.] is a chef in Savannah living--which is where [Karenga] Kofi [Moyo] lives now.  Kofi and I marriage ended after almost twenty years of being together.  Kofi is retired and living in Savannah and Gabriel and Yoshia, two of the boys are there.  Rael is here with me in Chicago [Illinois]. Kiaffe [ph.] is the marketer. Kwali [ph.] is a psychiatrist. She went to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and got her M.D. and then went on to be a psychiatrist.  Let's see, Kylolo [ph.] is a teacher in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Let's see Kwali, Kiaffee. Oh Zelpah [ph.] was killed in a car accident at the age of sixteen which I do believe on a personal side was probably the beginning of the end of my marriage.  She was killed in 1999 on our wedding anniversary, on our eleventh wedding anniversary.  Kofi's sadness and you know as a father that dearly loved his children it took a toll on us and also 9-11.  I was in New York [New York] on the street on a business trip by myself where I could see straight down the street maybe a mile to the towers [World Trade Center] and I saw the second plane hit the tower. I was standing on the street.  I was diagnosed with post-traumatic stress after that incident and corporations at that time were shutting down their multicultural or black agents--black divisions of their companies saying they were taking a wait and see--wanted to take a look--they wanted to recalibrate.  So we lost lots of money.  We went from a million dollar business to a $600,000 business to a $300,000 business and Kofi was working on a book for a few years and the book was published in 2005 and the marriage was over by the end of 2004.  But the book Real Men Cook was published by Simon & Schuster, six figure signing agreement and so it was great validation that the brand that we had built meant something.  And the book is wonderful which includes narratives from the cooks about why they would give up Father's Day pampering to donate food, to spend their own money, to spend their time certifying for safe food service and to stand up for hours and spend the whole day working to serve the public.  And it's a great gift of generosity and what Kofi would call the voices of men.  And it's just, it's a great offering.  And so that's the story of our family in a, in a nutshell.
Story_ID: 127821
Speaker 1: And now Real Men Cook is celebrated in what other cities?
Speaker 2: Well we've had as many as thirteen cities all on Father's Day.  So we feel that we have changed the way people view Father's Day and one of our contributions is the tradition of cooking on Father's Day. We have created that.  So that's been our contribution not only to African American culture but to the greater American culture.  You will see more families getting together for food functions on Father's Day and that did not exist before we created it with Real Men Cook.  We also see--so in those cities Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Detroit [Michigan], Los Angeles [California], New York [New York], Atlanta [Georgia], New Orleans [Louisiana] are just a few of the cities where we had Real Men Cook.  The economy situation that took place since 2008 has meant that we did not have Real Men Cook events officially in many of those cities.  Atlanta is still very strong. Washington, D.C. has been strong.  We lost our Washington, D.C. manager, one of our--one of the things that we raised money for and we have given a million dollars away in proceeds--over a million dollars and not just proceeds from the event but sometimes ticket share programs with nonprofit organizations.  The total as a result of Real Men Cook has been over a million dollars generated to nonprofit organizations.  So that's another contribution that we leave behind.  We are--I don't know if we are going to be in multiple cities. We may go more virtual where we're recording the activities of families and they'll all say Real Men Cook or they will call us to say they need an apron because our whole family is getting together and all the men are going to be cooking on Father's Day.  And so we don't know what the evolution of it will be, that will be up to Rael Jackson, my son, to craft what the future will be but we certainly have twenty-five years of celebrating men and I'm sometimes called a woman who transformed how Father's Day is celebrated.
Story_ID: 127822
Speaker 1: You have another business interest and that's the MOBE [Marketing Opportunities in Business & Entertainment] symposium series.
Speaker 2: Yes MOBE, MOBE, Marketing Opportunities in Business & Entertainment.  MOBE was launched in 1992 and that is a brand that was created so that--well I had these two, two areas where--of networks that I knew entertainers or people that were involved with--not entertainers necessarily, people that managed entertainers and music and movies, et cetera really wanted to get know the people who in corporate America, who were in corporate America who were like with Anheuser Busch or Pepsi, Coke, Lincoln, Mercury, Ford Motor Company.  These two worlds had never met before and now you have a lot of African Americans professionals that I knew as a result of working at Dollars & Sense.  Their worlds never met so there was a gentleman, [Charles] Chuck Morrison who did the early Sugarhill Gang [music group] commercials and, with Coca-Cola and I can--probably even the New Edition [music group] and Coca-Cola, you might remember some of those or the McDonald's commercials with music, you know.  This gentleman, Chuck Morrison who was a friend a mine and somebody who I did business with at Dollars & Sense and this--I'm going to use him as an example because he would use all of his knowledge as a corporate marketer and brand builder and put together like hip-hop artists or which was really in 1992 hip-hop was not accepted yet as a true art form or music form.  And he saw it and I saw it. I saw it as this is an opportunity to bring two sides together so I had a meeting with a gentleman named [HM] Ken Smikle who runs an organization called Target Market News and a dear friend of mine that I just wrote a book with last year, a health book. Sharon Morgan who was at that time was vice president of Burrell Advertising [Burrell Communications].  And I called them to my house which was my office and said, "I have this idea." Well first I told my cousin Kathy Rhodes [ph.].  The idea is to bring the music and the corporate people together and have a conference where they shared best practices and they told about how their industries worked so that we could collaborate with each other then to generate more business between the two entities and mostly black owned businesses.  So now we can build black businesses and they thought it was a great idea.  And I asked them to do it with me. Both of them were very busy and my cousin Kathy was like "Just do it, just do it,"  and I said, "Well no I need some help because I've got this Real Men Cook thing that I'm doing.  I do that every year and it takes up a lot of my time. I have the marketing firm [Resource Associates International]. I have all these promotional things going on. I have the U.S. Postal Service as a client that I was doing all the black stamps for--all the marketing. I went to--I found that opportunity by going to [Washington] D.C. Somebody told me that there was a vault in D.C. at the postal service with all these black stamps because they didn't know how to market them.  I went, made an appointment with whoever knew about that and told them "Give me the stamps and I will market them."  And they were like "Some of them are out of circulation so you can't market them but give us a proposal on how you would do it and if you do it you'll get more business."  And I did it. I did it with the first stamp which was the western--it was a Wild West stamp series and it had some black horsemen--what do you call them--cowboys and so I marketed that stamp.  Then there was the Madam C.J. Walker stamp. Then there was the--the last stamp I did was Malcolm X.  The Kwanzaa stamp, I did all the national marketing for the Kwanzaa stamp under our company Resource Associates International.  And these were events and events built around the stamp issuance and that took place in multiple cities and I worked with the public relations department and the stamp issuance department and the marketing department to get those things done.  So we were getting paid from all those entities and Real Men Cook was going and we were donating money from Real Men Cook events. It's a nonprofit organization.  And now I got this idea a burning idea to do MOBE and it wasn't called MOBE. It was just called the convergence of these two entities so that everybody makes money and everybody builds their business.  And so I--so Ken Smikle says, "I can't do it but I'll tell you--I'll work on the name for you."  And so I was like "It's marketing, certain advance symposiums series, and its entertainment," and he says "Okay Mo Better." 'Mo' Better Blues' [film] had just come out and he says, "Okay."  And I said, "Yeah like Mo Better marketing," and he said, "Well then just call it MOBE, M-O-B-E." And that's where the name came from.  And it was an aspirational event for African American marketers to attend whether they were at Columbia Records or Motown Records or Procter & Gamble or General Mills or General Foods or SoftSheen or whatever.  People wanted to be there, college students wanted to be there. You know, 'This Christmas'--do you know that movie 'This Christmas?' The people that put that together, Rainforest Gilms which is based in Atlanta [Georgia.]  They were students and I allowed them with my son [Rael Jackson] at FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] and I allowed them to come to MOBE free, to be in this network of people where all these things would converged and the goal was for everybody that came to MOBE to do at least three deals with some other people in the room.  So you had to go, you know it's a game. You get to know the person next to you, get to know the person across the room. You get to know the people speaking.  I don't care if it's a barter. It doesn't have to be money exchanged but it has to be a deal and then we'll do these every six months.  In addition to all this stuff I was doing, I also had Random House as a client and I was reading black books every month and reporting on them and then giving them a marketing plan on how to market the black book.  I was doing that, the postal service, MOBE and Real Men Cook at the same time.  So you know, I did have a little, I did have a little blow out. I had a meltdown (laugh) after twenty-five years but I was just juggling and I was having a ball.
Story_ID: 127823
Speaker 1: But the result of MOBE [Marketing Opportunities in Business & Entertainment] every six months for ten years was that two hundred million dollars.  We can account two hundred million dollars in deals that had been done between black businesses and corporations and some of them were--and then we started MOBE IT which was MOBE Influencers and Innovators of the Internet and Technology.  That was a MOBE IT segment so if you wanted four days of MOBE instead of three days of MOBE conference you could add on this one day which would be all about IT and that was when people, black people were just getting email numbers.  And there was [HM] Lee Bailey who has EUR which is Entertainment Urban Report [sic, Electronic Urban Report] and Lee Bailey had been an on air personality on the radio.  I called Lee. We got our email addresses the same time. We would be emailing each other all through the night.  This community of people which was Net New-R which was one of the first black Internet sites of communities.  There was BlackVoices[.com] with Barry Cooper who originated BlackVoices while he was working for an Oakland [California] general market newspaper.  BlackVoices was eventually sold to AOL and this was the genesis of all of this happening between--MOBE was built in '92 [1992]--well it started in '92 [1992]. By '96 [1996] we were getting email addresses and we had real communities of people that could communicate in New York [New York], in LA [Los Angeles, California], in [Washington] D.C. and in Chicago [Illinois] and share ideas and do deals through email and our registrations even came through email.  People were trying to say well, "How do you make money on the Internet?"  We would have people fax in, get the registration form from our website our MOBE website, download it and then fax it in to us with your credit card number on it and people would do that.  We were making so much money which is why we could--when Real Men Cook didn't have a good year we would put the MOBE money into it.  When MOBE didn't have a good year we put the Real Men Cook money in it.  But after 9-11 we had to create the nonprofit realm in [Real Men Cook] Charities that could be the presenting sponsor of Real Men Cook because otherwise corporate money would not support it.  There was a corporate backlash that caused money to be withheld sort of like what's happening with the banks.  America saves the banking community and the banks have no reciprocation to--like the automobile industry. Why is Detroit [Michigan] dying, you know. Why is Detroit dying when the automobile industry got saved?  We save companies but we don't save people.  But the spirit of MOBE was to build each other's businesses and it was just a wonderful, magnificent time.  I have all the MOBE books which are about fifteen different MOBE books about this thick with the bios of people.  The only thing I regret is that I don't have the Internet piece but what I do have--I still have that four letter URL, MOBE, which is valuable and I've been offered more than six--well, more than five figures for the MOBE--MOBE.com and I'm feeling one day myself or my son will revive that brand because the brand in essence still lives as something that made a difference for people all over the country.
Story_ID: 127824
Speaker 1: And again how does the Real Men Cook, the TV part and the reach--how does that come together?
Speaker 2: Well MOBE, Marketing Opportunities in Business & Entertainment--Real Men Cook is a perfect example of what that means, what that is.  Real Men Cook is an entertainment event that is marketing--that has the capabilities of marketing food and products that go along with that event and its, its business and its entertainment.  So it can grow the businesses that sponsor Real Men Cook and it entertains the masses.  Now the news media has had Real Men Cook become the number one news story in many cities.  Whenever we have an event on Father's Day in the cities, we're dominating the news.  We have got CBS, NBC, the Fox, the WGN TV all reporting that pretty soon, that in a minute we are going to report back how men gave up Father's Day to do something for the community and they'll report on it.  So we're able to measure the audience numbers from that and I think last year just the television value was something like $250,000 in television.  No we only did four cities last year so you can imagine we were doing.  And people aren't even watching TV as much as they used to watch.  So getting those numbers is pretty difficult but we're the ten o'clock news and with the six o'clock news. In a city like Chicago [Illinois] they lead in on Friday with people cooking in Atlanta [Georgia].  You are always seeing the guys from Real Men Cook cooking and getting ready for the event and then Saturday we might be at the studio with the guys cooking and Sunday morning between the weather you know, there is some news reports about Real Men Cook is coming and then the six o'clock news, they are showing bits and pieces of what happened and at ten o'clock news we're on the TV and that next morning, that Monday morning Real Men Cook is still the story. I'm hoping that we can build back to multiple cities but it's a new day so we'll come up with a new idea.  Perhaps we'll have to come up with a new idea on how to capture that kind of audience and capture the hearts and minds of the people focused on fatherhood.
Speaker 1: I do see it as something that maybe you were talking about doing something virtually.  That might be an avenue or even reality TV--
Speaker 2: Yes we have been offered it but I've been a little--oh no that's the brand, we don't--I don't know.  But I think there was a woman who was affiliated with Sylvia Franklin [ph.] that's a filmmaker who wrote a script for a Real Men Cook story like a Real Men Cook movie.  So we still maintain the rights to TV and all that stuff just in case it happens. You know, call us.  We're available because I believe the brand, the brand will--you know I'm proud that my marketing skills is--my marketing skills and my major in Afro-American studies--Real Men Cook living as long as it has.  The history of MOBE and all of it is just really an evidence that African Amer--Afro-American Studies and the--and it sort of a nationalistic point of view for me of how I should live my life and share and care you know, does pay off.
Story_ID: 127825
Speaker 1: You mentioned that you had written a book. What was, what's the name of the book?
Speaker 2: The book is 'Real Women Cook: Building Healthy Communities with Recipes that Stir the Soul.'  And it is a coaching book I was inspired to write.  Our Real Men Charities, which I was the executive director of for seven years, goes into schools in Chicago Public Schools and teaches healthy cooking and we dispatch men and that's been my job. I dispatch men to go places to do good in the hood.  And so in elementary schools in Chicago [Illinois] our men would in ten elementary schools, reached about a thousand children with healthy cooking classes and sessions and while we wouldn't have heat we would show them how to cook things with fresh fruits and vegetables and tell them where it came from. Consuming water, being the number one thing to be concerned about.  Your diet, what you put in your body would say how healthy you'll be and whether you will have to deal with illnesses or you'll live a life and I always say, "Look like this at sixty."  And people would say, "Wow my grandmother, she's sixty and she's got diabetes and she can't walk," and I'm like but the difference is healthy exercise, water and the food you eat.  And then the conversations you have. "What are you saying. What are your ears. What's the diet that your ears are getting?  Are you killing yourself or are you creating a life that's going to be healthy and happy."  And so our men are able to communicate that--I wrote the curriculum--and so they do that in the schools.  So the book was written because some of the moms would stay behind and you know because I would be sort of on the side and the guys would be doing their thing and they'd say, "I don't cook. I don't even know how."  Some of them would actually say, "I don't cook," like proud and I would say, "Oh my God, you're standing there with three children," you know which means they are dealing with processed foods all the time. That's all their consuming.  So many processed foods are foods that are wrapped in plastic that you don't know how old they are, how long they'll last and you are eating them to sustain yourself.  You're really eating them and you are slowing down the logical body functions, you're slowing down the brain, you're slowing down the ability to move, exercise, to jump, to run, to play.  You are distorting a lot of things.  So I wrote the book as a coaching tool and you'll see in the book it's very kindly written and it's not that it's easy, it's not hard and I do a lot of affirmations in the beginning of each chapter.  There are no meat dishes and I talk about--but there are fish dishes and I talk about why there are no meat dishes and what it takes.  I even talk about going to the bathroom more frequently that's a sign of good health.  Drink water--when you are hungry, drink water first.  And those are just some tips we give to the kids and the recipes are delicious.  My friends all love for me to cook for them and of course [Karega] Kofi [Moyo] will always will be the better cook. He's an excellent cook.  But women have to be told that it's okay to not know how because we understand that perhaps your mother didn't know how so you are not to blame.  But there is a way that you can do some of these things.  And in Chicago where we--people are working. They get a Link Card that provides them with food and how to use the Link Card.  I also teach home economics these are things that I'm doing now in my freedom away from leading Real Men Cook day to day.  I'm teaching to shop at the used stores, to get a white shirt to go on a job interviews but buy it for five dollars from a used shop.  These are the ways you increase your household income and so the book is really to get people--it's a home economics lesson because home economics is not in the schools.
Speaker 1: And there was one other book that you said you co-authored with one of your friends.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not the co-author but that's the Real Men Cookbook ['Real Men Cook: Rites, Rituals, and Recipes for Living'] that Kofi is the author of that I actually typed.
Speaker 1: You mentioned another book with a friend of yours.
Speaker 2: No that was the one, the one Real Women Cook is Sharon Morgan who is an excellent cook who owned a restaurant in Paris [France] who is my dear friend from way back.  I couldn't create a cookbook without her and it wouldn't have had my healthy angle but we, you know, we talked and collaborated on the book.  It was--it's really a wonderful book.  And it's self-published and really, I'm very proud of it.
Story_ID: 127826
Speaker 1: Well we didn't talk about when you became a vegetarian.
Speaker 2: I became a vegetarian in college [at Eastern Illinois University in Charleston, Illinois] during that time when I was the president of the Black Student Union. I would say about 1972 which was what how many years was that--about forty, forty-one years ago.  I became a vegetarian--more strict vegetarian only because I heard a nationalist guy who was talking about what black people should do, what black people should do and one of the things he said was that "And if you stop eating all that meat you wouldn't have all that acne and you wouldn't be fat and you could move around better."  I was like really and I didn't say anything at the time but then I asked him, you know and he's like "Girl you have to drink water," and I was like "What," and I had acne and was heavy and I did all of that and I just never had a craving. I would have--in early years I had cravings, of course, for fried chicken and it was about two years in between there where my son [Rael Jackson] was small and like I said my grandmother [Izetta Clay] was doing a lot of the cooking for him and I was picking him up from school one day and I was exhausted and I said, "You know what I'm getting ready to have some chicken," and he was like "No, mom no." (laugh)  And for about a year I ate chicken and I ate turkey and I went back--I took it out of my diet but he was--that's how alarmed he was.  He was like "Please don't mom. I know you're tired but don't eat any meat. This is not you."  I never--I trained myself--I could see my body functioning differently and I don't really--I certainly don't crave meat and I do a lot of--I spice my food, I eat--this is the best time to be in Chicago [Illinois]. Fresh corn and beets and the farmer's markets that are a nonprofit as a collaborator [with Real Men Cook Charities] and that collaboration is probably coming to an end now but we collaborated in a garden called Eat to Live [Englewood, Chicago, Illinois] and it is a collaboration with an organization--a nonprofit organization that teaches farmers to farm.  So we partnered with them with our healthy message to have a garden and to have a farm space that was granted to both of our organizations called The Eat to Live Englewood Farm and Garden--Garden and Farm Development.  And I was just over there the other day showing--
Speaker 1: Where is it located?
Speaker 2: It's in the Englewood section of Chicago which is 70th [Street] and Princeton [Avenue].  And we were--it was right next door to one of the schools that closed which is why--the relationship may be weaning because they closed the school and our whole base was teaching the children how to garden and it's a two-two lots that would be like where you would put two houses on.  Two lots of garden and I went over there yesterday but there were no children. The school is closed.  And it's in a sort of cul-de-sac area so if there is not the school there is no traffic.  But there was plenty of good garden food over there and I called some ladies from the community and said, "Come over here do you like tomatoes."  They had never eaten a cherry tomato, never, never and they ate it and I said, "I promise you it tastes like candy," and they were like "We have to wash it," and I'm like "No you just do like this," and I said, "Eat it."  We had a ball for about an hour in the garden and this is Englewood area.  Just to give you some context, this is where Jennifer Hudson's [singer] family was killed and we'd actually see the house that she used to live in from the garden.  And we even had a campaign this year for her to help keep the school open to support the garden and to turn the house into what we were calling, my father's house.  Very biblical relationship and it would be a house where we would teach fatherhood and we'd have men who might not have had an easy way to be taught how to be fathers or just deal, be real men for the children in the, in the community.  And that kind of house I think would be--put her house to very, very good use.  Didn't happen but you know, keep hope alive.  I'm from the [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson school so we're keeping hope alive, anything can happen.
Story_ID: 127827
Speaker 1: So tell me also more about the Real Men Cook sweet potato pound cake.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah and I always leave that out.  Real Men Cook sweet potato pound cake is a box cake mix that's sold through a chain called Jewel[-Osco] Food Stores here in Chicago [Illinois].  It was in all two hundred of their stores. Now they only have 186 stores but it is in those stores.  I never market that the way I should.  It just is not enough people or people to pay but I know that it is a dream of most people to get a product on the grocery shelves and that was never my dream. My dream was to get the brand--to get a brand dedicated to good black men on the shelf and something easy.  And our cook Shakoor who has a company called Shakoor's Sweet Tooth in Brooklyn [New York]. It's a bakery.  The bonus daughter Angie who was living in Brooklyn at the time and her husband Kenny said, "You got to come." We used to be in New York a lot visiting them.  "You got to have sweet potato cheesecake which Shakoor does back in the day."  And so I said, "Oh I've tasted that because one of our cooks had a two layer, you know, sweet potato on the top, cheesecake on the bottom, beautiful and it was delicious.  And so I went into the place and I said, "Oh yes I've had the cheesecake," but he had a cake--a pound cake that was a sweet potato pound cake, delicious.  And I said, "You know, if I could recreate this, because I'm a good cook. I do bakery stuff. I could recreate this recipe and if I put your name on the back of it and promote it, your store and you being the inspiration of the cake mix, could we do that?"  And he's like "Yeah, well aren't you going to give me any money off of it," and I'm like "No you get the fame and the fortune and I'm going to have to work like heck to like recreate this, put it in a box, get somebody to do it."  And after a year, after baking probably fifty cakes, you know, I got that recipe to a point where we could turn it into a cake mix.  I found some men who had catfish you know like a coating with flour and season and I said, "This is flour, right," and they are like "Yeah," and I'm like "It's flour and you put it in a box," and they are like "Yes what is your point?"  The point is if you could put seasoned flour into the bag, you could probably put my cake mix formula into a bag and you can find me the people and they did.  That relationship did not pan out as some business relationships don't, but we were able to find another manufacturer and take the recipe and its two eggs, milk and oil and you can make a sweet potato pound cake.  And it's not like a--it's delicious and it's rich so the box will only make a loaf where you know it is not going to make a two layer pound cake because it's so rich you really don't need that.  And I, you know, it's one of the things that I just did in tribute to men and there's a story about good men on the back of the box.
Speaker 1: What about the coffee. How did the coffee come into play?
Speaker 2: The coffee, let's see the coffee--how did that come into play?  A couple of people were pitching me on a lot of things but I thought coffee was simple and I'm really not a grocery person and I don't know about marketing in chains and stuff like that.  And now every time I tell the gentleman at Jewel, "You know, maybe I should just stop. I don't have the money to do this. Sweet potato costs are sky high and I'm not going to do it if it doesn't have real sweet potato bits in it which it does and I just have too high of standards to really make a lot of money."  And so he says, "But somebody buys this cake mix every day and that's why it's on the shelf without you doing the marketing.  So when you get a chance, the Real Men Cook brand is viable, when you decide to add some other things to it let me know."
Story_ID: 127828
Speaker 1: So what are your plans for the future?
Speaker 2: Well, you know my plan is to--I think at twenty-five years is long enough to devote every day of my life thinking about how I'm going to keep it alive and that's really the reality.  I'm proud. I have a legacy that, you know, I wanted to have.  Obviously when I was in my teens, eighteen or nineteen, I wanted a legacy of leaving something good for black people and I think I've done that but really the economy and you know, some things have taken its toll to have that many things going on over the years and then I've crashed. You know I've crashed.  I lost my home with the situation with the mortgages, not married anymore, had a second marriage it didn't work out and it was very short and I was very devastated.  I think my mission now is to live a good life and to give--to continue to do what I do but maybe I'm not the leader. Maybe I'm just--maybe I'm just the promoter.  I'm a super promoter and I'm now working with an organization called Black United Fund and they fund other nonprofits and it's a short term, full time position that I've been doing this summer that I love and I know exactly how I could make that organization better.  And what I see from my energy is that sometimes if you take yourself--your eye off of what you've been nurturing--like your baby this business has been my baby and at some point you've got to say, "That's grown. Let me, let me do something else for me."  And it won't be retirement because I don't have a stack of money and I know in America you don't retire in the old sense anymore and I have too much energy for that so all I can say is the best is yet to come.
Story_ID: 127829
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you have not done that you want to do in the future?
Speaker 2: Well I've done this before but I wouldn't mind doing it again. Taking a bunch of vacations (laugh).  Kofi [former husband, Karega Kofi Moyo] and I when I couldn't sell anything in December I would just get kind of nervous like you know, you just can't be on the phone selling people stuff in December when they are having Christmas parties and their closing out and they are counting their bonuses and stuff so we would go away in December of every year and vacation in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands] with friends and family.  I had an uncle that had a bed and breakfast in St. Thomas.  So I would certainly love to have that kind of life again.  We had a boat and all of our kids learned how to water ski and we were, we had--we enjoyed the boating life. I'd like to do that again.  What I have not done that I'd like to do I really can't think of anything.  I have lived such a rich life.  I have travelled, MOBE [Marketing Opportunities in Business & Entertainment] had a MOBE assessment trip to Africa. We went to Ghana. We went to Abidjan, Ivory Coast, Cape Town [South Africa], Johannesburg [South Africa].  I've had a friend with a restaurant in Paris [France].  I've travelled to Paris. I've travelled all over the Caribbean and places in South America.  I could travel more. I think I'd like to have more vacations with the children, visit them more often because everybody's everywhere.  I would like to have a relationship with my son [Rael Jackson], who is so committed to continuing Real Men Cook, that would not include the business.  I would like him to do whatever he wants to do but I would like to have that mother and son relationship be pure sometime without a thought about, "Guess what we could do."  Or me saying, you know, holding back, not wanting to share an idea because I don't want to get off into a business conversation. That's what I would like to do.
Story_ID: 127830
Speaker 1: Okay so tell me what are your hopes and dreams or concerns for the African American community even about the economic state.
Speaker 2: My hope and dream would be that we are kinder to each other.  That we speak life into every situation. That we go to meetings thinking about what are we going to leave people with that will make them feel better.  That we don't talk about boys with their pants sagging and maybe compliment them on their features, their eyes, their physique, their potential, you know, their future.  Maybe give them a word that makes them see a future.  We're not talking about the future for our children enough and we're not giving ourselves hope.  We don't know what the future is going to look like and then, you know, it's a grim picture, a gloomy picture that we have painted for--that's painted for ourselves every day.  I wish that we would turn the TV off and engage in some cultural activities, music, films.  We just finished the Black [Harvest] Film Festival here [Chicago, Illinois] and I've been supporting one of our cooks who is the chairman of the Black Harvest Film Festival in the area.  Every day in August there was a film produced and stared in by black people and the cultural richness of our creativity which we felt in the sixties and the seventies and we sang about, "We're moving on up, we're a winner, ain't no stopping us now." You know if we could infuse that back into ourselves you know, regardless of what the economy looked like we would--that would be my dream come true. That would be my dream come true.
Story_ID: 127831
Speaker 1: So now when you think back is there anything that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: No, no, I wouldn't--I thought I was--the second marriage, I hate that it ended so quickly. I hate that my first marriage ended at all.  I mean all of that was just heartbreaking. I mean heart wrenching. I mean like on your knees begging God to stop the pain, kind of pain but that pain goes away and what I can appreciate is that I was brave enough and I was good enough to make it happen and I'm not afraid.  And my thing for women would be, don't be afraid. You know men are just like us, hurt, broke down, wishing that stuff didn't happen and want a partner.  So I wouldn't do anything differently.
Speaker 1: Well what stands out in your mind the most about your past?
Speaker 2: That my marriages failed.  And I think the family is so important. The family there is nothing more important than that and to be a single woman but to be with my mom [Pauline Jackson] I have to go back to what's God's mission for me.  And my mother tells me every day, "I don't know what I would do without you being here.  I'm going on a vacation soon. I don't know what I'm going to do without you."  So you know it's all in divine order.
Speaker 1: What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: That I brought joy. That I brought life. That I was sincere and that I really wanted to make a difference.  I worked like as hard as I could to make a difference and I made some mistakes and I didn't mean it (laugh).  Those mistakes, I didn't mean to make them.
Speaker 1: Now many, many years from now someone, some child will be watching this interview and if you could send a message to the future generations what would you say?
Speaker 2: You have the power. You know just start it, making a difference.  Don't talk about what's wrong all day long. Do not talk about it. Know that it's wrong and get started or writing it and get started right away.  Do not let negatives wear you down. They will be--they are like cancer.  The people who talk negatively get away from them. They will pull you down and you will not realize any of your dreams and if you don't have a dream speak positive to somebody that you know is creative enough to take you to the next level and support them.
Speaker 1: What would you say to anyone wanting to do marketing or you know, the job that you did?
Speaker 2: Who we are is so important. We got to tell the story.  We can't just keep repeating blood stories and who got shot last night stories. It's not important.  Who got born? If you go in those communities and say thirty children were born in Englewood [neighborhood, Chicago, Illinois] last night, two adults got shot, the picture is not quite as gloomy, right?  Especially if you are going to infuse love into those children so tell the story and tell it in a way that people can be inspired.
Speaker 1: So also tell the future generations what values you consider most important and why?
Speaker 2: One day we had training with young children this weekend and if I could think of these three "Ps," perseverance, possibility--perseverance and--I can't think of the other one so I'm going to say person, you, meaning you the person.  It's character. It's really character.  Who are you inside and who do you fight not to be. Hold on and keep up the good fight.
Speaker 1: And you find character most important because?
Speaker 2: Because if you have character it will keep you from doing something that doesn't honor you, doesn't honor who you really are and without character you have poor judgment and without character and courage, you know, I would say character and courage you don't pursue your dreams.  I have no idea what you're dreaming but you're dreaming something, you know, and to hold it in and not pursue it is a violation to yourself.
Story_ID: 127832
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you want to talk about or say that we have not already talked about?
Speaker 2: Words. I would say that what we speak and what we eat can both kill us too soon.
Speaker 1: Anything else?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, are you sure?
Speaker 2: I can't think of anything.  If you have any questions (laugh) or anything that you think I left out. I don't know what it could possibly be?
Speaker 1: No, it's not a problem. I just wanted to make sure we covered everything.  You had a wonderful story and I'm just so happy that you took the time to share your story with us because it will be an inspiration to the future generations so thank you so very much for taking the time to tell your story.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Why did you want to tell your story? Let me just ask you that last question.
Speaker 2: Julieanna [Richardson] called me.  I always thought it would be awesome if--if to be a HistoryMaker and I always told Julieanna from the beginning, "You're probably the only business woman that ever lusts after their business."  You know, what a business, what a business to have to listen to people.  You know, we always say we all want to make a difference but this is about everybody who made a difference and we skip over a lot of people but these are the people that made the difference in a big way in a lot of self-sacrifice. And when you say HistoryMakers you're talking about who maintained over a long period of time a possibility and that is you know, to be one--to be among that number is major because you know I might not be here tomorrow but I would like to say that you know, what I did made people smile, made people change for the better and I know it made fathers connect with their children, I know that because they tell me that every day in the grocery store, in parks. Everybody has got a story about why they did something because they couldn't get Real Men Cook out of their minds or couldn't get the words Real Men out of their minds.
Speaker 1: Okay, fantastic.
Speaker 2: That was great.
Speaker 1: Thank you so much.
Speaker 2: Thank you I appreciate it. I appreciate it. You had me thinking about things I hadn't thought about in ages, if ever. Well thank you.
