Story_ID: 450506
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Thomas Livingston McLeary [HistoryMaker Thomas L. McLeary].  T-H-O-M-A-S, L-I-V-I-N-G-S-T-O-N, M-C-L-E-A-R-Y.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 8, 1944, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: All right and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I own and operate an insurance brokerage employee benefit consulting firm.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now can you give us today's date?
Speaker 2: December 10th, I think, 2006.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in my home at 1330 South Plymouth Court, Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 450507
Speaker 1: All right, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight warm up questions that they compel me to ask in the office and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay Larry [Larry Crowe] (laughter).
Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No.  I guess if I can't (laughter), if I can't quickly say yes, no.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Maui [Hawaii].
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 450508
Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask you about your family history first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Thomas J. McLeary, Jr.] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Edna Tubbs [Edna Tubbs Johns], E-D-N-A, T-U-B-B-S.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is May 10, 1912 and she was born in Okolona, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okolona, Mississippi.  Now what it is that near?  Do you have a sense of where that--where Okolona is?
Speaker 2: I've never been there, but Okolona is about an hour from Jackson [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now I can't tell you which way (laughter), but it's an hour from--it takes about an hour from Jackson to get to Okolona.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: But it's out in the country.
Speaker 1: Are there are any stories about your ancestors on your mother's side that you remember?  How far back can you trace your mother's side?
Speaker 2: My mother--we can go all the way back to her grandfather who was a slave.  And he worked, he worked on a plantation in, in Mississippi in Okolona, whatever that area was.  It may not even been Okolona back then, and he had about nineteen children.  It was a big family on my mother's side and we could only trace back now, could identify because then the slaves were freed and people scattered.  But we could only go back to about a few.  Her father and a brother and a sister, but her father had a lot of girls and a few--he had, he had a large family too.  I think there were ten or twelve in his family and interestingly enough he believed in education and even back then all of the girls went to college.  He believed in educating the girls so all of the girls in the family went to Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi] in Mississippi.  So my mother's mother [Mary Tubbs] had an education, college education although she never worked.  And they came to Chicago [Illinois] when my mother was a very little girl when they came to Chicago.  My--her father, her father was a--worked in the stockyards for many years and mother was a homemaker.  And there were I gotta count, Ernest [Ernest Tubbs], one, two, three, four, five, six children, including my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay so he sent them from Chicago to Rust to Holly Springs [Mississippi] to go Rust?
Speaker 2: Yes to go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm and they all went to college and then most of them stayed in Mississippi somewhere and only my mother's mother, my--her mother, came to Chicago 'cause she is the only, she is the only of my mother's siblings that, that I really remember and she died, I was a little boy when she died, when my mother's mother died.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So you know I think my mother had me, I think my mother was thirty-four or so when she had me so most of her, and I think her mother was one of the youngest children so I think by the time I was up and able to know people, most of her mother's, her aunts and uncles, were you know dead.
Speaker 1: Did you have relatives that worked at Rust College at all?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I'd have to ask my mother.  I don't know how that all happened.  Maybe it was the only place back in, this would have been, this would have been in the you know early 1900s no in the eighteen--1880, 1890, so maybe that was the only place black girls could go to--
Speaker 1: So you're saying that it was your mother's mother that went to Rust?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And her sisters.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Now--
Speaker 1: And her sisters all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah my mother's mother's sisters.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 450509
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So did your mother [Edna Tubbs Johns] get a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: She did.  She actually, she actually decided to go back to school when I was old enough to stay at home by myself after school.  And she went to night school for about ten years to get her, her teaching degree.  So it's kind of an inspiration.  She--
Speaker 1: Was it Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Chicago Teachers College, yeah, yeah, she went to Chicago Teachers College.  Because she worked as a back then she worked at Doolittle Elementary School [James R. Doolittle Jr. Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  And at Doolittle, they had a position called bath attendant which was a person--the kids took showers when they came to school back then.  There were showers at Doolittle High School [sic.] and once a week, the kids took a shower and it was my mother's you know the classes would come down, the boys would come and then the girls would come and you know they'd take showers and that was her job to see that they got their showers and she also provided you know minor first aid if anybody got you know, you know cuts and scrapes and that sorts, sort of things.  And she was looked down on by the teachers so it encouraged her to go to school and get her degree and she became a teacher.
Speaker 1: That's interesting though.  I've never heard of that of kids taking a shower (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  I never heard anyone else talk about it but and actually we lived at 59th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue] and I was going to Betsy Ross Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois] and I guess I got into a little trouble in first grade.  I don't know how you can get in trouble in first grade, but I guess I got in trouble in first grade so my mother got permission since she was working at Doolittle for me to go to Doolittle.  So I think oh maybe second semester, first grade or beginning of the second grade, I went to Doolittle.
Story_ID: 450510
Speaker 1: Now your mother [Edna Tubbs Johns] grew up--did she grow up in Mississippi or Chicago (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She grew up in Chicago [Illinois].  She grew up in in, she grew up in--she came to Chicago, god I should have asked her, I should have asked her all of this.  I should have her refresh my memory, Larry [Larry Crowe].  I think she was a young, I think she was not a teenager, but I think she went to high school here so I think she came to Chicago--they came to Chicago when she was in elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And is there a reason that the family gives for moving to Chicago?  I mean we all know about the Great Migration, is there a specific (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --reason?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, her father [Ernest Tubbs], her father got a job in the stockyards and he came first and then he sent for the, for the rest of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So my grandmother [Mary Tubbs] and all of my aunts and uncles came up to Chicago with my mother and lived at 59th [Street] and it was South Park [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] then, 59th and South Park and that's the only place that I ever remember them living.
Speaker 1: Now did your mother's side of the family talk about what life was about in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: No my mother never talked about--I think she may have been you know kind of young to remember and most of her recollection was and I know we never went back to Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's significant. That's--
Speaker 2: Yeah we never went back.  I never went back so maybe she went back before I could remember.
Story_ID: 450511
Speaker 1: Let me switch to your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Thomas Jefferson McLeary [Thomas J. McLeary, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the same spelling that you know as mine and the Jefferson is you know like [President] Thomas Jefferson.
Speaker 1: All right and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, July 28th, 1910.  And he was born in-- now it's Madison County, Florida.  I'm not sure if the county was called Madison back then, but it's oh it's just up I-10 [Interstate 10] from Tallahassee [Florida] because now I've been there.  I just wanted to see what it looked like.  As a matter of fact I--my father had, has a lot in Madison County that I've never seen that he's had it since I guess he left Madison to come to Chicago [Illinois] or left that area to come to Chicago.  And all of my children [Tiffanie McLeary, DeAnna McLeary and Thomas McLeary] went to Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] so one time when I was down there visiting, I said well let me go look at Madison and see what Madison looks like so that's why I know where that--it only took me about fifteen, twenty minutes outside of Tallahassee to get there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now what I read there's an interesting story about your ancestors on your father's side, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So tell us about the ancestors on your father's side.
Speaker 2: There was a, a white family that was an enormous landowner in that part of the, of the, of the county, that area and their name was McCleary.  But it was spelled differently.  It was M-C-C-L-E-A-R-Y.  And that is actually the way our name was spelled so my great-grandfather [Thomas J. McLeary] was the son of this landowner and my great-great-grandmother would have been a slave.  So that's kind of how the family history got started on that time--on that side.  And when my grandmother whose, who was Ruby McLeary [Ruby Alexander McLeary].  When Ruby came to Chicago she looked in the phonebook and she saw a lot of McClearys spelled M-C-C-L-E-A-R-Y but none spelled M-C-L-E-A-R-Y.  So she went downtown and did whatever you do and got the name changed.  And got one of the Cs dropped but we know we trace back to that, to that plantation wherever it was in Florida, the McLeary Plantation [ph.].  That's where you know the family kind of started.
Story_ID: 450512
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that they tell about those days?
Speaker 2: No, the only story they tell is, and [HistoryMaker] Jacoby Dickens actually told me this story, Jacoby was a little boy oh and knew my [paternal] grandmother [Ruby Alexander McLeary] back in Florida.  Now they all came from the same part of Florida.  Jacoby was from that part of Florida also and they were all like family.  And they were on the bus, they were getting ready to get on the bus and there were no seats.  This would have been back in, god, this would have been in probably oh boy, I don't know early 1900s, 1920 or something, Jacoby was a little boy maybe, maybe 1930, and my grandmother refused to have the kids stand in the back of the bus when there were seats in the front and when they went to the movie theatre, she refused to have them sit up in the balcony with the black people.  They had to sit in the first level and she--and he always remembered that and was kind of impressed by this strong woman who would not allow them to be mistreated back in Florida and you know I mean they're probably lucky they didn't get lynched but that's the only story that I've ever heard and it didn't come from you know from my family, it came from Jacoby.  But I know my father [Thomas J. McLeary, Jr.] came up here, my father and my grandmother and all the brothers and sisters, came to Chicago [Illinois] in oh probably the '20s [1920s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay and they lived in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] and they lived at 131 East 159th Street, I guess was where they lived, the whole family.  He had like a one, two bedroom apartment and that's where, that's where they stayed.  So I hear a lot of stories around--about Chicago but they didn't talk much about you know Florida and I think it was the same thing, they were all, my grandmother hardly didn't ever talk about it as I can recall and my father and aunts and uncles they were all little kids when they came up so they don't remember anything about back then.  So I don't think, I don't think they were good memories.  I think that's why they--she didn't talk much about it.
Speaker 1: I guess they just didn't wanna dwell on it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or go back and reflect on that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they were in Chicago and you know and that's, that was what happened to them.
Story_ID: 450513
Speaker 1: Did your father [Thomas J. McLeary, Jr.] grow up in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father, my father was one of the early African American entrepreneurs.  My father had to drop out of high school.  My father never went past like the ninth grade.  He dropped out, lied about his age and became a special delivery messenger.  So he delivered--what they did is you know I guess if there was like it was the early date of you know delivery, deliveries and mail, you know like FedEx and all those folks, but he rode a bicycle and delivered those, those letters that had some urgency.  And most--many of my aunts and uncles worked in the, worked in the post office.  Then my father and his brothers, because I remember early, one of, one of the things that I remember about my early childhood is that Sunday; Sunday my father would take me, take me to the Palm Tavern [Gerri's Palm Tavern, Chicago, Illinois] on 47th Street.  Now I was a little boy, I was eight or nine years old, but I guess all of the business folks would come up there on Sunday and talk and drink or whatever they were doing, I don't remember much about it.  I was you know kind of young.  But I do remember going to the Palm Tavern when 47th Street was really you know a real strong business.
Speaker 1: Yeah that was like the big strip in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah that would have been, and that would have been before, that was all before you know integration really got, got going.  That would have been--if I was, it probably would have been the early '50s [1950s].  I was probably seven or eight years old.  So this was you know '51 [1951] or '52 [1952] somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Yeah so on the south side of 47th Street was the--
Speaker 2: It was once 47th Street and 63rd [Street] were the streets you know that's where, that's where all of the, all of the stuff happened; all of the business took place.  But he and his brothers opened a cleaners on, on 59th [Street] and Calumet [Avenue] and it's interesting how a lot of people are connected and I didn't realize this, I used to after school even in elementary school [James R. Doolittle Jr. Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], I would go up and work in the tailor shop and what I would do, my major job, I would wait on customers but when I wasn't waiting on customers, I would take newspaper and make paper hangers where you know the pants would not go over the metal wire, there was paper back then and we would roll the newspaper on the, on the hanger and I would make the hangers that we put the pants on.  And it was a drugstore right next door to the, to the tailor shop where I would go in and you know get candy and stuff and later on we were both adults and just talking one day, Tom Burrell [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] worked in that, in that drugstore and would sell me candy.  Now he was a few years older than me but he was a little boy working in the, in the drugstore and I was working in the, in the tailor shop my father--with my father.  We didn't even realize that until you know forty years later we were just talking one day--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a story.
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah so that was, that was kind of interesting but my father--then, then the brothers opened another shop on 95th Street, 95th and jus- Perry [Avenue], a couple blocks west of State Street so they had, they had two locations and one of my aunts worked in the location, worked in that location.  She just waited on customers and most of the work was done at the other store in Calumet and you know you take the clothes to Calumet.  We did not have a system where we cleaned them on the spot so we had to send them out to get them cleaned and then have them come back, which was one of the disadvantages of my father's business, but you know I mean my father had never been past ninth grade so you know the inner workings of business he just always knew how to make money and but when business changed, he just wasn't able to change with, with business.  There were no chain cleaners back then and what one of the major parts of our business is that when I was in high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] and got my driver's license, during the summer my job was to go pick up clothes from the homes of, of a lot of the black doctors that lived in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].  So I would go by and pick up their clothes one Saturday and we would clean them and I would deliver them the next Saturday and pick up the next, the next batch.  So we provided pickup and delivery for the clothes and you know we never had a lot you know.  I never thought I was poor you know.  I know that in high school I had you know two pair of pants and two sweaters you know and I would wear one one day and then my father would clean it and the next day I'd wear the other one and every day I alternated this (laughter), this outfit and it never you know it never meant much to me that I just wore these two outfits to school you know most of my, most of my high school days but we always got by you know.  We never had a lot but we you know, we got by and it was fun.  I had a, I had a, I had a good time.  But then to finish that story, when the chain cleaners came, they approached my father and wanted to buy his business.  And my father fought it.  He was too proud to sell.  This was his business.  The business was not doing well at the time.  The store on 95th Street was struggling.
Story_ID: 450514
Speaker 1: There were three brothers, my father [Thomas J. McLeary, Jr.] and his two brothers and early on one of the brothers went back to the post office and you know there just wasn't enough money coming out of the business to support two families.  There was our family but it was just me.  I was an only child, but my brother--my father's brother had two, he had three, four children and there just wasn't enough money to support both--
Speaker 2: Finish your sentence.
Speaker 1: --both, both the families.
Speaker 2: Okay.  They're making a transition.
Speaker 1: Oh, they're making the--
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Okay so my other, his other brother died of cancer so it was just him with the two locations and his sister really wasn't real excited anymore about you know working at the shop on 95th Street.  So--
Speaker 2: Now about what year is this when this takes place?
Speaker 1: Let me see, this is--I'm in high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois], so this in the, this is '58 [1958], '59 [1959] somewhere in there so we got rid of the location on 59th [Street] and tried to hold onto the one--I mean got rid of the location on 95th and tried to hold on to the 59th Street store and then the chains opened up the first store, it was Pride Cleaners, I'll never forget the name.  Pride opened up on 58th [Street] and probably Prairie [Avenue] and underpriced him.  And just set the prices at a level where he just could not compete.  It literally drove him out of business.  And it broke my father.
Story_ID: 450515
Speaker 1: Well when he went out business what did he do?
Speaker 2: The--now remember at this, at this point in time my father [Thomas J. McLeary, Jr.] is fifty something okay fifty, it's the '60s [1960s] so he's fifty years old, no education you know, no money, never saved any money.  I'm just starting college [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].  He and my mother [Edna Tubbs Johns] divorced.  Well they were together but the marriage was not very good at this point and he was drinking quite a bit.  So the only job he could get was pressing clothes at Carson Pirie Scott [Carson Pirie Scott and Co.; Carson's].  So he went from owning his own business you know being kind of a big man in the you know in the little neighborhood to pressing clothes at a department store.  And that's how he spent the next fifteen years pressing clothes at Carson's.  And he retired at--oh he died, he died oh about, when did he die, about seven years ago he died.  So you know that last part of his life was you know not very rewarding for him.  He was a pretty kind of broken spirit from the time he lost his business and he lost everything.  He lost his business, he lost his wife you know the only thing he had, I guess the only thing he had left was me you know.  And we actually got closer.  Because growing up my father worked all the time.  I hardly ever saw him unless I was working at the store so all the activities I was in you know it was my mother.  I mean she took me to my first baseball game.  She took me to everything that I went to you know she took me until I was old enough to go myself.  So he and I didn't have much of a relationship until you know I guess he had to depend on me for you know just being able to have whatever life he had left because when he retired you know I mean his pension from Carson's was like you know forty dollars a month so he had social security and forty dollars a month so you know he didn't have much but at that point in time, he didn't need much.  You know and my father had always been you know a man who was fairly good with the ladies so he always had a lady that, he always had a companion so I didn't have to worry about him because he was with someone and you know but I always every Sunday I took the kids [Tiffanie McLeary, DeAnna McLeary and Thomas McLeary] by to see them so he could see his grandchildren.  And then he lost his sight.  He was blind the last oh eight, nine years of his life.  But I still took the, took the grandchildren.  It was kind of our pilgrimage every Sunday you know to see their grandfather so.
Story_ID: 450516
Speaker 1: Let me go back to the days when, when he was a young man.  Is there a story about how your parents met?  Did they pass down a story?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, and interesting enough my mother [Edna Tubbs Johns] just told me this story not long ago (laughter).  My father [Thomas J. McLeary, Jr.] met my mother at a party.  She was with someone else, a friend of his, who was madly in love with her but who she really, she was not in love with.  And my father just kept calling and kept calling and kept calling until finally the guy who she was dating asked her to marry him and it was at that point that she had to tell him that she just you know just couldn't marry him.  That she really didn't love him.  And that's when she and my father started seeing each other and they got married oh six, seven months after that.
Story_ID: 450517
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about how your parents met so they met at a party and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they met at a party.  It was a social club that my father [Thomas J. McLeary, Jr.] was a member of.  With a lot of the other businesspeople of the day, they had a social club and you know they did parties and my mother [Edna Tubbs Johns] met him at one of those parties.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So and you're the only child?
Speaker 2: I'm the only child yeah.  Yeah I'm the only child.  After my mother had me, she had a, she had a pregnancy where she miscarried and they had to do a hysterectomy so it wasn't that you know they didn't want to have other children, it was just the second baby you know created the problem and, and then she couldn't have any children after that.  But my mother was older remember now.  She was, she was thirty, thirty--let's see I was born in, she was born in 1912 and I was born in '44 [1944] so she was thirty-two when she had me and that was kind of late for that time when you think back in the '40s [1940s] that was--she was real old having the first child.
Speaker 1: Yeah for those days.
Speaker 2: For those days.  Yeah even getting married (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nowadays it's the average age--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or closer to average you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but back in the '40s [1940s] you know I mean most women you know had their first child boy even the mid-twenties was kind of late so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were would have 'em ateighteen--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --some sixteen, sometimes earlier.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.  So, so it was kind of unusual from that standpoint.
Story_ID: 450518
Speaker 1: You grew up at 59th [Street] and?
Speaker 2: 59th and Indiana [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Indiana?  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well of course there was the "L" [elevated train], the "L" went right past our building so you know that was one of the first sounds I remember is the "L" and, and we played, there was a back area, it was an apartment building, there was a back area and you know some of the boys from the neighborhood would come over and we'd have a little baseball game back there and you know the balls would hit people's windows and they would holler at us and the janitor would come run us off and we'd come back.  So those are some of the early, early memories and then again walking to Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois] and playing in the park, we could only go so far because even back then when I was growing up, you know there weren't gangs, but there were territories you know so I mean you could get chased or beat up if you know if you strayed too far and didn't have enough people with you to you know to keep the other folks off so.
Speaker 1: Now who were the gangs then?
Speaker 2: They didn't have names.  They were just you know--
Speaker 1: Just the neighborhood, the block the kids are on (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah block of kids, yeah kids on the block.  They would all go to the park you know and we were at 59th and then there was a group down at 57th [Street] and you know anyway the baseball diamond's down at 55th [Street] but we'd have to have a pretty big group to be able to go down there and to go to the pool at 55th and Washington Park.  You know oftentimes we could ride or bikes down there if there were three or four of us on bikes, we were, we were probably okay, but you know you didn't, even back then you didn't go through the park by yourself.  It wasn't, it wasn't a real smart thing to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But that's kind of what I remember.  There was a grocery store that was on between 59th and 60th [Street] on Michigan [Avenue].  It was a Certified Grocery Store and even as a little boy my mother [Edna Tubbs Johns] felt it safe to send me to the store with a note and the money so I would you know she just needed a few things that I could carry or pull back in my wagon.  I would go to the grocery store and all the people in the grocery store knew me.  That's why I'd come in with my note and they'd go get my stuff and so I remember doing that as a, as a little boy and then when I was in high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois], late in my, my later years in high school I worked in that store after school, bagging and you know doing all the stuff that you used to do back then.  Back then you know it's specialized now.  The baggers bag you know, but we stocked the shelves, we unloaded the truck when the stuff came in you know, we you know bagged the groceries as the cashiers you know rang up the stuff.  But I remember that.  And the other thing I remember is selling Christmas cards door-to-door.  That's how I made my little Christmas money.  I sold people--I'm amazed now and I don't know how I did it, but these Christmas cards, you know box of twenty-five, people would buy them and they picked their card and you know they had their names engraved on the cards you know and I was selling those cards back then for you know like three dollars a box you know and people were buying them.  And I had quite a little business selling those Christmas cards in the summertime so and the time I wasn't--I only worked in the store maybe three days a week so the other two days from oh right at Thanksgiving to a week before to two weeks before Christmas, you know I was going around the neighborhood knocking on doors selling Christmas cards.
Speaker 1: Okay now, how'd you get that idea?  I mean how did you come across the idea to do that?
Speaker 2: You know I think I just saw something--we got something in the mail or I saw it on or heard it on the radio or and you sent something in and they sent you your you know your, your materials and, 'cause it wasn't any training you know they just sent me the samples.  I had to pay--I had to buy the samples.  Okay so you buy the samples and then you go out and you take your orders.  So I don't really remember, remember exactly how it started but it wasn't like you know someone called on me.  I don't remember that so I'm sure I just saw it somewhere and it looked like a way to make some money so I went out and did it.
Story_ID: 450519
Speaker 1: Now you say your father [Thomas J. McLeary, Jr.] had, had a business and was very proud of it--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but he wasn't a very good businessman.
Speaker 2: He wasn't a very good businessman (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But--
Speaker 2: No.  What my father loved about the business is he was the you know, he was the big guy and all of the kind of hangers-on would come by the tailor shop right around closing.  You know and my father always had a bottle of something in the back and they would all go back and you know drink and tell lies and you know my father wouldn't get home 'til oh maybe eight, nine o'clock every night.  And oftentimes he had you know probably had you know one more than he should have had and he was always up and gone before, before I got up in the morning to go to school.  So I rarely saw my father.  On Saturday--it was the same thing Saturday he was gone all day Saturday.  I never remember he and my mother [Edna Tubbs Johns] going anywhere.  Never going out anywhere.  You know he'd come home and kind of pass out on Saturday and you know Sunday he pretty much stay in bed you know rest up you know from the week on Sunday.
Speaker 1: But you say he used to take you by Gerri's Palm Tavern [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he'd take me by the Palm Tavern (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For the business--
Speaker 2: --this was when I was little but as I got older you know and that was when I think that was probably when they were just starting the business and you know things were better you know, but then things would slowly got progressively worse, slowly over a long period of time.  And he had no idea what to do to stop it.  You know he should have probably sold, he definitely should have sold to the, you know, the chains when they came knocking but again, you know he still had enough money and you know I was working other jobs so you know he never gave me any money.
Story_ID: 450520
Speaker 1: Now were you aware, or were you cognizant of what some of his business struggles were when you were--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  Not until actually not until you know I came back to college [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], came back from college and you know I could kind of look back and see this progression you know.  I never knew things were, you know, because we never had money to do things.  One of my uncles who married, who married--who was also kind of an inspiration in my life, had an uncle who married my father's sister.  And you know we were back in the days of color, we're black folks.  And everybody on my father's [Thomas J. McLeary, Jr.] side was very fair.  Almost you know could have passed.  As a matter of fact one of the sisters moved to New York, married a white guy and passed.  And totally you know and, and in doing that had to totally separate her from the family.  So you know I've got cousins who I've never seen and you know they have children who my children [Tiffanie McLeary, DeAnna McLeary and Thomas McLeary] will never see you know because they've all passed and I'm sure these kids have no idea that, that they passed for white.  But so this guy was very dark so early on he was not liked by the rest of the family.  This was not thing that she was supposed to have done.  She was supposed to marry someone light not dark.  And but he was very successful.  He was in the insurance business and that's how I got my first connection to the insurance business.  He was an agent, then a manager, and then an executive for Chicago Metropolitan [Chicago Metropolitan Mutual Assurance Company, Chicago, Illinois] and he had a summer home in, he had a summer home in Michigan and actually my godfather, Leonard Livingston [Leonard J. Livingston], and a couple of partners owned an insurance company Mammoth Insurance [Mammoth Life and Accident Insurance Company] that was on, that was on King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] about forty, right down from it' a big church there now, it's, it was right down from 47th Street on the west side of the street.  And now it's a big Missionary Baptist church [Mount Pisgah Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] there now in that building that used to be the insurance company so I was always kind of connected to the insurance industry as a little boy but never thought I would ever do that.  But you know he had this summer home and whenever we went away in the summer, we would go up to Michigan, a place called Paradise Lake [Michigan] right outside of Cassopolis [Michigan] and we would get up early Sunday morning, drive up there.  You know it was about a two hour drive and spend the day and come home.  And if my father ever took any time off in the summer, we would maybe take a week off and go spend the week up there at my uncle's house 'cause my uncle had about a five bedroom house in Michigan and you know it was nice and my [paternal] grandmother [Ruby Alexander McLeary] was up there and the whole family would kind of come up there.  That was our place as a family to go in the summertime.  So but no it was, it was all looking back you know as I look back, when I became an adult and I look back I could see you know and then you know when I learned about business I could see what happened in the progression and how he never you know he spent all the money, he never saved any money so he never put any money back in the business and it was just inevitable that it would fail, but it was a slow, slow, slow process.  Because people liked my father, he was a very personable person.  So some people would even come where they know they can go down the street, go a block down the street and get their clothes cleaned, clothes cleaned you know cheaper, they would still come to him.  So he was still able to scrape out a living until, until they just cut the prices to the point where you know people just could not bring him his--their clothes any longer.
Story_ID: 450521
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself growing up?  Were you--you were an only child at home (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was an only child.  But there was a boy who lived next door to me, across the hall, you know who was an only child and he and I were like brothers.  So he was about a little less than two years younger than me.  So we would play together all the time.  We were inseparable.  If I went someplace, he was with me.  So we were like brothers so I kind of grew up with him, with him as a brother.  Because I didn't know a lot of the kids in the neighborhood because I didn't go to school in the neighborhood.  I went to Doolittle [James R. Doolittle Jr. Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] down on 35th Street.
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah now what grade was it that you got transferred?
Speaker 2: Second grade.
Speaker 1: Second grade okay.
Speaker 2: Okay so from second grade I didn't start going you know and Englewood [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] was our neighborhood high school so I went to Englewood when I graduated from Doolittle but until--up until then I didn't know just the, the guy who lived next door to me and then it was another kid who lived a block away who we kind of met and he became--it was like the three of us and we kind of hung out together and he was my age and he and I went all through Englewood together.  And we walked to school every day together.  I'd walk and pick him up.  He was at 59th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue] so you know we would walk to Englewood but that's kind of what growing up, growing up was playing in the, playing in the you know I call it the backyard but it was you know just the concrete between, this was kind of a U shaped apartment building.  It went down well kind of an L shape.  It went down Indiana [Avenue], it went down 59th Street, turned at Indiana and went south for you know like a couple of entrances and then so in that L there was this area that you know was just concrete where we played you know I mean we could go get a peach basket and knock the bottom out of it and tie it up to the side of the bannister and you know that's how we played basketball so because sometimes we would go up to St. Anselm [St. Anselm's School, Chicago, Illinois] on because my friend who lived next door went to St. Anselm so we would go up there and maybe go skating, maybe go play up there at the basketball courts sometimes because he knew the kids up there.  So we could go up there because he went to school there.  So as he got older you know we ventured out but until he got older and knew the kids up there, that's kind of how I met some of the kids in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: You got like St. Anselm and St. Edmund's [St. Edmund School, Chicago, Illinois] right there.
Speaker 2: St. Edmund's was right there yeah, yeah, but all the activity (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --was at St. Anselm because they had a--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --basketball court there.
Speaker 1: I think that rec center is now a church or something.
Speaker 2: Yes, I think that's right.  It is a church yeah, yeah but there were also outdoor basketball courts right on the corner of sixty, 60th [Street] and Indiana right across the street from or was it 61st [Street]?  Was St. Anselm was--no it was at 61st it was right across the street, they had basketball courts outside courts.  So occasionally we go play up there.  That was like a you know a great thing you know we'd have a real backboard (laughter) and you know we could go up there and play once in a while.  But my mother [Edna Tubbs Johns] kind of kept me close to, close to home because you know after school she wasn't home.  So I couldn't go out.  I couldn't go outside because she was you know going to school.  So in the wintertime what we would do, I kind of became a master of board games because in the wintertime we would play in the hallway between our two apartments inside, he and I, and in the summertime we would play on the back porch and you know primarily sit there and play board games and stuff like that so that's kind of how what growing up was like.
Story_ID: 450522
Speaker 1: And again as I got older, you know I would always go to Sunday school.  Sunday's church and Sunday school we went to Good Shepherd [Church of the Good Shepherd, Chicago, Illinois].  That was all part of my, my growing up so I had to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is Good Shepard was it Baptist?
Speaker 1: Congregational.
Speaker 2: Congregational, okay.
Speaker 1: United--when I was going it was a Congregational church and then they became part of the United Church of Christ as I got older.  And then around high school time, I got involved in the, in the youth club and then a lot of my activities was around the church youth group activity.  There was an assistant pastor who we all loved named Clyde Miller and about at that point in time he was really the father figure in my life.  Clyde and you know so Saturday we always had church groups and actually that was so important as I you know as look back at my life because Clyde took us out of the neighborhood and got us involved in you know the world.  Because you know I hardly came into you know any contact with white people growing up.  You know I mean there may have been a teacher or a few teachers at Englewood [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois].  There's none that I can remember at Doolittle [James R. Doolittle Jr. Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  May have--there were a few at Englewood but that would have been about my experience and you know then going downtown in stores and you know salesclerks but other than that, there was you know no interaction.  But what Clyde did to our youth group, is he took us all over and we interacted with youth groups at other churches all over the city and then out into the suburbs.  So and then he got me to go to camp and the church had a camp whose name escapes me at the moment but I went to camp and me and another guy, we were the only black kids at the camp.  So that was my first real experience being around other white kids.  It was a very positive experience.  We had a great time you know.  Had a lot of fun even to the point where one summer in college [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] I went back and I was a counselor at the camp.  And the camp, the camp hadn't changed much from a racial balance because from what I understand it was you know pretty expensive to go to this camp.  Very nice camp I mean you know.  I had gone to our church also had a camp and when I was in elementary school I went to camp at the at Good Shepherd's camp up in, up in Michigan but you know I mean we had you know rustic kind of cabins and you know outdoor showers and all that kind of stuff.  Oh this camp had heat, it was indoors, they had boats and you know all sorts of stuff you know so it was really nice place and I went back as a counselor and had a ball.  Again I was the only--I don't think there were any black camp- any black campers when I was counselor at this camp and this would have been like 1960 which was you know kind of earlier to have a black camp counselor with all these white kids and I wasn't much older than the kids you know they were high schoolers and I was like you know my--maybe sophomore in college and I started college when I was sixteen so you know I may have been eighteen or nineteen.  I probably was eighteen and I had you know I had campers who I was responsible for who were like sixteen so but it was a great time and the kids loved me and I'll never forget they had the contest for who was the most popular counselor and I won by this amazing margin.  I mean it was almost embarrassing 'cause not only did all of my kids vote for me, but a lot of the other kids (laughter) who had other counselors you know voted for me so that was important.
Story_ID: 450523
Speaker 1: Clyde [Clyde Miller] was an enormous influence in my life.
Speaker 2: So he was like the--was he in charge of a specific program at Good Shepherd [Church of the Good Shepherd, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Yeah the youth (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Youth--
Speaker 1: --he was the youth minister.
Speaker 2: --minister okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah he was the assistant minister of the church--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and the youth minister and can't, can't remember who the, who the oh boy, the guy who was, Joe Evans [HistoryMaker Reverend Joseph Evans], was our pastor and Joe went on to become the first black president of the United Church of Christ.  And I was in college [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] and we just assumed, we just assumed that Clyde would become the pastor and they picked somebody else and it destroyed the church because all the young people left.  As a matter of fact it was probably twenty years before I set foot in that church again after they didn't pick him to be pastor.
Speaker 2: It was the kind of church where the bishops choose or something or does the congregation choose?
Speaker 1: The board of trustees.
Speaker 2: Board of trustees.
Speaker 1: The congregation.  Yeah pretty much the board of trustees.
Speaker 2: Of the church itself?
Speaker 1: Of the church itself, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--
Speaker 1: It was my understanding you know but back then I didn't know.  You know I'm a kid.  I don't know how--all I know is that the person who we thought should have been selected because he was the lifeblood of that church you know and they didn't pick him and I was through with them I just walked out.  Me and everybody else all of the other, all of the other young adults for the most part left that church and it's suffered since then.  You know it was one of the, it was one of the more influential churches on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].  I mean John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] was a member, you know I mean it was a fairly influential church for its time. But (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What happened with Reverend Miller?
Speaker 1: He went to, he, he left and went to Denver [Colorado] and we kind of you know kept in touch for oh maybe ten or twelve years but you know then we kind of lost touch.
Story_ID: 450524
Speaker 1: Now tell us about high school.  Now you well did you have any--Reverend Miller [Clyde Miller] was your primary mentor, I guess (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was my primary mentor yeah.  He was my primary mentor.
Speaker 1: But were there any teachers at Englewood [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] that took any interest in what you were doing or that you, you know, remember?
Speaker 2: No.  (Laughter) As a matter of fact you know how people talk about teachers and remember teachers' names, man, the only teachers' names I can remember are the ones that were terrible (laughter).  I don't remember any of the--I do there was a, there was a Mrs. Miller [Frauline Essex Miller] who was an English teacher who was a very pretty lady.  I remember her I think because she was pretty, but no I had no mentor in high school.  I had--I was not involved in any extracurricular activities in high school.  I remember going out for football and I was kind of a naive little kid you know.  I went out for football and first day you know we put our stuff in the lockers and a guy came up to me and said, "No you don't wanna use your lock, this a better lock," and he gave me this locker, this lock and I you know put it on my locker you know and I came back and all my stuff was gone (laughter).  So you know, so that took care of football.  There was no football after that.  So I never played and I never played any sports and although I was, I was a fairly good athlete.  I was a very good baseball player but I always worked after school either in my father's [Thomas J. McLeary, Jr.] shop or at the grocery store so I had no time for you know afterschool activities.  The only--that's why Clyde and the church group that was my afterschool activities.  It was all connected to the church [Church of the Good Shepherd, Chicago, Illinois].  Nothing connected to high school.
Story_ID: 450525
Speaker 1: Now what was the racial makeup at Englewood [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was all-black.
Speaker 1: All-black.  Okay by that--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah it was all black.  There were no white kids at Englewood.  We had gangs.  We had the Disciples was the--the Cobras was the big gang the Egyptian Cobras was what they were called back then.  That was the big gang.
Speaker 1: A guy named (unclear) or something like that?
Speaker 2: You know I don't remember.  I don't remember the names Larry [Larry Crowe].  I know but, but we had, we had a group of there was a group of us that I don't, that I was just part of I guess.  I don't know why because I was one of the smart kids and these were some of the good, the smart athletes and we all ate lunch together at the same lunch table and we were kind of the buffer because there were probably about twelve of us who ate lunch together and kind of you know were friendly in high school.  So we were too big a group for them to mess with.  So we were kind of the buffer that kind of held the gangs from just you know taking over the school.  Because there weren't a lot of them in school and you know there weren't guns back then and they weren't selling drugs, it was primarily just you know we'll beat somebody up was pretty much the worst that could happen to you and I could run.  So if you could run, you were fairly safe if they couldn't catch you.  You know you were, you were fairly safe.  So I was usu- I was always, I was never caught I was always able to outrun, at least I could outrun the gangsters you know but you know I never--I knew I was fast when I played--I learned I was fast as a kid when I was playing baseball because they always put me at centerfield and I could always steal bases and but I never, I never played track, I never did any of, I never played football, never did any of that stuff.
Story_ID: 450526
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] or subjects?
Speaker 2: Probably yeah, probably science was my favorite.  And I thought I was a smart kid you know.  I finished--I was probably, I was in the top as I recall I was in the top ten in my class.  And there was a physics teacher and I really enjoyed this physics class but I don't remember the teacher's name but I asked him you know I had gotten accepted at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] down in Champaign [Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] and I asked him what did he think about me being a physicist as a career?  And he thought that was great.  That I should go ahead and I should have physics my major when I went to the University of Illinois.  And I thought that was a great idea Larry [Larry Crowe].  Now so I went down there and you know I enrolled and was sitting down there with this counselor and he was picking my classes so I'll never forget this.  I had, I had scored--the, the, the class that they got rid of all the black kids with back then was the first semester of English.  And that's where because you had to write, you had to write an essay at the end and regardless of what your classes, your grades were like, if this essay didn't pass, you failed okay.  And that's how most of the black kids didn't make it at the University of Illinois and I'm not saying they purposely did that, but you know.  But I had scored high enough on the entrance exams to not have to take that class so I went into the second semester of English.  Also I had scored--I had taken college algebra in high school so I had a college algebra grade so I'm sitting there with the counselor and he said, I'm thinking you know but that this was you know in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] they sent over an instructor from, from what's the junior college over by Englewood?
Speaker 1: Oh Wilson [Woodrow Wilson Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Wilson.  So they sent us but you know I mean it wasn't really college algebra but we got a you know I had an A in college algebra.  So, so he said, "Okay take second semester English," put me in trigonometry you know I'm saying maybe I ought to take the college alg- "Oh you got a grade there we're gonna put you in trigonometry."  And he said, so I had that, I had chemistry, I had, I had to take a language because I was a liberal arts physics major so he said, "Well you know Russian is the up--."  Now this is the '60s [1960s] right okay.  "Russian is the upcoming language of science okay.  So I think you ought to take Russian."  So you know here I am I'm this naive kid you know so I take, I got first semester Russian okay and so now I'm at sixteen and I got the gym and the other stuff so I got sixteen hours--
Speaker 1: That's a tough schedule.
Speaker 2: --and he said, and then he said, "You know you're a pretty smart kid, you got some good grades, let's get you off to a good start, let's give you an elective," so he gave me philosophy.  So I had nineteen hours my first semester at the University of Illinois and I walked into this Russian class, Larry, and everybody sat down and you know I'm sitting there.  Clearly I'm the only black--well when I was, when I started the University of Illinois in Urbana, there were, I may be off one or two, but if we don't count the African transfer students, there were twelve black students in the whole school--
Story_ID: 450527
Speaker 1: Let's put, get some of this on tape, but--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You were telling me--there were twelve black students?
Speaker 2: Twelve black students.  Yeah there were twelve black students when I was there and--
Speaker 1: As we were saying off camera, the blacks, the black presence at these Big Ten [Big Ten Conference] schools are starting to make an impact and football (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we couldn't go--
Speaker 1: We talked about Sandy Stephens.
Speaker 2: Sandy Stephens, the university yeah it was just beginning to happen.
Speaker 1: First black quarterback.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Lou Holland who Holland Capital [Holland Capital Management LLC, Chicago, Illinois] was the star running back at the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin].  In basketball it was Lou Hutchison [ph.] and Archie Clark.  Oh it was great basketball in the Big Ten back then you know Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] had you know the Lucas [Jerry Lucas] teams and Havlicek [John Havlicek] were--
Speaker 1: One black that was Mel Nowell (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mel Nowell was on that team.  Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] had, had a star black player when I was there, Don--
Speaker 1: Was it Freeman?
Speaker 2: --Freeman.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Donnie Freeman yeah, Don, Don hits some rough times after that.  Dave Downey [David J. Downey], who was a star on that team, Dave Downey from Champaign [Illinois].  I know Dave he's been, he's been in the insurance business also all his career.  So I, I know Dave and I've talked to Dave and Dave kind of looked out for Don, got him a job with the bank in Springfield [Illinois] and you know he--his wife died.  She was there when I was there.  So he had a little hard time.
Story_ID: 450528
Speaker 1: But back to you know when I went into this Russian class and this is kind of funny, you know I sat down, the only black kid in the Russian class, of course, and the instructor came in and said something to the class in Russian.  And they all answered (laughter) so I knew I was in trouble.  But I couldn't get out of that class.  My advisor would not let me out of that class.
Speaker 2: Now what is--this is we've had plenty of bad advisor or bad counselor stories, but this sounds like a nightmare of one.
Speaker 1: Oh it was terrible (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's building up the way you know all the hours--
Speaker 1: Plus--
Speaker 2: --and Russian and trigonometry and physics.
Speaker 1: Plus, to make it, to make it worse, there was no room, there was no dormitory room on campus.  So they had built what was going to be married housing you know that was about a twenty minute bus ride you know out into--and that's where they put us.  The took these married dorm things, housing things and there were like five of us in a little--
Speaker 2: Five black students.
Speaker 1: No I was the only black student--
Speaker 2: Oh okay five students.
Speaker 1: Yeah in all of these little places out there.  So you had to get up in the morning and take a bus into campus, you had to catch the bus.  If you wanted to go to the library, you had to take the bus.  I mean it was a nightmare.  So that was probably the worst year of my life.  I, I struggled through this Russian class and I guess I had a sympathetic instructor.  You know there weren't many sympathetic instructors down there at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] at the time.  But this guy was a foreign, he was a Russian of some sort, something, something maybe not Russian but you know from Eastern Europe and he told me he said you know, "You worked so hard I'm gonna give you a D out of the kindness of my heart."  And so I had this D in Russian, I struggled through chemistry, got this C in chemistry so I was on probation after the first semester okay.  And then I had again I had but the biggest mistake I guess I passed trigonometry and went into calculus.  I had another exchange student teaching calculus who I couldn't understand.  His English was terrible you know.  But all these other kids in this class I mean they were math whizzes.  They knew all this stuff.  They had had this calculus stuff in high school, I hadn't had any calculus in high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] you know so it was, it was, it was miserable so but somehow I struggled and got a C average but I'm still on probation 'cause my overall grade point average was under C so I'm now in my third semester down there and I'm what they call final probation if I don't get this thing up.  So I was talking to some kids and they said well you know psychology is pretty easy, why don't you switch into psychology.  So that's what I did.  I bailed out on the--but I still had to finish that damn Russian (laughter) so I actually made it through two years of Russian.  I think I got a D and three Cs in the three or four semesters I took Russian but I finally got my grade point up above three so I could you know and then I finished school and you know came out with you know low grades and not much of a future--
Story_ID: 450529
Speaker 1: What I failed to ask you at a certain juncture was, you graduated from high school, from Englewood [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] in '61 [1961] right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how did you?  What--were there counselors at Englewood that negotiated your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not that I recall.
Speaker 1: --entry in the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: How did you choose University of Illinois?
Speaker 2: My mother [Edna Tubbs Johns].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This was all my mother.  My mother, I got what was called a General Assembly Scholarship [Illinois General Assembly Scholarship].  Each of the state representatives had a couple of scholarships that they could give to the--to go to the University of Illinois or I guess to any state school in Illinois and in my neighborhood, nobody ever asked for these scholarships and somehow my mother found out about this and she you know we weren't political, she didn't know anybody, but she went and asked the, asked the guy and he gave me the scholarship.  So that's how I got to the University of Illinois.  My mother struggled and you know paid the room and board because that was the only scholarship it was like two thousand dollars and--
Speaker 1: Who was your representative, do you remember?
Speaker 2: No.  He died.  He died a long, long time ago.  But he was just, you know he represented that district back in the early '60s [1960s] and I think he died while I was in school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that's how I got to you know, that's how I got to the University of Illinois but I don't remember ever discussing anything with anybody at Englewood you know, most of the kids and in that era, most of the, most of the boys went Vietnam because Vietnam was really smoking back then.  That was '60 [1960], '61 [1961].  Most of the boys went to Vietnam, if you didn't go to college you went to Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Or in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: By then--
Speaker 2: Right, then you went to Vietnam, but that was you know and and probably half my class, half my class died in Vietnam, my high school class, a lot of my high school class you know died.  And actually I went to the wall [Vietnam Veterans Memorial, Washington, D.C.] one time and you know I could pick out quite a few, quite a few names of people that I knew that had died over in Vietnam at the memorial.  But anyway that was no, I don't remember--
Story_ID: 450530
Speaker 1: It was funny about six, seven years ago, I got this call from the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].  For whatever reason, they offered back in the '60s [1960s], they offered lifetime membership into the alumni association for one hundred dollars.  So I said why not you know.  I had no real good feelings about the school but I said one hundred dollars why not?  So I became a lifetime member of the alumni association.  So for a number of years they have been calling me trying to get me, "Well you know that was a great deal but most of the people that took that one hundred dollar deal are paying the annual dues."  And I said no (laughter).  Got my one hundred dollars, my lifetime membership and that's it.  So they sent this lady by, Larry [Larry Crowe], a nice little lady and she came by and she was reclaiming, you know graduates from the school of liberal arts and science who had not been active in years and you know a number of people gave her my name so she came by to see me and she said, "What was your most memorable experience at the University of Illinois?"  And I sat there for a few minutes and I said, "I have no good memorable experiences from my four years at the University of Illinois."  And I was just being honest.  And that poor lady, she didn't know what to do or what to say.  She--I guess nobody ever answered like that.  But when I was down there you know there are places we couldn't get served on campus, we could not get our hair cut on campus, we could not go into any bar safely on campus.  So it was almost total segregation at the University of Illinois when I was down there.
Speaker 2: This was 1961?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah, we--the black students, the black boys had to go into Champaign [Illinois] to get their hair cut at the black barbershop and that was dangerous because the town kids did not like the university kids you know.  So we had to ride our bikes in groups in to get our hair cut.  And if they find--found out we had to just get up and go and the barbers were nice, they said, "You guys got about five minutes just get up and get in this--just get on out of here, we'll finish right quick do what we can do," and so it got to the point where--and didn't have money to come home.  Even though you know I mean, you know my folks [Edna Tubbs Johns and Thomas J. McLeary, Jr.] didn't have money for me to take the train home.  I don't know how much it cost but so once I left in September you know it was Christmas before I came back you know.  Maybe every once in a while they would come get me for Thanksgiving but basically it was at least Thanksgiving before I would come home.  So you got your hair cut when you left and you got your hair cut when you got back to Chicago [Illinois].  But it was rough.  It was not, it was not a very good experience.  I had a professor, I got a, I got a you know--I was taking this criminal justice course and I took the first exam and got like you know like all of his questions right.  And he called me up and he said you know he said, "You know you did really good on this test."  He said, "I'll tell you what.  This is our deal," he said, "Just, it's just me," he said, "it's just personally I don't think I can ever give a black student more than a C."  He said, "So I tell you what, you've got a C right now, you don't ever have to come to any of my classes.  You don't have to take any exams.  This will be our deal."  He said, "You don't really need this course so you know it's just a credit you know to graduate."  And that was, that was our deal so.
Speaker 2: Did you accept the deal?
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  I had previously tried going to the administration with what I thought was discrimination.  That was a worthless, worthless waste of time.  I mean nobody was listening to anything.  Nobody cared you know.  I mean there were only a handful of us on campus at the time.  Until '63 [1963] when they had this big program when they brought in a lot of black kids from Chicago and then, then you know social life changed.
Story_ID: 450531
Speaker 1: From what we've heard from people that were at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] almost at the turn of the century through the World War II [WWII] period and nothing really changed in all that time I guess?
Speaker 2: Nothing changed.  No nothing.  I don't know if it's much different now.  You know I don't know if it was much--if it's you know and again, I don't know, but for me it was just you know terrible.  But then, then the black kids came.  Probably about five hundred came in in '63 [1963] because I mean there were no girls you know so I mean there were a couple of girls.  Of the, of the maybe by my second year there were thirty black kids you know and probably twenty-five of them were males so you know I mean there just weren't any women you know.  You couldn't go into Champaign [Illinois] without risking your life you know so I mean there was no--not much of a social life back then until '63 [1963], September of '63 [1963] although they had this program and they brought in all the black kids from Chicago [Illinois] and around the state and--
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963] seem to be like a breakout year for civil rights in a lot of ways (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: The March on Washington.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: A lot of sit in demonstrations around the country.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah it was.
Speaker 1: Barriers falling down.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but see I was, I was in school when, I was at school when both the Kennedys got killed you know.  When Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--no I was gone when he got killed but when, when, when John [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] and Bobby [Robert F. Kennedy] you know I was on campus you know and they closed school and you know did all that kind of stuff, but but '63 [1963] was when and then we could have parties and you know the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] had a full house and the AKAs and the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] were the only Greek organizations that had a house.  So you know most of the parties were at the AKA house so you know there were girls and you can date and you know have some sort of a social life, social life in college which is why never even considered under any circumstances any of my children [Tiffanie McLeary, DeAnna McLeary and Thomas McLeary] going to the University of Illinois.  I mean I can't imagine the circumstances that would have you know had me recommend that they go there to school.
Story_ID: 450532
Speaker 1: When you were at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], did you have any idea that you--was there any, any link to insurance at all (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) None at all.  No, no.  If we wanna go to how all that started well, when I graduated from, this a great story.  This is--
Speaker 1: This is like '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965].  Okay and this is my luckiest moment in life.  When I came out of school, I had--just picture this--I had a very low grade point average, like a 3.2 on a five point system or something because of all those you know hard years--hard semester.  So I had a low grade point average, I had no money and I had a bachelor's degree in psychology.  Now, what are my prospects you know?  So I started going around calling on all of the corporations you know.  Every morning I get up and I go downtown and I call on people and fill out job applications and you know nobody would ever call me back.  You know I was one A, had no, had no grades or money to go into graduate school anywhere so you know I'm just not gonna get anymore deferments.  So I'm you know, I'm not--I don't look good.  But I went and I applied at the Prudential [Prudential Insurance Company of America; Prudential Financial, Inc.], when the Prudential Building [One Prudential Plaza, Chicago, Illinois] was downtown and they had a, actually they had a regional office in Chicago [Illinois] and I went and I filled out an application and they called me in and they said this was after about six months with no luck at all.  So they said, "Okay, we have this management training program that we're gonna offer you a job in so you'll start," I think the pay was like $115 a week or something, something like that, "And if you go to Vietnam and come back alive," and this is an actual quote, "you go to Vietnam and come alive, the time you've been in the [U.S.] Army will count as seniority."  And you know it sound like a good deal to me and it was the only one I had so I went to work for the University of Illinois.  So I was talking to a buddy of mine--
Speaker 1: You mean for Prudential?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry for Prudential yeah.  Started at Prudential--
Speaker 1: This was in '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: This is in '65 [1965] and they said, "But what we want you to do is we want you to go down and you probably ought to go to the draft board and check your status.  So you know we'll know what's gonna, what's gonna happen to you."  So I was talking to a friend of mine and he said, "You know I heard that the National Guard is--you can get in the National Guard and not go to Vietnam."  So he said, "You know there's an armory [National Guard Armory, Chicago, Illinois] over on 51st Street."  And I knew that armory was there but I didn't know what they did so I went over there and I walked in couldn't find anybody.  You know it was like just empty.  So I walked around and then I heard some activity in a room and I walked into this room and there were just a bunch of young men like me, except they were almost all white and this is 51st and Cottage Grove [Avenue].  But I walk in this room and they almost all white you know and I'm in this room and a sergeant walks in.  He says, "All right everybody be quiet, everybody hold up your right hand."  And he did the little induction thing.  And he inducted--he went through that okay.  So then he's looking at the list and he's looking at me funny and he's checking off and he called me over and he said, "What's your name?"  And I told him my name and he said, "You're not on my list."  He said, "How'd you get in here?"  And I said, "Well you know I wanted to join so somebody told me to come by so I walked in this room."  And he said, "Well I gave you the induction thing--"
Speaker 1: So you held your hand up too?
Speaker 2: I held my hand up, yeah.  (Laughter) Sounded good to me.  So he didn't know what to do with me.  So he said, "Well I tell you what, this is your lucky day."  He said, "You go to your draft board and get a release and I'll let you in the National Guard."  So you know I got on the bus and went over to the draft board and lady looked me up and looked me up and said, "Boy your name sounds familiar for some reason."  Looked at me, and looking around and then said said hm, then I saw her go get some mail.  It was in the outgoing mailbox.  My draft notice was in that day's outgoing mail and she pulled it out for me.  She said, "I'm not supposed to do this but you don't need to go over there.  You got over here," and she pulled it out and gave me a release.  And I avoided Vietnam.
Speaker 1: That's pretty close.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That is pretty close.  I don't know if I would have gone.  But I didn't have to make that, I didn't have to make that decision.
Speaker 1: Did you have were you politically aware what was going on (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely.  Yeah, yeah.  No desire to go you know, to go kill anybody you know.  But I never had to make that decision.  'Cause I had talked to some folks who you know talking about going to Canada, you know doing all of the things that people had done because I sure didn't wanna go.  You know I mean I had an education and I thought I was fairly intelligent.  I could go you know work in Canada.  What's so bad about that other than it's cold as hell?  But you know I never had to make that decision so that's how I avoided Vietnam.  I mean I went and worked at the Prudential and that's how I got started in the insurance business.
Story_ID: 450533
Speaker 1: Did you think that you would take to the insurance business or?
Speaker 2: No.  This was just you know a job until I could find a real job you know.  This was just something to do.  I was still you know having fun.  I was single, I had no responsibilities, didn't need a lot of money and you know I was the second person hired by Prudential [Prudential Insurance Company of America; Prudential Financial, Inc.] in Chicago [Illinois] in the home office in Chicago who wore a tie to work.  And they immediately let me know that you know.  That's how they separated the people.  You either wore a tie or you didn't.  I mean that was the strata those who wore ties and those who didn't.  And I was in, I was in an exec- I was in a position where I wore a tie, me and one other guy, two of us, we wore ties every day to work.  And I was kind of in the training program but I got locked in, I was an underwriter, that was the first stop and unfortunately I was very good at it.  I reviewed policies to determine you know whether the company would accept the risk or not.  And I got real good at that so they never moved me.
Speaker 1: Now what makes a good underwriter anyway and what you know what do that mean?
Speaker 2: Actually it's speed.  You know because a lot--you have a lot of applications to look at.  You have to quickly look at the information and decide, make a decision.  Yes or no.  Or yes, but we're gonna charge extra you know different levels of extra, but you know charge more money.
Speaker 1: The underwriter makes an assessment of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Assessment of the risk.
Speaker 1: --what the risk--
Speaker 2: Yeah look at it you know.  Is this a person we can give the policy to or not?  You know and it was health and it was character and it was a number of factors and there was point systems associated with you know different health conditions and if you know hit a certain point level, you were rejected.  And that was, it was speed and you know making good decisions and I got to be very good at it.  But it's also kind of boring you know sitting there looking at this stuff all day and I would get very bored.  So it didn't look like I was going anywhere.
Story_ID: 450534
Speaker 1: But I came in contact with the management, with the field management you know those people who ran organizations that sold the policies and they were always trying to recruit me to go out and sell.  But you know I mean we were taught to kind of look down on them.  But then one day, crazy guy, this was a crazy guy, but, but good guy, name was Nick Nicholson [S. Bonenfant Nicholson, Jr.] and he was assistant manager for a person who became my very good friend, a guy named [HistoryMaker] John Lassiter who was the district manager.  He was the first black district manager hired by the Prudential in Chicago.  And Nick came and said well, he said, "You know I want you to go to dinner with me and I'm gonna talk to you about joining my staff.  I really think you'll be good and we're gonna go to dinner."  So he took me to the Playboy Club [Chicago, Illinois].  We had dinner at the Playboy Club and he was telling me about you know how good I would be and how he really wanted me on the team and then he took out his W2 and he put it on the table.  And I looked at how much money he made and I thought about how much money I was making and then he said to me, he said, "You know I've never had an agent start with me that after the first three months didn't make at least three hundred dollars a week," you know and I think I was you know I had gotten all these promotions I think I was up to one hundred sixty-five dollars a week you know.  So I decided to, to do it.  So I had to go get, you know, go get the transfer 'cause I was a home office employee so I had to transfer from what I was doing into sales.  And I went and talked to this little old lady in the human resources area and she says, "You gonna go out and you're gonna leave here where you wear a tie every day and go work with those people?"  And I said, "Yes (laughter).  That's what I gonna do."  She said, "That's not very smart," and I said, "Well, but this is my decision."  And she said, "Well I just want you to remember one thing, that the door only swings one way."  So (laughter).
Speaker 2: So you can't come back once you leave?
Speaker 1: Cannot--she was telling me I could not come back.  If I make this move and it doesn't work out, don't come back.  And all my friends in the home office [of Prudential Insurance Company of America; Prudential Financial, Inc.] telling me how I shouldn't do this, how I was on the fast track and you know all of that stuff and but I got out of there and never looked back.  But you know it was, it was, it was a hard decision.  I mean only thing I had ever really sold was Christmas cards (laughter) you know so I had no sales experience but he taught me how to dress.  He immediately put me into debt so I'd have to make money.  I had paid a for Chevrolet Impala and he took me out to I guess it was a guy named Dukes [Rufus L. Dukes] who had an Oldsmobile dealer and Dukes was his client so he took me out to Dukes and put me in, put me in a convertible Cutlass [Oldsmobile Cutlass] and took me down to Roosevelt Road and had me buy three custom made suits and you know so all of a sudden I was in deep debt and had to really, really work and make some money and that's kind of how it all got started.
Speaker 2: You think that was part of the strategy?
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  You know and as I got to know him that's what he did with all the people.  I mean it was--I wasn't any different.  You know he made 'em buy a new car, made 'em buy some clothes you know and that's how he, that's how he got them, got them going, got them motivated.  So now you're motivated you got all these new bills, you are really motivated.  But you know I was still single you know it was a time in my life where I could take all the risks you know and not have to look back.  So that was the beginning--
Story_ID: 450535
Speaker 1: You were at Prudential [Prudential Insurance Company of America; Prudential Financial, Inc.] a long time and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So just kind of chronicle for us your rise at Prudential.
Speaker 2: I was one of the top salesmen in the country all the years I was there.  I always qualified for all of the top clubs and all of that.  And what, what--I probably may have never left Prudential had they not changed the way they did business.  I had kind of gotten--I was kind of moving--well let me start, let me start over.  What most of the insurance companies did back then, the Mets [Metropolitan Life Insurance Company], the Prus, New England [New England Life Insurance Company], New York Life [New York Life Insurance Company], they got their salespeople, they tried to, I, I called it keep them barefoot and pregnant.  They tried to get them so indoctrinated into their company that they wouldn't think about anything outside of their company and how it operated.  So they weren't in the insurance business or in the insurance industry, they worked for that company.  Well I had kind of stepped outside of, of the Prudential way of doing things and had gotten involved in the insurance industry and went to meetings where I met other people you know selling insurance for other companies and had got to see a part of the industry that most people didn't get to see, particularly all of the black agents because back then all of the black agents were usually in one office.  And they kind of kept them apart from the rest of the, of the industry which was all in their strategy.  The other thing that they did is they never let a black--when they promoted a black agent to manager, either he took over an existing black operation or he had to start a black operation because they did not think I know at least at the Prudential, they did not think and this is you know now 1970, '71 [1971], they didn't think that a black person could manage white people.  So that's kind of how, how, how it worked but I kind of got past that and I didn't wanna be in management.  I wanted to kind of build my own business and I began--my customers became small businesses.  So I was selling my prospects where the black business is on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois].  That's where I was doing most of my prospecting activities and I was you know pretty successful.  Prudential had a product that I sold a lot of.  It was a group health product that you sold to companies.  And I began doing very well selling that product.  It was the door opener for me.  I would get in, I'd sell them that product and then I could sell the, you know, the owners of the business other products once I got in, that was my strategy.  And--
Speaker 1: About what year is this when you--?
Speaker 2: This was '76 [1976], '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I stayed five years in the home office.  So I was in the home office from '65 [1965] to '70 [1970] and then you know I began selling in '70 [1970] and this is about sixty--'76 [1976], '77 [1977].
Story_ID: 450536
Speaker 1: As we were going through the chronology you mentioned (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chronology yeah--
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] John Lassiter.
Speaker 2: Yeah, John, John actually, John was my manager when I became an agent for the Prudential [Prudential Life Insurance Company of America; Prudential Financial, Inc.] in 1970 and you know John, John was not the typical black person that Prudential had expected to get you know.  I mean he was this guy who worked at social security so they thought that he was kind of a talented, no making waves kind of guy, but that wasn't John.  John, John just did all sorts of things that were different.  One is we were immediately directly connected with Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois].  I mean we supported all of the Operation Push things.  When Jesse had his first expo [Black Business Exposition] over at International Amphitheatre [Chicago, Illinois], we were there exhibiting and had a booth.  Boy John did some great things and it was John who directed me into the industry.  John kind of threw me into the industry because there was an association of, of, of, of insurance salespeople, national organization, a very highly regarded in the industry and John got me involved in that at a very early point in my career.  And I would attend their meetings and then I got on their board of directors here locally in Chicago [Illinois] and became the first black president of this organization--
Speaker 1: Of the national?
Speaker 2: --of the Chicago--
Speaker 1: Chicago, okay.
Speaker 2: --Chicago association.  I became the first black president and--
Speaker 1: It's called the Chicago assoc--
Speaker 2: Chicago, when I, I was president, it was called the Chicago Association of Life Underwriters and it--the national organization was the National Association of Life Underwriters.  They went through a name change a few years ago and now they're called the National Association of Insurance and Financial Advisors.  They were trying to, to catch the movement in the industry more toward you know all financial products and not just insurance products.  But it's still the same organization.
Story_ID: 450537
Speaker 1: So I got to meet all of the insurance people in Chicago [Illinois] and I could see you know what you saw in the Prudential [Prudential Insurance Company of America; Prudential Financial, Inc.] is you saw agents making a certain amount of money.  Back then probably the top agent in Prudential, this is the mid-'70s [1970s] was maybe making one hundred fifty thousand dollars which back in 1970 was a lot of money but when I stepped out into the industry and began meeting you know some of the other leaders in the Chicago insurance community, I mean I was seeing people making five, six, seven hundred million dollars a year you know and so it just kind of opened my mind to the potential.  So that was when I shifted from selling to individuals to selling to companies.  What I saw is that most of the people making a lot of money were selling to companies and to individuals.  And the individuals they sold were through their activities at those companies.  So that was the direction that I took and I--just my natural market was black businesses so that's where I started I mean.
Speaker 2: So the commission on those sales are much higher (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are much larger.  Yeah, yeah what, what one of the speakers you know there're a lot of speakers in the insurance industry and you hear the motivational thoughts.  One speaker put it you know says very simple, he said an individual, and he pulled out a normal, a regular checkbook.  He said your individuals have you know the little checks.  He said businesses have those big checkbooks with the big checks and those checkbooks had more money in them than the little checkbook so just logically businesses have more money, they have more needs than individuals.  So, so I began selling this Prudential group product which was my door opener to get me in.  Oh, and I was doing very well and the product was doing--was great.  It was very competitive and then one day Prudential made a huge mistake in their underwriting of the product.  Prudential allowed children of you know the people who working at these companies.  There was no underwriting on the children.  So children were automatically accepted it didn't matter, no questions.  All the other companies had questions, questions, the health questions that they ask also applied to the children.  So whenever an agent ran into a situation with sick kids, they just went to the Prudential because the Prudential didn't ask any questions.  So all of a sudden Prudential's losses skyrocketed.  I mean they probably had every leukemia kid in Illinois and it just skyrocketed and so they were gonna--they changed their rates on the product and they just weren't competitive.  You couldn't sell their product.  My contract with the Prudential did not allow me to sell other companies' products so I had a decision to make.  I had to either violate my contract or leave the Prudential.  So you know I think I'm a pretty honorable guy.  My decision was to leave the Prudential.  At that time this was, this was now about '78 [1978].
Story_ID: 450538
Speaker 1: Now just to put this into perspective I think for the three years leading to that you were the top salesperson in the--
Speaker 2: I was the top--I was one of the top five or six salespeople in Chicago [Illinois].  I was the top in my agency.  I was maybe in the top twenty or thirty in the company and at that time Prudential [Prudential Insurance Company of America; Prudential Financial, Inc.] had you know twenty some thousand agents.  So you know I was, I was well known throughout the Prudential Insurance Company.
Speaker 1: And you were in the Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] office, is that--
Speaker 2: We were back, we were not yet, we had not gone move to Hyde Park yet, we were still on 99th [Street] and--96th [Street] and Halsted [Street].  We moved from 96th and Halsted to Hyde Park but we were, we were just kind of in that transition, we were getting ready to move into Hyde Park and so I talked to John [HistoryMaker John Lassiter] and John said, "Well let's go down and talk to the president of the region."  I was in the chairs to become president of the Chicago Association [Chicago Association of Life Underwriters] and a move at that time for me to move from Prudential, to leave Prudential would have you know been, it would have just set a little ripple throughout the industry.  I'm the only black person you know involved at the--I'm probably the most well-known black agent in the City of Chicago because of my industry you know activities.  So we went and talked to the president of the region who actually when I was a home office employee at the Prudential, he was an up and coming executive okay and you know I was--I bowled in the Prudential bowling league and he was on my team.  So he all--we knew each other, we were friends.  So we sat down in his office and he said, "You know, you know Tom [HistoryMaker Thomas L. McLeary] we really want you--don't want you to leave particularly because of this situation."  He said, "So if we keep this between us, you can sell anybody's product you want."  He said, "Don't worry about your contract."  He says, "We want you to stay with Prudential."  So okay you're the president of the region okay, I'll do it.  So I stayed, I stayed at Prudential, but I really left emotionally at that point in time.
Story_ID: 450539
Speaker 1: And as I began building my business now, having you know being able to reach the--before I had to sell my customer the best Prudential [Prudential Life Insurance Company of America; Prudential Financial, Inc.] product, now I could sell my customer the best product regardless of where--what company it came from.  And that made all the difference in the world to me and so I began building my business.  I formed my first corporation in 1978 because I needed an entity to contract with those other companies.  I didn't wanna contract with me as an individual so I established a corporation with a friend [HistoryMaker Ann Smith].  She and I established this corporation and we, we began operating as a business.  So for the first time now I'm operating as a business.  Had my own secret--
Speaker 2: Is this Endow [Endow, Inc., Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: This is in Endow yeah, yeah.  And Endow was first formed in--and again we went to a friend of ours who was not a, you know, not a corporate lawyer, he was just a you know a jack of all trades you know nice guy.  For some reason he recommended that we established as a 501(C)(3), a tax exempt organization because our first customer under Endow was a university.  They had--we had pitched them on setting up a charitable giving program where we would sell life insurance to their, to their graduates with the school as owner and beneficiary as a charitable gift to the school.  So we needed a name to fit that sales strategy. So that's how Endow came about.  We, we, we came up with the name Endow but he said, "Well since you're selling charitable stuff maybe you should you know be a 501(C)(3)," and we did.  But it made absolutely no sense at all so we reformed in 1981 as a for-profit.  So Endow actually started in '78 [1978] as a not-for-profit and then reformed in 1981 as a for-profit organization and at that point in time I had finished my year as president of the Chicago Association [Chicago Association of Life Underwriters] and I felt it just didn't make sense for me to stay you know an employee of the Prudential so I moved on and separated, had my own office, was no longer housed in the, in the agency.  Had my own organization, hired my own people.  And that's how I really got into the insurance business and that was the major step you know.  Stepping out of the agency, you know having my own business, having to pay bills, having to hire employees, having to do all of those things.  So that kind of got me, got me started.
Story_ID: 450540
Speaker 1: But my journey through the association which has been you know just an extremely important part of my, my career.  What, what was happening, Larry [Larry Crowe], and the reason most of the black people in the life insurance business that started the same time I did and came after me would grow to a certain level and then plateau.  They couldn't, just couldn't go any higher and there were a lot of reasons which we don't need to get into here but one of the primary reasons is they never stepped out away from their company and became part of the industry.  And because once you do that then you see what is available to you in this, in this business.  So I became president, the first black president of the state association [Illinois Life Underwriters Association; National Association of Insurance and Financial Advisors Illinois] and then moved on and I had to--my state put me up for, as a candidate for national office and I had to run, I had to run, it's an elected position, so you have to you know--oh about twelve hundred people vote and you have to you know you have to win.  So I became the second elected black trustee in the history of the national organization [National Association of Life Underwriters; National Association of Insurance and Financial Advisors] and I led the ticket.  There were eight people running for six slots so there're six winners.  But I got the most votes of all of, all of the candidates.  I had been speaking all over the country.  You know I'm this only black guy who is you know well known and one of the very few well known in the industry and I was a very good speaker so I was always getting invited to you know I spoke all over the country to the local organizations of the national organization.  I mean I get invited and I'd speak at state meetings.  I spoke at Texas meeting.  I mean I've spoken in front of thousands of people on various topics relating to insurance sales and, and so that's how you know I as well-known (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) These are primarily motivational speeches?
Speaker 1: Primarily motivational.  Yeah motivational, sales ideas, you know.  I told my story in a very interesting way.  You know and it wasn't a black story, it was a you know an insurance industry story so but I was this black guy so these folks could, could bring this black speaker in who could actually speak you know and they felt good about it and you know they were trying to recruit other black agents into the organization.  So you know everywhere I would go they would have more black people in the audience than they'd ever get for a normal meeting.  And that made me feel good because you know I'm trying to encourage them to come out and get involved and to because you know that's how you grow.  So anyway I was on a lot of committees, a lot of insurance organizations and then it became, then it came the time for me to decide, do I wanna become the first black president of the organization?  Everybody felt all of the, you know, influential people in the organization felt that I would win you know.  It's--you run for secretary and then it's automatic progression through the chairs.
Story_ID: 450541
Speaker 1: But at that time in my life, it wasn't a good time in my life for me to do this.  My son [Thomas McLeary] was starting high school and it looked like he was probably gonna play a little bit of high--he wasn't a great athlete, but it look like he was good enough to maybe play some high school basketball and the one thing that the insurance industry did for me, is it gave me total freedom.  Being in business for myself having total freedom, I don't think I missed anything that my kids had.  You know it didn't matter when it was.  I remember going to my daughter's swimming meets when they were--when she was in grammar school at ten o'clock in the morning.  'Cause you know I just work my day around you know, you know when my son was playing Little League baseball for oh maybe eight years in the summer, you know my day ended at two o'clock so I could come get him after school and we lived, we lived down here.  And my wife [Elizabeth Sawyer McLeary] took him over to the Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] Little League and I went over there to--they had one practice and then they kind of had a game and I went over there and I looked at the competition and I said no.  He not going here.  So I took him up to 83rd [Street] and King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] where he could play with the boys from the hood you know.  I wasn't gonna have a son who you know didn't you know understand what it means to be, to be black and I didn't want him to grow up you know not having relationships with all different levels you know.  I mean we lived a good life.  I didn't want him to you know just get all into that life.  I wanted him to know what the real life was like you know because he's a black man in America and he gotta know what the real stuff is like.  We played basketball at 63rd [Street] and Stony [Stony Island Avenue].  I mean that's the basketball league that we played in.  One it was more competition and two you know I mean he had to be tough.  And I wanted him to be strong.  I didn't wanna have this little you know sissy boy you know because he grew up with all of the privileges of life you know.  So anyway that was just my, I could be, I could be all wrong in that, but, but that's kind of so I had to get up and we had to battle traffic to go to Tuley Park [Chicago, Illinois] and the Cole Park [Nat King Cole Park, Chicago, Illinois] to practice you know two days a week we went to practice and you know we played games and it was always me you know.  I always took him.  I never planned anything that there was nothing that could happen that could interfere with me doing that.  Once in a while you know his mother would take him and I'd go pick him up but 90 percent of the time I was there and that's what this business allowed me to do.  It allowed me the freedom to you know do that (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 450542
Speaker 1: And it sounds as if, it seems as if in insurance, the same amount of effort yields more if you're focusing it on the right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's exactly right.  Yeah--
Speaker 1: --pool of money or the right clientele.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes if you, if you, if you focus you know it's amazing how much you can get done in a very little amount of time.
Speaker 1: Now does it hurt black agents to be I mean to live in a black or work with the black community?  Now you see we always see in the paper headlines we have the highest infant mortality rate, the highest number of car accidents, the highest number of burglaries.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I mean it's more incarcerated people in our community--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --coming out and coming right back to the community again.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I mean you know you hear stories about the insurance industry redlining the black community--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --they're taking advantage of all that and charging more for everything.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How's your--
Speaker 2: It's harder.  It's no question it's harder.  Yeah for all of those reasons that you just mentioned, it's, it's more difficult and there's less money you know.  The biggest thing, see because in the business that I'm in the more money you have, the more insurance you need you know, most of the time.  I mean there are exceptions but most of the time the more you make because insurance is a replacement of income.  So the more income you have you know if you died, the more income your family needs to stay in their own world you know.  So that's kind of, kind of simple.  So you know and I, and I kind of thought about that.  I know some, I know some very successful people who are good friends of mine who are white who grew up in the country club.  You know grew up around nothing but money you know.  And they did very, very well.  And then there'll others who grew up in the same circumstances that didn't do well at all.  So it's more of what you do with the opportunities that you have than the opportunity so I've always looked at it you know I've done very well with the opportunities that I had and could I have crossed over?  Yeah probably.  I could have maybe changed my clientele.  Maybe it would have worked, maybe it didn't.  I have--but I know 90 percent of the very successful black insurance agents in the country and I don't know one that has a very successful business that is primarily white clientele.  They almost all work with people of color who, who do very well.  So you know but I have some, I have some large customers I mean, Abbott Laboratories is a customer of mine, so I have you know some--that's the garage door--some publicly, publicly traded companies and we can--we'll come to that a little later how all of that works but yeah, I'm glad I did it the way I did it.  And I think I did it the best way.
Story_ID: 450543
Speaker 1: So you know all of that to just get back to why I didn't become the first black president of the organization [National Association of Life Underwriters; National Association of Insurance and Financial Advisors], I chose to not run for president because if I had I would have been away from home a lot and I didn't wanna have to make the decision you know do I wanna go speak to this group in Montana or go to my son's [Thomas McLeary] basketball game.  That would have been a decision that I would not have wanted to have to make so I made it easy on myself I took the easy way out and decided not to run.  So they badgered me about running for a couple of years and you know.  Like anything else when it's your time, it's your time.  And when your time passes you know there won't be another time and I knew that was gonna happen.  I knew I would never be the first black president and you know in the foreseeable future there's no chance for them to have a black president so I am disappointed that I did not do that.  If I had done it you know maybe I would have inspired you know someone else out there to have become president, but I think I made the best decision for me and my family.
Speaker 2: It was a decision about happiness it seems in terms of (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, because, I, I've done all of this you know for quality of life and you know that decision would have impacted you know my quality of life.  I gave a whole lot back to my industry and yeah I could have given more back by being president but you know I gave more than my share so I feel comfortable with the decision.
Speaker 2: Now let me backtrack a little bit.  You were married in '75 [1975] is that correct or am I--
Speaker 1: Seventy-four [1974].
Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974] okay.  All right.  Now how did you meet your wife and--
Speaker 1: My wife was a referredly [ph.].  My wife was, one of my clients, one of my major clients at the time, was dating my wife and she needed insurance so he sent me to see her to sell her insurance.  And I did but when I first saw her I knew that this was the woman I was gonna spend the rest of my life with.  So I had to figure out okay client you know, what'll I do?  So I got rid of the client (laughter) you know.  I just had to say you know I met her, I really like her.  We're gonna start seeing each other.  If it affects our business relationship you know just give me a call and I'll send your files to whoever you ask me to send your files to.  And he never asked me to send this files, he just stopped doing business with me.  So I lost a, I lost a customer and gained a wife.  But we got married.  It didn't take long.  We got married, oh we may have dated for six months or so and then we got married.  Maybe that was the luckiest moment of my life not getting out of Vietnam but meeting Bunnie [Elizabeth Sawyer McLeary] is probably the--it was definitely the best moment of my life but maybe also the luckiest.  If I'd never been in the insurance business I never would have met her so you know this was all destined I think maybe.
Story_ID: 450544
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you some questions about the Minority Business Development Council [Chicago Minority Supplier Development Council] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Can you kind of give us a history of that and some of the personalities--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --involved like I think Ralph Moore [HistoryMaker Ralph G. Moore], Maye Foster-Thompson (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --Frank Brooks--
Speaker 2: Yes.  All my--
Speaker 1: Jim Lowry [HistoryMaker James Lowry].
Speaker 2: --all my very, very good friends.  Oh my very, very good friends.  And what made me you know and one of the key factors of my success.  Back in it was either '83 [1983] or '84 [1984], I got a call from Maye Foster-Thompson and Maye said, "You know we need someone to help us with our insurance and you were referred to us."  So I went in and I met with Maye and I became their agent.  I you know I fixed up all their insurance programs, I designed a retirement plan for their organization and then Maye looked at me and said, "You know you're a minority firm but you never joined the organization."  And she said, "If we're buying our insurance from you, you ought to at least be a member," and I said, "Yeah you're right you know."  So I joined.  Then Maye called me about six months later and said, "You know our guy who was chairing the minority business committee is going out of business and would you consider being the chair?"  And you know this is a good client, influential lady, of course.  You know I had no idea what I was getting myself into.  So I became the chair of the minority business committee and you know things just grew from there.  Very, very quickly for a long time Maye was looking for someone from Chicago [Illinois] to become involved at the national level, with the National Minority Supplier Development Council and she thought I was the person.  She selected me.  So I ran for the chair of this region for the National Minority Business Development Council [sic.] there.  It's like a three legged stool.  You have the organization and then you had the people who run the local councils around the country, that's one group.  Then you have the chairpersons of the local councils.  He [Matthew Hickey] taps you on the shoulder?
Speaker 1: You can finish your--
Speaker 2: Oh okay who is, who are typically you know the corporate person that's chairman of the board of these organizations and then you have the minority business chair and these people run three national committees that kind of you know develop the programs and you know the all of the programs for the national organization.  And in the minority business community, the country is broken up into seven regions and I was the regional chair for oh six or seven years and then I was elected the national chair.  But so I got to know all of the people involved in minority business all over the country and Ralph Moore, you know I met Ralph early on in this relationship, he's been a friend of mine, Jim Lowry who I think is the probably the most knowledgeable person on minority business in this country.  Jim actually became a client of mine in 1974 and Jim and I have been friends and he's been my client for over thirty years.
Story_ID: 449229
Speaker 1: Okay let's keep it going now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay so yeah back to, back to, back to Jim [HistoryMaker James Lowry], Jim and I have been just, just very good friends for thirty, thirty plus years and he's been very helpful.  He has a lot of relationships and I met a lot of people.  Jim has helped me grow my business tremendously.  Ralph [HistoryMaker Ralph G. Moore] also, Ralph is always, always helpful.  And then Ralph, Jim and I and a few other people formed ABLE oh a few years ago.
Speaker 1: Now what does ABLE stand for?
Speaker 2: ABLE is the Alliance of Business Leaders and Entrepreneurs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's an organization of the largest black businesses in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you just can't get in there with a small business, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: You gotta--
Speaker 2: No.  You have to have at least a--well, have to at least a million dollars of revenue and been in business for five years.  And what we wanted, is we wanted an organization where some of the largest--you know there was no black business organization in Chicago you know not really.
Speaker 1: Until ABLE, really?
Speaker 2: Yeah until ABLE.  Yeah, yeah I mean there was the you know you had the Hispanic Chamber [Illinois Hispanic Chamber of Commerce] and the you know you had the Asian chambers but there really wasn't an organization of black businesses in the City of Chicago.  Most of the black businesses were connected to the Chicago Minority Business Development Council [sic. Chicago Minority Supplier Development Council], which were all of the minority businesses.  So we just didn't have an organization that could speak specifically to us.  There were some industry specific groups you know.  The black contractors but overall business across all business segments, there was no black organization.  So we were actually encouraged to form by some members of the Executive Leadership Council.  The Executive Leadership Council is an organization of black corporate executives who can be no more than two reports from the CEO to be part of that organization.  They're headquartered in New York [New York], a guy named Frank Brooks [sic. Carl Brooks] is their president.  He runs the organization.  So their idea was that you know there was this black, black business organization that if they wanted to leave Corporate America and go into business for themselves if they had an opportunity, there really wasn't anybody for them to talk to who had been very successful in business that they knew because they don't come in contact with a lot of black businesses.  So we formed, and the organization has grown and you know I'm very satisfied with our progress.  I think we've made some very good progress--
Story_ID: 449230
Speaker 1: Okay we were talking about ABLE [Alliance of Business Leaders and Entrepreneurs].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The significance, it's singularly significant for Chicago [Illinois] because it had never been done before, right?
Speaker 2: Never been done before and ABLE has a tremendous amount of potential you know that as stewards we just have to make sure that we you know we reach the potential for the organization.  ABLE could you know be the beginning of a national organization that can pull that can really give us some power.  One thing I've learned about minority business is we have not learned yet how to harness our power as minority groups.  Many corporations take us for granted, as they should.  You know we have to be able to punish them in the marketplace if, if they don't live up to their commitment to do business with the people who they do business with.  You know we can't wait for them to understand the economic necessity.  We have to push them forward and many of them will come kicking and screaming but ABLE can help do that.  It's difficult for the National Minority Supplier Development Council to do that because when you look at the structure of the organization, it's the corporations who are members.  You know what many people don't realize MNSDC [sic. NMSDC] is a 501(C)(3) organization and the corporations are the members.  The minority businesses are the beneficiaries of the not-for-profit.  So you know it's a corporation to provide all the funding, so you know how aggressive can you be you know as an organization at delivering you know messages that wouldn't be taken you know positively by your customers.  So it's a tough position for the organization to be in.  The minority businesses could speak out and I think that's what I tried to do as chair of the minority business committee to speak out to get some positive programs running to increase business.  And our whole goal is to increase business with minority firms and as Jim Lowry [HistoryMaker James Lowry] says so eloquently to create businesses of size, which is the future of minority businesses.  We must create businesses of size because that's where the world is going and if we--we can't wait for the world to you know help us, we've gotta charge forward and become a force.  So you know that's where we have to go and ABLE can help do that.  But you know we have to, we have to you know do a better job of communicating the struggle.
Speaker 1: Are there any organizations like ABLE or branches of ABLE in other cities?
Speaker 2: None that I have, none that I have run into and you know I've been all over the country in my minority business you know capacity with MNSDC, no.  But there are a lot of, there are a lot of cities who are interested in what we're doing and I'm hopeful that some will start our model.  The ones that like ABLE that exist are industry specific.  You know there is the Association of Automotive--Automotive Businesses [ph.] that do business with the automotive industry, NAVIS [ph.], in Detroit [Michigan] so there's some again there's some industry specific things as national chair of the minority business committee, I got to know Al Barber fairly well who was chairman of the, of the black--of the minority contractors association [National Association of Minority Contractors].  Okay so you've got on the contractor side you have an organization, you have an organization for automotive manufacturers but nothing that crosses all segments of business and that's where I think we can provide a model for the, for the country to move forward toward.
Story_ID: 449231
Speaker 1: Back to insurance for a minute--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you are a chartered life underwriter?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Many of us don't know what that means, but it's like being a certified public--it's a certification that you--
Speaker 2: Yes it's a certification like the CPA [certified public accountant] you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --there are--when I did it there were ten exams.  They have you know now there are eight exams, but there're ten exams of courses that you have to complete, exams that you have to pass in order to get the designation, oh and it's like a, you know, advanced degree in insurance and financial services.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I got that in 1972 actually and in--it's funny, you know you, you go the whole circle.  There is the educational institution which is responsible for this--for the designations in the insurance industry, the American College [The American College of Financial Services, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania], which you know gave me the designation.  I'm now on the board of trustees of that, of that organization so.
Speaker 1: So this is a college that exists for insurance (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a college that exists, yes.
Speaker 1: --exists for the insurance--
Speaker 2: For the insurance industry yeah.  Most of the designations that are connected to the insurance industry this college owns.  And it even provides the education for designations that it does not own.  Really the only, there're only a couple designations connected to the insurance industry and the financial services industry that the college doesn't own.  The most notable one is the CFP [certified financial planner], the CFP designation.  But it actually does the best job of educating people who want to pass the exam to get their CFP.  Our pass rate is higher than all of the other educational institutions that provide education for the CFP designation.  So it's always been the--it was the first and always the foremost college that provides education specifically to the insurance and financial services industry.
Story_ID: 449232
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about Endow [Endow, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] now, where it is now and, and--
Speaker 2: And where it's going?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Endow is evolving and it sort of started about twelve years ago.  About twelve years ago, I had been recommended to the president of North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company [Durham, North Carolina].  Now North Carolina Mutual is now 108 years old.  It's the oldest and largest black insurance company.  I was recommended to their president and CEO as a person who can help them reengineer their company, take them from an insurance company that sells small policies to--throughout the black community.  Their company has not really--had not really changed in a hundred years.  Back when, when emancipation came you know there became a need for black people to get buried.  You know there were many needs when the slaves were freed.  But that was one--kind of a critical one.  How does someone get buried when they die if you think about it?  And in--there was a, a gentleman who was a barber by profession who was a freed slave of the Duke family and he owned barbershops all through North Carolina at that time.  They catered to the white landowners.  All of his barbershops were in all white communities and when someone black died, he passed the hat in this barbershop, and that's how people got buried.  Well he and a physician got together and said you know and a few other business owners and said you know let's form a burial society.  So they formed this burial society which evolved into the life insurance company and they did very well.  They were the largest business of America--in America you know in the 1900s and then integration came.  And black people could now buy insurance from white companies and they gravitated as we did you know.  We went to all of the stores that we couldn't go to before and the insurance companies who wouldn't sell to use before, we all kind of moved in that direction and they lost the top of their market.  They used to insure all of the doctors and the lawyers and the, you know, government workers.  But they lost that market.  They all went to the white companies.  So there--they were relegated to a lower end of the market economically and they continued to sell small policies, burial insurance.
Story_ID: 449233
Speaker 1: But they, they knew they had to change so I was able to build a relationship with them and for the last you know ten years, I've been working with them, to help them reengineer their company and we've made some real progress.  And I mentioned earlier about my large corporation clients.  They all came through my relationship with North Carolina Mutual [North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company, Durham, North Carolina] where I was able to provide an opportunity for these large organizations through my activities with MNSDC [sic. National Minority Supplier Development Council (NMSDC)] you know it kind of all comes together.  You know I knew these people in these companies so I was able to bring North Carolina Mutual in to sell group insurance products to these organizations.  So you know we are growing that company and Endow [Endow, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] is one of their, you know, only consultants who is working with them in this process and some exciting things are gonna happen.  And I even envision oh maybe five, ten years from now from North Carolina Mutual becoming a public company, traded on the stock exchange where we will evolve and just grow exponentially over the next ten years.  And I, I look to be a big part of that, of that growth.  So in addition to Endow's client base becoming larger and larger businesses, we are now for our insurance brokerage and employee benefit sales.  We are targeting larger and larger businesses.  And the second phase of our growth and development is through our relationship with North Carolina Mutual.  And we have put together some strategic alliances. I partnered North Carolina Mutual with Minnesota Life [Minnesota Life Insurance Company] to help North Carolina Mutual better, have the capacity to do business with larger and larger organizations.  We have a very interesting program that we're in the final stages of pulling together between New York Life Insurance Company and North Carolina Mutual where we have developed a product that will sell term life insurance through black affinity groups.  Our sororities, our fraternities--
Speaker 2: Churches perhaps.
Speaker 1: --churches, the alumni associations of our black schools.  We have another project with United Healthcare [UnitedHealth Group] where we have developed a program, an employee benefit program that we'll be offering to the black--historically black colleges [HBCUs] that'll have North Carolina Mutual life insurance and dental insurance, United Healthcare health insurance and with United Healthcare and the National Medical Association and Meharry--Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee], we've developed a program that has a feature that deals specifically with those diseases and the management of those diseases and the prevent- the preventative piece for those diseases that specifically affect people of color.  So you know I see Endow doing more of these types of projects where what I'm able to do Larry [Larry Crowe] is to pull all of the relationships that I have developed over the years in the insurance industry and build specific programs where I can partner North Carolina Mutual with other interested parties in the insurance industry to develop programs that will ultimately help black people so and, and other minority groups.  So I'm very excited about that.
Story_ID: 449234
Speaker 1: We recently--one of the challenges that Native Americans have is that none of the traditional insurance company or very few of the traditional insurance companies wanna do business with Native Americans.  They look at them as being, you know, on these reservations full of drugs, full of disease, dying early and I'm not diminishing the medical problems that occur on these reservations, but we have kind of developed a way where we will insure tribal members and our pilot program is in the final stages where we have agreed without asking any health questions to insure every member of a tribe in California.  It's gonna be our first project.
Speaker 2: Now a number of tribal councils around the country have a lot of money as a result of gambling (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They do.
Speaker 2: --on the reservations and other--
Speaker 1: Yes, they do.
Speaker 2: --land--
Speaker 1: They do yeah.  Yeah, so they have the, have the economic ability to provide the insurance for the members.  You know and each member gets a--there's a special word that they use for it, but they benefit from the revenue, from the gambling.  And the other business, many of the tribes have gone into other business, business interests and, and this insurance industry has allowed me to meet you know all these people and the National Minority Business Development Council [sic. National Minority Supplier Development Council] who I never would have met.  You know one of my, one of the groups that I'm really that I love talking about is Foxwood [Foxwoods Resort Casino, Mashantucket, Connecticut] up in the Connecticut because these are black Indians [Native Americans] (laughter) you know and they are African you know I mean they're dark, dark skinned.
Speaker 2: Yeah are these Indians--that's the group that built the big museum up there.
Speaker 1: Yes, museum, golf course and they have the largest freestanding casino in the world.  You know and I've gotten an opportunity to meet with them and to get to know them and they're very sophisticated from an insurance standpoint.  So we are looking at maybe doing some things together putting them and North Carolina Mutual [North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company, Durham, North Carolina] together and maybe some other folks you know to, to expand everyone's access to products and you know an opportunity to make money in the insurance industry.  Because I mean it's a multi-trillion dollar industry that African Americans and other people of color have been totally shut out of.  When you think about it when you look at the size of these organizations and how very, very few black people are, are involved in you know.  Just the opportunity to maybe expand that and provide opportunities for, you know, black kids who maybe who are unborn you know to be able to develop and grow and prosper from the insurance industry is what I see Endow [Endow, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] playing a big role in during the rest of my, my life.
Story_ID: 449235
Speaker 1: In terms of that I know at some point you'll probably retire.  But what are your plans for succession in terms of your company leadership?
Speaker 2: I have various succession plans.  And I don't plan to retire.  Why would I ever want to re- why or why at this point would I want to retire?  You know when I, when I sit down I think about it Larry [Larry Crowe], I've got--I'm probably from every standpoint income, ability to make money, relationships, knowledge, at the peak of my career.  So why would I wanna stop when I've got all of those things you know right there?  So I have a little different philosophy about retirement.  I have gradually reduced the number of days a year I work.  I will ultimately probably get down to around one hundred days a year that I will work and probably in the next five years I'll get down to a hundred days.  I'll probably take altogether seven, eight weeks a year off.  So that will just continue to increase until I get down to the one hundred days.  And I have some very good people in my organization.  There's a young man who's only been with me a year, but his name is Unis Davis [Unis P. Davis].  He has an economics degree from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  He's been in the insurance business all of his life.  He's about forty years old.  And Unis is just bright and young and has all the potential ahead of him and Unis could--I see him as, he's definitely part of my management team.  There are three other people, Art Davis [ph.], Gordon Davidson [ph.], Nicole Davidson [ph.], who become an integral part of everything that I do and where we're growing the organization.  I expect us to grow exponentially in the next five years so I have people who can carry on Endow [Endow, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] so I'm not worried about Endow.  I also have, have you know two daughters [Tiffanie McLeary and DeAnna McLeary].  One daughter worked with me, went back into education.  You know she getting her Ph.D. this year or in '07 [2007].  I have another daughter who has an M.B.A. who is doing the afterschool program now.  Who, who knows, one day she may gravitate back.  And I've got a son [Thomas McLeary] who'll be getting his M.B.A. in a couple of years.  He has even told me that you know he's looking at opportunities.  But one of the opportunities he's looking at is the taking over his daddy's business.  So I have a lot of possible succession.  I have an agreement, I have a written plan, I have a funded plan so in case you know I get hit by a bus or a lightning strikes or if something happens to me you know there's a plan in place for Endow to go forward.
Story_ID: 449236
Speaker 1: But that's what I see.  I see growing it.  I see us attracting young talent, continuing to grow the management team as we grow.  What I've seen you know selling insurance to businesses, large minority businesses all over the country, one of the mistakes that minority businesses make is not to grow their management team.  To bring in very talented people, you have to spend the money on very talented people in order for your business to long term you know grow to significant levels and often times you know entrepreneurs tend to think that they have to do everything, that's not me.  There are only a couple of things I do very well.  I think I've identified those things.  I try to only do those things.  So I will have support for all of the other portions of the business that I don't think I do well.  I manage relationships and I sell, that's all I do.  Now you ask me to sit down at the desk and do some stuff, I'm a mess it up.  So I can't do that you know and I know I can't do that.  So I have other people to do all of the other things, the putting the programs together you know.  I get it started, I step away and then I'll deliver it.  And everything in between I have other people that do 'cause that's not my skillset or my interest.  So maybe that's a long answer but that's kind of how I see (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a good answer.  That's a good answer that speaks to I guess your philosophy in doing business and we can't do it all by ourselves right.
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  And I'm always looking for talent.  Again another thing Jim Lowry [HistoryMaker James Lowry] taught me.  I mean talent is, is critical.  You know when I look at the people that came through Jim Lowry's organization [James H. Lowry and Associates, Chicago, Illinois] and they've been a customer of mine for you know thirty years, wow.  I mean it's who's who in black America, who came through when you look at you know Bob Holland [Robert Holland Jr.] who ran Ben and Jerry's [Ben and Jerry's Homemade Inc., South Burlington, Vermont].  When you look at Peter Bino [ph.], when you look at Robin Brooks [Robin C. Brooks] who's now running--who is Frank Brooks' wife, who is running you know Brook Sausage [sic. Brooks Food Group, Inc.], not Brook Sausage but you know their meat processing and manufacturing company.  Oh, I could go--the Guthries [Michael J. Guthrie and Carlton L. Guthrie], the Guthries who had the big automotive organization [Detroit Chassis LLC] in Detroit [Michigan].  I mean it's just been a who's who.  And so you never worry about losing talent.  But you bring talent in and they leave you better than you were when they, when they came so if they move on and do their own thing, that's great, you still have relationships with them, just, just a terrific thing that you know we have to learn to do.  Grow, develop and, and utilize talent.
Story_ID: 449237
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today, you know, as we sit here?
Speaker 2: That we'll be bypassed by globalization.  My greatest fear is what's happening to our youth.  I'm fearful that we have a lost generation out there, you know.  I look at when I was growing up.  In the black community, education was important for the sake of education.  You know I knew that--I didn't know why but I knew I was gonna go to college.  You know it was just the way it was.  And I knew that I had to do well in school and it wasn't any why.  I knew I had to do well in school because that's what my parents [Edna Tubbs Johns and Thomas J. McLeary, Jr.] expected.  It was expected of me to do well.  And boys, we've lost that.  Education has somehow gotten lost in our community.  I look at the kids that you now I come in contact with, with my wife [Elizabeth Sawyer McLeary] who's you know taught school off and on for a number of years and but we've had some great kids that we've worked with and helped and then for every kid like that there's twenty that's just lost and that there's no one you know who can help them.  So that's my greatest fear.  My greatest fear is how do we as a people get our kids back into the educational mainstream?  And I don't know--I don't have the solution for this but you know there's some great educational minds out there. Hopefully they'll come up with something.  That's, that's a fear.  On the business side again, my fear is that we've gotta grow minority businesses of size.  We can't grow a business, make a lot of money and say that's it, I'm happy, I'm content, we've gotta grow businesses so that we employ more people so that we provide more leadership.  You know we have to take control of what's going on.  One of the fears I have and this may be crazy but you know I can kind of see the United States turning into South Africa.  You know where we'll have a minority, a majority of people of color but they'll be no change at all in the wealth in this nation.  So that's an enormous fear that I have and, you know, the only way we can change that is through education and through growing businesses of size and taking our being able to harness our economic leverage and you know force companies to do business with us.
Story_ID: 450545
Speaker 1: You know one of the things that--it's hard, you know, I mean we can go back to all of the, the ways that you know we were separated on the plantation and how you know we were pitted you know the house against the field, the light skinned against the dark to control and manipulate us you know.  Some of that still goes on.  But we have, we've gotta overcome all of that.  We have--it's critical.  It's critical that we move forward and become--you know we're always gonna have different ideas and there's gonna be different--they'll be different leaders, but we have to somehow come together on issues of economic empowerment.  If that's the only thing we can come together on that in itself is probably enough because we spend a lot of money.  Our, our, our primary source of power is not the political piece, it's the economic piece.  So if we can take that trillion dollars we spend and direct it so we spend it with 1) our own businesses and 2) businesses that do business with us then everything else will fall into place.  Because then our businesses will grow.  Then our kids will be able to get jobs you know.  They'll be alternatives to McDonald's and Burger King and you know they'll be and they'll be in the community.  You know because all of the studies show that you know African American firms 75 percent of the people they hire are African Americans.  We just don't have enough hiring, hiring power so that's why the businesses have to grow so you know that will, that will serve so many different aspects of our community.  We're getting better at you know those of us who have been fortunate enough to have you know to have done well are becoming much better at giving back.  You know we need to continue to do that.  We need to give more back and, and just take our economic power and use it to benefit our people and not just be satisfied in having a nice lifestyle and you know we'll let the government do it, we can't do that.
Story_ID: 450546
Speaker 1: And in regard I mean when we arrived this afternoon, there was a project actually going on in your home and you were talking about how--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --your wife [Elizabeth Sawyer McLeary] spearheads the adoption of some kids, informal adoption of young--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --people and all the time can you talk about that a little bit?
Speaker 2: Oh man boy we've done you know it's, it's, it's all kind of you know, it's, it's, it's informal.  For example, there were a couple of kids who, great students who were in a private school that my wife knew about who were gonna have to leave the school because their mother could not continue to pay the tuition.  So we just paid their tuition.  There were kids at CVS [Chicago Vocational High School; Chicago Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois], Chicago Vocational that you know that we mentored and taken out and taken them to places where you know they normally don't get an opportunity to go, helped them financially, sent them money when they're in school, things like that.  There was a basketball, a group of kids that qualified to participate in the national basketball tournament for the Youth Basketball Association that's connected to all of the Ys, YMCAs [Young Men's Christian Association] all over the country and but these were kids from you know 63rd Street I mean they didn't have any money to go to Florida for a week and I sent an email out to thirty of my friends and you know and in a week or so raised thirty thousand dollars to take these kids to you know and then you know okay now we got the money, the coach said well now what you know their parents can't go, those that have parents and so I said well you know what's a week so I took a week and we took these kids to Florida and didn't win a basketball game.  We lost, were 0-6 but man the kids had a great time and Jim Lowry [HistoryMaker James Lowry] helped.  Jim Lowry had a, had a condo in, in central Florida where these kids--where the tournament was gonna be so he gave me his condo and I could put half the kids in a condo so we only had to rent another, another condo so and then I found out the coach was just a young guy and I found out he didn't drive (laughter).  So I was the driver.  I had to drive the kids all over Florida but they had a great time.  We had a great time and--
Speaker 1: These (unclear) kids or?
Speaker 2: No, these are --
Speaker 1: No not (unclear), K Town kids but at the 63rd street Y [63rd Street YMCA, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: 63rd Street Y, yeah, yeah (unclear) yeah, (unclear) yeah he's the head of the program yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah right.
Speaker 2: Yep, we--good kids and actually two of the kids, two of the kids were on the Hales Franciscan [Hales Franciscan High School, Chicago, Illinois] championship basketball team so they went on and won a state championship a couple of the kids.  One of my kids is starting or playing a lot now, Sterling Williams at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  Sterling was on my Y team.  He didn't go on the trip with us but Sterling was on my Y team--
Story_ID: 450547
Speaker 1: So all this kind of interaction with these kids you know and I don't know if it had an impact on their lives but you know maybe it did.  Maybe somewhere along the way there was a positive influence and you know my son [Thomas McLeary] was always involved with these kids you know.  And you know what he's learned, I think is that you know it's the you know and you asked me earlier if I had a favorite statement but you know reminds me of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] you know it's the content of your character and when I think through all of this I tried to teach my son and my daughters [Tiffanie McLeary and DeAnna McLeary] that it's not what you have but it's the content of your character that defines you and, and so that's how I look at these kids you know.  I look at their character and if they have character then I'll do anything I can to help them.  You know, I don't care what other people say about 'em you know and that's what has been rewarding with my life.  My wife [Elizabeth Sawyer McLeary] and I have encouraged kids to go to college, were now in college and who have graduated from college, who had no idea about going to college.  You know these were smart kids that she came in contact with but their parents never went to school so going to college was not you know after high school was just the end of high school, it wasn't you know going on to college so oh god I don't know how many, how many application fees we've paid, you know gotten kids to fill 'em out, gotten kids to take the exam again, encourage them to get their test scores up, look for money for them, given them money you know.  That has been one of the real rewarding, rewarding things.  There was a girl who had the opportunity to go to a--she played basketball at Chicago Vocational [Chicago Vocational High School; Chicago Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois], an opportunity to go to to a basketball cultural exchange program and they started in Australia and they went, you know, they went to--they started Australia, went to New Zealand, went to Hawaii.  What a wonderful opportunity for a kid to, whose never been you know outside of the city to go but she had to raise so much of the money herself you know again, I made a few calls to some friends and we were quickly able to raise the money that she needed to go to, to her program.  So those are the kind of things that I like to do, Larry [Larry Crowe].  I like to find a kid that I can reach out and touch and sometimes it's totally anonymous and other times you know the kid knows.  But we have a young man who's just graduated last year at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  This was a kid whose mother never worked, who was homeless, whose younger brother got killed by a gang but who was the number one kid in his class and you know we encouraged him, we fed him.  We gave him food, clothes, money and you know last year he was so proud when he, when he invited us to his graduation at University of Chicago.  I mean those--that's what makes this whole thing worthwhile.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So it's stuff like that you know.  Yeah I give money to all of the you know lot of the organizations and but you know, you know sometimes I'm able to help someone, some kid because of who I am and who I know and that probably makes me feel as good as anything else I do you know with my time and my energy.
Story_ID: 450548
Speaker 1: Did your mentors coming along model that kind of behavior for you?  Or did you have a mentor?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't--not that I can think of.  I don't know where, I don't know where that, I don't know where that came from.  I think--I don't know.  I think part of it is, is the industry that I'm in you know because believe it or not it's an industry where you help people.  I remember when I, the first death claim I ever paid.  I got a call from, from the child.  They only had one child and I got a call from her when she graduated from college to thank me for having her family buy that insurance that she used to go to college.  I mean so I think part of it is the industry and helping people make sure that the people that they love are taken care of if anything happens to them.  So that part of what I do I think maybe contributes to, to the way I feel but I just feel, I feel very lucky.  I feel that a whole lot of things have kind of come together in my life and you know I don't think you can ever help too much because I've gotten so much that I don't even know if it's possible to give back you know in a direct proportion of what I received.  So whenever I have the opportunity I do.  And I'm not alone.  There are a lot of people out there that do the same thing I do.  You know and I just think you know the more people that do that the better off we all are.
Story_ID: 450549
Speaker 1: Now tell me this, when you look back on your career--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and all the things you've done to this point--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --is there any major thing that you would do differently now?
Speaker 2: Not--I've actually thought about that.  No.  Only one thing maybe, maybe I would have worked a little harder in the early days.  Some of those early days when I was single and didn't have a lot of responsibilities even though you know, even though I was you know leading the agency [Prudential Insurance Company of America; Prudential Financial, Inc.], I could have done a lot better if I had worked you know more at it.  So that would have maybe be the only thing is I may have worked a little harder in the first five years of my career, but nothing else.  I think that everything I did you know worked out and I don't wanna change it.  Yeah I don't think I would ever change anything really.
Story_ID: 450550
Speaker 1: And likewise when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I think my legacy is yet to be done.  I think I can make a dramatic impact on the financial services industry for people of color.  That's what I would like to see my legacy become.  I remember talking to one of the executives at Aon [Aon Risk Services, Inc. of Illinois; Aon Risk Services Central, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] years ago when you know when we were, when we were doing some business with them and you know we were participating on some of their programs as they're minority participant you know and we'll go over to their headquarters and you know only black people I saw were pushing mail carts.  There's still so much of that in the industry and I see being in a position, maybe being in a position if I can continue to grow and develop the organization that I'm building [Endow, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] to change that.  Because the opportunities are enormous and I would hate to leave this place not having more of an impact on getting more young African Americans and other people of color involved in the industry.
Story_ID: 450551
Speaker 1: Getting down to the last couple of questions, but I wanted you to have an opportunity to talk about your family you know.
Speaker 2: Oh my family, well I can, we can, you know this could--you got another couple of hours?  This could go, this could go on.  I'm so proud of my, I'm so proud of, of my family.  You know I have a wife [Elizabeth Sawyer McLeary] who has encouraged and, and just been a part of everything that I've ever done, who has just helped immensely with me, my development everything, couldn't have done it without her.  And we have just been very, very blessed to have three terrific children.  My oldest daughter--all of my kids went to Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].  I decided that you know I wanted my kids to have a black college [HBCU] experience you know, (laughter) particularly after my experience at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] so and--
Speaker 1: Why Florida A&M?
Speaker 2: Well, we, I decided that when my oldest daughter it was time for her to go to college that she and I were gonna do a college tour so she and I went around and we visited oh a whole bunch of schools.  And I hadn't thought much about Florida A&M.  It wasn't one of the major schools on my list but I had heard good things about, about it so oh I don't know I guess we were, we were at Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and just went on down to Florida to see it and just happened to show up.  Wasn't an official thing or anything we just went there and happen to show up while they were having an indoctrination program for incoming freshmen and we sat through that and I was just so impressed with the caring that I saw in that school.  With how they talked about nurturing the kids and taking care of the kids and how, how a student can you know call a professor at home and you know.  I couldn't even see a professor you know and they can call him at home, what is this you know.  And was just really impressed.  So my oldest daughter went.  She didn't care.  She knew she was going to school, wasn't real excited about it, but knew she was going to college.  Like I was saying before you know she knew it was expected of her and if that was okay, that was as good as any place else so, so she went and but education was her thing.  She was gonna become a teacher.  So she started it and then as I got to know the school more and got to know, got to become acquainted with the president, Fred Humphries [HistoryMaker Frederick Humphries] at the time, I, I really got to know about their business school and how impressive their business school was.  And my younger daughter was interested in business and they had this fabulous five year M.B.A. program.  So she applied and didn't get accepted.  So you know we figured out a way--I told her you know let's write a letter to the dean.  So we wrote a letter to the dean explaining why she wanted to go because she didn't--she had good test scores, but she did lousy as a student.  She went to Whitney Young [Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois] you know kind of fooled around high school, had a wonderful time.  Her grades were mediocre at best.  So she wasn't on their radar as someone to go into this program.  She wrote this great essay and they accepted her on probation.  And then she you know of course did very well and then it was just a natural for my son [Thomas McLeary].  You know that he was going there.  He just didn't have any choice.  He was going to Florida A&M.  So it's a great business school.  Those two children were just really interested in business so I just thought that was the best place for them.  So they agreed and they've had a great time, great experience.  They both had a great experience.  I had a great experience.  You know no question I've given more money to Florida A&M than I'd ever give to the University of Illinois (laughter) so it's my school now.  I look at it as being my school and I encourage every kid that I see that I come in contact with to at least consider Florida A&M as an option just because a terrific place, terrific people.  They nurture the kids, they care about the kids and I think that's different.
Story_ID: 450552
Speaker 1: The other thing, Larry [Larry Crowe], that I've looked at, I've looked at my friends who have kids who have gone to black colleges [HBCUs] and then I've looked at those who have gone to the Ivy League schools you know I have many who have gone to both and you could have a good experience both places.  But in order for you to have a great experience at an Ivy League school, as a black student or probably as any student, but particularly as a black student, you've got to be at the top of the heap.  You've got to be at the top of the class.  Or none of--all these opportunities are connected with Ivy League schools will come to you.  People looking for black kids to hire in Corporate America if that's your interest, they go to many of the black colleges to look for those kids.  They don't go to Ivy League schools to look for black kids you know.  Now they may go to Ivy League--they may go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to find a black kid, but they don't go there looking for that black kid.  So then I look at the networks that these kids have and I think a lot of that is part of our future.  I look at the network of Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] graduates that my daughter has access to all over America in all types of businesses and I know Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] has a network, and I know Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] has a network and these networks are interchangeable you know.  It's just fabulous to be part of that network.  Now I know a few people who worked the Harvard thing well but very few.  I think it's just so much easier for black kids to excel out of black colleges than out of traditional schools.  So you know I think that's our, that's our future and that's why I'm always you know involved in you know making sure that our black colleges you know continue to survive.  They must survive.  We cannot let them not survive, so.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now is there anything I have not touched upon that we need to address before I ask my last question?
Speaker 1: I don't think so.  I think we've, I think we've covered about everything.  I think we, yeah I think we've done a good job of covering, covering everything that I wanted to at least you know talk about.
Story_ID: 450553
Speaker 1: Let me ask--our last question is this and we can't cover everything but this is similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I would like to be remembered as someone who gave far more than they received.  Who had an impact on people's lives, a positive impact on people's lives.  You know that's much more important to me than to be remembered as you know a leader in the insurance and financial services industry or you know I think that's how I, that's how I would want to be remembered.
Story_ID: 450554
Speaker 1: The first one was taken at my uncle's summer place in Paradise Lake, Michigan in 1951 and in the picture I guess going from left to right is Leonard Livingston [Leonard J. Livingston] who is my godfather who owned Mammoth Insurance Company [Mammoth Life and Accident Insurance Company] and next to him Ruby McLeary [Ruby Alexander McLeary] is my grandmother on my father's side.  She was at least 101.  We weren't sure how old she was when she died.  And then next to her is my mother [Edna Tubbs Johns] and my father [Thomas J. McLeary, Jr.] and I'm the little boy in the picture and the little girl is my cousin, Sherry Isabel [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):
Speaker 1: This is, this is probably a one of the insurance, local insurance events that I spoke at where I was the keynote speaker, Chicago Association of Life Underwriters meeting in oh probably the '86 [1986], '85 [1985], '86 [1986].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):
Speaker 1: That's my wife Bunnie [Elizabeth Sawyer McLeary], uh-huh.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):
Speaker 1: That's the christening of my son at St. Thomas the Apostle Church [St. Thomas the Apostle Catholic Church, Chicago, Illinois] and he is one years old so that's probably 1985.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: When I was inducted as president of the Illinois Life Underwriters Association [National Association of Insurance and Financial Advisors Illinois] in 1991.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):
Speaker 1: My mother, this is my mother and wife and Tiffanie [Tiffanie McLeary], DeAnna [DeAnna McLeary] and Tommy [Thomas McLeary].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):
Speaker 1: Mother on the left, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):
Speaker 1: This is in--I had an aunt and uncle that had a summer home in Atlantic City [New Jersey] a few blocks from the boardwalk and this is the boardwalk in Atlantic City with me and my aunt and uncle in '56 [1956].
Speaker 2: (Unclear) I sang the 'Lucky' old song.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):
Speaker 2: I was eight years old.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):
Speaker 2: This is high school graduation picture, 1961 Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay this is high--graduation University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], June of '65 [1965]. (OFF CAMERA VOICE):
Speaker 2: That's my baby picture when I was oh that's December so, September, October, I was four months old.  And actually when I ran for, when I ran for trustee at the national association [National Minority Supplier Development Council] level, my campaign button was my baby picture.  Someone had that idea in the campaign.  Someone saw a picture, wasn't that picture it was another picture, yeah uncorruptible yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):
Speaker 2: The bottom one is I was two years old.
Speaker 1: In the inaugural class of the Business Leaders of Color.  That is that picture with the bio.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):
Speaker 1: Two thousand and three [2003].
