Story_ID: 648211
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2:  	Lorraine Carroll Miller, L-O-R-R-A-I-N-E, Carroll, C-A-R-R-O-L-L, M-I-L-L-E-R is my last name [HistoryMaker Lorraine Miller].
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	My date of birth is May 6th, 1948 in Fort Worth, Texas.
Speaker 1: And Ma'am what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2:  	Right now I am a commercial realtor with Keller Williams Preferred Properties.
Speaker 1: And just for the record, I think that we should say that you are the first African American to serve as clerk of the U.S. House of Representatives.
Speaker 2:  	I was the first African American nominated and elected to serve in the, as an officer of the U.S. House of Representatives since 1789.  There had not been an African American that served as an officer of the House and it was my fortune to be the first.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2:  	Today's date is July 27, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2:  	We're at the offices of Keller Williams Preferred Properties at 9701 Apollo Drive in Upper Marlboro, Maryland.
Story_ID: 648212
Speaker 1: Okay now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as sort of a warm up and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2:  	Chocolate cake.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, spring.
Speaker 1: A favorite color?
Speaker 2:  	Emerald.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2:  	The beach.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2:  	To God be the glory, great things he hath done ['To God Be the Glory, Great Things He Hath Done'].
Story_ID: 648213
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Johnnie Miller] side--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --separately; then we're gonna try to put 'em together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2:  	My mom's full name was Lena Marie Jones Miller [Lena Jones Miller].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And it's L-E-N-A?
Speaker 2:  	L-E-N-A, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	March 28th, 1922 and she was born in Winkler, Texas.  That's in Navarro County, near Corsicana, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you've given me three places I don't know, but are they close to Dallas [Texas] or Houston [Texas] or Galveston [Texas]?
Speaker 2:  	It's closer to, I guess the largest city would be Corsicana, but it's a, it's about seventy-five miles from Fort Worth [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  What can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what are the stories on that side?
Speaker 2:  	Can't trace 'em, her side of the family, back very far.  You know we were kind of an oral people so you get the stories kind of that passed down.  My mom's father they lived, at least my father, my grandfather, lived in Galveston because when he died he was ninety-two years old and he would always talk about, he called it the great Galvestian flood [Galveston Hurricane of 1900], which made them move from southern Texas to north central Texas, where, that's Navarro County, and Corsicana and then my mom moved to Fort Worth.  And my maternal grandmother, Hassie Cloud Jones was part Cherokee Indian [Native American], hence the, the last name was Cloud.  Don't know much about the family.  Everybody is deceased pretty much now, just one kind of distant cousin that's around, but everybody else is passed on, so there's not a whole lot of history that's been shared.
Speaker 1: Now how do you spell Hassie?
Speaker 2:  	H-A-S-S-I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So your grandfather talked about the great Galvestian flood.
Speaker 2:  	Galvestian flood, that's what he called it.
Speaker 1: I know, Galveston, we were there back in February and there were plaques up about this hurricane that hit and everything was flooded early in the century.  Is that you think?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, that was it.  He, he talked vividly about that for years 'til the day he died.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the stories he told about it?
Speaker 2:  	How he'd never seen, he had this thing, he says, "I saw more water than I could drink," and that was really for my granddad who was kind of an avid swimmer, I think that was a, a big deal for him 'cause he says, "Baby it was more water than I can drink," so that was, it must have been devastating.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It was, from what we understand, so that's when he moved, moved to--
Speaker 2:  	Moved inland, yes.
Speaker 1: So he wound up in Winkler?
Speaker 2:  	He wound up in that area.  He was a carpenter, and that's how he supported, there were, I think, eight of them, seven of them, yes.  And that's how he supported the family, being a farmer and a carpenter.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2:  	My maternal grandfather was James Jones.
Speaker 1: Okay, James Jones.  And he lived to be ninety-two.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: And when did he pass?
Speaker 2:  	It had to be 1983, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was born in the 19th century then?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Story_ID: 648214
Speaker 1: Did he talk about how he [Miller's maternal grandfather, James Jones] wound up in Galveston [Texas], I mean how he--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --how his family was in Galveston?
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: Had they been there since the emancipation?
Speaker 2:  	I haven't the foggiest idea, I really don't.  And we didn't, I have a first cousin that's trying to get our family history together, but she's, we just haven't had a chance to get it and everybody's passed away now that would really know the history.  And so she's searching, you know, archives and trying to figure out where people came from.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your grandmother [Hassie Cloud Jones], was she, did he meet her in Galveston or in, near Winkler [Texas]?
Speaker 2:  	I don't, I can only speculate.  I don't know.  I don't remember.  I know they been married a long time, long time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now what did your mother [Lena Jones Miller] say about growing up, did she grow up in Winkler, or was she just born there?
Speaker 2:  	She grew up in that area and basically in Corsicana [Texas].  She left home when she was about sixteen trying to finish high school.  At that time, I think that if you completed the tenth grade, you were considered a graduate of high school and, but she never completed it and she eventually got her GED [General Educational Development] from TCU, from Texas Christian University [Fort Worth, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	She was an adult, married.  I was a grown, almost grown person when she did that, but she wanted, my mom was very big on education and continuing education so she got her degree.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she--
Speaker 2:  	High school diploma I mean.
Speaker 1: Did the high school that she attend near Winkler not go any further than tenth, you know?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, it did.  As I remember and I can't remember the name of the school, but she would often talk about how they were bused.  She would come and live in Fort Worth [Texas], ride a bus from Corsicana to Fort Worth and would stay with families of folks that would let the kids live, and they went to school at I.M. Terrell [I.M. Terrell High School, Fort Worth, Texas].  I.M. Terrell was kind of a bad region.  The high school for African Americans.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	So Winkler, of course, is a small town. I mean it's very rural, and so they would come to, to Fort Worth to live with families during the week and then on Fridays they would take a bus back to Winkler or Corsicana or wherever they were staying.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you had to do something to get an education, you had to (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes, you had to work at it.
Speaker 1: Work at it, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes, you had to work at it.
Story_ID: 648215
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Lena Jones Miller] do for a living?  Did she--?
Speaker 2:  	She was a beautician, a hairdresser.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	That was, she had a cadre of friends, her girlfriends that I think she had gone to school with she'd known a long time and they were all hair dressers and they had a little beauty shop on, on the Southside of Forth Worth [Texas] after she actually moved to Fort Worth, and that's where she worked.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now, all right, any other stories on your mother's side of the family that you remember? That, that you might remember?
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: Now did she have a lot of brothers and sisters, or?
Speaker 2:  	There were eight of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And she, right now, there are only two sisters that are living.  Aunt Maggie [Maggie Jones Porter] is eighty-six and she lives in Fort Worth and Aunt Ola Mae [Ola Mae Jones Turner] is eighty-eight and she lives in Pittsburg, Texas, the true peach capital of the world, not Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2:  	Pittsburg, Texas.
Speaker 1: All right, Pittsburg, Texas.  All right I'll have to remember that next time.
Speaker 2:  	Hot links and peaches.
Speaker 1: Okay, the true peach capital.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 648216
Speaker 1: All right now let me go to your father's side and then we'll--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --we'll find out how they met.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2:  	Johnnie, J-O-H-N-N-I-E, Johnnie Calvin Miller [Johnnie Miller].
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	November 29, 1922 and he was born in Frankston, Texas.  Wait a minute, it's called Brushy Creek, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, Brushy Creek.  That's B-U (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) B-R-U-S-H-Y, I think, Creek, Texas.  It's a little enclave outside of Frankston.
Speaker 1: Near Frankston.  Now why did they call it Brushy Creek, do you know?
Speaker 2:  	'Cause it was a brush creek.  That was it.  I mean that, that's where, I went through there once when we were children and it's a, it was a little creek.  That's where they got their water from and little houses, grew up around that little creek.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So now how far back can you trace your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2:  	Probably to my grandfather, Cal Miller.  Don't know much about grandpop.  I don't even know where he was born.  On his funeral program there was no historical information at all.  And the same with my grandmother, just knew her maiden name was Payne, Annie Payne Miller.
Speaker 1: Is that P-A-Y-N-E?
Speaker 2:  	P-A-Y-N-E, yes.  But not a lot of information about her at all.
Speaker 1: Now is Brushy Creek like an African American town?
Speaker 2:  	It's a little enclave, yes, yes.  I don't know, I haven't been down there in maybe, almost fifteen, twenty years, but it's, and it's basically my family.  I have a nation of cousins down there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I ask because now in Texas has a lot of, of little places that were founded by black people--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm, yes it do.
Speaker 1: --and so Brushy Creek, would you say, do you have a sense that it's been around at least since the end of slavery, as an African American enclave?
Speaker 2:  	I don't know that.  I, I could tell you my dad was born in 1922 so there were, it was basically a farming community and I know my granddad was a farmer, but I, I really haven't been down there enough to give a real sense of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, but it is an African American enclave?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: There are no rich white people (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) No. Well, now there--now there are 'cause we still have property down there, and my, my first cousin has been talking, we were--one of my trips home, we're supposed to go down and look at it because we, there's a lot of timber down there and it's overgrown and people have moved on and so we're trying to figure out what we're gonna do with it because we been paying the taxes on the property and, and nobody's really paid much attention to it, except, you know, getting the taxes done.  But--
Speaker 1: So is Brushy Creek, is that a hundred miles from Fort Worth [Texas] too, or--?
Speaker 2:  	Little more than that, yes, it might be a hundred and twenty miles or so.  It's near Tyler.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. That's--closer to Tyler, Texas, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes.
Story_ID: 648217
Speaker 1: So your [paternal] grandfather [Cal Miller] was a farmer, is that?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did he, was it subsistence farming or was he growing any crops for sale, or?
Speaker 2:  	He--it was a little bit of both, subsistence farming and then sold some crops to buy school clothes and replenish what he was planting for subsistence; so we had, my maternal grandfather [James Jones] had more of a huge farm.  There was, in East Texas, in Pittsburg [Texas], again the peach capital of the world, out at Rocky Mound [Texas] he had about a hundred and ten acre farm out there that still exists.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	It's in the family.
Story_ID: 648218
Speaker 1: Did your dad [Johnnie Miller] talk about growing up, what it was like to grow up out there?
Speaker 2:  	What I gathered from both my mother [Lena Jones Miller] and father, they lived in the country, they wanted to get out.  And they wanted to come to the city for schooling, for a better life, you know, outhouses and not having air conditioning, and you know the things that the rurals had in those days, just made a different, it was a hard life, it really was, and they wanted a better life and education was the way out and both of them thought coming to the city was the way to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So now did your father have a chance to finish high school?
Speaker 2:  	No, he didn't.  He came to Fort Worth [Texas] and immediately went to barber school and got his license and hung out his shingle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now your father had, had he served in the--
Speaker 2:  	In the [U.S.] military--
Speaker 1: --military before he--
Speaker 2:  	--in the [U.S.] Army, yes.
Speaker 1: So he was in the Army first and he served in the Korean War [sic. World War II, WWII].
Speaker 2: I think so.  You look at those pictures and it seems it was the islands of somewhere.
Speaker 1: Yeah, lots of palm trees.
Speaker 2:  	Lots of palm trees.
Speaker 1: So if, maybe if he served during the Korean War era, but he, certainly that picture indicates that he was stationed on one of the Pacific Islands (unclear).
Speaker 2:  	Yes, the Pacific Islands.
Speaker 1: The U.S. was everywhere, Marshall Islands, Guam, Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan] even, all those places.
Speaker 2:  	Right.  But I think he enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: So he served in the Pacific, we know that, during the Korean time, during the time of the Korean War.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: You said he enjoyed it.
Speaker 2:  	I think it was very memorable for him.  He, he talked about it a good bit.  As a matter of fact, he saved his Army uniform and it's hanging in a closet in our home in Fort Worth, so I think he, it was a memorable time for him, maybe that's a better way to describe it.
Speaker 1: Okay, how he would have come along, if it was the Korean War, during the time that the Army started to integrate--
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: --so things may have been a little bit better for him than it had been for the soldiers before.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, it may have been.  And he didn't, you know, it's one of the fallacies, we didn't talk a lot about this and we should have.  Now you think about it, but we didn't.  There wasn't a whole lot of, the little information I would pick up is when his brothers would come around or they'd run into another Army buddy that somebody saw at the store or something, you know they ran into 'em.  They would come by the house and there would be four or five of them in the living room and they'd just be laughing, "Aw man, you remember when so and so did this."  "Yeah, yeah, yeah," you know, so you hear a little bit and pick up a little information but you never to--never had an opportunity just to sit down and say, "Okay dad what happened here? What did you do here," and that kind of thing, so, that's unfortunate.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it's a product of the time too.  I guess people talk more to their children about what they do nowadays.
Speaker 2:  	I think so--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --because they, I think people understand it.  Then that was fifty years ago and we just, we weren't there yet.
Story_ID: 648219
Speaker 1: You think he [Miller's father, Johnnie Miller] liked it--and certainly (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I did, I did, because the, the times that he did talk about it, you got a s- I got a sense that he, it was, it was a growing up time for him because obviously, he was a young man and an experience, like one of his brothers was coming back from World War II [WWII], I believe, got off the ship in New York [New York], and called grandmother [Annie Payne Miller].  They had finally moved to Fort Worth [Texas] and called his mother and said, "Mom, I'm in New York, I'm back on U.S. soil and I'll probably never come to New York again and so I'm gonna take a day and just sightsee and look around and I'll be on home the next day."  He died in New York.  He lived fifty-six years, became a New Yorker, never left New York.  He, he said he got there and said it was such a different way of life, went to Harlem [New York, New York] and he said, "I saw black people walking down the street and driving cars," and he said, "We don't do that in Brushy Creek [Texas]," and so he, he became a barber too, hooked up with some guys, went to barber school and opened a barbershop in Brooklyn, New York, and stayed there fifty-six years.
Speaker 1: It's interesting, you know, you can do that on a G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] and go to barber college.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: So a man with not a lot of education could, you know, become a barber.
Speaker 2:  	And he did.  And the G.I. Bill was, was the catalyst for that, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's what my dad did--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --G.I. Bill.  You get a license, hang it up and you're off.
Speaker 2:  	Hey, and then you're running, off and running, yes.
Story_ID: 648220
Speaker 1: So, what was the name of your dad's barbershop?
Speaker 2:  	Well, my dad [Johnnie Miller] worked downtown, it was Fort Worth [Texas].  He, he worked at a--the only African American barbers that only cut white hair, Carl Wiley's barbershop at 512 Main Street, Fort Worth.
Speaker 1: Now this is something that is disappearing these days.
Speaker 2:  	It's gone.
Speaker 1: It's been in a certain era, you know.  I think they still have black barbers cutting hair in [U.S.] Congress, right, right, isn't that true (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yeah, it's kind of, yeah they do.
Speaker 1: Cause that's a tradition of--
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: --you know--
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: --the black person--
Speaker 2:  	And the shoeshine, yes.
Speaker 1: --doing the shoeshine--
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: --and the barbering--
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: --and all these kind of--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --things.
Speaker 2:  	Yup.
Speaker 1: This being a southern city [Washington, D.C.], you know, but it was a time when the most successful black barbers in the 19th century, only cut white people's hair (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) That's right, that's right.  My father cut Jim Wright's hair for years.  I didn't even know it.  Yep, I asked him why they only cut white folk's hair and he says, "Well--." That's the way, in those days, that's what people did, and if you were gonna be a first class barber, that's what you did.  And there was about six of those guys that worked in--Mr. Wiley owned the shop and they were on Main Street, the only African American business on Main Street, downtown Fort Worth, and they had an exclusive clientele.  You looked back on it, it didn't really register with me now, but I look back on it now at this tender age and I say huh, he cut the hair of a lot of prominent white businessmen in Fort Worth.
Speaker 1: Right, they probably paid big tips.
Speaker 2:  	Sure, big tips.  During Christmastime, my sister [Maurietta Miller] and always, and I always got silver dollars and those big huge peppermint sticks that they would give him for us as little Christmas tokens.
Story_ID: 648221
Speaker 1: He cut Jim Wright's hair, and this is the congressman that you ended up working for--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --in Washington [D.C.], yeah.
Speaker 2:  	But I, I tell you a little quick story.  After I was on Mr. Wright's staff, I would pick him up from the airport sometimes and he'd say, "Lorraine [HistoryMaker Lorraine Miller], I want you to drop me off by the barbershop. I need to get a haircut."  I said, "Okay," and we're riding along.  I knew where he was going because this is my dad [Johnnie Miller], so we drove, I pull up in front of the barbershop [in Fort Worth, Texas], my dad was standing outside waiting on him, and everybody called my dad Junior, and Mr. Wright was getting out of the car and he said, "Junior, how you doing?" He says, "I want you to come over and meet a member of my staff."  And I said, "Hi, dad."  And Mr. Wright looked at--he says, he says, "Junior," I said, "That's my father."  He said, "Well goddamn, I didn't know that.  Why didn't somebody tell me?"  I said, "You never asked."  But he never knew until I pulled up in my car in front of the barbershop that the guy that had been cutting his hair for more than twenty years was my father.  So, it got him.  That was a good one on him.
Speaker 1: That's a remarkable story.
Story_ID: 648222
Speaker 1: When your father [Johnnie Miller] comes back from the, now did he--oh now, did he and your mother [Lena Jones Miller] get together before he went to the Korean War?
Speaker 2:  	After.
Speaker 1: After, okay.
Speaker 2:  	This is after he came back and he was already either in barber school or just about, because he became a master barber so.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you're born in '48 [1948]?
Speaker 2:  	Nineteen forty-eight [1948].
Speaker 1: Okay, so when did he come back?
Speaker 2:  	I haven't the, I haven't the foggiest idea.
Speaker 1: It's making me think that he was in World War II [WWII] rather than Korea because, well Korea really doesn't start you know--
Speaker 2:  	We talked about the Korean War, you know what, maybe he had been stationed in Korean. I don't, I really, really don't know, so I'm just merely speculating, but I was born in 1948 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He could have in the interim there somewhere, but seems like he was in, if you were born in '48 [1948], he's got to get back first--
Speaker 2:  	Yep.
Speaker 1: --and so, looks like he's in the tail end of World War II, that's what it seems like, you know.  I think, I know people that got back from World War II in '46 [1946].
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: It was basically over in '45 [1945].  You know they didn't get back until '46 [1946].  I'm thinking that, okay, at any rate, so is there a story about how he and your mother met, how they?
Speaker 2:  	Not that I'm aware of.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	No, no; there's no story that I'm aware of.
Story_ID: 648223
Speaker 1: Now did he [Miller's father, Johnnie Miller] go to barber school in Fort Worth [Texas]?
Speaker 2:  	In Fort Worth, yes.
Speaker 1: And, now she got a beauty license too, right?
Speaker 2:  	In Fort Worth, yes.
Speaker 1: In Fort Worth, well, it's--
Speaker 2:  	There had to be some mingling somewhere, some connect; and I would imagine it was centered around barber and beauty schools 'cause sometimes back in the day there was a combination of 'em especially in the black community.  It's, so I have no idea how they met.  I just know they didn't date. It wasn't like two or three years before they married after they met, so.  I think my mom [Lena Jones Miller] was looking for stability in her home life and she wanted kids, and they got married.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So they meet at Fort Worth though, we know that.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Now was your mother's clientele African American?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.  Her entire clientele was African American.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, and the shop that she owned was a collaboration of her and other (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) She worked in Mr. Duncan [ph.], this is the name I remember.  Mr. Duncan had the place, owned the shop, and his two daughters and my mom were the hairdressers there.
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walked, talked, their talents, habits, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2:  	My mother, clearly my mother.  We have a physical resemblance.  My mom was very disciplined.  She was a kind of a no nonsense kind of person.  I am somewhat of that, and that is non- nonsensical as she was.  My dad was more of a gregarious, liked to meet people, sort of a popular kind of guy.  That was my sister [Maurietta Miller].  My sister was very outgoing and reaching out to people and people gravitated to her as they did to my dad, so I'm more of my mom, a little reserved sometimes.
Speaker 1: Interesting your father's nickname was Junior but he wasn't really a junior was he?
Speaker 2:  	No, he wasn't.  That was the name that people--'cause he was kind of junior (laughter).  He was, that was kind of his personality, fun loving, joked a lot, but that was, everybody called him that and I had asked one of his brothers once, I said, "Why did y'all call him Junior?" "'Cause," he says, "oh, 'cause he's Junior."
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now where did, where in Fort Worth, is there a name for the neighborhood that you grew up in?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, Como.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2:  	Como is in the, C-O-M-O, like Lake Como, like Lake Como in Italy.  We have a lake out there and it was, it's an African American enclave.  It's in the West Side of, on the West Side of Fort Worth.  I went to elementary school and junior senior high school there.  I'm a 1966 graduate of Como Junior-Senior High School [Como Montessori, Fort Worth, Texas].
Story_ID: 648224
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory, earliest?
Speaker 2:  	An earliest childhood memory.  Probably, my life has always been centered with my sister [Maurietta Miller].  We're a year and three months apart, so I think probably my sister and I playing with Mickey.  Mickey was our first dog, in the backyard.  When I think I really have a conscious of, of us.  And I remember Mr. Littlejohn, Calvin Littlejohn was an African American photographer in Fort Worth [Texas] and I clearly remember, and I have the photograph hanging on my wall here, of my sister and I.  I had to be maybe two, maybe two and a half, and my sister was at least one, and we were having our first photograph and I can remember my mother [Lena Jones Miller] and father [Johnnie Miller] in the background saying, "Girls, be still, be still," because I'm pulling on Pooh's [Maurietta Miller] hair and she saying, "No, no," you know, and it was, it was probably my first memory.  Us playing with Mickey and taking that photograph. It just took so long to get them, to get us still for a hot second to click.
Story_ID: 648225
Speaker 1: Now did you grow up in the same house in--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, well, describe the house for us, what kind of house was it, and?
Speaker 2:  	My father [Johnnie Miller] had the house built.  My mother [Lena Jones Miller] used to joke that, I asked her, "Why did we come out to the West Side of Fort Worth [Texas]?"  I was born on the Southside.  When they had me we lived on Oleander Street on the Southside of Fort Worth, which was more developed and in the heart of the black community, and I always ask my mom, "What, why did we move out to Como [Fort Worth, Texas]?"  And she says, "Because your father grew up in Brushy Creek [Texas] where it was rural and no streets."  When we first moved out there, my father had the house built.  The street was rocks and dirt and the city hadn't extended services really out there and we had electricity, but, and running water, but that was basically it.  So he had this house built in this area where we were surrounded by trees until other people came into the area to build homes.  So it was a one, two, a three bedroom house I think, living dining room, big backyard on a rocky street.
Speaker 1: So he was more comfortable in a rural looking kind of looking setting.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, that's what he knew, and that's what he was looking for to build a new home for his family.  And so we moved to Como and went all the way back to the Southside to church because I, I've been, we're lifelong members of Mount Zion Baptist Church at 1101 Evans Avenue [Fort Worth, Texas], in the heart of the black community and so we drove probably fifteen miles, well maybe not fifteen, ten twelve miles to church from Como on the West Side.
Speaker 1: Now I always this question, is there, is there a major street, what's the major street going through Como?
Speaker 2:  	Horne Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: H-O-R-N-E.  Horne Street is the main thoroughfare that, that runs through the town.
Story_ID: 648226
Speaker 1: And we always ask this question like this: what are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2:  	Well, when you go to, when we would, when we were young kids and going to my [maternal] grandfather's [James Jones] farm in East Texas in Pittsburg, the smell of cow manure and pine needles, I loved it.  It was, I hadn't smelled that before because I hadn't been exposed to cows, but I instantly liked that.  And then in Fort Worth [Texas], my mom [Lena Jones Miller] had peach trees in the backyard and the smell of fresh peaches when you pull 'em off the tree and that fuzz is still on 'em, ah, that was, that was good.  And to be outside when my mom was cooking dinner, and we were playing out in the backyard and you could smell the aroma of her preparing dinner and we'd be out in the backyard and my sister said, "I think it's time to go eat," and you could, that was a good warm feeling.  I enjoyed that.  It was one of the good feelings of my childhood.  That was good.
Speaker 1: So it was just you and your sister?
Speaker 2:  	Just my sister and I.
Speaker 1: What's your sister's name?
Speaker 2:  	Maurietta, Maurietta Miller.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's M-A-R--
Speaker 2:  	Well she liked to spell it M-A-U-R-I-E-T-T-A.
Speaker 1: M-A-U-R-I--
Speaker 2:  	I-E-T-T-A, even though it is spelled traditionally the M-A-R-I-E-T-T-A, but she wanted the U in it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she added the U herself?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, she did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a reason that she gave for that, or just--?
Speaker 2:  	It was Munchie.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's her nickname?
Speaker 2:  	Munchie. I call her Munchie.
Speaker 1: Moochie?
Speaker 2:  	Munchie.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: M-U-N-C-H-I-E, I think, I don't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: (Pronunciation) Munchie, Moochie.
Story_ID: 648227
Speaker 1: So it's just the two of you and your parents in the household--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --then basically--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --growing up? Okay.  And, so now what did you like to do as a young kid?
Speaker 2:  	Read.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was a voracious reader.  My mom [Lena Jones Miller], when my sister [Maurietta Miller] and I were growing up, we took music lessons, private piano lessons that my mother saved for.  She didn't have the money and she saved for twelve years.  My sister and I went to private music lessons with, at Mrs. Bark [ph.] on Bonnell Street [sic. Bonnell Avenue], at two, no our music lessons were three o'clock on Monday afternoon.  Hated it. Hated it.  I couldn't, I was not musically inclined to play the piano.  My sister, of course, was a musician and she had a natural gift for it.  My dad [Johnnie Miller] was a singer, sung in the church choir all his life and I picked up that from him 'cause my, on his side of the family they were singers.  And so we sang in the choir.  I could sing it but I could not play it, and to this day I can read it, I know the notes, but I could not execute it.  My sister, we used to have a running fight because we'd go to music lessons and she could run through her music real quick and get through her lessons well and I couldn't, but my sister didn't want to do her theory and I would do her theory, but she couldn't help me do anything because I could do my theory, I just couldn't play it well, so.
Speaker 1: For how many years did you have lessons?
Speaker 2:  	Twelve, twelve years.  My mom was very, that's one thing that she wanted us to have was those music lessons.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now did you have a musical preference for music? I mean, was there a certain kind of music that you liked better than other music when you were growing up?
Speaker 2:  	Well, I like, I like a lot of different music.  I love jazz, I love the classics.  Some of the movie scores at the theme of a movie or so, I like that, but basically, well in our choir here in Washington [D.C.], we sing anthems and I adored that and I developed an appreciation for, at church in Fort Worth [Mount Zion Baptist Church, Fort Worth, Texas], and then when I, I attended Jarvis Christian College in Hawkins, Texas for two years, right after high, after school, graduated from high school [Como Junior-Senior High School; Como Montessori, Fort Worth, Texas] and there we sang lots of anthems and Jarvis Christian is part of the Disciples of Christ, and we did anthems every Sunday, and it was a big, a big deal, so I enjoyed that, the complexity of it.
Speaker 1: What are the characteristics of an anthem?  I guess I'm not appreciating the, the--
Speaker 2:  	Well, an anthem, well usually, the ones that we know and sing most frequently, are written by whites, even though there are a lot that African Americans have done in the last fifty, sixty years that are the spirituals.  The spirituals were just phenomenal and they were done by African American musicians, and the complexity, the intricacies of making the notes and do them--executing them in a way that the author intended and not as one of our choir directors say, "You can't slide over it. You got to walk through it," so it's, it's really an art form that's dying but I think it's on a revival, the spirituals in particular so when I attended Jarvis we did lots of spirituals, lots of anthems, the kyrie, you know; everybody knows Handel's 'Messiah' [George Frideric Handel].  Those the kind of things that we did, and you had to learn them by memory.
Story_ID: 648228
Speaker 1: When you were growing up, did they celebrate Juneteenth?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was mixed.  In some quarters, folks thought it was an embarrassment because we had learned of the Emancipation Proclamation so late, and then others thought well, even though we've learned about it late, let's celebrate.  I mean people now accept it, if there's no stigma attached to it.  When I was growing up, there was a little, little stigma to it--
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: --but we celebrate it.
Speaker 1: I know in those days, it wasn't embraced by the whole country the way it is now.
Speaker 2:  	No, no.
Speaker 1: I think the reason why it is embraced now is because it's the only surviving celebration of emancipation.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes it is, yeah.  And it's, it's a big, in Texas it's a big deal.  We, we celebrated.  Juneteenth is the day you take off work and it's a celebration.  Everybody-- we have a Juneteenth parade down the main thoroughfare in Fort Worth [Texas] that people organized.  It's a big deal.
Speaker 1: I know there's a story in here someplace about why black people don't celebrate emancipation in other parts of the country, or stopped.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: That story I don't know, I mean I can only speculate what it might have been.  I think there was, there had to be celebration at the beginning of emancipation.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, had to be, had to be.
Speaker 1: So, there's a book for somebody to write.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, it is a book for somebody to write and that's a story that needs to be told, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I thought I'd ask about that 'cause I know it's been celebrated in Texas for a while, so.
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah we, we do, we do Juneteenth, and we do it in a big way.
Story_ID: 648229
Speaker 1: I read that your, your--were your parents involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?
Speaker 2:  	My mom [Lena Jones Miller] and dad [Johnnie Miller] were members of the NAACP in Fort Worth [Fort Worth Tarrant County Branch NAACP, Fort Worth, Texas].  Dr. Flemming [sic. George D. Flemmings], as a matter of fact our church [Mount Zion Baptist Church, Fort Worth, Texas] is across the street from the NAACP office that we've had there for years, and Dr. Flemming who was the president of the NAACP in Fort Worth [Texas] for years would come to our church during our pastor's anniversary and we would always have our anniversary dinner in the basement of the church and he was always the guest speaker. And Dr. Flemming would talk about the issues, the civil rights issues that were going on in Fort Worth and things that he wanted Fort Worth to be, African American community to be aware of and support or speak out on things.  So it was always an interesting time.  He was, in my mind's eye, he was kind of a boring speaker, but he had lots of information that he was giving out so it was, I'm a child, I'm not an adult, I'm, I'm, and I was like I wanna get out of here, I'd rather go home.  But I look back on it as a very historic time, very historic.  Fort Worth was going through a lot of integration, the schools were being integrated, some schools were being closed, people were being transferred and there was a lot of consternation.
Speaker 1: Now what period is this, when you were growing up or?
Speaker 2:  	This is when I was growing up.  And this, I guess I had to be, let's see, maybe 19---I graduated in '66 [1966], so this was--
Speaker 1: This was in the late '60s [1960s] or--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, or early, yeah or late '50s [1950s] when integration was really getting started and moving in Fort Worth and the drums were beating and there was lots of concerns about where we were gonna go with it.
Speaker 1: Now, there seemed to be a lot of push back too from, I was reading some of the material in the outline that that the attorney general [John Ben Shepperd] in Texas tried to ban the NAACP.
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean they officially tried to outlaw it.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah, absolutely.  The, for the opponents of the NAACP, what, there were two things that were going on.  African Americans at that point in Texas, there were not a lot of outlets.  There weren't newspapers that were writing the stories and giving the opinions, the opinion makers were white opinion makers were not talking about this because they wanted it to go away.  They wanted society to stay where they were predominate and we were to follow suit.  Whatever they decided to do was what we should do.  And as the NAACP, one of the principles of the NAACP was that you have to look out and make your own decisions.  It, it empowered African Americans to think for themselves and they became the source of the opinion and that was a problem for those folks and that's why they had to try to ban it, to stop, to stop that kind of opinion generating that would affect what black people thought and how they reacted to what the whites were doing, so one of the tools was voting and people in the NAACP strongly, and then in the country also there was this dilemma about voting and having access to the ballot box that was going on nationwide and you could look on the TV, if they covered it, and you would see people, black folks marching and carrying on so that kind of discontent in the white community, I mean they saw that this was going on and they couldn't stop it; and so the thing for them to do was try to ban the NAACP, and in Texas it was, it was pretty bad.
Story_ID: 648230
Speaker 1: So did black people have the legal right to vote in, in Fort Worth [Texas] when you were growing up?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.  We just, it was such a stigma.  There wa- people were afraid to vote.  They had the opportunity, but the politicians in particular were, absolutely, they didn't want you to vote and they did everything they could to discourage them from voting.  Intimidation was rampant absolutely rampant.
Speaker 1: Do you have an example?  Can you give us an account of intimidation?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I can remember going with my mom to vote and our polling place before they started putting them in our respective neighborhoods, you had kind of a central place you'd go and when we would go with her to vote, they said, "Where you going girl," and it would be like a deputy sheriff and he's standing there with his cowboy hat on and big belly and he's looking at mom saying, "Where you going girl," and I, I couldn't have been more than six or seven, but I was enraged that he's calling my mother a girl.  That's, you know, Lena Marie Miller [Lena Jones Miller], that's not a girl.  But we had to endure those kinds of things and she didn't say anything and wouldn't even give him the courtesy of looking him in the eye.  She just looked away, we went right on in and voted and they would, you know, they would try to put up little, little challenges as well, "Who are you voting for today?"  And my mom would say, "I know who I'm voting for if I could just have a ballot."  It got a little better when they would put the precincts out in our areas then they would bring white precinct judges because we would, it may be in my community but the person holding the election was white and they would really try to intimidate you, so over time, that was changed, but it was challenged for African Americans to go to the polling place and feel comfortable in voting, you know, and the turnout was low, and that was again another reason for the white community to say, well see, they don't even want to participate.  They got an opportunity, they won't take advantage of it and, but nobody ever said that people were intimidated in going to the polling place.
Speaker 1: Now when did the first African American office holders emerge in, in Fort Worth, you know?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, let's see.  It probably was the city council [Fort Worth City Council] and it was probably Leonard Briscoe [Leonard E. Briscoe, Sr.].  Mr. Briscoe was a real estate guy, a developer.  I think it was Leonard Briscoe.
Speaker 1: Okay. That would have been in the, in the '60s [1960s] or '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2:  	Sixties [1960s].
Speaker 1: Sixties [1960s], okay.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.  Late '60s [1960s].
Story_ID: 648231
Speaker 1: So Leonard Briscoe [Leonard E. Briscoe, Sr.] was elected in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2:  	Yes, I think the late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, in the late '60s [1960s], huh?
Speaker 2:  	I think so.  I don't--um-hm, it was the late '60s [1960s] because, oh, and Mrs. Barbour, and she was in the early '70s [1970s]. Mrs. Barbour was my high school counselor and she became a city councilperson, so Walter Barbour, Walter B. Barbour, B-A-R-B-O-U-R.
Speaker 1: Walter, okay.
Speaker 2:  	Walter B. Barbour, Mrs. Walter B. Barbour.  I think she's still alive.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So this was a protracted struggle--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --going back a while--
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, and actually struggled to destroy the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], intimidate black voters--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --so the community, I guess the upshot, gets galvanizing, starts electing its own representatives by the late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2:  	Right, and then we, I think we, the council [Fort Worth City Council] went to single member districts also.  That was a big fight too.  I remember that.  Yeah, and it was, I think the whites finally figured out they were gonna have to relent a little bit and in doing so, the single member districts came in and said, okay, we'll let you guys have your own spot and your own districts and, so you can govern your own people.  And you go over there and we'll stay over here.  We'll still run things, and--but we'll give you a modicum of say so into the affairs of the, of the community, so.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.
Speaker 2:  	I think that was the compromise they--that was reached. I think people pretty much agreed to it just to move forward.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what would you estimate the black population of Fort Worth [Texas] is in those days you were growing up?  I mean in terms of the percentage of the population.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, the percentage of the population.  We probably maybe, maybe not even 10 percent.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's even a tougher struggle, not even 10 percent of the population.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, because, it may be, maybe 10 percent.
Speaker 1: I know where I was coming from was going through the same thing.  Whitney Young told us we were 40 percent of Dayton [Ohio] and we didn't know it.
Speaker 2:  	Really?
Speaker 1: We were.
Speaker 2:  	Wow.
Speaker 1: We didn't know it.  So it changed a lot of things.  People actually, you know, but--
Speaker 2:  	I think we were, Fort Worth has grown now.  I mean I go home and I literally don't know anybody, but, yeah, we may be, we have an influx of Hispanics, Mexican Americans that are, that's our gentrification.  Here we've--we've got gentrification going on in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], but we really have it going on in Texas.  It's been going on for a while, it's just been segmented; and now the economy is such that we're all integrated, you know, really integrated now.
Story_ID: 648232
Speaker 1: Tell us about school now.  You liked to read.  And you started school at what school--what, what?
Speaker 2:  	Como Elementary.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Como Elementary School [Fort Worth, Texas].
Speaker 2:  	Como Elementary.  The school was in a giant block.  It was a relatively new school when I started school, just been built and the junior and senior high were combined, but I had Mrs. Van Dam [ph.] was my first grade teacher.  So I enjoyed school.
Speaker 1: Mrs. Van Dam, huh?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now was this a black woman or a white woman?
Speaker 2:  	Black woman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have white teachers in your school?
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: This was a completely segregated school.
Speaker 2:  	This was a completely segregated school, completely.
Speaker 1: And this school, and, you started in '55 [1955], right, in first grade?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So this was a year after Brown versus the Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954],
Speaker 2:  	Brown versus the Board, yes.
Speaker 1: And the separate but equal and all that stuff.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Was the State of Texas trying to show, I mean the city trying to show that they were building an equal school?
Speaker 2:  	I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	I really don't think so.  But no, we, my childhood growing up in school was pleasant.  My sister [Maurietta Miller] and I and my mom [Lena Jones Miller] was a PTA [Parent Teacher Association] mom, and brought the cookies and the sandwiches and we had May Day and different May Day flag pole and participated in plays at school, and I had a enjoyable childhood in school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Both of us.
Speaker 1: So what kind of reading material did you like?  What kind of books did you read?
Speaker 2:  	Anything I could get my hands on, mysteries.  I liked history and I just read anything that I could, that was available.  And my mom always took us to the library and we would spend hours in the library and just look at books, I learned to love books, and it was a great escape.  I remember reading 'Jane Eyre' [Charlotte Bronte] as a young child and just, it was, that's how I learned a little bit about the world and to see that it was something beyond Como and Fort Worth [Texas].  So at high school and junior high, my sister and I both played in the band.  I would, again, I'm not a musician. I played the flute because my sister played the flute and I thought it'd be easy for her to teach me how to play the flute, but she played the flute, the piccolo, the trumpet, oboe, the clarinet, drums, the bass guitar.  My sister was a true musician.
Speaker 1: So is this in junior high school?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, in junior high school.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your junior high school?
Speaker 2:  	Como Junior-Senior High School [Como Montessori, Fort Worth, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So they were combined so (unclear).
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, there was the elementary school, that was right on Horne Street and then you make the left on whatever that is, at the right, and then you go up to Littlepage [Street] and it was the high school, different property; Como Junior-Senior High and then the elementary school.
Story_ID: 648233
Speaker 1: Okay so you said your sister [Maurietta Miller] was really good at all--in the band (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.  She played everything, played solos and when we'd have our football games, she'd play the trumpet solo (makes sound), that would be my Pooch playing the solo in the, but she was really good and she would teach everybody else who was like her older sister, not a musician and couldn't get it.  She would go and tutor the other guys on their horns.  She even played the alto saxophone for a while too, so, she didn't do well on the cello.  We, we, she, my mom [Lena Jones Miller] rented a cello for her and she'd be practicing at home and everybody, my father [Johnnie Miller], my mother and I and the dog would say, okay, that's enough on the cello 'cause she didn't, she didn't get the cello well.  And it was, yeah, but everything else she was very good at.
Story_ID: 648234
Speaker 1: I read that you really credit the church with giving you like, speaking, a public speaking ability.
Speaker 2:  	That was the first--I don't enjoy public speaking, but my first opportunity to do public speaking was at church. It really was.  You know they had all these little, you know, programs that we'd have at the church [Mount Zion Baptist Church, Fort Worth, Texas] and they would need to, they'd need to have speakers, and that was the opportunity.  Thus, my sister [Maurietta Miller] and I were very active in church and so we were dubbed a lot of times to do a little speech.  It's the pastor's anniversary, give a little talk about the pastor as a pastor to young people.  So my mom [Lena Jones Miller] would help us write what we needed to write and go over it with us so.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now how were your grades in school?  Were you--?
Speaker 2:  	Pretty good.  I did okay.  Not a scholar, but I, I did okay.  I did real well.
Speaker 1: Did, were you in the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] or--?
Speaker 2:  	Initially and we did a little Girl Scouts.  I'm not a groupie groupie, so, yeah, we did Girl Scouts and we definitely sold Girl Scout cookies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you involved in, so you weren't involved in a lot of group activities or clubs and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2:  	Not really, no, not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, not really.
Speaker 1: All right.  So what, what would people say about you in terms of what your activities, say in middle school going into high school [Como Junior-Senior High School; Como Montessori, Fort Worth, Texas]?
Speaker 2:  	She was a nice girl.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Disciplined.  My mom was a strict disciplinarian, again.  And so my sister and I knew the parameters that we could, how far we could go, and you did not act up outside, you couldn't go anywhere and, and act unbecoming.  My mother would just not tolerate that.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a chance to travel much when you were a kid?
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: Did you ever leave Texas to go (unclear) visit?
Speaker 2:  	No, we went to East Texas a lot to my [maternal] grandfather's [James Jones] farm.  And that was our basic, where we went during the, until I was in high school.  We'd go to Pittsburg [Texas] or we'd go down to Brushy Creek [Texas] on occasion especially if someone died.  And that was basically it.  We flew to Dallas [Texas].  We had a lot of, my mom had a lot of relatives in, that lived in Dallas and we'd do that a lot.  But outside of Texas, rarely.  I think, I don't remember ever leaving Texas until I was in college--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at Jarvis [Jarvis Christian College, Hawkins, Texas].
Story_ID: 648235
Speaker 1: The world kind of came to Texas when do- when John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated in '63 [1963] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what happened in school that day?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, I was sitting in the cafeteria having lunch and Mr. Williams who was our principal then, Oscar Williams [ph.], came over the microphone and said that President Kennedy had been shot.  Said that earlier that day he was in Fort Worth [Texas] and had gone to the, the Texas Hotel [sic. Hotel Texas].  That's what it was called then.  It's now, I guess, a Hilton [Hilton Fort Worth].  But he had had a breakfast meeting there with a lot of, of political luminaries and business people and then had gone to Dallas [Texas] for that parade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was just in Fort Worth.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, earlier that morning.  And that was all on the news, Channel 5, WBAP [WBAP-TV; KXAS-TV, Dallas-Fort Worth, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, so, I guess the whole country was turning its eyes toward Dallas and then--
Speaker 2:  	It was on our local radio, it was, Dallas was viewed with a black mark.  They said Dallas killed President Kennedy and you don't want to come to Dallas because you'll be shot.  And it was a black mark on the area.  I think we're just now coming out of it with the, the old TV series of 'Dallas' that kind of brushed away that whole stigma after the Kennedy assassination.  But it was pretty, you were made to feel guilty that Kennedy had, was assassinated in Dallas.  It was like the whole area, we're ashamed of you, why did you guys do this, how did you allow this to happen, you know?  It was as if everybody that was in Dallas, Fort Worth had a responsibility for Kennedy's assassination so it was a very sad time, a very--I remember it being heavy, dark; very uncomfortable, very uncomfortable time.
Story_ID: 648236
Speaker 1: Now I didn't ask you about the March on Washington.  Now that was the August before JFK [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you know anyone from Fort Worth [Texas] that went to the march?
Speaker 2:  	There were, I had a couple of friends.  I wanted to go and my mother [Lena Jones Miller] wouldn't let me go.  But, I, I really, really wanted to come and she said, "Oh no, you're not going anywhere."  We had a march downtown Fort Worth [Texas], the day of, and I begged my mom to let me go down there and she said, "Okay, you can go, but you and your sister [Maurietta Miller] can go, but you come right back home.  I don't want you loitering and don't do anything.  If somebody says something to you, you know, just don't, don't engage them."  And then I had during the march, I had a guy that spat on me, and I remembered my mom's stern words, "Don't engage them.  If somebody does anything to you, you know, turn the other cheek, don't get involved because I don't want you hurt."  And I came home, I was madder than a wet hen and I told her I said, "You should have let me do something.  I could have slapped him, I could have hit him."  And she says, "No, and then you would have probably encountered him in a way that he could have hurt you."  You don't know what, he could have had a knife or gun or whatever, so the better part of valor was to remain calm.  She said, "That's why I didn't want you to go down there in the first place," so, anyway.
Speaker 1: I'm glad I asked that question.  So did you get involved in NAACP Youth [NAACP Youth Council]?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, we were.  My father [Johnnie Miller], when my sister and I were way little, we had youth membership, and we went to the meetings. We had a very active NAACP [Fort Worth Tarrant County Branch NAACP, Fort Worth, Texas] at that time, very active.  They were doing a lot of things and there were a lot of these critical meetings.  I can just remember as a child the (unclear), we got to go to the NAACP meeting, only we just not gone tell anybody.  And it was a critical time.  You could feel it, you could sense it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, I guess the NAACP Youth was doing a lot of things in those days, I mean, really active.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.  We're trying to, we're trying to revive it now.  And it's coming back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's coming back.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they had a different character from the regular NAACP.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was more activist oriented.
Story_ID: 648237
Speaker 1: In high school [Como Junior-Senior High School; Como Montessori, Fort Worth, Texas], were there any particular mentors or teachers that really inspired you?
Speaker 2:  	There were a number of 'em.  Mrs. Grant [ph.] who taught American history, who really brought the Civil War, she had a slant on the Civil War, which was really, first time I rally realized that African Americans were involved in the Civil War because she taught it.  You looked at the book, read the, I can remember, it was a red covered textbook of American history and you thumbed through there and there were all white people, all.  And Mrs. Grant made the Civil War real.  And brought our struggle to the forefront.  First time I'd ever heard that.  She was a very, a caring teacher who wanted you to understand beyond what was on that printed paged.  And then Mrs. Scott, Dorothy Scott who just passed away recently in Fort Worth [Texas], was my typing teacher.  I told my counselor, Mrs. Barbour who later became a city councilwoman [on the Fort Worth City Council], I went into Mrs. Barbour's office one day.  You had counseling sessions and the school, our junior high school was big on college prep and getting you ready and Mrs. Barbour was saying to me, "Lorraine [HistoryMaker Lorraine Miller], so you're going to take typing one and two."  And I said, "Yes I am," and she said, "I strongly recommend that you take typing three and four and maybe five and six."  And I said, "Mrs. Barbour, when I go to college, I'm going to have someone type my papers for me and do all those mundane things, I'm just not gonna do that myself."  So, the difference in schools now, the relationship between the council and the parents is Barbour picked up the phone, called 737-0983, that was my home number, and said, when my mother answered the phone, she said, "Lena [Lena Jones Miller], this is Walter B.," and she says, "Well Lorraine was here and she was telling me that she wasn't going to take--I had recommended that she take typing three and four and possibly five and six, but she didn't want to because she wasn't going to have to do that when she got to college, the typing and stuff."  And so Mrs. Barbour, my mother said, "Thank you Walter for calling, I'll take care of it when she get home."  So I walk in, I had to walk home from school, so I walk in the door from school and my mother always had a little snack for my sister [Maurietta Miller] and I, so before we could sit down, she was standing at the refrigerator and turned to me and she says, "You will take typing three and four, five and six, seven and eight if it's offered, and don't you ever tell your counselor what you are not going to do.  You're gone take that course and you gone make A's and you are going to do your own papers when you go to college.  Do you understand me?"  I said, "Yes ma'am," and sat down and had my snack.  So, that's the difference in the way parents, you won't find that now, where a counselor can call, know your parents and really, and what we do we do now?  We use the computer.  And what does the computer do?  It has the typing--
Speaker 1: Yeah, keyboard.
Speaker 2:  	Keyboard.
Speaker 1: And the better you can type, the better you can--
Speaker 2:  	Absolutely.  But it, I didn't have that vision but Mrs. Barbour did and she relayed that to my mom so I got the vision.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I didn't realize at first, so Miss Barbour's name is Walter.
Speaker 2:  	Walter, um-hm, first name.
Speaker 1: And so it was just a--
Speaker 2:  	Yep.  It always amazed me that she would have a first name like that, Walter, but it is W-A-L-T-E-R, Walter B. Barbour.
Speaker 1: So people called her Walter B.?
Speaker 2:  	Walter B.  But Mrs. Barbour was very sophisticated and so you only called her Walter B. if you knew her, otherwise she was Mrs. Barbour.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now you are not in, so in high school you weren't in a lot of groups, but you, did you run for class office or anything?
Speaker 2:  	Oh no, I did not do that.  I played in the band and that was about it.
Speaker 1: So you're kind of a quiet person, nice person (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes, I'm quiet and demure (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. All right (laughter).  At that level I guess.
Story_ID: 648238
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so did you have an idea what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2:  	I thought I wanted to be a doctor.  I knew I wanted to be a doctor.  I wanted to be an anesthesiologist.  I've known that since I was in the ninth grade and one of the, the things I would do particularly on the weekend, I--my mom [Lena Jones Miller] would give me a quarter and I could ride the bus.  It was twelve cents each way, downtown to Thompson's Bookstore [Fort Worth, Texas].  And I would buy old copies of the American Medical Association journal [Journal of the American Medical Association] and I'd read them and look at the pictures and, and try to anticipate what one college was going to look like in the coursework and what I would be studying as a doctor, so, since the ninth grade I knew I wanted to be a doctor, and pursued that.  I took biology and chemistry in high school [Como Junior-Senior High School; Como Montessori, Fort Worth, Texas], all of that.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any, did you know any black doctors in town that you were--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --impressed with?
Speaker 2:  	Well, my doctor that birthed me, I guess, is that the way--?
Speaker 1: Delivered you.
Speaker 2:  	Dr. Guinn was, James E. Guinn was the first black doctor in our community in Fort Worth [Texas] that brought my sister [Maurietta Miller] and I both in the world.  Dr. Gwen was interesting cagey little guy.  There was always this (demonstrates), um, called us Lil' Miller, "Oh, Lil' Miller, now what's going on with you today?"  So it, he wasn't the inspiration, I guess I, I also wanted to be a missionary 'cause I wanted to help people and I thought one of the better ways to do that was to actually go out into some foreign country in Africa and help people and the best way to do that was to have a skill of being a doctor, and I thought that was my life's calling.
Speaker 1: Now were you inspired by something on television or movie or something you read about?
Speaker 2:  	Not really.  Kind of with the church it was, my mom was very involved in the missionary society at our church [Mount Zion Baptist Church, Fort Worth, Texas], and that was a part of it 'cause she was always a helping hand, wanting to give, but I think it was just a combination of my voracious reading when I was growing up and I figured going to medical school would be the ideal thing to combine that with a missionary.  Albert Schweitzer was a person that I had read a lot about and what he was doing in Africa and so that was probably one inspirational person that I got to read a lot about.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a couple of specials about him when we were growing up, we're about the same age.  I'm thinking about televisions his activities in Congo [sic. French Equatorial Africa] and different places in Africa, right, Dr. Albert Schweitzer.
Speaker 2:  	And you romanticize all of that and say, "Ah, that's the thing to do," and what I want to do with my life.  I knew I wanted to give and go that path, but, that's what I initially thought.  You got to start out with something, you got to start out with a dream.
Story_ID: 648239
Speaker 1: So did your--now, so you were--thinking back to this typing discussion, you were focused on going to college--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2:  	Well my mom [Lena Jones Miller], there was never, she knew it was going to be tight, but she always told my sister [Maurietta Miller] and I, "You are going to college and you're going to graduate and you're gonna be successful," and that was, it was never a question that we were going.  We knew we were going to have, it was not going to be easy, but we knew we were going.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how did you make your decision in terms of what college to attend?
Speaker 2:  	My mother's sister was, taught school in Gilmer, Texas, and she was friend of the, I guess you would call him now, the chief operating officer, the COO of Jarvis; and that's how I spent my first two years right out of high school [Como Junior-Senior High School; Como Montessori, Fort Worth, Texas], at Jarvis Christian College [Hawkins, Texas].
Story_ID: 648240
Speaker 1: Okay, so, was there anything special about graduating from Como High School [Como Junior-Senior High School; Como Montessori, Fort Worth, Texas]?
Speaker 2:  	Just getting out, just graduating.  There were one hundred and three in the class; and it was June 6th, 1966, or June 2nd, one of them.
Speaker 1: There's something about that.  Now being a Christian now doesn't that kind of, isn't that kind of scary, June 6, 1966?
Speaker 2:  	No.  Six, six, sixty-six, and it may have been the second, I'm blanking, but like it was so close.  No, I, I was looking forward to going to college and that was an exciting time, and got my first job as the maid at the Green Oaks Inn [Green Oaks Inn and Conference Center] and I couldn't even use my first name, Lorraine [HistoryMaker Lorraine Miller], because there was already someone else there with the first name Lorraine so I had to go by Carroll [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now Green Oaks Inn, now this is a--
Speaker 2:  	A hotel.
Speaker 1: Hotel, okay.
Speaker 2:  	Kind of a hotel, resort sort of, on the west side of Fort Worth [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so--
Speaker 2:  	There were three of us, Marilyn String [ph.] who graduated with me and Faynell Brown [ph.]. We all got our first jobs at the Green Oaks Inn.  That was our, that first check, oh my, it was like wow.
Speaker 1: Did you ever help at the beauty shop or anything like that when you were growing up or (unclear)?
Speaker 2:  	No, because my, by that time my mom [Lena Jones Miller] had stopped, by the time my sister [Maurietta Miller] and I came along she stopped, she was a homemaker for a good while until my father [Johnnie Miller] got really sick, had a blood clot on his brain for, so she was really a homemaker.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So it was Jarvis College [Jarvis Christian College, Hawkins, Texas], 1966, and it's just outside of Dallas [Texas]?
Speaker 2:  	Eighty miles from Dallas.
Speaker 1: Okay, so eighty miles so that's not just--
Speaker 2:  	On highway 80 [U.S. Route 80], East Texas.  That was probably the first time I've been away from home for an extended length of time, which was fun.  The first couple of weeks were a little tight 'cause not being close to my family but then I got over it and I enjoyed it.  Jarvis was a good adventure for me.  I became a member of the choir and we toured.  That was the first time I had an opportunity to really get outside of Texas, and we toured around the country doing performances which the churches-- because they were the Disciples of Christ, we would sing at Disciples of Christ churches and they would give a stipend to the school, so it was a fundraising effort for the school, for Jarvis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Jarvis is African American--
Speaker 2:  	Yes, it's an African American school.
Speaker 1: Okay, historically black college [HBCU]?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, historically black college.
Speaker 1: And run, established by the Disciples of Christ?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.  It's an adjunct of TCU [Texas Christian University, Fort Worth, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, so T- TCU is a, an adjunct of TCU.
Speaker 2:  	Well, it's an, let's say it was sponsored by, the upshot of it, Jarvis had oil on its property, TCU needed revenue, so they said ah, well we'll adopt you, TC- Jarvis and make you a part of kind of our system without, as a Disciples of Christ and we'll take your oil revenues.
Speaker 1: So is that actually what happened?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: They took a portion of it or all of it.
Speaker 2:  	Well, pretty much, I think they left Jarvis with the crumbs because Jarvis was struggling, but we had oil derricks all over the campus and they were constantly churning, bring up that black gold, the Texas tea.
Speaker 1: I'm telling you, so, that's interesting.  There's a story there I guess for somebody to write, too (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) A real story, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 648241
Speaker 1: You're majoring in pre-med, right?
Speaker 2:  	I started out as a major in pre-med until I ran into Dr. Cliff [ph.] at Jarvis [Jarvis Christian College, Hawkins, Texas] who suggested that I needed to take, one semester I had four science classes.  I had botany, I had genetics and I had a chemistry class and a biology class, and each of those classes had labs and I knew then that the kind of sacrifice that I was going to have to make to become a doctor with those labs, getting up at two o'clock in the morning, walking up to the science building, counting fruit flies, was not something [HistoryMaker] Lorraine Miller was going to do.  And so I quickly discerned that maybe how I had romanticized becoming a doctor and anesthesiologist because I watched, it wasn't the--the doctors, before--it was 'Dr. Kildare.'  I loved 'Dr. Kildare,' and I loved the woman that was the supporting actress.  She was the anesthesiologist.  Dr. Kildare would go in and make the dramatic surgery, but she was the one that, you know, did the anesthesiologist work and I thought ah, that's a move more manageable for me.  But it was, was very rigorous work and you have to be super disciplined and you have to have a strong, strong science background, and this is no play. You have to know what you're doing.  And I quickly figured out that's not what I need to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So how were your grades during this time?
Speaker 2:  	They were okay, but not anything to write home to say, "Mom, I'm doing well."  So I decided to change my major to political science and my mom [Lena Jones Miller] gave me a stern warning.  She said, "I am working to make sure you have four years of college.  You got to do whatever you gotta do within those four years, okay?  And you change majors all you want but you got four years to finish," so I had to get cracking.
Speaker 1: So you didn't have any scholarships or anything.
Speaker 2:  	Oh no.
Speaker 1: So you mother was basically paying--
Speaker 2:  	No.  We struggled. We did student aid; and my mom and dad [Johnnie Miller] worked to pay.
Story_ID: 648242
Speaker 1: Now, you left Jarvis [Jarvis Christian College, Hawkins, Texas], right?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But now Jarvis offered political science too, right?
Speaker 2:  	Jarvis offered political science.  I decided I wanted to move home and moved home and go to North Texas State University [University of North Texas, Denton, Texas].  And that's where I ultimately graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	I made the fatal mistake, most young people, I think in those days, you want to move quickly, and I make the mistake of buying a car.  And when you buy a car that means you got to get a job to support the car, and then I never, I always stayed at home.  My mom [Lena Jones Miller] would, even in my early twenties, would, unless you had a specific destination, are you moving somewhere for a job, you know you stayed at home.  She didn't believe in okay I'm a go off somewhere and get an apartment.  That was just not mother's philosophy.  You stay at home.  And so I bought a car, which was the worst mistake, and I had the work and then I dropped out a semester and then, but I went back.  She says, "Oh no, you're going to school," and I finished.  I couldn't participate in the graduation ceremony because I was working.  And so I stood outside the Buddies Supermarket [Buddies Supermarkets, Inc.] in Denton, Texas, on a Saturday when we had graduation, and heard my name over the PA system in the distance.  The Buddies grocery store was near North Texas State.  It was at the stadium so I could hear the ceremony but my manager wouldn't let me off because I was one of the fastest checkers and on Saturday was when we had large volumes of customers, and so he said, "I just can't let you off."  And I said, "But I'm graduating," and he says, "I'll give you a couple of days off," and I said, "No, no, no, but I'm graduating this Saturday."  He says, "I can't do it.  You're one of my better people."  And I went, "Yeah," and I needed the money.
Speaker 1: I can't, that just seems so cold.
Speaker 2: So he allowed me to stand, I stood outside on my lunch break and I heard my name announced over the PA system, so.
Speaker 1: So this is 1970?
Speaker 2:  	This was 1972.
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972], okay.
Story_ID: 648243
Speaker 1: So you were in college when, I guess you were at--now where were you when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated?  Were you at Jarvis [Jarvis Christian College, Hawkins, Texas], or?
Speaker 2:  	At Jarvis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, at the student hall.  I was sitting in the student union building when they announced that he had been assassinated.  It was depression.  It was really like someone you knew had died and it was, so I remember we were in the student union building.  There was only one TV down there and everybody was, had come into the building and all gathered around the TV just trying to get a glimpse of the news to see what had happened.  It was, that was a dark time, very sad time.
Speaker 1: Did the school do anything special to commemorate Dr. King?  Have an assembly or something (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I don't remember. Well they had a little ceremony and at chapel on Sunday, there was an acknowledgement and prayers, but it was so, such a dark time.  I think people were afraid of their own personal safety.  They'd say if they could shoot and kill somebody like Dr. King, what could they do to us?  They could probably ride up on campus.  I think there was rumors that vigilantes 'cause Jarvis is on highway 80 [U.S. Route 80].  It's off the interstate, okay, and the highway was not fifty feet from the campus.  And we often would have young white boys that would come by in pickup trucks.  There was not a security (unclear), I mean you just turn into the campus and people thought, okay, we're gonna go back to the old '60s [1960s] where Ku Klux Klansmen [KKK] can just ride up on the campus and start shooting, and the dean of women, Miss Propina [ph.], just told us to stay close to the dorms, you know, not walk out on the campus until there was a kind of a calming, to figure out what was going on.  It was a perilous time because people didn't know what to expect.  And we didn't do any rioting because we were at school, but it was, people were concerned.  Everybody was trying to call their family to make sure everybody was okay back home.  And for them to know that we were okay at school, and my mom [Lena Jones Miller] told me, she said, "Just stay there, don't go anywhere, don't go off campus, just stay there until we know better what's going on."
Story_ID: 648244
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968] kind of put an exclamation point on kind of a new political consciousness--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that's going on.  And now, I don't know how it affected your political science department at North Texas State [North Texas State University; University of North Texas, Denton, Texas].  Now North Texas State is an integrated. School--
Speaker 2:  	It was white (laughter).
Speaker 1: It was white.
Speaker 2:  	No question it was white.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we don't even have to waste the term integration, huh?  It was white.
Speaker 2:  	It was white, yeah.
Speaker 1: North Texas State.  Were there any black professors there?
Speaker 2:  	I don't remember any.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	I don't remember any.  And it was a pretty sizeable university even back then.  But I don't remember anyone.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you still involved in the NAACP Youth [NAACP Youth Council]?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, we were, my dad [Johnnie Miller] kept our membership up for us.  But at that point, I wasn't very active in going to meetings because I was in college and, so.
Speaker 1: Now was your sister [Maurietta Miller] in college by this time?
Speaker 2:  	My sister was a year behind me and so when she graduated she came to Jarvis [Jarvis Christian College, Hawkins, Texas] also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was she still there when you left?
Speaker 2:  	She didn't graduate from Jarvis.  She graduated from TCU [Texas Christian University, Fort Worth, Texas], Froggy High on the Trinity is what we call it.  She was a TCU graduate.  She attended Jarvis a couple of years I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And TCU was, you said they were using Jarvis' land to fund TCU, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah, so.
Story_ID: 648245
Speaker 1: So then are there any, any special teachers there, out of--
Speaker 2:  	Out of Jarvis [Jarvis Christian College, Hawkins, Texas]?
Speaker 1: --North Texas State [North Texas State University; University of North Texas, Denton, Texas]--
Speaker 2: Oh, North Texas State.
Speaker 1: --Jarvis or North Texas State, I guess, when you're looking at college.
Speaker 2:  	Well, Dr. Cliff [ph.] was, Jarvis had a lot of, it reminded me of high school [Como Junior-Senior High School; Como Montessori, Fort Worth, Texas] in that the professors were caring, they, even though you were in college and you were on your own and had your own responsibility, they took an extra interest in you that kind of reminded me of high school that they were trying to make sure that you were successful and you got the material and it wasn't, you weren't imposing if you asked the professor, "Look, you got an extra ten minutes after class that you can talk to me?  I didn't quite understand this lecture.  Can you work with me a few minutes?"  And that was common, they did that and when I went to North Texas, I asked--one of my first classes there, I was the only African American in class and this woman says, "Some of you," this was an English class, "some of you are taking this class and you will make an F.  Probably the majority of you will make an F," and I thought, okay, now what does this mean?  And it was kind of an eye opener, a very different approach to education then.  There was non-caring, she could have given a flying fajita if any of us really, when class was over, she was the first one out the door, which was so different from Jarvis because, you know Mr. Cliff, Dr. Cliff would stand there and say, "Anybody have any questions?" This is a chemistry class, and you know, somebody would raise their hand and he'd answer the question and then he'd say, "I want you to come up and put that formula on the board," and you work it through and, "Let's work it through together," which was a, they didn't care.  He put the formula on the board at North Texas and it was up to you to figure it out.  So, that was very different.  There was no helping hand there, but I made it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and graduated.
Story_ID: 648246
Speaker 1: In Fort Worth [Texas], now this is the age when, when the Black Panther Party is formed.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: There's, I mean, you know just a whole different dialogue, interest in African history and African politics, so this is going on probably around here somewhere--
Speaker 2:  	Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: --just wondering what your influences were cause that was like a big surge of that.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, we had a group at Fort Worth called the United Front of which I attended a couple of meetings.  My mom was not particularly interested in my being involved in any of that.  Again, she was very disciplined, disciplinarian and reserved.  She says, "You know you just, you don't know who all these people are, what their agendas are, so you just have to, you have to be careful."  I can still hear her saying that to this day.  So I attended some of the meetings and participated in some of the marches because I was just so socially conscious at that stage of my life and I wanted to be involved somehow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you lean towards any, any black philosophy or political philosophy?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, the racial consciousness of our being black and proud which I can remember James Brown's song 'Say It Loud, I'm Black and I'm Proud.'  Yeah, that was my, my hairstyle changed.  I started wearing an Afro.  I remember my sister came home from Jarvis [Jarvis Christian College, Hawkins, Texas] the first year she was there and she had this big huge Afro and my mother said, "Oh, my god, what have they done to you down there?"  And I said, "Mom I've been wanting that all along too."  She says, "You're not going to have that hairstyle and you go in there and I'm gonna press your hair," 'cause my mother was a beautician, and Pooh [Miller's sister, Maurietta Miller] said, "No, no, no," and I, I had an Afro and I remember Mrs. Barbour [Walter B. Barbour] again calling my mother and says, "Lena [Lena Jones Miller], there is a job here at Texas Electric [Texas Electric Service Company]," that was the electric company, "that I think would be great for Lorraine [HistoryMaker Lorraine Miller] as a career builder, but she's gonna have to press her hair."  And so mother said, "Walter B's on the phone. She said there's a job at Texas Electric she can help you with, yet, but you got to press your hair."  And I said, "Oomph, not pressing."  My mother said, "You're not going to press your hair?"  And I said, "No, I'm not doing it," and I said, "I'm an adult now, I can make that decision on my own."  And reluctantly my mother said, "Well Walter she's not interested but thank you for calling," and all that.  So that was a part of the race consciousness and being proud that we were African Americans and my mom slowly accepted.  I mean she didn't want--well she was more interested in our not being hurt or disadvantaged because of this new awakening of race consciousness.
Story_ID: 648247
Speaker 1: Well I know that the--1972 was the Gary convention [National Black Political Convention] with the attempt to form the National Black Political Assembly (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Right--right.
Speaker 1: Right.  Did you go?
Speaker 2:  	No, Lena Marie [Miller's mother, Lena Jones Miller] was not gonna allow me to leave.
Speaker 1: Okay, but I know there is some trickle down from that even in Texas and so, I know they had the second conference in 1974 in Little Rock [Arkansas].
Speaker 2:  	Little Stone, I call it Little Stone.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  But you know Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois], all these groups are involved though in this, and do you remember when, I don't know, was, who was the first congressman elected in Texas in the Dallas area there?
Speaker 2:  	In the Dallas area?  It was probably Eddie Bernice, but--
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Eddie Bernice Johnson?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.  But Barbara Jordan from Houston [Texas], she was a state senator.  That was my huge idol.  To this day I have huge admiration for her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah Barbara Jordan, she was ahead of Eddie Bernice I think.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.  She was from Houston.
Speaker 1: Right, so she's in Houston, so that's, yeah and, so was there any, who was the first woman in the Dallas area?
Speaker 2:  	I think it was Eddie.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess it was Eddie, I guess you're right.
Speaker 2:  	Eddie was what elected in, was it '88 [1988] or '90 [sic. 1992]?
Speaker 1: But you're, yeah I think so.  So your local congressman, was it Jim Wright?
Speaker 2:  	Jim Wright for a number of years.  It's the 12th Congressional District.  He was in [U.S.] Congress thirty, thirty-four years.  So he'd been there I think since 1955, '53 [1953] something like that, when he was first elected to Congress.
Speaker 1: And the speaker of the house, I know during the--
Speaker 2:  	Sam Rayburn?
Speaker 1: Sam Rayburn of Texas and Lyndon Johnson is the president [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], so there was a big presence, Texas presence.
Speaker 2:  	It was a Texas--called them the Texas mafia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Texas had a big presence in Congress, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Big, huge presence.
Story_ID: 648248
Speaker 1: When, when did you start really getting interested in [U.S.] Congress?  I think, was it around this period of time after you graduated [from North Texas State University; University of North Texas, Denton, Texas]?
Speaker 2:  	Well after I graduated, one of the things, interestingly enough, I'd done: ten years after I graduated I started work at the Fort Worth Independent School District.  I was a peer advisor and then got my teaching certificate and worked as a peer advisor at Arlington Heights High School [Fort Worth, Texas] and then at Trimble Tech [Trimble Tech High School, Fort Worth, Texas], but I had always, years before that, twelve years, at least ten years before, I had always applied to Wright's [Jim Wright] office.  I'd send a letter saying that I was interested in working in his office and I always got the polite little computer generated, somebody generated letter saying thanks but no thanks.  And then I decided, my mom [Lena Jones Miller] passed away in 1977, that was the turning point for me, and I, she died in late April of 1977 and in December of 1977 I decided I was going to move.  I was tired of teaching school. I was, I saw my wheels spinning.  I'm trying to prepare myself to teach, to help kids learn and I'm looking at a group of kids who could have cared less.  All they wanted to--, "Give me a D so I can pass and get out of your class and I don't have to see you again, you don't have to see me," and I thought that was not something I wanted to do the rest my life.  My mom thought that teaching school was the end all and the be all.  It was for her we had arrived.  And so I decided that December that I was going to move to Washington [D.C.].  I had a friend who, at that time, was associated with Shiloh [Shiloh Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.].  His father [Earl L. Harrison] was the pastor of Shiloh for thirty something years, or more.
Speaker 1: So this was a person in Texas, a man in Texas.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, he and moved to Texas and we worked together on a CETA program [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act of 1973] and Lemuel Harrison, and Lemuel said I thought I wanted to be involved in politics and I thought, you know what, I'm going to be lieutenant governor of Texas because the lieutenant governor in the Texas structure is much more powerful than the governor.  So he said to me, "Lorraine [HistoryMaker Lorraine Miller], if you really want to be in politics, you have to go where the best politicians are and where you can learn and observe and get a sense of is this what you really want to do."  He said, "You got to go to D.C.," and so he was born and raised there in the district.  And he says, "I want you to go to my dad's old church when you get there because you know you're gonna have to affiliate with a church."  And so I did.  I came here, enrolled at American University [Washington, D.C.]; and joined Shiloh.
Story_ID: 648249
Speaker 1: Let me backtrack just a little bit and ask you about the Watergate hearings.  That was such a big--this is the biggest political crisis in American history, I think, in terms of president [President Richard Milhous Nixon] resigns, these long hearings where the members of [U.S.] Congress are basically getting more public scrutiny than ever before--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: --on television.  It was broadcast day after day.
Speaker 2:  	That's about the time we started televising the sessions in the House [U.S. House of Representatives].  I think it was '76 [1976] when we first started that.
Speaker 1: Watergate hearings, this was like '74 [1974], I guess, yeah, summer of '74 [1974].
Speaker 2:  	But it did, it all kind of melted into the openness, the transparency of the Congress and it was, I can smell and feel the intensity of people coming to the Rayburn Building [Rayburn House Office Building, Washington, D.C.] to the hearings, and how folks were standing in the hall lined up trying to get in 'cause the rooms are only so large and only so many people could get in there and it was, it was a lottery system or something that they had developed.  I, I, the reason I noticed, when I worked for--Wright [Jim Wright] was the first member I worked for, for eleven years and we were officed in Rayburn and we had a lot of people that were coming from Fort Worth [Texas], who wanted to just sit in the room during the hearings and it was--
Speaker 1: Not Watergate right?
Speaker 2:  	Not Watergate, Iran-Contra [Iran-Contra Affair].  'Cause that was huge too.  But the Watergate hearings were monumental.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was the first big time the country like saw their congresspeople every day, at least the ones on that committee--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --deal with the crisis situation--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --day after day after day.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, day after day after day.
Speaker 1: So is this, this and the subsequent election of Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] in '76 [1976]--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --kind of set up, when you arrive in '77 [1977], there's a feeling of form--
Speaker 2:  	End of '77 [1977], yes, really '78 [1978], because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay. (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: I came in December of 1977, the last Sunday; and we drove up (unclear).
Speaker 1: So this is the middle of the Carter administration--
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: --wasn't quite as upbeat as the beginning.
Story_ID: 648250
Speaker 1:  	Master Jimmy [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] as we called him.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, what, why did you all call him Master Jimmy?
Speaker 1:  	Oh, 'cause he was from the farm in the South, in Georgia, and so it was like, he's a master 'cause, and it was just something people, when I worked on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.], especially the African Americans, there were so few of us and so we called him master, not to his face, but you know, that's the way we talked about him.
Speaker 2: Now the Carter administration, when you arrived in, the beginning of '78 [1978], right--
Speaker 1:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --so what did you do when you initially, you, you enrolled at American University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1:  	I enrolled at American University, couldn't get a job with Jim Wright, after sending these letters and getting these perfunctory responses back from him, thanks but no thanks, I decided, came home for Christmas one year, and decided that I wanted to do this, I wanted to work on the Hill.  I initially went in and talked to the chief of staff, interviewed with him, talked to him and he said, "Oh, that's very nice."  I was so wanting to work on the Hill that I said to him, "I'll work in the office free, and work around my class schedule if I could come and work." He says, "Oh, that's very nice, thanks, but no thanks."  And so, what happened, came home one Christmas holiday and I decided okay, there's got to be a different way of doing this than writing a letter, so I decided I was going to have direct action.  I went to my city councilman who happened to be Jim Bagsby then, and my state representative who happened to be Reby Cary, and said to them, I need you guys to write a letter to Mr. Wright and tell him I'm interested in working on the staff.  I've worked on the CETA program [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act of 1973], I worked in the school system [Fort Worth Independent School District].  I thought at least I had something to offer.  So Jim gets back to me and says, you're in luck, we're going to write you the letter and we will let you know what we hear from her.  So they wrote the letter, I come back to Washington [D.C.] and this was a Sunday night I get back to town, and my phone rings.  I was living on Massachusetts Avenue.  My phone rings and it was Joe Shosid  [Joseph L. Shosid] .  General Joe Shosid was Wright's district guy.  And he says to me, "[HistoryMaker] Lorraine Miller, this is Joe Shosid ," and I said, "How are you," and he says, "I work for Jim Wright.  In the morning I want you to go to the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.] and see Marshall Lynam," and I said, "Oh, I've met Mr. Lynam.  I've interviewed with him and he told me no."  And I said, "Even for a free internship."  And he says, "Young lady," he was a [U.S.] Air Force general, "young lady please follow my instructions.  Go to the Capitol, go ask for Marshall Lynam, be there at ten o'clock tomorrow morning."  I, at that point in my life, I was absolutely, tee-totally broke.  So I walked from my apartment to the Hill.  I find his office.  Wright had just become the majority leader then, and he was officed in Longworth [Longworth House Office Building, Washington, D.C.].  They sent me to the Longworth office.  Marshall gets on the phone while I'm in his office and he says, calls over and says, "Can I speak to Jim?"  And then apparently Mr. Wright comes on.  He says, "Bring her over to the office," so Marshall and I walked from the Longworth office to Mr. Wright's office in the Capitol and I'm sitting outside the, the door there, and his assistant was trying to be nice to me, small talk.  Wright comes out and says, "Here, we're just gonna go around here and get us a little something to eat," and I thought I don't have any money.  I got sixty cents in my purse.  So we go around to the House dining room, we sit down at a table and he looks at me and he says, "Oh, just order whatever you want on the menu."  I look at the menu and I'm looking for the cheapest thing.  The cheapest thing on the menu was sixty cents for the house salad.  So I said, "Oh, I'll have the house salad."  He said, "That's all you want?"  I said, "Oh, dieting," but I knew that's the only thing that I could afford.  So we're sitting there and I'm chomping on my salad and he says, "Well, Lorraine, I'm just, I didn't know you in Fort Worth [Texas] and I'm just so delighted you're going to join my staff."  I drop my fork, lettuce all over my lap, I'm like, "What?"  He says, "Yeah, and I understand that you're gonna start tomorrow or the next day."  I was flabbergasted.  So I started eleven year venture with Jim Wright.  That was my first job.  And then Wright resigned.
Speaker 2: Now wait a minute, we're going too fast.
Speaker 1:  	Okay (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 648251
Speaker 1: Let's talk about what you did in those eleven years.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: This is important.  You're working for Jim Wright (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Well it was.
Speaker 1: He becomes the speaker of the house, right?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, he becomes--
Speaker 1: And this is big stuff, so.
Speaker 2:  	One of the, my first job was answering the phone and I've worked over in the congressional office, and my first, I guess I was there three days, and I was taught to answer the phone, so I answer the phone, "Congressman Jim Wright's office," and it was Mr. Wright.  He says, "This is Jim, can I speak with Marshall [Marshall Lynam]?"  Marshall was the chief of staff.  And I said, "Jim who?"  Well I was off the phone for two weeks (laughter). He, he became infuriated that someone was answering the phone for him and he didn't, the person didn't even know his voice.  And I, beyond having lunch with him that day when I started, was the first time that I ever heard his voice, so I didn't know him, so I was off the phone duty for two weeks, which I didn't mind, because the phone rang incessantly.  But I started out doing correspondence.  That's the typical, you know, write letters, people write in and you write back on behalf of the congressman, and then the first thing he did, it was 1980 and that was his largest and most difficult reelection that he ever had in the years that he was in [U.S.] Congress.  I'll never will forget, I was riding the subway between the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.] and the office buildings [Longworth House Office Building, Washington, D.C.] with him one day.  He says, "Come on, I want you to ride over with me."  And I thought okay, so I get on the subway with him and he's, in that little short ride, he says, "I want you to go home and help me out with my campaign."  This was like in March of 1980, or maybe it was '79 [1979].  "I want you to go home and help me on my campaign," and I said, "Well what about school [American University, Washington, D.C.]?"  He says, "Oh, next semester you can take up whatever you need to get done with school. I just need you to go home and help me with this campaign."  Gave me a little wet kiss on the cheek and an airline ticket with an open return.  So I went home to Fort Worth [Texas] and worked his campaign.  He won by 62 percent, which he had always enjoyed winning by a much larger margins, 80, 85.  But Jim Bradshaw was a young, upstart Republican that was on the city council [Fort Worth City Council].  He was younger.  Wright was getting maybe in his mid-sixties at that point, and Bradshaw was taking it to him, and one of the things that Bradshaw said about him was that he didn't hire minorities.  Wright at that point had a driver that was his only African American employee, in Washington [D.C.] or in the district.  And so all of a sudden I became it, and so I came home and became the eyes and ears in the African American community for Jim Wright, which nearly killed me because the campaign was so intense.  But it was an eye opening experience to the politics of Fort Worth.  I got a baptism in African American, Democratic politics that lasted 'til today (laughter).
Story_ID: 648252
Speaker 1: So what kind of things did you learn (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) How (pause) in our community people sell short their vote and folks were for, they worked for nickel and dimes to, on the precincts, to get people out to vote.  White communities, they were making, the white folks that were doing the same thing in white communities were making nine times more and you couldn't get them, they would do that work for little or nothing, and was glad that Wright thought enough of them to ask them to do it.  But he would pay them little of nothing, but they spent a lot of money in the white communities.  And they wanted to spend as, and if it, in the campaign budget, whatever they had to do in the black community was on a shoestring.  But in the white communities, they really went out of their way in mailings, in phone calls, all that to get people to turn out for the election.  That amazed me.
Speaker 1: So he had the loyalty of the black community without having to put out very much.
Speaker 2:  	Well, what he did was constituent service.  He was a believer in it and had the staff and the local office sold.  For instance, I could go to the grocery store and I would run into people who would say, "Baby I want you to know, tell Jim I'm voting for him because my son was in World War II [WWII] and got his leg hurt and Jim helped me to get his disability, and without his support I wouldn't have gotten it, and he's getting it even to this day so yeah, I'm gonna vote for Jim Wright."  I would hear stories like that repeatedly at my own church [Mount Zion Baptist Church, Fort Worth, Texas], folks would come up to me and say, "You know, twenty years ago when I got out of the war, I didn't have a place to live and I was a struggling veteran, and he helped me.  And I used, he helped me get access to the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], and I want to do whatever I can for him, so if you need me to do whatever, take people, use my car, rides to the polls, not a problem.  For Jim Wright, I'll do it."  And he was great on constituent services and that he did no matter who you were.  That was, I can easily say, that they didn't discriminate, they didn't, 'cause he's black I'm not gonna do the letter or the phone.  They may not have done as much, but clearly they, they worked it.  They worked community service, they did constituent services very well.  And so that brought dividends over the years to him.  And people knew him and supported him.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1:  	So it was easy.  What I had to do was go out there and cultivate those folks, who, he knew they were out there, but there, they are a little lethargic and he couldn't have won by the margin he did had he not had a significant turnout in the African American community; and he knew that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He knew that well.
Story_ID: 648253
Speaker 1: Now well he [Jim Wright] became was it speaker in '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Becomes speaker of the house in '78 [1978].  Did this, how did this add to, you know, the responsibilities of the staff, or did it affect (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Oh yeah.  It's, 'cause you have a staff in the congressional office and then you have a leadership staff.  I worked on the Democratic Steering-- Democratic Steering and Policy Committee [House Democratic Steering and Policy Committee].  That, that committee actually determines what committees the members serve on and you followed the policy work of those committees.  So, for instance, I had science [U.S. House of Representatives House Committee on Science and Technology; U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Science, Space, and Technology].  Went on a couple of trips to Superconducting Super Collider.  I've went on a trip with Mr. Hall, Ralph Hall, one of the first congressional, codel [congressional delegation] that I attended because the Superconducting Super Collider was in Waxahachie, Texas, and that's where it was proposed to have been built.  And so we went to Lucerne, France to look at a similar facility [at the European Organization for Nuclear Research] there, and so my job was to go observe, make notes and come back and brief him on what we saw and what the possibilities were.  Interesting time.  And so I worked for him those eleven years and then I went home, managed a district office for him for a while too.
Speaker 1: So you worked for him from '78 [1978] to '88 [1988], is that?  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes. Yes, um-hm.
Story_ID: 648254
Speaker 1: I know in '88 [1988]--now when you--as you're leaving he becomes a target of an investigation, right?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you--were you around at all when this started?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was around for that.  He was, he was accused of using ill-gotten funds to write a book, and it's the way of the ethics laws have changed and tightened up.  If those same charges came up today, it probably wouldn't be a violation, maybe a slap on the hand or a penalty they may have assessed him, but it was so much rancor.  Mr. Wright [Jim Wright] was a, that was the 100th Congress.  That was a time when, I believe this was first year of his speakership that our appropriations bills were on time.  I can remember being a staffer on the Democratic Steering and Policy Committee [House Democratic Steering and Policy Committee] and he would bring all the committee chairs in to 324, H324, the third floor of the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.], and then he'd bring 'em in and he'd say, "I don't care what you've gotta do, I want all the appropriations bills done on time.  And you're the committee chairs.  I want you to get the numbers to me early and we want to figure this, and I want these bills done on time."  They haven't been done like that in years.  But he ruled with an iron hand and if you, if members who wanted to, Dan Rostenkowski was the chair of ways and means [House Committee on Ways and Means], and if Rostenkowski disagreed with him, Wright would say, "Well, Danny, you know you're gonna have to do this."  And Rostenkowski would bluff out, he says, "I don't give a shit, you got to get it done.  And that's the way he worked."
Speaker 1: Now he sounds a lot like Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] in terms of (unclear).
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Was he mentored by Lyndon Johnson at all, or was there?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.  Well, he was mentored by him and then you, he had a close association, so he was in a lot of meetings with him.  So you get a chance to emulate some of his style, the way President Johnson dealt with the entire [U.S.] Congress.  Wright saw that he had a very strong hand.  Johnson suffered no fools and he tried to do that but with a measure of decorum.  He was trying to be a little more diplomatic, but he had no problem.  If he had to put his foot down, he would, to get members to do it.  And, of course, there were more perks that members--that was the time when we were just ending the patronage system in the House [U.S. House of Representatives].  Jack Brooks was in charge of our patronage in the House for eons and so anything a member wanted from trying to find a bargain apartment to being on a committee or having a relative hired in some capacity in the House, that was the way it was done.  And if you didn't play ball, you didn't get any patronage.  You didn't get a chance to go on any trips, you didn't do anything.  And it made a difference.  They put you on, back then the agriculture committee [U.S. House Committee on Agriculture] was a big committee, the banking committee was a backwater committee before it became an exclusive.  And they'd put you on the banking committee and you'd sit there and rot, or government reform [House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform].  They'd put you on something that the press wasn't covering, there were no big issues out in the country that brought the jurisdiction of the committee to light; and so you know if you didn't play ball their way, they had a way of punishing you.
Story_ID: 648255
Speaker 1: Did you have a sense of these kind of political dynamics before you started working with Jim Wright?
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: So you actually learned on the job (laughter).
Speaker 2:  	I learned on the job and I had the privilege for many a year of being the only African American and, in most cases, the only woman in the room, which was very interesting, a little scary at first, but Mr. Wright, Mr. Wright allowed me to do that in a lot of instances.  And then when he retired, that role continued.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now here you are, you're working, you're in your twenties, late twenties or early thirties?
Speaker 2:  	Thirties.  My mom [Lena Jones Miller] died, I was twenty-nine, so I'm in my thirties.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you get there in '78 [1978], you're thirty then, right.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you're getting like a, so did you feel that you were really in your element at this point?
Speaker 2:  	No. No. One, reverse chauvinists, and you had to learn to deal with the chauvinism.  There were racists, but my presence in a lot of those heads up leadership meetings that they were conducting was a way of, for them to say okay, yeah we have an African American in the room, but maybe we ought to think differently about the policy implications of what we're discussing.  How will it impact the African American community, because then there was a growing consciousness that we were becoming a, a viable voting bloc, a very viable voting bloc that needed to be cultivated and so it was, I kind of felt sometimes that I was the, the person of consciousness, even though I may not have said much, but the mere presence of having someone sitting in the room when they're having these discussions, and then an occasional member would turn, the staff generally you do your work before they get to the meeting and when the members have their meeting, it's the members discussing among themselves.  And then only on occasion, a rare occasion, would they turn to some staffer and say, "What do you think? Can--will Tom do this," and, "Do you think we can get him to agree to--" whatever.  That would be the only other time the staff would have an input so you'd have to know what was, what the deal was, what the discussion was going to be and what the outcomes you wanted before you went into the meeting.  And then you'd try to plant that seed with the members before the meeting to get the outcome that Mr. Wright was looking for.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2:  	So it was a, it was a strategy session; and I, I learned, learned a lot.
Story_ID: 648256
Speaker 1: How big was his [Jim Wright], was his staff?  And I guess, I'm getting into how many, what's the percentage of, were there any other African Americans on staff and were there any other women?
Speaker 2:  	Lots of women who did the clerical work.  There, again, two different staffs.  The congressional staff that worked in the congressional building-- office buildings [Longworth House Office Building, Washington, D.C.].  And then the leadership staff that worked in the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.].  And so it could have been twenty-five, thirty people, if you combine the staff and then that doesn't include the staff in the district office in Fort Worth [Texas].  So it was pretty sizable.  All told, it may have been fifty people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So out of fifty people, were there any other African Americans?
Speaker 2:  	He eventually hired one young lady to answer the phone.  After I got there, was there a couple of years, he brought on a couple of other folks, but no one in a policy position until, oh god, a year or so before he resigned.  He had another young man that he brought on in a policy position.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about women in terms of women in the--
Speaker 2:  	African American?
Speaker 1: No, any of them in the policy position?
Speaker 2:  	Well, yes, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: What were some?
Speaker 2:  	He had, he had quite a few women.
Speaker 1: In a policymaking position?
Speaker 2:  	Oh sure.  Our director of--our legislative director are all women.  But these were women he'd known for years.  This was not somebody that applied for the job.  Dorothy Beard was somebody he literally had known for twenty, thirty years before she came to work for him.
Story_ID: 648257
Speaker 1: When Jim Wright left in '89 [1989], now you had left, right?  The--I mean by the time he had resigned you had actually left, is that true?
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: No, you were still there?
Speaker 2:  	I'm still there.
Speaker 1: All right.  So well was it the scandal that made him leave?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	It was the scandal of it and the blowback he received from it.  You know when you, when you do bone crunching politics, sometimes the bones get together and they come back on you and part of his problem was the discontent among a lot of the members, of the way he had treated people.  They thought he was a little too heavy handed on occasion, and I think his, Mr. Wright was a loyalist, so if you were his friend, you were his friend.  And he stuck by people, rightly or wrongly.  And I think folks said, "Okay, enough is enough already and we need a change in leadership."  And he saw that.  I think he was willing to hold on as long as he could, but I think the writing was on the wall that he needed to do something and so he decided to resign.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's something to consider if you're speaker of the house to resign.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so he must have had a lot of pressure on him.
Speaker 2:  	It was a lot of pressure.  It wore on him, it grated on him, he was very disturbed by it, because a lot of the folks that, you know, members have two things, their vote and their word.  And he saw that a lot of their word was not with him, and he receiving them from the, his committee chairs who are like your cabinet, and in those days, committee chairs were really the speaker's cabinet.  They were his emissaries, they did his bidding, whatever kind of policy issues the speaker was trying to push, they were the point persons to get it down within their committees, and he saw a lot of that support eroding, and just thought it was time to make a, make a change, and so it--it, it was clear handwriting on the wall for him.
Story_ID: 648258
Speaker 1: You start working for Tom Foley?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, and, and--now where did, Foley was from--
Speaker 2:  	Washington State.
Speaker 1: --Washington State, right.
Speaker 2:  	Mr. Foley was the number two in the House [U.S. House of Representatives], the majority leader, and what happened, it, I, I tell young staffers sometimes you have to be careful about how you do your work because you never know who's observing you.  So Mr. Wright [Jim Wright] had resigned.  I had talked to William Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.], Bill Clay about coming to, he was the chair of post office and civil service [U.S. House Committee on Post Office and Civil Service], and I had talked to Mr. Clay preliminarily to see if I could come and join his committee staff and he said, "Let me work it out and I'll get back to you."  And in the interim I was packing my boxes one afternoon and the phone rang and it was Heather Foley [Heather Strachan Foley].  Heather Foley was Mr. Foley's wife, but she, more importantly, was his chief of staff, unpaid, and she said, "What are you doing?"  And I said, "Oh, I'm packing boxes," and she says, "Is there somebody else there in the office? Can you come down to see me?"  And I said sure.  So I went down to see her downstairs, and she said, "My husband and I would like for you to stay on with the office of the speaker with him.  Are you interested?"  And I said, "Of course."  And I said, "What do you want me to do?"  "Well, continue the job you've been doing.  We observed you over the years.  You're dedicated, you didn't run home at five o'clock.  Apparently Mr. Wright had a lot of confidence in your judgment and we wanted to, you know, when you find good staff, they're good staff and so we want you to stay."  And so I stayed with Mr. Foley, which was a, Mr. Foley had a different temperament.  He was not the, he was not the kind of man that would, he wasn't vindictive.  He was more even tempered and wanted to make members happy.  Wright wanted them to be happy, he may not have been the instrument sometimes of their happiness sometimes but he wanted them to be willing and willing to follow his lead on the legislation that was impending on the floor.  And Mr. Foley was more of a hands on, "I wanna see what I can do to make you happy and enjoy your work," which he thought made them more willing, not by force, to vote with the leadership, but because they saw the benefit of their own political salvation and the, the general good of what they were doing.  So his approach was a little different, a little softer.  And after all the rancor, Mr. Foley was a calming presence over the House and things calmed down and you didn't find the--even on the, with the Republicans; it was much calmer, not a lot of rancor.
Story_ID: 648259
Speaker 1: Now Wright [Jim Wright] was speaker during the end of the Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] presidency--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the beginning of Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan].
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: Through, I guess, the beginning of George Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush].
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: George H.W. Bush.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: And so the Democrats at this time had control of both houses?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.  And then I think at one point the [U.S.] Senate for a two year--I seem to think, no, we had both houses, Democrats had both houses.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now we had an interview of Ron Dellums [HistoryMaker Ronald Dellums]--
Speaker 2:  	Oh, did you?
Speaker 1: --a couple of weeks ago, yeah.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, good.
Speaker 1: We were talking about the, the South African sanctions in the past.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Now was that done while you were with--?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, I went on their codel [congressional delegation], that first codel that he and Bill Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III] put together when we had a group of members that went to South Africa, I went with 'em.  Yeah.  It was a very, as R.V. [ph.] says, a pregnant moment to witness that and to meet the clerk and to see he and Bill Gray in action and the members.  It was a very heady time, very heady.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were at the point of a lot of news in those days, I guess, to be in the position that you were in.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah.  It was, it was a very historic time.  It was the first time I met Mandela, President Mandela.  We were there in Johannesburg [South Africa].  He had been released maybe twenty days.
Speaker 1: So this was like 1991 or something (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes, yes, very, this was right after he was released.  And I remember we were meeting in some little building and there were people standing in chairs.  There were so many people even though we, we had a congressional delegation, a lot of the ANC [African National Congress] members were there and there was a, I said to him, President Mandela had an uncanny resemblance to my grandfather, my mother's father [James Jones], and I had a picture of my grandfather and as he was walking by and he was shaking, Mandela insisted on shaking everyone's hand, and when he got to me, I said, "Mr. Mandela, this is my grandfather, you resemble each other."  And he looked at him, he took the picture in his hand and he looked at it and he said, "We're all brothers," and when I got home I was telling my--my grandfather had already passed, and I was telling my aunt about it and they were just in tears.  It was just, for me a very moving moment to see my, see my granddad and then to see Nelson Mandela and then to see their resemblance, even their gait, the way they walked was similar.  I have a original work, a White House photograph on the wall in the living room at home of President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and President Mandela at a state dinner.  I won't tell you how I got the photo, but my granddad would have been absolutely delighted to have had an opportunity to (unclear), and I look at that picture and I see my granddad.
Speaker 1: Now is that your granddad that lived to be ninety-two?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They have an uncanny resemblance.
Story_ID: 648260
Speaker 1: Just, backtrack a little bit back to, I think I jumped over too far, but.  Now you went to Georgetown [Georgetown University School of Business Administration; McDonough School of Business, Washington, D.C.] and earned an M.B.A.--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in '89 [1989]?
Speaker 2:  	Well it was, I was working at the Federal Trade Commission and doing congressional relations for the Federal Trade Commission and the chair of the Federal Trade Commission was Bob Pitofsky [Robert Pitofsky] and he was the dean of Georgetown law school [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.] .  He said, "Why don't you go to Georgetown Law," and I said, "Chairman, with this job and all that, I just, I can't do that."  I'd just gotten out of the White House, was coming to the Federal Trade Commission, I just can't do that.  And he says, "Well you need to further your education."  I said, "I do," and I saw a program at Georgetown.  This was the first year they had done this and he says, "Okay, go," and the FTC paid for it, which was great.  And then I did the Harvard Kennedy School of Business [sic. John F. Kennedy School of Government, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Senior Managers in Government program, which was very intense.
Speaker 1: Now give me some dates.  I think I don't have the right dates for the M.B.A.  Where was that?  That was the Federal Trade Commission, so that's--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah that had to be--
Speaker 1: --after you serve with Speaker Foley [Tom Foley] right?
Speaker 2:  	Foley, yes.  And then I had even--
Speaker 1: So you were with, let me just go back a little bit.  So you were with Speaker Foley how many years, from '89 [1989] to?  	Eighty-nine [1989] to '90 [1990], Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was elected in 93 [sic. 1992] and then I worked a year for Mr. Lewis, [HistoryMaker] John Lewis.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what year was that, was that after Foley?
Speaker 1:  	That was right after Foley.  Mr. Foley asked me to leave the speaker's office to help, they expanded the leadership of the House [U.S. House of Representatives] and had these deputy whips, of which Mr. Lewis was the first African American deputy whip, and he asked me to join Mr. Lewis' staff to help him as his floor assistant.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you were sent there by Speaker Foley basically, right?
Speaker 1:  	Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So, so you, when you were with Speaker Foley, you handled, you were his facilitator.  I have a note here that you--
Speaker 1:  	Yes.
Speaker 2: --you scheduled his appointments and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) Not his appointments, but I, I scheduled a lot of, I worked for the Democratic Steering and Policy Committee [House Democratic Steering and Policy Committee] again and then worked on healthcare, and we tried for years before President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] got the health care bill [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010] done, this built on what President Clinton and Mrs. Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] were doing, what Mr. Foley had done as a foundation on healthcare was what they built upon, the Clintons did when President Clinton became president and trying to get healthcare done then.
Speaker 2: Wait a minute now, okay so, Foley '89 [1989], '92 [1992], John Lewis '93 [1993], then, then is that when you go to get your M.B.A. after that?
Speaker 1:  	I did that before.
Speaker 2: Before, okay.
Speaker 1:  	Yes, yes.  I was doing that while I was at the FTC.
Speaker 2: Now where did the FTC come, now, okay?
Speaker 1:  	Well, I left, the FTC came in after my stint at the White House.
Speaker 2: Okay, now I'm really confused now, 'cause I'm trying to go back to, okay so Foley '89 [1989], '92 [1992], right, you said.
Speaker 1:  	Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 2: Now we're into Clinton, then you helped John Lewis in '93 [1993].
Speaker 1:  	No, it was Foley, then to John Lewis, and then John Lewis to the White House.
Speaker 2: Okay, to the White House--
Speaker 1:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and how long were you there, were you there at the White House?
Speaker 1:  	Two years, eight months, twenty-one days.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So that takes you to '95 [1995], I guess?
Story_ID: 648261
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) On the resume what does it say for the date of the, in the education section, it should give you a specific date.
Speaker 2: Okay, I don't have the resume in front of me. I have an outline they prepared that, you know, from it, I guess.
Speaker 1: I guess.
Speaker 2: But I, so I guess that's why I'm--
Speaker 1: Confused.
Speaker 2: --confused, yeah.
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, because it was-- right, and then Foley [Tom Foley], and then to [HistoryMaker] John Lewis and from John Lewis I went to the Clinton White House [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and then to the Federal Trade Commission.
Speaker 2: Okay, then the FTC, okay.  Then to M.B.A. [from Georgetown University School of Business Administration; McDonough School of Business, Washington, D.C.], right?
Speaker 1:  	Yes, while I was at the Federal Trade Commission I did the, the M.B.A.
Speaker 2: So that would have been in the '90s [1990s], right, ninety--
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, it was down there.  It had to be, 'cause I, I would have, I should have brought that, but I--
Speaker 2: --that would have been '98 [1998] or so, or later?
Speaker 1:  	Maybe.  Because on there, on that--
Speaker 2: Well can clear it up, I just want to get a sense of the flow and then, so then from there, we go to, you said Kennedy School of Government [John F. Kennedy School of Government, Cambridge, Massachusetts] after the M.B.A., right?
Speaker 1:  	I did the Kennedy School of Government first.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	That was in '96 [1996] I believe.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay, '96 [1996].
Story_ID: 648262
Speaker 1: Well, any rate, let's go back a little bit.  Now is there a high- a highlight of your service with Foley, with Speaker Foley [Tom Foley]?
Speaker 2:  	The queen [Elizabeth II] coming.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	I made a, he was so, one of the things he probably wanted more than anything than being speaker was to be the ambassador for the Court of St. James [Court of St James's].  And when the queen made her visit here, he was oh so excited.  I'd never seen Mr. Foley just like, he was into it.  Got him a new suit, everything, so we had to brush up on the protocol for meeting her majesty and all of that, so he was really into that.  That was a big deal for him and for our office, getting him ready to meet the queen.  Legislatively the House [U.S. House of Representatives] had toned down after Mr. Wright [Jim Wright] resigned, Mr. Foley became, everything was kind of more at an even keel, even though, this was the advent though of Newt Gingrich.  Bob Michel [Robert H. Michel] had been minority leader for a number of years and there was a great working relationship between the staffs, the Democratic and Republican staff at that time.  I mean yes we would fuss and argue on the floor, our members would, but in the evening, they'd have dinner together.  And they would travel together.  They knew their families and everybody shared things about what was going on with the families.  Some of the families didn't move to Washington [D.C.] and the members would go home every weekend or so, but it was a much more camaraderie, and then Newt decided that the, the old genteel way, because as they, as we call it, Republicans had been in the wilderness for nearly forty years, meaning they had not been in the majority in nearly forty years, and Newt took it upon himself to change that.  And so we had a lot of late nights with him making special order statements.  And the statements were, it may have been midnight here in Washington, it was three hours earlier on the West Coast at nine o'clock at night.  And he was talking to a different, the chamber would be empty but he was talking to a different, he was talking to America, but on the West Coast and so it was, that was how he started his unraveling.  He thought the House needed to be torn down and rebuilt in their liking; and he set about doing that, very methodically, and engaged a number of people in that pursuit.
Story_ID: 648263
Speaker 1: In '94 [1994] I was really surprised, and I guess I didn't follow things closely enough to understand what's going on, but in '94 [1994] I was really surprised when the Republicans took the House [U.S. House of Representatives].
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  So were we.  Vic Fazio, who was the chair of the, Congressman Fazio was the chair of the D triple C [Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee] at that time, and I remember a couple of months before the election he came and told President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] that he thought in their-- in his judgment, the Republicans were going to take the House, and the president said, "No, I don't, I don't think so, I think we'll hold it."  And I remember the day that, that evening in November when they won, and that next morning, I went by the oval facility [Oval Office] and the president was just standing there looking out the window in utter disbelief.  He could not believe it.  It had a big toll on him, and then they saw blood in the water and they just, it just went from bad to worse.
Speaker 1: So a lot of the Clinton agenda, you know, was stymied.
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: The government actually came to a standstill at one point.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: In '96 [1996], right?
Speaker 2:  	Not too far removed from what we're going on now.  But he was, I've never, Clinton always seemed to me to be someone who was unflappable, unchallenged and this got him.  You could see it on his face, on his demeanor.  He was kind of a happy go lucky kind of guy, but the happiness and the joy I think he had just being president and enjoying the presidency and the hard work, I mean, it was a lot of work.  I mean you never leave the job, but he enjoyed it and he saw that he was making progress and it came to a screeching halt.  That was, that was very hard.  That was almost, I equate that with the time that King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, doom, it was dark, a very dark period around the White House, and the same thing I felt when we were at Jarvis [Jarvis Christian College, Hawkins, Texas] when King was assassinated.  It was, there was no light there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there seemed to be a lot of the people and, I mean Clinton came in with a lot of new initiatives.  A lot of people were excited, then it all just, two years in it just hits the wall.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, hits the wall.  And part of it is because we weren't paying attention.  I think a lot of members thought, assumed that I can do what I need to do here and then I don't need to cultivate any more what I'm doing in my district because people will know what I'm doing in my district and will automatically support me.  And they got a wake up call, a big fat wake up call that we were just not prepared for, but it was brewing out there all along, they didn't know.  And I think they were detached from what was going on in the districts.  I think too focused on Washington [D.C.] and not focused enough on the districts, so now you see members very focused on the district, that's why a lot of them lived here.  On the weekend you could go to Eastern Market [Washington, D.C.] and it was almost like the House was in session because everybody was in town, didn't go back to the district.  And that, the same thing that happened to Mr. Foley [Tom Foley].  He just assumed that the folks in Spokane [Washington] were going to elect him as long as he put his name on the ballot and up jumps Judy [ph.] one day and they said no.  And he really realized at the last minute that he was in trouble and it was too late by the time he figured it out.  Complacency is the death knell of politics, and that's one of the very valuable lessons I think members learn and they're--they keep their, you got to keep your finger on the pulse because you never know, you never know what's going go--happen in your district, and you want to be aware of it, be on the front end of it as opposed to having react to it.
Story_ID: 648264
Speaker 1: So two, there are a couple of Texas congressman, I know there may be even more, but Tom Delay and Dick Armey seem to take a real special role in the Newt Gingrich revolution.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, big role.  Both of these gentlemen I consider friends.  I've known Dick a long time, and I must tell you when I was doing congressional relations for the White House for President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], they were pretty supportive of me, not of the president at all.  They hated him, but I was able to get them to do a few things that they ordinarily wouldn't have done to be involved in.  Policy discussions opened the door for folks to, because we'd known each other a long time, and we had this, Texans are pretty collegial, they try to be (unclear), so we--my position, they would use me to get things that they wanted that ordinarily they wouldn't have, perks they wouldn't have gotten if you did the strict party.  I'm not gone give you extra tickets to the, let's say, the president's picnic, and a lot of times members would bring important people from their district, their finance chairman or some big supporter in their communities and they want to come to the White House [Washington, D.C.], no matter who the president is or what party, and so, I was helpful to them and they were helpful to us.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So [HistoryMaker] Eddie Bernice Johnson said the same thing. She had known these guys for a long time and they would always joke her about joining the Republican Party after she--
Speaker 2:  	Well, Dick, was a good guy, I mean, well, he's an interesting man.  I retract the good guy, but he's an interesting man; and he was, he was always accessible to me when, when I worked on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 648265
Speaker 1: So after the, so Gingrich [Newt Gingrich] takes over, so, so did you, is this when you went to the Federal Trade Commission, or, or?
Speaker 2:  	I went to the White House.
Speaker 1: Oh, White House.
Speaker 2:  	White House, yes, for that two and half year stint, and then to the Federal Trade Commission, but Gingrich was very much a factor in what we, what we did.  My basic job was, at the Federal Trade Commission, was appropriations, keeping enough money coming in to the keep the door open and Chairman Pitofsky [Robert Pitofsky] had started a new initiative on identity theft and we were trying desperately to get monies to pursue it and develop programs so that we could stop identity theft.  This was way back then.  We couldn't get any of the Republicans to hear it.  They were just anti-McCain [John McCain], (makes sound) the other chair of the house appropriations subcommittee on commerce, justice, state [sic. U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies], they didn't hear it (shakes head).  They didn't want it.  Now, identity theft is one of the big piranhas in our financial system and they're trying to put more money in it, but at the time when we were trying to get ahead of the curve, we just couldn't get a lot of the support (shakes head) and Gingrich--they went on this and--, "This is the way of increasing government," and, "You're just trying to add to it," and then we had (unclear) jurisdiction with the, the Antitrust Division at justice [U.S. Department of Justice] and the Federal Trade Commission had dual jurisdiction, and, why don't you just give it to justice and we'll just get away, do away with the Federal Trade Commission altogether, and it, that was what I was, the kind of atmosphere I was dealing with and so it was, it was very difficult, very difficult, long hours and I thought leaving the White House and coming to the Federal Trade Commission, I made the mistake one night of leaving the White House in a car going to the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] and it was like nine o'clock at night, drove past the Federal Trade Commission and the lights were out.  And I thought, that's where I want to work, where the office building is shut down and people go home like normal people.  What I didn't realize was across the street was the adjacent building where all the lights were on, that's where the work was being done.  So I got this job.  I soon realized that it was one of those 24/7 kind of positions.
Story_ID: 648266
Speaker 1: Now when did the Democrats retake the House [U.S. House of Representatives]?  This is--
Speaker 2:  	Oh my god.
Speaker 1: Was it '98 [1998], or?
Speaker 2:  	Wait a minute, 2000.  When did, Pelosi [Nancy Pelosi] became speaker in, oh my god, I'm getting my dates mixed up here.  I wanna say, no, we took back the House and no we didn't for a while.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it stayed--
Speaker 2:  	Because our last Democratic speaker was Foley [Tom Foley], then it was Pelosi.
Speaker 1: Right.  So they had it for a long time, yep, sure did, cause Dick Hastert [sic.] served for many years.
Speaker 2:  	Denny Hastert [Dennis Hastert].
Speaker 1: Denny Hastert, right.
Speaker 2:  	Denny Hastert.
Speaker 1: From Illinois, right.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  So at the Federal Trade Commission, we got you at the Federal Trade Commission now.  This is like 1997, '98 [1998].
Speaker 2:  	Yes, so this had to be, I'd been at the White House, this had to be '95 [1995], '96 [1996], '97 [1997], something like that, '98 [1998], yeah.  I was there four years--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --four and, almost four and a half years.
Story_ID: 648267
Speaker 1: This was a job that took a lot of energy.
Speaker 2:  	A lot of energy and a lot of political skill because we had interesting policy questions coming up and then we had these mergers, what was it, Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.], I'm trying to remember some of the big--
Speaker 1: The breakup of Bell [Bell Telephone Company], I mean AT&T [AT&T Corporation; AT&T Inc.].
Speaker 2:  	Yes, that was huge.  And not only for the Federal Trade Commission but for the Hill [Capitol Hill], and you had to work both sides of the aisle and the chairman had decided to, in the interim, for political reasons, the FTC needed to trim down, so he decided to close a couple of district offices.  I remember he closed one in Boston [Massachusetts] and one in Colorado, and it was my job to make the members happy with that, and they don't like closing anything that's in their district and Olympia Snowe tells me, she says, "The only reason I'm gonna let this go through is because you," and I have--know each other from the House [U.S. House of Representatives] when she was a House member, and I applied to work on her staff once and she wouldn't hire me because I was a Democrat.  She says, "But I like you, but I think you're gonna be too loyal to the Democrats and I gotta have, even though I want you, someone to work with 'em, I can't have someone that's solely a Democrat."  So I said well, "Ms. Snowe, I'm a Democrat, that's what I am."  And she said, "Okay, let's think about it."  And when she said that, I knew okay, okay, gone.  But that was a very interesting time of trying to get policy things done and an independent agency supposedly.  Those agencies, the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] and the FTC are supposedly independent, but they are very much controlled just as health and human services [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services] or HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] or any other agency.  The independence comes in that they have a commission, commissioners that are appointed (unclear) both parties and it, it's very difficult to, you've got your commissioners you got to deal with on the independent side and then you got the [U.S.] Congress still where they have oversight.  And it's, it was more than, had enough to say grace over (laughter).  It was quite challenging.
Story_ID: 648268
Speaker 1: Now you were chief of the FCC's [Federal Communications Commission] Consumer Information Bureau (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bureau, yes.
Speaker 1: That's from '99 [1999] to--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --2001?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, um-hm. The-- while I was at the FTC, Bill Kennard [William E. Kennard] and Chairman Pitofsky [Robert Pitofsky] were good friends.  They shared some jurisdiction on some policy issues and Bill had a real huge problems in his Consumer Affairs Division, so he asked Pitofsky, I didn't really appreciate that, but the two men decided that--Pitofsky said, "She's done a great job for the FTC, so Bill if you need her, I'll let her go to you," and no one had discussed this with me.  It's as if I'm property.  And these two guys met in a, in a conference room somewhere and discussed thoroughly my leaving the FTC, going to the FCC, how much money I was going to make, all of that, and they decided and then he came up to me and said okay, here's what we need you to do.  And I went to the FCC because I thought I had done pretty much all I could do at the Federal Trade Commission and then Pitofsky was leaving and I adored him as a leader and I, and then I thought, I never worked for an African American chair and Bill Kennard was the chair there of the FCC and I thought it would be a good adventure.  It was tough.  Cause they dumped the worst stuff on me.  More than a hundred thousand complaints that had to be cleared up, and the oversight committees were screaming at Bill about it and he felt with my extensive congressional background that, that would be a good--that would be a good way to try to get this done and (unclear).  But I got it, got it down, got those complaints done and--
Speaker 1: What type of complaints were you fielding here, these hundred thousand?
Speaker 2:  	People, consumers were coming in calling and writing the FCC about all kinds of things.  For instance, we had a big controversy about telephone bills, how complicated they were, how much information was not there and the information that was on the phone bill, if you didn't understand what those fees were and why they were there, you couldn't look at a telephone bill and actually read the bill and understand (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --your usage.
Speaker 1: Now I remember something called a line charge--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --which I--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --everyone would assume if you have a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --phone you have a line--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so why are they charging me now for a line?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 648269
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All kinds of things, and we went through them thoroughly.  I brought all of the telecommunications companies and their consumer affairs folks in; and I had our folks to really go through a phone bill, just get a typical phone bill and go through it.  "Do you understand every charge to say, 'Why is it there,' just from our perspective," and then we brought the folks in and had them to do it, the same kind of analysis and you saw the discrepancies and I said, "Well why are you charging this person twenty-six cents for this particular fee for something and then charging thirty-one cents for the same thing?"  "Oh, well this is to offset."  You know they had all kinds, oh yeah, it was, they were skimming millions of dollars off the American consumer and that was one part of it, and then for people who were handicapped and had some kind of disability, oh my god, they were just being literally raped by the telecommunications companies because they put all kinds of fees on 'em and they knew if you were hard of hearing or blind, you're not examining your bill.  And they would just arbitrarily attach fees that you would have no idea why and even if you used the product they were trying to sell--if you didn't they still charged you for it.  So it was, it was a scam that we went to war with them on, and so I had all these backlog of complaints, while you're still trying to deal with the everyday complaints that consumers were having with the telecommunications (unclear), and then you had Reverend Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and Reverend Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton] who were saying, as we were, radio licenses and they were discriminating against African Americans (unclear).  All of that was going on at the same time, so it was juggling a lot of balls in the air and trying to get them, trying to get them resolved.  We did a fairly good job doing it but, and then you got the eight hundred pound gorilla of the [U.S.] Congress that was just breathing down your neck trying to, you know, every time we turned I had to spend more time preparing the chairman [William E. Kennard] for testifying on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] which was so time consuming, but that was, that's the nature of the beast.  And you just had to do it.  So it was a l- it was, it was, it was tough.
Story_ID: 648270
Speaker 1: And then I went back to the White House after that.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So this was in 2000?
Speaker 1:  	Um-hm that was--
Speaker 2: Now this is while Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] is still president?
Speaker 1:  	Yes.
Speaker 2: So this is 1999.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: It's gotta be--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --at least.
Speaker 1:  	Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay so you went back to the White House in what capacity?
Speaker 1:  	I was executive director of the White House Community Empowerment board.  And you're gonna say what does that do?  The White House initiative on community empowerment was, you know the president was very interested in his first campaign, when he was going around the country, he saw the devastation in lots of communities, just sure, the amount of poverty, the lack of businesses in black, Hispanic, poor people who just didn't seem to have opportunities, and so what he created were those empowerment zones, and part of my job was, I tried to look at things simplistically sometimes, maybe too simplistically, but my job was to work with the cabinet secretaries and those empowerment zones that we had already identified, what are the needs?  What does the secretary of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] have in his arsenal, things that he's doing community wise that we could get from the Department of HUD and put in Dallas [Texas]?  What does the secretary of HHS [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services] has health related in a program that we could put in Birmingham [Alabama].  That was an empowerment zone.  And so part of what my job was to look at those areas, those cities, those empowerment zone areas, get an assessment of their needs and then talk to the cabinet secretaries in those various departments and try to get them to steer resources to those areas.  And to do it in a more forceful, direct way.  Not okay, two years from now you can apply for this (unclear).  The president wanted immediate help.  So several places we put job centers, in South Dakota, in Birmingham, 'cause folks were, had high unemployment and no prospects and so he wanted to, I want people to get the training they're needing so let's put those Job Corps centers there.  So we, we did a lot of that as an example.
Speaker 2: I know there were hearings in Chicago [Illinois] in community colleges--
Speaker 1:  	Yes.
Speaker 2: --and several big gatherings and people discussing the empowerment zone, what it was, how to fill out an application, how to get involved in it.
Speaker 1:  	And helped us, we tried to streamline the paperwork so it wasn't so onerous, but you got the necessary information.  But my job was more action oriented.  You see the need, find the solution, get the solution to the need.  And that was, it was done under the auspicious of the vice president's office, so I actually worked for Vice President Gore [Al Gore] on his staff--that's where I was listed in the hierarchy.  But it was a presidential initiative that the vice president managed.
Story_ID: 648271
Speaker 1: Yeah I remember that well, so, but this I guess comes to an end in 2000 when the, George W. Bush [President George Walker Bush] is elected, right?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So, okay.
Speaker 2: And then I was the, I worked in the, it was the Old Executive Office Building, now it's the Eisenhower Executive Office Building [Washington, D.C.].  And then I went to the American Federation of Teachers, my first union job with labor.  Very interesting.
Speaker 1: Well this is American Federation of Teachers in 2000, yeah?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So what was going on there in 2000?
Speaker 2:  	Everything.  Unions were, this was a teachers union and the president wanted No Child Left Behind [No Child Left Behind Act of 2001].  That was our big, our big deal, trying to figure it out.  The president was in, he had come up with the initiative and we were against a lot of it, and trying to figure out how we as a union would sell this to our membership and our membership was calling saying, "We don't do this."  I mean, "That doesn't work for us in Michigan," or, "This is not going to work in South Florida," and how can we, how can we get them to see the error of their ways now before this gets passed.  So we were in a big push to try to influence the, the direction, the policy direction of No Child Left Behind.  And it, then after it passed, then how do you implement it and how you--how do you make it workable for a lot of schools and it had real implications for teachers because it-- teacher preparation and preparedness-- and we were just trying to monitor as best we could the effects of that and the morale of our teachers went to rock bottom, which meant that the funds that the union had been enjoying over the years, were decreased, and we're in a fight, just pure and simple.  We were in an out and out fight, and so we were trying to, it was that, that schism between what the AFT thought was good for the kids and what worked for the teachers.  And in the middle here was No Child Left Behind and it was kicking us on both ends.  And we just, it was a no win situation.  The politics of it was very conservative and you would think pro, pro the student, but it was very anti the teacher.  And then it, it bought some clear revelations that would have a lot of people in the classroom that didn't need to be in the classroom.  And, so you had to come to an understanding of that and then what do you do about that because what the opposition was saying, look if you got all these, these teachers that graduated college in 1920 and they're teaching in 1985 and 1990 and they don't know what they're doing, and the subject matter has changed and they haven't been back to upgrade their skills and their knowledge and so what do you do?  And you got these people who are there, who are tenured and are at the cusp of retiring.  And then what do you do with these folks?
Story_ID: 648272
Speaker 1: We heard complaints back in 2002 interviewing people that, in the [U.S.] Department of Education that No Child Left Behind [No Child Left Behind Act of 2001] might not have been as bad if it was actually funded--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --by the administration [of President George Walker Bush].
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Which it wasn't. So, it presents a challenge when standards have to be met and there are no funding, no funding to back it up.
Speaker 2:  	Well, and then part of it, funding for schools, only 7 percent of public education was funded through the federal government, the rest of it is states.   And so the conservatives were saying, we're not into education, that's not our business, that the state business so let the states run it.  And then you got fifty states running fifty or so different kind of programs and then where's the uniformity?  I was listening to National Public Radio [NPR] the other day and they were talking about the common standards that some of the states are opting out of now from No Child Left Behind 'cause the whole premise was if all the states are doing the same kind of things and measuring it in a way that you can see the student's progress, then there should be an equal or just about an equal amount of resources that are needed to achieve that.  And so you can measure goods in and the product that comes out.  Well some of the states are opting out of the, the measurement tool that, that's been offered from every state and so we're again back to the unbalanced approach of educating our young folks.  So what you--the education you get in South Dakota and then you move to Georgia, it may be a different standard, so there we go.  And that's what, the conservatives say that's the right thing to do.  Because if your states has a--states' rights.  It's up to the state and the people that live in that state to determine what that is and so we shouldn't have this commonality.
Speaker 1: Think even [HistoryMaker] Armstrong Williams go in trouble for being funded to promote it--
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --though the program itself wasn't funded.
Speaker 2:  	Armstrong Williams.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was an interesting time.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: No Child Left Behind and--
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 648273
Speaker 1: Do you think in retrospect, looking back at this, do you think it [No Child Left Behind Act of 2001] was an attempt to weaken the public schools?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Because there was an effort to, they wanted to privatize it, for money.  I mean it's just like prisons: it's not so much the crimes you committed, it's the prison industrial complex that's grown up around it that these people made gazillions of dollars off of.  So they started privatizing the schools so people are making gazillions of dollars off of charter schools and all of that so it's, it's how can you make money from it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  A lot of the schools, the private schools that were started as a result of the integration of public schools have always coveted public money.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.  Always, especially the Catholic schools.  So that was, that was a, that too was a challenging time.  I guess I've gone from, as my mom [Lena Jones Miller] would say, pillar to post, from challenging, from challenge to challenge to challenge from the [U.S.] Congress then you go to the White House and you got everything.  That's a job that you don't, it's beyond twenty-four seven, it's thirty-eight nine, thirty-eight days, thirty-eight hours in the day, nine days a week.  You never, never leave the White House, and then going on to coming back to the Federal Trade Commission just problem after problem after problem, and there have been significant problems, concerns and challenges that I've tried to work through with folks.  So it's been an interesting time, a very interesting time.  If I had my druthers, instead of trying to be a doctor, I probably would have gotten a law degree, because of the discipline of the training, the mental discipline I think, and the analytics of it would have been useful.  But you know you learn, and you get in there and you fight and survive.
Story_ID: 648274
Speaker 1: Now you were working for American Federation of Teachers during the election of 2000 when Al Gore was--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --defeated by the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision [Bush v. Gore, 2000] that--
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: That was tough.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was just--
Speaker 2: That was a heartbreaker.
Speaker 1: Yeah, where he wins the popular election but he loses basically because they won't count the--the Supreme Court rules that they should not count the Florida--
Speaker 2:  	I went to Florida to help out a member, Arm [ph.], oh what's Arm's last name, anyway, he and I were assigned a county to go to and the county clerk told us, "Don't come here, don't call here, you're not wanted, and we'll let you know at some point what Mr. Gore's numbers are here."  So I tried to engage her.  I says, "But we are representing the Gore campaign, and we have a right to know the results of tabulation after they had gone through all this."  She said, "You in Florida, lady, you don't matter here.  I don't care if you are with Gore, you don't matter here, and I'll let you know when I wanna let you know," and I said, "Will you let us know before the press knows?"  She says, "Young lady you don't get it. You don't matter here and have a good day," and she shut her door.  I said, "Okay, welcome to Florida, and the presidential recount."  I think they eventually sued her and then they were, the lady that became a member of [U.S.] Congress from Florida [Katherine Harris], what was her name, that Bush [President George Walker Bush] personally, anyway, she was the state--secretary of state of Florida and she was calling all of the county clerks and telling them, "Talk to no one with the Gore campaign, no one."  So they had instructions to freeze us out, give us no information, even though it was public information.  They just shut Florida down and I, you could see the power of politics on a state when one party controls, they absolutely shut Florida down. You weren't able to get any information.
Speaker 1: Do you think Al Gore capitulated too soon or should he have--
Speaker 2:  	No.  He wasn't, they, they had decided that he was not going to be president and when I say they, the power structure in the Republican Party, they were not going to, had it not been the Supreme Court, it would have been something else.  They were just not going to allow him to be president, they just weren't, and I think they had fixed the wheels of government to make sure that didn't happen.  Certainly the Supreme Court suggested that.  That decision was a clear indication that they would go to extreme lengths to make sure that didn't happen.  They wanted, they wanted the White House.
