Story_ID: 71385
Speaker 1: Okay.  Miss Morgan, we're gonna... I just ask that you look at me.  Everyone's gonna be quiet over there [chuckling].   And I'm gonna start out by slating it.  And my name is Julieanna Richardson.  And I'm the interviewer.  And Scott Sterns is the videographer.  And so I'd like to have you first state your name and spell it for us including your middle name. And I...  And your date of birth.  And we'll go on from there.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I don't have a middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  That's fine.
Speaker 2: Start now?  My name is Rose Morgan.  I was born 1912.  I'm ninety-eight years old [ninety years old at time of interview].
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have today's date and our location.
Speaker 2: Today's date is...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] January 28th [2002].
Speaker 2: January the 28th at 5201...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] 2002.
Speaker 2: 2002, 5201 Cornell Avenue [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I'd like to have your profession.
Speaker 2: My profession was in cosmetics, beauty salons, banking, real estate.  And now I'm a homebody [chuckling].
Speaker 1: That's hard to think... hard to imagine.  Yes.
Story_ID: 71386
Speaker 1: Okay, Miss Morgan, I want to first ask you about... Well, you know, I first started asking about your family.  And I'd like to first ask about your father and his name.  And what you know of his background.  I know your father had a great impact on you.
Speaker 2: Yes.  My father [Chaptle Morgan] was sixty-seven when he died.  And there were nine children.  I was the seventh child.  And he always felt that I had something that he could help me with.  And I could always do things with my hands.  And at the age of ten, I started making cut flowers.  And we did not go to the hardware to buy wire.  He used to pick wire up from the streets and bring it home.  And I had this paper that I would cut out the flowers... Cut the patterns out and make cut flowers.  And I had children going from door to door to sell them.  And we were getting then something like three cents for, oh, maybe six flowers.  And I would give them a penny and I had two cents.  And I thought I was making money.  So the girls wanted more money.  I said, "Then we have to raise our price."  So we raised the price to five cents.  So I gave them two cents on a bunch of flowers.
Speaker 1: Cute story.  But I want to even... Tell me about your father and what you know of his background.  You know, was he originally from Shelby, Mississippi?  And so that's where you were born, but...
Speaker 2: I was born yes in Edwards, Mississippi.  And he moved his [our] family to Shelby, Mississippi.  He was a farmer.  He raised cotton and corn and vegetables.  And we had a big cotton field.  My mother used to get up in the mornings, something like four, five o'clock and make breakfast.  And they'd have breakfast.  And they'd go to the fields.   And at that particular time, everybody went to the fields... Those who were not in school.   And I used to go with my mother to take water to my family to drink at noontime when they'd come home.  And instead of having dinner at five, they'd come home and have their dinner around one o'clock.  So when they finished, they had supper.  And after supper, they got themselves together to get ready to get up the next morning.
Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about his growing up at all?  Anything... Did his...your father ever share any of his growing up?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I don't remember too much about his growing up, because he had one brother as I can remember.
Story_ID: 71387
Speaker 1: He had one brother as I can remember.  And I didn't know too much about him. And your father's name?
Speaker 2: Chaptle Morgan.  He was quite a man.  Everybody respected him.  He had a big white horse.  And he would ride this horse.  And people were very jealous of his horse.  So one night the horse was sick.  And they had fed the horse glass. And he had to...  They had to cut the... kill the horse.  He was the most beautiful horse.  White horse.  And Mr. Morgan owned this horse.  When he would go to town he would ride this horse.
Story_ID: 71388
Speaker 1: And your mother, what was her name?
Speaker 2: My mother was Winnie Morgan.  Her name was Winnie Morgan.  She had brothers and sisters.  And was the mother of nine children.  I'm the seventh child.  All of them were smart.  They were very smart.  I always felt that I was the leader of the pack [chuckling].  I... At the age of ten, I was making these cut flowers and had these kids going from door to door selling them.  And I felt I was in business.  So I really started business at the age of ten.
Speaker 1: Now what was your mother's maiden name... Do you know... remember that or... I know her name was Winnie.  But what was her maid...?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously].  Richardson.
Speaker 1: Richardson.  Oh! I'm a Richardson.
Speaker 2: You are a Richar...?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: That's right, you are.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.  But she...  Do you know where she was originally from?
Speaker 2: Mississ... Same place...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Mississippi?
Speaker 2: my father.  Yeah, [Edwards,] Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was...  And did she share any of her growing up or was she a
Speaker 2: quie... She looks like a quiet woman.  Was she a quiet woman?
Speaker 1: Yes she was.  You know how when you have... My mother was the mother of nine children. When you have nine children all you had to do is to think about your children and their food and getting their clothes together.  She was really the woman of the house.
Story_ID: 71389
Speaker 1: And what... And I know that you're very much like your father.  But what do you... You know, we each take attributes from our mother and father.  And I was wondering what, you know, what you think your... You know, what similarities do you have with your father?  And then also what similarities do you have with your mother?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Well my father [Chaptle Morgan] felt that everything that I did was great.  And he used to praise every little thing that I attempted to do.  And he helped me.  Because he said that I had a great imagination.  And I felt that I had a great imagination.  I could do things with my hands.  And I could direct my little friends what I wanted them to do.  I've always been a director [chuckling]... from the age of ten.  Had them going... Working for me.  Imagine my having a staff at the age of ten [chuckling].
Speaker 1: And making money on them too [laughing].
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously laughing].
Speaker 1: But let me... What about your mother?  Was there anything that you, you know, in terms of, you know, the attributes that you got from her?
Speaker 2: Not really.  She was always sure that I was clean, my clothes looked good.  And whatever I wanted to do, and my father agreed, she would... It was okay with her.
Story_ID: 71390
Speaker 1: And do you have any... Can you share with us your earliest memory?
Speaker 2: You mean something that happened to me?
Speaker 1: Early. The earliest memory you have of your life.
Speaker 2: Getting ready to leave [Edwards,] Mississippi and come to Chicago [Illinois].  That was the greatest day of my life.  I remember I never had a coat of my own. You know, how you have brothers.  I always wore the brother's jacket for as... for my coat.  And when they left Shelby [Mississippi] to come to New York... come to Chicago [Illinois], I had a little black velvet coat, high top shoes.  And I thought I was really dressed up.  I was a queen.  I just couldn't imagine my looking the way I looked.  But we came to Chicago and got off at the 12th Street station.  I shall never forget.  It was in the wintertime.  And I said, "Oh I don't think I want to stay here. It's too cold."  It was in the wintertime [chuckling] when we came.  But we moved to 4926 Vincennes [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  And that was in 1927 [1922].  And, you know, it was like... In that block, we were the only black family in that block.  And there was a family that lived across the street.  He was in real estate.  And these people had something against him.  And they dropped a bomb on his front.  And blew off the front.  And it blew all of our windows out.  All I wanted to do was to leave Chicago and go back to Mississippi [chuckling].  But it was just something that happened.  And it was over.
Speaker 1: Now I want... You... Were you six years old when you moved? Or were you older when you moved to Chicago [Illinois].  'Cause you're born in 1912.  I just want to make...
Speaker 2: That was a mistake.  I was ten years old.
Speaker 1: You were ten, okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So it was really more like 1922 and '27 [1927]... Than '27 [1927].  But let me... Can you... Do you know why your father moved to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Because he wanted his children to get an education.  He wanted them to come to Chicago [Illinois], because he thought that they had more of a chance than they had in Mississippi on a farm.  Which it happened that they all got good jobs.
Story_ID: 71391
Speaker 1: And I want you to just... I'm trying to still establish something.  I do not believe I did not start with my questions.  Okay.  I'm going to have to go back real quickly and do that.  But before I do that, with your... I always start with the same questions.  I can't believe I didn't do that.   With your... Can you tell me your siblings' names and the order?  You know, 'cause you're the seventh of nine, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But if you could start with the oldest and go, you know, to the youngest.
Speaker 2: The oldest was a brother.  His name was Lacy Morgan.  And the next was my sister.  Her name was Mattie Morgan.  The next was a brother, Chaptle Morgan.  The next was another brother, Burn, "B U R N" Burn Morgan.  Then a sister, Ardelia [Taylor] Morgan.  Another sister, Josephine Morgan.  And then there was Rose Morgan, Albert Morgan and Fred Morgan.  Is that nine?
Story_ID: 71392
Speaker 1: Now Miss Morgan, I need to go back.  There're five questions I ask of everyone [chuckling].  And I can't believe I did this.  But they're very... They're sort of People magazine-ish.  They're short.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: My favorite food?  My favorite food now is something that can keep [chuckling] me thin. [Chuckling.]  I avoid starched foods.  My favorite food... I like vegetables.  I eat a lot of salads.  And I like cabbage.  That's a vegetable that I like.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color?  [Pause] Blue and red.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is like July and August.  I like the hot weather.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to go to vacation?
Speaker 2: Well, I go to Florida.   And I used to go down to Atlantic City [New Jersey] when I lived out East.  Those are my favorite places now.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have a favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Story_ID: 71393
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now let's go back.  So you were ten years... You were ten years old when you moved to Chicago [Illinois] then, huh [1922]?  You said?  ten years, okay.  And that was at the time that you start making artificial flowers.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Now did you find... Did you find that your family, in the transition from, you know, from Mississippi here, That there was a transition? You know, that everyone had to go through?  Do you remember that at all?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now when... So let's talk... I mean you had talked about the making of the artificial flowers.  And, you know, around that same time, I think it was a year later you start working in the laundry?
Speaker 2: I did.  I started working in a laundry shaking sheets.  I worked there for about three weeks.  Oh my arms.  I couldn't raise my arms, pulling those sheets up, couldn't raise my arms.  I said, "I can't do this."  So I started doing hair.  And ever since then I've been doing hair.  I used to shampoo my little friends hair.  And their mothers would braid it up.  And then I learned how to press hair.  I started shampooing and pressing, started doing hair at home.  I did hair at home until I went to beauty school.
Speaker 1: Now I wanna go back to the laundry though.  Because there was still... a story about that your father said that if you... if... You know, you were complaining about it.
Speaker 2: About getting out of the bed to get up in the mornings.  He [Chaptle Morgan]  told me, he said, "Rose, if you've made that bed hard you're gonna have to lay on it.  And I [unclear] wanted to go to work, you didn't' want to go to school.  So now you're gonna have to get up and go to work."  I said, "I might be on a hard bed, but I'm gonna get myself a feather mattress.  I'm not gonna have a hard bed [chuckling] to lay on."
Speaker 1: So you actually... So you start working that early, that young.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And so his whole thing is if you don't want to go to school... Were you going to school still?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He said, "If you're not gonna go to school and if you're not going to work, you're gonna have to do something."   I said, "Well I'm going to do something.  I have in mind what I want to do."  And I started doing hair at home.
Story_ID: 71394
Speaker 1: Now who was th... Di... Who did you start practicing on, your friends or your other siblings?  You have a lot of boys though in the family right, too.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah.  My little friends.  My little girlfriends.  Their mothers were very happy to have someone to shampoo their hair and comb it out.  Then I learned to press out the hair.  And I learned to curl.  I taught myself.  Before I went to school I was doing hair.
Speaker 1: So why do you think you have such an affinity for doing hair?  Or what attracted you?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Because I've always been able to do things with my hands.  And I've had a great imagination.  You have to have an imagination to be a good hairdresser.  You have to know what you want the person to look like. Even with makeup, I started early.  With makeup.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And so you actually started making... You know, you worked... So you're doing hair out of your home.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay, for your friends.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And the mothers are bringing them.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Were you charging at that point?
Speaker 2: Of course!  Of course I was charging [chuckling].  I was making money.  I started making money at age of ten when I started making cut flowers going from door to door selling them.  So I think I've been in business since the age of ten [chuckling].
Speaker 1: And did your parents... Did they ever say anything about your being an entrepreneur?  Your father always encouraged you, right?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] He encouraged me.  He just felt that... He praised me with everything that I ever attempted to do.   He thought it was great.  So it made me think I could do anything.  'Cause my father thought it was great.
Story_ID: 71395
Speaker 1: And were there other people in the... I want you to describe a little bit your - as far as the question, the question was... I want you to describe a little bit just your family life.  You know, how was family life? 'Cause it's a relatively large family.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And... But, you know, can you just give some examples of how your family life was?
Speaker 2: Well my sister... older sister [Mattie Morgan] was married when we left the South [Mississippi].  And my oldest brother [Lacy Morgan] was married.  And then I had a brother [Chaptle Morgan, Jr.] that was next to my oldest sister had left home before any of us left the South.  And he used to write back and say what great things were happening to him in Chicago [Illinois].  So that gave my father [Chaptle Morgan] the incentive to decide to bring his entire family away.  So my father had a cotton farm and... farm.  And he sold his cotton at... to other gins from... You know, they have cotton mills... cotton gins. Sold it to other companies.  And he created money.  When he left the South he had money to take care of his family.  So he left the South and brought some of the children.  And left my mother [Winnie Morgan] with myself and my sister that's here [Adelia Morgan] and a brother.  And he moved us from the farm to the city.  And then he sent back for us.
Speaker 1: And... But here in your life when you got here, what... How would you describe your life?  The home life for us. And the community that you... But, you know, home life I'd like to...
Speaker 2: Well see that's... I was in school.  I went to school.  And the home life was... It was good.  My father... As I said, we went to 4926 Vincennes Avenue [Chicago, Illinois].  And there weren't any black people out there. We had an eight-room apartment.  This was a big apartment.  So we had all the family living in this eight rooms plus we had our cousin and his wife living there.  Well, you know, how it is when you have all those people so you can pay the rent.  So, to me, at that age I thought I had a beautiful life.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And did... What was your father doing?  You know, how did he make a living here when he first got here?
Speaker 2: He was a night clerk at the hospital.  Not in a hospital, in a hotel.  It... And then he got his sons... He got jobs for them.  Now what jobs they were at the time I don't really remember.
Speaker 1: And what school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Willard, Willard [Elementary] School.  At 49th and Forestville [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Was there anyone else influencing your life sort of at that time besides your father and your, you know, your family?  Anyone else you looked up to?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The community that you grew up in, can you describe that community?  You said, "It was, you know, the place you first moved to... It was... You were the first black family."  Or [unclear]...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm, um-hmm, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So I mean can you just describe it?   Who were they?  Were they, you know, sort of white ethnics or what were they?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] They were white.  Most... 49th and Forestville [Chicago, Illinois].   That's where the school... Willard [Elementary] School.
Speaker 1: Nothing about the community or anything?  Things sort of centered around family life, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I was just trying to sort of get a sense... Anything about Chicago [Illinois] around that time?
Speaker 2: I just thought it was the coldest place in the world [chuckling].  I wanted to go back to Mississippi.  Back...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Did you go... Did you ever travel back? The family travel back?  Once you got here, you were here?
Speaker 2: I've only been back once since I've been here.  And I was grown when I went back.  And that was only for just a day.
Speaker 1: And your father, he never went back?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He was probably... Once he...
Speaker 2: No he never went back.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Do you think the killing of that horse had something to do with him wanting to leave?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  Why... As I said to you before, my brother came here.  And wrote back to tell them that he was living where they had running water and eve... How nice everything was.  And he decided he wanted to bring all the other kids he had.
Story_ID: 71396
Speaker 1: So, excuse me.  So you went to the Willard [Elementary] School.  And then what school did you go to afterwards?  What... You went to high school, right?
Speaker 2: I didn't really go to high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went... I decided to go to beauty school.  I went to Morris Beauty Academy.  Not to learn, to do hair.  I went for the anatomy.  So I could pass the exam to get my license.
Speaker 1: And...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Because...
Speaker 1: What...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] before I went to school, I had people from the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], South Side [Chicago, Illinois], all over coming to get their hair done.  It... See I had... I have always had a great imagination.  I could always do things with my hands.  And people would get up at five o'clock in the morning to come to my house.  So I could do their hair before they went to work.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: That was at an early age.
Speaker 1: So word spread about you quickly.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.  And how would you approach someone's head at that time?  I mean if you... Would you take a look at it?  Would you feel it?  I mean what...How do people approach, you know, hair?
Speaker 2: Oh no.  Then in those days you don't do that.  They see somebody else's hair that you've done.  And they want to look like what you... In your mind.  You say nothing to them. You just go and do the hair.  And they like what they saw in the mirror.
Speaker 1: And around that time people were... You... Were you doing men's hair at all or just...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] No.
Speaker 1: Always women. Okay.  But in... Okay.
Speaker 2: Not always.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Because...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously].  After I...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Until you had your salon.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Okay.  So that... Were you happy with the education you got at Morris School?
Speaker 2: Yes!
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you find that you felt that you... Did you learn anything there?
Speaker 2: Of course!  I learned anatomy.
Speaker 1: But what did you learn in the anatomy?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I learned about the scalp.  I learned about the treatments that I had to do.  And about cutting the hair.  Some things that I didn't do myself.  But, you know, when you have an imagination and you see what's been done, you can copy it.  You see how a person who's a professional... You see what they do.  You don't have to have someone to teach you that.  You see it, and you do it.  That's if you have that kind of mind.  And that's the kind of mind I had.
Speaker 1: And who owned the Morris School at that time?  Was this the main sch... beauty school in Chicago or... Do you know who owned it or...
Speaker 2: Morris, Mr. Morris himself.   His name is Morris.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it a pretty... It was it a good sch... It was the school that people went to for beauty [unclear]?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Well now, you know, that's been, oh I'd say seventy-five years ago [chuckle].  I mean it goes in and out of your mind.  You have people who were in the school who They practiced out on people who come from the streets and want to do their hair... Get their hair done.  That's how most schools are... operate.
Story_ID: 71397
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then after school... After you graduated you opened a booth right?  You rented a booth, right?
Speaker 2: M-mm, m-mm..
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: I got my license [chuckling].  Well yes.  After I went up there, I rented a booth on 55th Street [Chicago, Illinois] called Coleia's Beauty Shop.  And she was so glad to have me come in, because at... my knowledge was great.  And it helped her.  And then she had her sister to come in.  And after her sister came in, she wanted her sister... She had learned the things that I was doing.  So she was trying to teach her sister.  So I had to leave.  So I went back home and worked in the house.  I worked in my home.  And then I worked there for maybe about a year.  And then I got a booth at South Park and 60th Street.  And I stayed there.  And I met this girl Oletha White.  She was a dancer.  And she was one of my customers.  And she got Ethel Waters for me and a lot of the stars.  So she said to me, "Rose, I'm going to New York.  Would you like to go." I said, "Oh I can't leave.  I'm the breadwinner for my family."  'Cause I was making the money then.  So then I called her back and told her, "Yes I could go for five days."  And I went with her to New York.  And we drove her 1938 Ford.  She had a new car.  And when we got to the George Washington Bridge [New York], I looked across and saw the skyline of all these tall buildings.  I said, "Is that New York?"  She said, "Yes."  "People live in those buildings?"   'Cause, you know, these are flat buildings.  And these are high buildings down there.  And I thought New York was the place.  So we drove on up.  And we went on down to Ethel Water's house.  And I... They got a room for me upstairs in her building.  And she had two young... Or had a friend with two daughters.  And they took me on a boat ride.  And I saw...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] We have to change tapes.   Okay.
Story_ID: 71398
Speaker 1: Okay.  You know, I wanna ask you the spelling of two names. The woman who you start first working with in her salon.  Then she got her sister in was Co...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Coleia.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: "C-O-L-A..."  How you spell, Adele?
Speaker 1: Off camera voice, sister Ardelia Taylor:  Coleia? "C-O-L-E-I-A".
Speaker 2: Okay.  And then the friend of yours who, you know, who introduced you to Ethel [Waters]... The dancer... I'm sorry, your client.  What was her name?
Speaker 1: Oletha White.  She was a dancer at the Elise Palace...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously]. Here?
Speaker 1: Here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.  "O-L-E-T-H-A"?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Oletha White.
Speaker 2: Okay. Okay.  Now okay.  So you go... At this point in time when you go to... when you go to New York for the first time you've already done Ethel... I'm sorry, Ethel Waters.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: I went down to the Palace Theatre [New York] to do hair.  And she invited her friend.  Her friend recommended me to go to the Palace.  And her friend decided she wanted to drive to New York in 1938.  And when we drove across the George Washington Bridge, I saw all these tall buildings.  I just felt well all this was great... "Does people live in those buildings?" I said.  She said, "Yes."  'Cause here you only saw these little flat buildings.  And when we got down to her house, I went down to do her hair.  And she had these two young girls and their mother there.  So the next night the girls took me on a boat ride.  And I went on this boat ride.  I had never seen people dressed up like these people were dressed up.  Their hair was beautiful.  Everybody was just gorgeous.  I said, "Oh this is the place for me. Chicago [Illinois] is a country town.  It's like Mississippi [chuckling]."  I said, "I'd like to come back to New York."  So I came back.  I told my family I wanted to go back to New York They said, "You're out of your mind.  You can't go back to New York."  Because see, I was the breadwinner [chuckling]. I was really helping with everything.  Everybody was working.  But I made my contribution.  So I stayed here for a little while.  This was in 1938.  And the last of 1938 I moved back to Chicago [Illinois].  I mean moved back to New York.  I went to New York.  I rented a booth.  The first week I took in ten dollars.  And my booth rent was ten dollars.  I made just the money.  But I stayed there.  And my money went up, up, up.  So I... There was a girl across the street that had a hat and dress shop.  I rented her kitchen.  Tore out everything in the kitchen and made space for two people, myself and another girl.  That's how I rented it.  And started in business. And I had so much business.  She had a dress and hat shop.  She had people coming in.  I moved across the street and bought a shop.  The lady was moving up on the hill.  I bought the shop, started out with five operators.  And I had eight operators when I decided to buy a brownstone.  I met a girl by the name of Olivia [Clarke] Stanford.  She was my customer.  She said, "Rose, I'm from Virginia."  And she said, "I went to school and I got my bachelors."  She said, "But I can't go around with a sign on my back and make money."  She said, "I need to be in business."  I said, "Really?"  I said, "Okay.  I'll sell you a third of my business."  We took that old brownstone and renovated it and opened it up.  Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] cut the ribbon [1946].
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: We started out... You've never seen so many people trying to get in.  We started out with thirteen operators.  Inside of six months we had fifty operators working in this brownstone place where I had a ten-year lease.  I stayed there for ten years.  After ten years...
Story_ID: 71399
Speaker 1: Miss Morgan, you're going too quickly!  You know [laughing].  I just wanna take you back a little bit though.  I wanna... Can I just take you back...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes!
Speaker 1: ...A little bit?  Okay.  I wanna take you back to even, you know, Ethel Waters.  And I was wondering, you know... Did you do her hair several times? Or was that the motivation?  And what even was she like as a person?
Speaker 2: Oh a lovely person.  She was at the Palace.  Palace Theater here [Chicago, Illinois].  I did her twice there.  That's how I happen to go.  But that was her friend that recommended me.  And that's how I happened to meet her.  And then when we went to New York, I stayed in her building on the second floor, which she had upstairs, and downstairs.  And I met these girls.  We went on this boat ride.  And I decided New York was for me.
Speaker 1: Now what was it... What... How was New York life compared... I mean you were on this boat ride.  But you're also... This is you're basically experiencing life in Harlem, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  And I had no experience here in Chicago [Illinois].  I worked.  I did not get out socially.  And that was my first time out socially seeing how people dressed up, what they looked like.  And I said, "This is what I need."  And I wanted to go back to Chi... to New York.
Speaker 1: So how did the blacks in New York differ from the blacks in Chicago [Illinois] besides you saying, you know, "A lot of people here were [chuckling] country."  But how did they differ? You know, in their attitudes or manners or just even their background?
Speaker 2: Well they... I was fortunate enough to meet the people who were teachers.  Some were doctors and people who were in social work.  I met a different group of people there.  And I was be... I was able to stretch my imagination with them more so than here.  I just met the same people here.  It was altogether in New York.  New York is different from Chicago [Illinois].  Chicago... You people live in Chicago, you think Chicago's great [laughing].  But New York was really something.  You meet people from all over the world.  And it was just different.  And it was different for me, because I was not exposed to those kind of people here.  I was with my family and with the little people I knew.  Then I got a chance to meet the people who were in show business.  I just met everybody.  I know people from all over the world.  And I met them through New York.
Speaker 1: So New York allowed you to almost take a canvas and paint it from...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 1: ...You know, from scratch.
Speaker 2: It did.
Speaker 1: Right. Okay.
Speaker 2: It did.
Story_ID: 71400
Speaker 1: And the place where you... where, you know, you were... Have... The woman... You opened up in her hat and dress shop... Where was that located?
Speaker 2: Across the street from where I was renting a booth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But what street was that?
Speaker 2: 45th... 44th and 7th Avenue [New York].  Between 45th and 44th.
Speaker 1: So it was Midtown.
Speaker 2: Nah [Harlem].
Speaker 1: 45th?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] 100th.
Speaker 1: 145th.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  [unclear].  Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And this you... So you immediately... The people that you got to work with you there... Did you, I mean did you recruit them or...
Speaker 2: You mean my customers?
Speaker 1: No, no.  You said that, "When you went to..." You know, you decided to go in and you tore things up in her kitchen.  And you had two other people come with you...
Speaker 2: One other person.
Speaker 1: One other person.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm. You wanna know how I met that person [Olivia Clarke Stanford]?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: I met her as a customer.  And trained her as a beautician.   I trained her and trained her my way.  And we made good business.  And then I was fortunate enough to have a person across the street that was moving to a brownstone and putting her business in this brownstone.   I bought her shop from her.  And I had started out with five operators.  I started out with five.  And then ate it up with... ended up with eight.  And I stayed there five years.  And decided to buy this old brownstone, which had been vacant for fifteen years.  All of the people up on the hill, the pimps and the hustlers, they said, "Oh that girl doesn't know what she's doing.  She's gonna lose her shirt."  But I renovated that building.  And as I said to you, Adam Clayton [Powell, Jr.] cut the ribbon when we had the grand opening [1946].
Speaker 1: Now so you had... To have someone like Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] there, you had to have already started establishing a rela... a reputation there.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Yes.  I had already started a reputation.  And then I was fortunate enough to know a lot of the politicians up on the hill.  You know, New York had a place called Sugar Hill [Harlem].  And that was Sugar Hill.  And that really made the name for Rose Meta. Everybody all over knew Rose Meta had taken that old building that had been vacant for fifteen years and made a house of beauty.  And the cars... Chauffeurs used to bring their people there to get their hair done.  And you had a newspaperman by the name of Dan Burley.  I don't know whether you knew of him.  He worked with the Amsterdam News.  Dan Burley said, "If you want blow hair, go to Rose Morgan.  You'll come out with bouncy, shaky hair."  'Cause I took all the oil out of the hair.  Then people used to have little curls.  Years ago, little curls.  You wouldn't know about it.  But I took all that out and made them have straight hair.  And you'd come out shaking your hair.  Oh it was just wonderful.
Story_ID: 71401
Speaker 1: Now... So what techniques did you learn at that point?  How were you able to do that?
Speaker 2: My own imagination. I knew that if you wanted the hair to be loose it cannot be sticky.  You have to blow dry and brush that hair while the blower was on it to make it loose.  And then when you pressed the hair out you didn't have grease on it.  You had the oil and it made it loose.  So I created this.  This was my method.  And everybody wanted to learn it.  I used to train all these people that worked for me maybe a year or two years and go out, move on.  And I said, "Well..." I said, "The people who are coming in town... I'm known now." All down through the East [coast].   People would come in... They would come in and go to lunch from Connecticut, Brooklyn [New York], all over, to get their hair done.  But when that operator left me, they didn't know where they were going.  They could take some.  But I advertised.  It was just beautiful.
Speaker 1: Do you know, I think that that... I wanna concentrate on that a little bit.  Because I think that that sounds like even techniques being used today.  Because they're a whole... I mean I remember when I grew up; people would take that [chuckling].  You know, it would be very oily.  You know, they...
Speaker 2: Greasy.
Speaker 1: Greasy.  And so you're saying you figured out much earlier on that that was what you should do?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Almost fifty years ago.  I did that fifty years ago.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And that made the name Rose Meta, Rose Morgan.  I used two pl... I had two places, Rose Morgan House of Beauty and Rose Meta House of Beauty.  Rose Meta was a trade name.  And I decided I wanted to use my own name.  So I had two places, one Rose Meta and one Rose Morgan.
Speaker 1: But this is... But the first place you had was this place that was... the last... You know, the mansion that you took over [401 West 148th Street, New York, Rose Meta House of Beauty].
Speaker 2: Yeah. Rose Meta.
Story_ID: 71402
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Okay.  I want you to describe even New York.  And who some of your clie... I mean clients were at the time.  And even what Harlem was at that time.  This is sort of... You know, we're out of the Harlem Renaissance really.  What is considered the Harlem Renaissance, right?  Because you had moved there you said in 1938.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So I'm just wanting you to describe, you know.  Who are some of the movers and shakers in New York at that time and...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Bessie Buchanan, which her husband owned the Savoy Ballroom.  [HM] Etta Moten [Barnett].  Fannie Robinson.  All of your top celebrities were my customers.  All the show people who came in.  And when people read about all these people going, everyone else wanted to come.  And I had publicity with the Amsterdam News, the Pittsburgh Courier.  Or even... That book in there shows you back from 1950 on up.  All of those newspapers.  That big book back there will show you all the people that came into the shop.  And all the advertising.  I kept it.
Speaker 1: Did you find that... I mean were those types of people coming to you when you first had, you know, you and the person working together, you know, in the dress and hat shop?
Speaker 2: No. No, no.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No. That was...
Speaker 1: This is much... But I wanna concentrate on your...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] That was back in '39 [1939]...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously].  Right.
Speaker 2: or '40 [1940].
Story_ID: 71403
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] I wanna concentrate on your early time then, you know, in New York.  Because you're learning at this point.  Even though you have a very entrepreneurial nature about you... Business nature I think instinctively.  You... Were there any things that you learned about, you know, being in business and operating and having people work for you?  I mean...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I started, yes.  No, well I didn't learn that until I went into the salon, which I had five people working.  I only had one person in the dress and hat shop. When I moved from there I had five people.  Then I learned what it meant to pay commissions and to have to be responsible for salaries for other people.  And that was around 1941, '40 [1940].  Yeah, in '38 [1938].  Yeah...  Yeah.  I went there in '38 [1938]... around '41 [1941].  'Cause I had to give salaries plus a commission.
Speaker 1: And did you find that... I mean were there any stories you would like to tell about that?  Were there things that were positive and negative?  Did you have some bad experiences?  And those were experiences that you learned from, you know, about how to basically operate a busi... You know, be in the salon business?
Speaker 2: My bad experience was when I moved across the street I had a girl... That's where the name came from, Rose Meta.  She was a Ziegfeld Folly.  And she was gonna go in business with me.  And I had rented the... This place and put the deposit down.  And her husband had left and gone away.  And she went to find her husband and never returned.  So then...
Speaker 1: Ardelia Taylor:  He went in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Ardelia Taylor: He went in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: Did he go in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 1: Her husband?
Speaker 2: Ardelia Taylor:  Yeah her husband.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But she went down to see him in Ohio before he went in the [U.S.] Army.  But she never returned.  And I had a friend that owned a liquor store, which was once a doctor.  And I told him.   He said, "Rosie, if you don't have all the money then you got to borrow the money."  I said, "Borrow the money?  I have some money, but I don't want to put all my money into the beauty salon."  So I did.  I went to the Carver Federal Savings and Loan.  And I got some money.  And I went... I opened that shop.  It was a trying thing, but it... Everything happened for the best.  She never came back.  So that's where the name Rose Meta came from.  Her name was Meta.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] I registered the name.  Rose Morgan doing business under the name of Rose Meta.  And I kept that name for ten years.  I kept it.  Then I decided to use my own name.
Speaker 2: So was she well known as a Ziegfeld [Folly]... whatever.  I mean was she a well-known person in the comm...
Speaker 1: No. She lived... She came from Washington [D.C.].   Oh yes.  She was a Ziegfeld Folly. Now you know that was years ago [chuckling].  And decided that she... Her sisters were in business in Washington [D.C.].  But she had no regrets.  She said that she was sorry she went away.  And then I franchised the name down in Detroit [Michigan].  And got her a job with the people in Detroit.  And she was pleased. We had no problems.
Story_ID: 71404
Speaker 1: Now when you went to... when you went to... Because she left and you had, you know, you had to borrow money... Did you...  Did they first turn you down?  Didn't you go to someplace else, too, first?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  I went to the Humana... Manufacture's Trust, no.  I went to Chemical Bank, I think, to try to get some money.  And they turned me down.  Then I had a friend.  This is when I wanted to get this money to open up [507 West] 145th Street [New York, 1955].  It was an old laundry I had to tear down and build.  That's one of those black place glass front buildings and...
Speaker 1: Ardelai Taylor:  That was after ten years.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Ardelia Taylor:  That was after you was Rose Meta for ten years.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.  I had done something for the man... The president of the Manufacturer's Trust Company.  He wanted to know... He built a building in the same street.  And he wanted to know would it... Would he be able to rent these apartments for a certain amount of money?  And I told him, "Yes."   I said, "But you've got to get the teachers, the lawyers, the doctors and the hustlers.  People who are making that kind of money."  And he was so happy I gave him this advice.  'Cause he had gone to Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] or the man who owned the Amsterdam News.  And all of them told him, "You ask Rose.  She's up [chuckling] on the [Sugar] hill [New York].  Ask her.  She'll be able to tell you."  And I gave him good advice.  So I told him, I said, "Well I'm coming to you for something [chuckling].  I need forty thousand dollars."  You know, I needed forty thousand dollars to get started there.  'Cause the place was costing two hundred fifty thousand dollars to do.  You know, he said, "No problem."  He said, "Get your people give me an estimate.  And send the people in.  And as they do the work we'll release the money to them."  And they did.  Wasn't that beautiful?  I didn't have to worry about the money.  And that was something, to tear down a laundry and to build... You'll see it in that book back there.  Those buildings that I built.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  Now did you... Okay.  I still wanna stay around like 1941, '42 [1942].
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: I'd like to stay there now.  I... Just for my own information, when you opened the brownstone building, what year was that?
Speaker 2: 148th Street.
Speaker 1: But do you know what year that was?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Ardelia Taylor:  1943.
Speaker 2: It was 1943?  So 1943 she opened.  Okay.   Boy your sister knows those dates over there [laughing].
Speaker 1: I was... It had been vacant for fifty years.
Speaker 2: Okay, been vacant.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 71405
Speaker 1: Did you... I just wanna understand.  What was New York like during that time?  And who were the people you were interacting with?  And who were some of your clients?  I'd just like to get some stories.
Speaker 2: All my clients were teachers and social workers.  I had all the top people who would pay the money.  And people who were in service.  And they used to drive up there in limousines in the car... I mean to get their hair done.  They would travel from Baltimore, Maryland...
Speaker 1: Ardelia Taylor:  Lena Horne.
Speaker 2: Oh you wanna know who were some of the customers?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I wanted to know some of your customers, you know... But you're saying this was your customer base in 1943 when you opened up the Rose... Was it Rose Meta at that time or was it Rose Morgan?
Speaker 2: Ardelia Taylor:  It was Meta.
Speaker 1: Rose Meta.
Speaker 2: It was Rose Meta.  When you opened up Rose Meta House of Beauty, what... Who were, you know, who were some of... First of all I wanna say, you saw this place.  Was it on Sugar Hill [New York]?  Was Rose...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] That was Sugar Hill.
Speaker 2: That's Sugar Hill.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Sugar Hill, yeah.
Speaker 2: Can you describe for people... You know, there'll be young people looking at this tape who won't even know Sugar Hill.  But Sugar Hill was a big thing.  Can you describe what Sugar Hill was?
Speaker 1: Sugar Hill.  All the top people lived at Sugar Hill.  That's why they call it Sugar Hill.  'Cause people up there had money.  They had houses they owned and beautiful apartments.  And it was just really Sugar Hill.  And when I had that opening at that place [Rose Meta House of Beauty, 401 West 148th Street, New York], it was really fantastic.  As I said to you, Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] cut the ribbon.  And they said, "Adam Clayton Powell is gonna cut the ribbon?"   I said, "Of course."  And he thought, "Well this is a great thing to do, to come and cut the ribbon for Rose Morgan."  It was really wonderful.  And we opened up as I said with thirteen operators.  Inside of six months I had sixty operators working there on three floors.
Story_ID: 71406
Speaker 1: So tell me what your vision for this building was.  And who worked with you to even get it prepared?  I mean did you have an architect work with you?  Who did the decorating, you know?  Were you pattering it off?  You know, did you... 'Cause this was really sort of high society.  And I'm wondering who...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Well I decided that I would only take three ro... three floors for the beauty salon.  And the other two floors... One I lived in.  And the person of whom I had in business with me then was Olivia Stanford.  She had the top floor, which was small, but all of them were small. You know how these brownstone buildings are like.  So, therefore, we had three floors for the beauty salon.  And it made it easy.  And we had switchboard and they're on... At that time about sixty operators working there.  'Cause we even had a salon in the basement.  We had booths in the basement.
Speaker 1: But what were you wanting to create when you... I mean you saw this old building. What I'm trying to say... And what was your vision for it?  You saw this building, but what was your vision?  Was it, you know... Because remember you said, "People were saying she's not... This... She's... This is not going [unclear]."
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Well I wanted a place up on the [Sugar] hill [New York].  See this was up on the hill.  I'd never pl... had a place up on the hill.  'Cause at that place we were so busy there.  I had to rent a place across the street.  An apartment for an annex for that place.  'Cause I didn't have the space there.  My vision was that I had never seen in New York a building with House of Beauty on it.  And I thought this would be an attraction for the people to say, "Well you're going to Rose Meta's House of Beauty?   Rose Meta's opening up a house of beauty."  And we had so many people trying to get in there.  It was just great.  And to start out with thirteen operators and inside of six months to have sixty people working in there.
Speaker 1: So how long did it take you to get it completed, I mean...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] About three months.
Speaker 1: Three mo... That's all?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So did you have an architect working with you or...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Do you... do...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I had a...
Speaker 1: Was that an architect of note or was it just... Was it a name that others would know the person who worked?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  Mr. Herd, no.  'Cause I thought I'd pull my hair out with him [laughing].  No, no.
Speaker 1: [Laughing] Okay.
Speaker 2: No [chuckling].
Speaker 1: So can you describe it? Like when you came in, you know, what was on the different floors and everything?  Can you describe that?
Speaker 2: Oh it was gutted out.  It just... It was nothing.  As I said, it had been vacant for fifteen years.  And whatever I did in there I had to have an imagination to do it myself.  I had a styling room on the first floor.  You walked in... A reception desk and the lounge room and nothing but styling.  When the operators would finish with the basic work, people'd come down to get their hair styled.  See I had hair stylists.  I didn't let a girl go through with the whole thing.
Story_ID: 71407
Speaker 1: So describe then... Describe what the experience was coming into your salon then.  'Cause that's different than... I mean what was the experience coming through?  I would make an appointment... I mean I would be taken... I'm just trying...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Oh yes.  You'd come in.  Reception would receive you.  And she'd assign you to your operator.  And then you'd go into a room to be styled.  We had maybe seven or eight people doing nothing but styling.  I taught everybody who came through those doors they had to do my method. They had to do the Rose Morgan, Rose Meta method.  And they had to learn to take the oil out the hair.  When we would dry your hair we would not have grease in your hair. We would spray your hair.  And we would brush it until... And we'd brush all the kinks out.  And when you leave there, if you didn't want it too curly and you wanted to... Years ago, like people are wearing their hair straight now, you could walk out of there and shake your hair.  Bouncy hair.  I don't know if you ever heard of this writer by the name of Dan Burley.  He used to write in his column, "If you want blow hair, go to Rose Morgan [chuckling].  You will not have the grease in the hair."
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: So that really made us famous.  But when we left there, I left an ov... Bought an old laundry on 145th Street [501 West 145th Street, New York].  I tore the whole thing down and built this two story of fifty-foot front by one hundred twenty-five.  And that was the place.  I had ten thousand people trying to get into that place to see what it was like.  And I believe I had Mrs. [Mayor Robert F.] Wagner to cut the ribbon.  That's what I showed you in that book back there.  She cut the ribbon for the place.  And it was misty rainy.  And the police was outside. They wouldn't let the cars stop in front of the place. They had to move on and walk back.  And they were in line from 145th Street to Amsterdam.  And they were in line with an umbrellas trying to get in.  They had to open the doors and let 'em in and let 'em out. They said it was the greatest opening for a business.  It was bigger than a Broadway show.
Speaker 1: We need to change tapes.  Okay.  Can you spell Meta?
Speaker 2: "M-E-T-A".
Speaker 1: Okay.  "M-E-T-A".
Speaker 2: One word.
Speaker 1: One word.
Speaker 2: Rose is the first name.  The name of the place was Rose Meta.  Rose Meta.  Meta, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Good. me.
Story_ID: 71408
Speaker 1: If you comb that hair out, part it into four balls, don't put grease in it, you put loose...
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] But why were you thinking not to put grease? That's what I'm...
Speaker 1: Because I didn't want the hair to be greasy.
Speaker 2: But everyone else was doing grease.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But I thought you could do without it.  I thought that you can spray the oil that you spray on the hair.  And if you put it on, it had to be loose and you put it on your hair and then go through.  And then you brush it while that air is blowing through.  And it brushes.  You put nothing else on it.  And you press it all and you shake it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But let's go back.  You went to the Morris School of Beauty. Okay and you...
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] Oh no no.  I didn't go there to learn how to do hair...
Speaker 2: No, I know.  But I'm just saying what were do... When did you come up with this blow drying technique is what I'm trying to...
Speaker 1: My own thoughts.
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] But when?
Speaker 1: And oh I guess I must have been about fourteen.
Speaker 2: You're talking about you were blow-drying when you were fourteen?
Speaker 1: Fourteen or fifteen years old yes!
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Okay Geeze!  Okay.  So... But... Okay but was that counter to the look that black people were wearing when you were age fourteen?  Okay.  We have to wait, just wait.  I don't want to beat you up.  But I don't want to short trip, you know.
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] No you ask me the questions.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] right.
Speaker 1: I mean, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: At this age, how can I remember from a hundred years ago?
Speaker 2: I know.  I know.
Speaker 1: [chuckling].
Speaker 2: But no.  What I'm saying is that this was just experimentation you came in with?
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My own imagination.
Speaker 2: But were you looking at other... Were you looking at... Because your technique really makes black hair in a different way...
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 2: ...Look like white hair.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: In a way, you know.  I mean it gives it the feel of white hair.  So what I'm saying is that were you... was there... were you... was there... Were you looking at maga... I don't know how you came up with it is what I'm trying to...
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] Oh you have to practice what you... You can't look at a magazine.  You gotta have your own imagination and what you think it would look like.  And how much heat you can put on the hair without putting a lot of oil on the hair.  Now when I came to New York, people couldn't believe it!  They could come out of my place with shaky hair.  With not a, little tight curls.  I never used a little tight curls.  I knew what I wanted.  I listen.  I am not a... I never had a beauty school.  But it was like having a beauty school. You had to work two weeks in training.  And I paid you to learn my method before you could work for me.  That's why we were busy.  Now we used to have people standing in line to pay the check. Standing in line to get the hats.  Standing in line to check the coats.  Now you know that's something.  Having a beauty salon, where you could service almost four hundred women a day.  Open up at eight o'clock in the morning, close at seven thirty, eight o'clock at night.  But now I had eighty people working in one place and I had seventy-nine working in another place.
Story_ID: 71409
Speaker 1: So you said that it took two weeks to train someone as to your tech...
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] No matter how experienced you were.  I don't care where you have... coming from, or what school you went to, or how much practice you had before coming there.  But you had to learn my method.
Speaker 1: And wha... who... when you went to hire people, what were you looking for in a person to be, you know, who would be in your salon?  'Cause you were... you definitely were catering to a certain clientele.  So I'm just wondering who were you... You know, what attributes would they have?  Or what were you looking to make a decision about whether this person could work for you or not?
Speaker 2: 'Cause they had to go... come in and demonstrate to me what they could do.  And if you couldn't do what we were doing, then you had to work in training for two weeks.  So we could teach you what we wanted.  We didn't have a person to come in and say, "Here.  Here's a customer you do that customer."  You had to come in and do a shampoo.  You could be a shampoo girl for a month or so.  And then we will let you go through with pressing the hair out.  And there's a certain way you had to curl.  We didn't let you make those little tight curls.  You had to curl the way I had learned to curl to get what I want.
Speaker 1: Okay and can you describe that curling technique?
Speaker 2: I didn't give you a [unclear] curl that you wrap it around.  You seen people curl their hair and wrap it around.  You had to curl that hair and curl it up and roll it up and let those curls come down loose.  And that gave you nice loose hair.  And gave you any kind of style we wanted to give you.  You saw those styles in that book in there.  You saw what they look like?  That was sixty years ago.  You never saw anything like that [chuckling].  But I have it on paper.  And I have dates in there to show you when that was done.  And how we... with the eye and the ear, the nails.  In that book you'll see it again.  You just see how those people look.  That's my work. And you see I'm not just sitting here saying to you what we did.  I have it on paper to show you what we did.  But I perhaps could have gone out and said, "Well I'll have a school to train this."  But it wouldn't done me any... I couldn't have been any better off than I am now.  I just kept up a professional business.
Story_ID: 71410
Speaker 1: So the... Rose, when did you decide to join... When you dropped... Well you said you had Rose Meta and Rose Morgan.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: You had two salons simultaneously?
Speaker 2: Yes!  Oh I had three.
Speaker 1: And what was the third one?
Speaker 2: I have an an... well I had an annex to one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I had three.  I had [401 West] 148th Street [in 1946] and I had [507 West] 145th Street [in 1955] and I had 105... [9 West] 125th street [in 1947].  You remember the Joe Louis Restaurant, [11 West] 125th street? Well I had that building which was his office [1955].  They had upstairs and downstairs.  I had that as a beauty salon.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  So you were like you had a license to print money is what you had [laughing].
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You were making a lot of money weren't you?
Speaker 2: Well I'm gonna show you the price list in there [laughing].
Speaker 1: [Laughing].
Speaker 2: I'm gonna show you a price list.
Speaker 1: [Laughing].
Speaker 2: When I got started there with... In the beginning, we had price list of seventy-five cents for an arch and fifty cents for a manicure.  No seventy-five for a manicure and fifty cents for an arch.  A dollar and a quarter for something.  Oh! Prices were terrible.  But we went up to three fifty [dollars] and we went up to four fifty [dollars].  And the highest price to get your hair done, the complete thing was like six fifty [dollars], seven dollars, you know?  But remember this was a hundred years ago [Laughing].
Speaker 1: That's right the prices have gone up tremendously now...
Speaker 2: [Laughing].
Speaker 1: Now.  But you're right.  No but that...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So now did you... I also was impressed when I was looking through the book... I'd rather you not make reference to the book.  We'll get to that.  But I... you know, 'cause this on camera...
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: But when you had you're... the first salon that Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] cut the ribbon for [Rose Meta House of Beauty, 401 West 148th Street, New York, 1946], did you... you had... What were all the services you were offering in this salon?
Speaker 2: Oh why there you had head to toe.  We had body massage, facials, manicures, pedicures.  Oh we had everything.
Speaker 1: [Pause] I just... I mean but... Okay what I'm saying is that you knew that you had enough clientele to support... like massages.  There are still people I know who don't ever... have never had a massage before.
Speaker 2: When I had that place, I had equipment where I had a chair you could sit in and get the massage.  I had a chair you could sit in and get massages.  I had a [phonetic] gyrolated massage table where you turn it on and it vibrated while you were getting massages.  And I had high colonic irrigation and the Health Department came and got me [laughing].  And I had to turn it over to Harlem Hospital.  We would give you a high colonic irrigation.  We had it set up where all the stuff goes through the sewage.  Did we Delia [Ardelia Taylor]?
Speaker 1: This is like way ahead of its time.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, um-hmm, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: How did you even think of that?  Was this stuff that was...
Speaker 2: Well we had the massage parlor. We had people coming in with the big stomachs and wanted to clean themselves out.  We had the whole thing set up.  The Health Department made me take it out.  'Cause I didn't have a license [unclear] for it.  I eve... They even took me to court [Chuckling]. Took me to court a poor [unclear] this woman who was doing my massages was frightened to death.  Because she had to go to court.  But I had to take it out.  And I donated it to Harlem Hospital.
Story_ID: 71411
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about, you know... Oh was there anything else you want to say?  But let's talk about some of your sort of famous clientele that you had.  You know, the people that you had come in there.  I'd just like to...
Speaker 2: I had [HM] Diahann Carroll started at the age of ten.  [HM] Diahann Carroll, [HM] Etta Moten [Barnett].  I had... Name some of the stars.
Speaker 1: Ardelia Taylor:  Lena Horne.
Speaker 2: Lena...
Speaker 1: Lena Horne.  Well let's talk about Lena Horne.
Speaker 2: Oh Lena Horne was one of my favorite customers.  And...
Ardelia:  The one that was married to Tom.
Speaker 2: Huh?  Oh Isabelle.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Isabelle worked for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But let's first talk about Lena Horne.  And then we can get to [unclear].
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: But Len... Lena Horne.  What... When did she start coming in?  How did she... Well she heard about you 'cause you were the thing in town.  But I mean [chuckling] what age was she when she first started coming to you?
Speaker 2: [Pause].  Oh about how old is she now?
Speaker 1: I think she's in her nineties I think isn't she?  I think she...
Speaker 2: Yeah she's near ninety.  'Cause she was along with me.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I have pictures in there too. I'll show you.  Lena was married to that white guy?  Thirty.
Speaker 1: Ardelia Taylor:  She was about thirty.
Speaker 2: Thirty?
Speaker 1: Ardelia Taylor:  Thirty something.
Speaker 2: Think so?  I think she was about thirty years of age.  Twenty-nine or thirty.
Speaker 1: And what was she?  What was her career like at that point?  I mean she was... She was... Her career was taking off right?  She was...
Speaker 2: [Pause] What was she doing?  I mean where was she working?  Oh I don't remember exactly.  I really don't.  I have crammed so much into this brain of mine.
Speaker 1: But her career had taken off at that point right?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  She was very famous when she was coming to me.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: There is a... I got a thing in there with Lena I should have sent you.  It's in there for you and I said to myself I should've sent this to you on the top.  It tells my life from the age of ten up to 1976.  Everything about me then.  And it was for you and I was so sorry I didn't send that to you.  But I have it in there for you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Lena Horne's picture is in there.
Story_ID: 71412
Speaker 1: But what I wanna... I wanna get some sort of anecdotes about some of these people.  Anecdotes, you know, coming from your salon.  Just, you know, memories that you have.  You know.  So they could be funny stories.  They could be things that, you know, or people that, you know.  That... Things that people might not know, like... Do you have a favorite Lena Horne Story?
Speaker 2: [Pause] Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Like her hair... Do you have any stories from a hair perspective?  [Laughing] like one type of hair versus the other.  Or, you know.  Attempts at something that may have gone bad.  You know, someone's hairdo?
Speaker 2: We used to give her body massages.  We had Carol Faulkner.  Remember Carol Faulkner?  Carol Faulkner used to bring her evening clothes.  She'd bring her evening clothes to the place and get a body massage, get her hair done.  And I got pictures there where we dressed her.  And she left and went on out wherever she was goin... where she was going.  Many of them used to bring their clothes in and get themselves fixed up and go out.  Now we had umm. [HM] Ruby Dee?  She was a customer. What's this other girl that sings?  Gosh some of their names are gone out of my mind.  It's a shame I can see them, I can't think of their names.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have Sarah Vaughn? Or?
Speaker 2: Ardelia Taylor:  Sarah Vaughn yes.
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] Oh yes.  Sarah Vaughn.  I used to go downtown to Downtown Cafe society.  And she was wearing a little piece on top of her head [chuckle].  And I took down her wig and put on her downtown Cafe Society. Name some of the others.
Speaker 2: Let's see.  Well I don't know.  Would Ella Fitzgerald... Would she?
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] Oh Ella Fitzgerald was one of my good customers.
Speaker 2: Off camera voice:  Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Ella Fitz [Fitzgerald]... All of 'em.  All of the people who were fam...
Speaker 2: Off camera voice:  [Simultaneously] I'm trying to think of Allen's, King's son's wife.  The piano player.
Speaker 1: Oh [jazz musician] Hazel Scott [married to Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.].  Oh. Oh Hazel Scott!
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Hazel [Scott] was my... All of the people who were in the theater were my customers.
Speaker 1: So anyone who was anyone was coming to Rose...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Every... Yeah.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 71413
Speaker 1: And... So you were really a status symbol.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: You know, if... Okay.
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] I had the largest beauty salon in the world [Rose Meta House of Beauty].  When I say the largest, I service in my salon more than any salon in the whole world served in one day.  We used to serve at [507 West] 145th street [New York] four hundred women a day.  You had to stand in line to get your check for your coat, stand in line to check your coats.  Stand in line to pay your check...  I never rented the space to anybody...
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] So you... they were... everyone worked for you.
Speaker 2: Worked for me and I paid 'em a salary.
Speaker 1: Oh!
Speaker 2: Had to have... That's why I had to have accountant bookkeepers.  Plus we had to have withholding tax and it was... it was really a big business.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And it was all... I had good people working for me, you know.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And I had a couple of bookkeepers I had to put in jail for stealing money.  I didn't really send them to jail.  But I had to have them arrested.  But I released them, you know.  So there's always somebody feel that if they handling your money, they can take some money.  Money is very tempting. And I couldn't handle the money.  I had to have a receptionist that was on.  Her shift, she had to have all of her receipts and check out.  She had to check it out to a bookkeeper.  And the one at night had to check it out.  So the money was checked.  But the bookkeepers tried to steal [fifteen hundred dollars in 1955].  But they were caught.  Had them arrested, but I didn't send them to jail.  I did the proper thing didn't I [chuckling]?
Speaker 1: [chuckling] I think if some one's gonna steal your money yeah.
Speaker 2: [chuckling].
Speaker 1: Now I was asking about... You know, the other thing I had read about was that you actually had a registered nurse?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: As part of the staff.  Is that true?
Speaker 2: A registered nurse?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It said that your staff of twenty-nine included a registered nur... I'm reading from something so it may not be...
Speaker 2: Yes.  You see I had body massages.  And she had to be a person with a license.  And they took her to jail.  Because I had in this salon a high colonic irrigation.  And had it set up where we could clean out the stomach?  And we were not supposed to do that.  That was the problem I had to go to court for.  And the equipment I had to donate... I donated to Harlem Hospital.
Story_ID: 71414
Speaker 1: I'm trying to think of some other people that may have been your cli...  Do you have a client that was your favorite client?
Speaker 2: [Pause] Oh! See I had all of the actors and actresses like Ruby Dee and [HM] Diahann Carroll.  All of those people.  I can't remember all the names.  [HM] Etta Moten [Barnett] was my customer.  All of the celebrities were my customers.  But you wanna know if I had a favorite one.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: [HM] Diahann Carroll was really my favorite.
Speaker 1: She was!
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And why was that?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  She... 'Cause we started on her when she was at the age of ten.  And she grew up through the shop.
Speaker 1: And how would she have come?  Her mother brought her there when she was ten?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: But she wasn't performing then?
Speaker 2: Oh no! No.
Speaker 1: [unclear].
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] She was in school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But we started on her when she was at the age of ten.
Speaker 1: Did you like see... Did you get a chance to talk to her the other day when she was here?  I mean...
Speaker 2: No I was down there, but I wasn't feeling well.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: I didn't even come into the reception.  I would have seen her.  I had to leave after the theater.  I didn't feel good.
Speaker 1: I'm sure she would've been glad to see you...
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Um-hmm, Um-hmm, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay that's nice.
Speaker 2: The other girl also.  I knew all of 'em.
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] [HM] Dionne Warwick.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm. All of 'em.
Story_ID: 71415
Speaker 1: Now tell me about... you know, because black hair, you know... the other thing that impressed me when I was reading, you had a whole philosophy of black hair that was an enlightened philosophy.  Meaning that, you know, most people, you know, blacks were afraid... ashamed of their hair.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: They thought that they had... You know, we would also talk about bad versus good hair.
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Um-hmm, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And you had a whole belief system around that.  And I'd like you to talk about that.
Speaker 2: Well I just felt all hair was good hair.  It depended upon how you treated it.  I mean your hair... Take for instance people who have straight hair, that have bouncy hair.  No matter what your hair is like, how kinky it is.  It could be pressed out and it could be loosened to shake it just like the same hair.  And that is what was... that is what made my business a success.  I took out the oil.  I took out the grease out of the hair and had dry pressing.  We would blow dry the hair and blow it with whatever amount that we wanted to put on the hair.  Whatever amount of oil we wanted to put.  We dried it into the shaft of the strand of the hair.  And when we pressed the hair out, the hair was loose and bouncy.  That was really the success of my business.  Is making the hair look natural, not look like it was greasy.  'Cause you were seeing people who had been into the beauty salons and they put so much oil on it, it would be slick down.  And it was impossible for it to move.  But when you went into my salon, we shake the hair and the hair was shaky.
Speaker 1: Now at this time, you know, I mean black people...  I mean at the time you were coming along, people were very won... very color conscious.  We still have that.  They were very color conscious and they were also very hair conscious.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And I mean I know, I grew up with good hair ver... you know, bad hair.  And even people nowadays say, you know, "She has good hair." You know.
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] There's no such thing as good hair and bad hair.
Speaker 1: [chuckle].
Speaker 2: All have good hair.
Speaker 1: So the people... a lot of... Because you were servicing a lot of people...
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: with supposedly good hair though to right?  In your salon?
Speaker 2: M-mm.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: M-mm.
Speaker 1: M-mm?
Speaker 2: M-mm.  It was the way it was treated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 71416
Speaker 1: It was the method of doing it.  You had to blow and brush.  You see how that camera is?  That camera has extends out to make my picture.  The hood came out from the dryer and it stood on a stand.  And it was so that you could fool with nothing but the hair, but brush it, comb it and brush it and brush it.  You know?  You sprayed the oil on it first.  I've always used oil spray on the hair.  Not to put the grease on the hair.  And if I had oil we put on, we put a lot of mineral oil in the grease... in the petroleum to make it loose instead of making it sticky.  It has always been loose.  You always had bouncy hair.
Speaker 2: And were there any people at the time that you were... Who were you buying your products from?  You know, at the time.  Were they, you know, any black distributors that you were buying products from?
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] I was always making my own oil.  We... When we shampooed the hair, the oil that you put on, I always bought my petroleum, and bought my mineral oil to make it loose, make the consistency of what I wanted on the hair.  I never put anything on the hair that made the hair sticky and stiff.  That was from a very early age.
Speaker 2: Hmm.  So you weren't dealing with any distributors or anything like that?  You know, for your products?
Speaker 1: Only the treatments for the hair.  The oil... The pressing oil I always mixed it myself.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: Because I knew how I wanted the hair to look.  And that made the business productive.  It gave the people a different look.  When you came out, the wind couldn't blow through the hair.
Speaker 2: And who were some of the people you were buying?  What... for the treatments, who were you buying products from?
Speaker 1: You mean for the treatments for the...
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Like scalp?
Speaker 2: treatment... Or scalp treatments for straightening or...
Speaker 1: There weren't any treatments for straightening.
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Oh there weren't treatments! When you think... My goodness.  That's right.  There were no...
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.  My own treatments.
Speaker 2: Oh gee! Okay.
Speaker 1: We had the caps.  And we would give you treatments that had products that we would have in tubes that we would put into the hair and put the caps on to treat you.  But...
Speaker 2: But you never deal with like... well no the Fuller Brush [Company] people... But I'm just wondering were there any black companies that you were dealing with...
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] No.
Speaker 2: No.  So you did everything your...
Speaker 1: Um-hmm, um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Okay. Oh...
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] That's why it was different.
Speaker 2: Huh.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 71417
Speaker 1: And you also started your own cosmetics line.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Can you describe that?
Speaker 2: I had the skin cream, Rose Morgan Skin Cream.  I had the lipsticks. I had the powder.  I had... I still have boxes of powder I'll show you that I had called Rose Meta.  I don't have any of the other things.  I had a whole line.  Plus I had people going from door to door selling them.  And we sold them over the counter.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  So you... so there was really no one like you around.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: Really.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.  I just improved on what the other people had done.
Speaker 1: And so who were some of the other people that had done things that you would say you improved upon?
Speaker 2: I would say on... You had a product here called [unclear] Products.  It was in the ten cent stores I believe.  I know I had mine in the chain stores in Chicago... in New York.  I can't say Madam [C.J.] Walker.
Speaker 1: But why do you say not Madam [C.J.] Walker?
Speaker 2: Because everything I had was not sticky.  It was... made your hair look natural.  I had to improve on what had been done before my time.
Speaker 1: Now were there comparisons between you and Madam C. J. Walker?  Weren't people...
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] No I had a professional business.  And she had schools.  She did the training.  But I had professional business.  But you had to be in two weeks of training before I would hire you, learning my method.
Speaker 1: But nobody compared you with her, because she became a society maven? Like you became a society maven.  She was a big entrepreneur.  So were... you know, business person...
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] For schools.
Speaker 1: Right.  But no one made that comparison?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] M-mm, no.
Speaker 1: They never said, you know...
Speaker 2: No.  Not in professional.  I was the only one.  You see.  People have always rented space.  They never wanted responsibility.  To employ like one hundred fifty people, you have to... See I employed seventy-five in one place and eighty-some ninety in the other.  But that's a responsibility.  When you rent a booth, you have no responsibility.  You just rent space and make the booths... And you rent it to the people.  And they have their own clients.  I had to supply the clients.
Story_ID: 71418
Speaker 1: So who were you... Who were the people that were your friends and, you know, and that you were socializing with? Or, you know, you could go to for advice or just to let your hair down? You know, after a hard day?  I mean I'm just... Because you didn't have a lot of people on your level.  And I'm just wondering were... You know, who were you dealing with?  Or, you know, could say, "You know, I have this problem.  How do I deal with it?"
Speaker 2: No I didn't have those kind of people.  I had to figure it out myself, with myself and my lawyers whatever I was doing.  I had social friends.  But I couldn't take my problems to them.  'Cause they wouldn't be able to help me with my problems.  I had to solve my own problems.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: This was what I feel... I feel that I was put here on earth to do these things.  And I was... just had the knowledge to do them.  Tell me how many people would know at the age of ten to have kids going from door to door selling the flowers that they were making.  It had to be in you.  You have to have in your mind what you wanna do and you have to follow through.  How does these big companies... I wish I was like Ford Company or some'n like that [chuckle] and have some'n going for me now [chuckling].  You know?
Speaker 1: We're gonna change tapes.
Story_ID: 71419
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: Hmm?
Speaker 1: I going what was that little grimace?  You grimaced just now.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: [Laughing].
Speaker 2: I said I had business going.  I was employing people.  You never had anybody with legitimate business like beauty salons employing all these people.  Imagine someone hiring eighty people.  Employment!  With employment... Unemployment insurance and all that business.  It was just like any big business.  And I didn't have partners.  I was doing this myself.  But I had bookkeepers.  I had managers.  And as I said I had these bookkeepers who were not honest.  They had to go to jail [for stealing fifteen hundred dollars in 1955 from Rose Meta House of Beauty].
Speaker 1: Now what mistakes do you say you made?  You said, "I made one mistake where I'm... the only mistake." Or... You were saying that, you know, you wish you had, you know, you were a Ford Company today.  You said... you started to say the mistake I made.  Do you remember?  You said that, "I wish I were a Ford Company." You know.  You said, "I don't have... It left.  I would have like to have had my..."
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Something going.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I should have had cosmetics on the market, you know. That was my mistake.  Cosmetics should have really been on the market.  They were sold but sold through the beauty salons.  And they were not even in the drug stores.  But I just had so many people.  Everybody came and bought.  I had cosmetics.  I'll show you some of my product boxes with my name on them.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And I... this is what I... I would like Miss Morgan if you can sort of reach back and think of any favorite stories you have from like, you know, whether it's 19-, you know, '41 [1941], '43 [1943] to, you know, up until your marriage to Joe Louis.  Is there any stories that you have that were sort of like... just stories.  You know, stories of running the salon.  Or stories of, you know, being with, you know, your friends or stories of, you know, life in New York or sto... you know.
Speaker 2: I know.  I don't think I have any.
Speaker 1: Now Miss [laughing] Sister [Ardelia Taylor] can you help us out over there?
Speaker 2: It's always been business.
Speaker 1: So... But see I'm like that too.  I'm driven and I understand.  So you were working like really twenty-four/seven.
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Um-hmm, um-hmm.  I really don't have any.  Isn't that horrible?
Speaker 1: No but I think you do.  But you can't remember 'em.
Speaker 2: [chuckling].
Speaker 1: Can you help me out any?
Speaker 2: Off camera voice:  I'm trying to think if we have some.
Speaker 1: I don't know of any.
Story_ID: 71420
Speaker 1: Well then describe an average day then.  Describe an average day for you.  You get up at what time?  I mean, you know, describe an average day.
Speaker 2: I always had someone to open up.  I've had receptionists on.  I've had two.  They'd open up.  They'd have their bank separate from one another.  We would get their bank to open up.  And they would have their appointment book.  And I used to have a switchboard where I had like ten incoming lines.  Imagine I had a switchboard?  That many people calling in.  And she had to use the switchboard to make their appointments.  And they were trained to run the business until I could get in.  If I couldn't get in until nine [o'clock], nine-thirty.   I always had someone to close.  I couldn't... See my nephew used to work for me.  And I used to have him in one of the places. And then he decided that his wife was working there, he didn't wanna work down there.  So I had him at the other place.  And I used to leave him to close up for me.  And he used to like the horses [chuckling].  He would leave out and leave somebody there.  I said, "Oh that could never happen."  So I said, "Well if he told me he thought he'd better get another job."  He went in the banking business [laughing].  You know, I'm one of the founders and one of the incorporators of Freedom National Bank.  Oh you have that don't you?
Speaker 1: Yes I have that.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: But any other sto... So your day... So you would get there about nine [o'clock], nine-thirty.  and then describe the rest of your day and what it took really to run your operation.
Speaker 2: Oh with my bookkeepers and the office and going through the shop. And if I saw somebody not doing what I wanted them to do, I said, "Oh that beautiful!  But I like it this way."  And I'd take it over.  And I'd do what... I saw the mistakes she was doing.  The customer thought that I was just helping this girl.  And they were happy for me to touch them.  And I'd walk through the shop to see what everybody was doing.  And they had to do exactly what I wanted them to do.  That's why we had such a business.  Because these girls I trained them or had someone to train them when they came in.  And when you walked into Rose Morgan House of Beauty, you got what Rose Morgan had offered.  Because she knew you were getting her service.
Story_ID: 71421
Speaker 1: Now were there people that only wanted to see you?  Or did you at the point...
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] I didn't work.
Speaker 1: You didn't... Okay.  So there was a point where you stopped really doing hair.  But you trained them...
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Yes. Yes.  Oh my God!  I had seventy-eight people in one place and ninety in another, no!  I had to go and see what they were doing.  I was glad to go and speak to the customer and say, "Oh that's beautiful." You know.  She knew that girl I had trained.  You know?  Or that man.  I had a lot of men working for me to.
Speaker 1: And are there people that you started and people... they went onto launch...
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Launch careers for themselves?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Thousands.  I wouldn't say thousands [chuckle]. Hundreds.  I wouldn't say thousands.  Hundreds.  And when they leave, I knew that... see I had national business.  Everybody who came into New York, they knew to go to Rose Meta.  They didn't knew where to go find that person who had left me.  They still come to Rose Morgan or Rose Meta.  I had two names.  Rose Meta House of Beauty [401 West 148th Street, New York, opened in 1946] and Rose Morgan House of Beauty [507 West 145th Street, New York, opened in 1955].
Speaker 1: And was there a difference in who went to each place?  No.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It was all one big enterprise.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So how much were generating in revenue between these places?
Speaker 2: Hmm thousands of dollars. But you see it was legitimate.  It was strictly salaries, commissions.  That's why I had to have all these people, bookkeepers and stuff.  They were on salaries plus commission.  And everything had to be legitimate,   with no under table money.
Story_ID: 71422
Speaker 1: Now did you get involved civically also in the, you know, in New York?  I mean with committees or mem, you know.  I mean 'cause I... the thing is, you know, I'm looking and you say, you know, Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] cut the ribbon on your first place.  And then Mayor Warner?
Speaker 2: Mayor [Robert F.] Wagner [Jr.].
Speaker 1: Mayor Wagner.  Sorry.  Who was involved in... So you were... I'm just wondering did... were they asking you to be involved civically? Were you involved civically in New York?
Speaker 2: Not too much.  I had to make appearances at places when something was going on.  They'd have me on as a person from my establishment, you know.  But I never had to go out and do this work.  I never had to do any work.  I didn't have the time.
Speaker 1: How about the fashion shows.
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] I used to do my own fashion shows.
Speaker 1: And I wanted you to talk about that.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Ooh.
Speaker 1: Why you even came up with that idea.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Oh that was promoting the business.  I used to have fashion shows where I had two thousand people to come to the show.  I used to have all your name bands to play at the show.  I have pictures in there now to show you where I had all these models.  I even had Fannie Robinson, Bessie Buchanan, [HM] Etta Moten [Barnett].  All [chuckle] were people in my shows.  There were people.
Speaker 1: They were actually in your shows.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I had [HM] Etta Moten [Barnett] in my show.
Speaker 1: 'Cause she was the belle of the town.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm!  Janice King.  C.D. King's wife.  Oh I just had all your top people.  Everybody wanted to get out there and show themselves off [Chuckling].  Yes [chuckling].
Speaker 1: So now what would you... So when did you first come up with the idea of do... When did you hold your first fashion show?
Speaker 2: Oh I started my first fashion show when... 19... around 1950 and '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: Ardelia Taylor:  No you had your first one at Rose Meta about '45 [1945].
Speaker 2: Yeah '45 [1945].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ardelia Taylor:  At the Renaissance [Hotel, New York].
Speaker 1: At the Renaissance yes.
Speaker 2: And so tell me... So when did... How did that idea even come? Was it you sitting there or some people saying...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Mm...
Speaker 2: "We should do this?"
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] M-mm, m-mm.  I did that to promote the business.  I had the fashion shows and I had all these glamour girls.  Everybody wanted to be in the show for nothing.  I didn't have to pay models.  I had models to come and we'd train them how to walk.  All your nice girls.  Oh that's what I have in the book back there to show you.  These girls and we're training how to walk. And the shows were fantastic. Andy Kirk?  Did you ever hear of Andy Kirk and his [Twelve] Clouds of Joy?  Lot of famous bands. We would... had famous bands for the fashion shows.
Speaker 2: And you said you held this at the Rena...  Was it the Rena...  What was the place?  The first place?
Speaker 1: Ardelia Taylor:  The Renaissance [Hotel, New York].
Speaker 2: Renaissance.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Renaissance okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.  Rockland Palace [New York] where you could get two thousand people in there.  We'd have... Then we were charging like two hundred fifty [dollars] to get in to see the show.
Speaker 1: Now where were you getting the fashions from?  Where were they coming from?
Speaker 2: The girls would... They would wear their own clothes.  But the hair styles... They were Rose Mor...
Speaker 1: Ardelia Taylor:  She was doing the hair styles.
Speaker 2: The hair styles.
Speaker 1: I see! Okay!
Speaker 2: And they would buy clothes and be in the hair show [chuckling].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you would actually... it was a way of featuring your hairstyles.
Speaker 2: Oh yes!
Speaker 1: I see...
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] It wasn't fashion.  It wasn't clothes.  The hairstyle shows.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You're...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] It wasn't called fashion shows.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Rose Meta or Rose Morgan Hair Style Show.  People were coming to see what hairstyle I was showing.  What the girls looked like.  And the audience would dress themselves up and we'd make a lot of money fixing the audience up.  The audience would come in to get their hair done to go to the show [chuckling].
Story_ID: 71423
Speaker 1: And did you... I'm just won... I'm trying to, you know, sort of figure out New York, at that point in time and what was happening in Harlem?  Who were some of the movers and shakers in the community besides you and, you know.  Either male or female.  Who were some of the other, you know...
Speaker 2: You mean in the beauty business?
Speaker 1: I would like to know in the beauty business and just in New York period.  But let's talk about the beauty business.
Speaker 2: Oh!  Who was in the beauty business big?  Most of 'em were small shops.  There was Jimmie's salon.  That's a man.  When I went there, rented a booth in his salon.  Frank used to be in the beauty salon.  All the other salons were people who had these salons and rent the booths out to people.  I'm the only salon remained employing people. Never rented a booth to anybody.
Speaker 1: But wha... Okay so let me ask you this.  Were there other people in let's say in the beauty industry?  Maybe they were, you know, making products or they were, you know, in the fashion industry or other things that were sort of making a name from the sales there.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think.  I don't think there was anybody.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because see I had this great imagination.  I just stole it from everybody [laughing].
Speaker 1: Did you have... Were there any well-known black designers at the time?  Clothing designers?
Speaker 2: [Pause] I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: I did order... I had several customers who were sort of fashion designer.  Mrs. I can't think of her name now.
Speaker 1: Ardelia Taylor:  Lois [Louise] Bell.
Speaker 2: Oh [designer] Lois [Louise] Bell.  You'll see her in my book back there.  She had people in that show and showed some of her things.  And the... When I'd have these fashion shows, these girls would buy their own clothes.  See I had a hairstyle show.  I didn't have a fashion show.  Mine was a hairstyle show.  But it was like a fashion show.  'Cause they'd buy clothes to be in the show.
Story_ID: 71424
Speaker 1: And your... The hairstyle show.  When would you usually hold the show?
Speaker 2: What would I do?
Speaker 1: When... What time of year would you hold it?
Speaker 2: More or less in the spring.  It'd be in the spring.
Speaker 1: And would you do it... Would it be before Easter?
Speaker 2: Sometimes before Easter.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Okay.  Would you do it... Would you ever do it to unveil certain new hairstyles?
Speaker 2: No.  It just would be
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] Just for show... okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, a Rose Morgan hairstyle show.
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] So it would be... you would be showing the hairstyles and then you'd have entertainment?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And name bands.
Speaker 1: And would you serve food?  Would food be there?
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] No.
Speaker 1: No food.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So it was like theater style seating...
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 1: And, you know, people...
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  And I had the government there clocking the people.  So I had to pay tax on [chuckling] the money.  He knew how many tickets we were sold.
Story_ID: 71425
Speaker 1: Did you ever work with any black women's organizations like the Links or the AKA's [Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority] or anything in tandem with them or not?
Speaker 2: Oh no.  Only [HM] Dorothy Height's [Edna Beach] 100 Black Women.  I'm still a member of the 100 Black Women.  I was vice-president of the 100 Black Women.
Speaker 1: [Pause] Not any other organizations.
Speaker 2: How did you get involved in that organization?
Speaker 1: Through [HM] Dorothy Height.
Speaker 2: Okay Dorothy. You know, is there a way... I'd like to have that book maybe in front of me.  I wanna get to Joe Louis.  But I'd like... Can... it's pretty large.  The opening here of this...
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Because you made Ebony also.
Speaker 1: Oh yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And Ebony was a big deal and making Ebony was a big deal, right?  So they sent their whole crew of photographers...
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] Yeah.  They had... They even had the Daily News.  They had the Daily Press there.  They had peoples in line a block long waiting their turn to come in and out.  People trying to get in and couldn't get out.  They said it was bigger than any Broadway show [Chuckling].  I really never had a house of beauty where you could employ ninety people and knew.  You see what it look like.  You see it there.  Here's a drawing of it.  The artist was my friend.  He drew what the front should look like before it was done.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: And that's in there.
Speaker 2: But when you... when you thought of this place, did you just say, "You know, this was my vision. This is what I wanna have." You know, I mean, you know, a lot of times reality comes out of dreams.  And I'm just wondering, you know.  How did this place... Let's put it this way.  How did this place differ from the Brownstone that you bought?
Speaker 1: Well in the [1946] brownstone [Rose Meta House of Beauty, 401 West 148th Street, New York], I had a partner.  Olivia [Clarke] Stanford.  And my ten years were up.  So I decide to buy this old laundry do demolition and build that building.  And that's where I was gonna leave this brownstone and move Rose Morgan [House of Beauty] into.  The other was Rose Meta [House of Beauty].  The brownstone was Rose Meta [House of Beauty].  So she decided to stay there for a little while.  Then she decided, "Well no that she didn't wanna stay." So she left and moved, and moved out of the country.  She and her husband, to Puerto Rico.
Story_ID: 71426
Speaker 1: Now you also... because... Let me ask you what you consider beauty.  You know, what does being beautiful mean to you Miss Morgan?
Speaker 2: Beautiful means thinking beautiful.  You... In order to be beautiful, you gotta look like you look today. You're thinking.  And all you're thinking about is nice things.  You got to think good. And you got to keep yourself groomed.  Then you're beautiful.  That's beauty.  You got to think each day what you wanna put on, how you wanna look.  Just can't say, "I know I'm a beautiful girl.  I don't have to do anything about it."  I don't care how beautiful you are.  You got to get yourself together [Laughing].
Speaker 1: And so that's why at the... at your school not only did... you know, you did everything from sort of head to toe.
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Oh yes.
Speaker 1: It was not just the hair...
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The nails.  It was the makeup.
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 1: It was charm classes right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  We had charm classes.  We had everything.  We really had... when we say head to toe, we had everything there.
Speaker 1: So who were coming?  Who were coming to your charm classes?
Speaker 2: Well some of the mothers who came in sent their daughters in.  Some of the mothers came in for their makeup.  They'd learn how... We had to apply their makeup and to... with their charm.  Not for modeling, but the youngsters came to learn how to walk.  Because when we had our shows, you'll see in this book somewhere, where we had the girls lined up to be trained how to walk.  But we created in the minds of the people grooming wasn't for them. They really changed the people in New York. Changed all the people who were not working for people.  Booth renters.  'Cause you didn't have shops in New York.  'Cause you have it just like you have it here.  People renting booths.  You didn't have many people who hired people.  I was... I did something New York had never done.  To really employ all these people.  But I trained them to go out and rent for themselves. And it didn't bother me when they left.  They left and they took customers. I said, "Now I'm known all over the country.  It's All right."  When they come in town they don't know where to go [chuckling].  And I still have advertisement.  And people knew the name Rose Morgan or Rose Meta.  When they'd wanna find a place, that's what they looked in the book for.
Speaker 1: You... the thing that impresses me like when I was looking through the book and, you know, and looking at just the, you know, the facade of the place, is that everything is done in a very classy way.
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Everything.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And even the graphics that are used for your, you know, your ads.  They're done in a very classy... They don't look, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: You know, they... they're done in a very nice way.  And I'm just wondering did you dictate that book?  Or did someone help you in that whole approach?  Or...
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] My artist.
Speaker 1: And what was his name?
Speaker 2: Art Harris.  At that time I... my boyfriend.  And his name was [designer and artist] Art [Arthur] Harris.  And he was really a great commercial artist.  And see to do this, you have to have a commercial artist.  Now he did that.  Well he did it just like the house of beauty would be.  Only a commercial artist could really do that for you.  You know?
Speaker 1: So he was a pretty talented guy then...
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Oh yeah.  Um-hmm, um-hmm, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Now you also... at this time, black people are really... they, you know, were in New York that is really sort of... it's the seed of even...  It's the fashion capital anyway...
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Of the United States.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And you really became sort of the fashion capital for the black community.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: You know, in... within your salon.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I changed them.  I changed and all the other salons tried to do what we were doing.  We took the oil out of the hair.  Gave you bouncy hair.  Which changed the people.  Now if you see how far back this is. It's 1950.  See what those people looked like?
Story_ID: 71427
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.  Now this was a lot of money also to spend on a salon.  It says one hundred fifty thousand [dollars].
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay and...
Speaker 2: I had to build it.
Speaker 1: You had to build the place?
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Yeah I had to do demolition.  And that's when I was trying to get this money from this bank.  And I had helped him with information.  And he said, "Rose," he said, "I will help you."  He said, "As you progress, I will pay off."
Speaker 1: Now that was pretty good.  Because Ford One Bank turned you down.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And was that surprise to your or disappointment? Because you were making so much money, you know.  That it's not like you didn't have assets.  You had assets and you had a cash business.  Were you disappointed when they... when you got turned down?
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Well I was disappointed.  Because of the amount of money I wanted to borrow.  I know that they didn't loan you... They didn't loan black people that kind of money.  And I didn't bother.  I just called up this man I had done a favor for [chuckling]. The borrow and savings building.  The Borrow and Savings Bank.  I had done him a favor.  So he couldn't turn me down.  He said, "Sure Rose. Any time."  So whatever I wanted, I got from him.  But he didn't... they didn't say, "Here here's fifty thousand dollars." They didn't give me that money.  And I didn't want it.  But as I had to make my payroll, they met my payroll every week.  Well that's like letting me have the money.  So I was very pleased.
Speaker 1: So that's how they did it. They met your payroll.
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: That's... okay.  That's...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] They met my payroll and whatever lumbers and whatever I had to buy, they paid it.
Story_ID: 71428
Speaker 1: Now the other thing I have a question about... because this sort of a question was were there men who actually sent women to you? You know, like maybe they married someone or they had a girlfriend who they wanted to like be... You know, to be improved [Laughing].
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: You know, [laughing].  You know what I'm saying they were...
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: You know, they had the looks but they were a little, you know, rough around the edges [laughing].  Did you do any of that? You know, taking, you know, taking some one and sort of making up... transforming them so to speak.  Do you remember anyone [unclear] like that?
Speaker 2: You mean sponsors.  Did I ever have anybody to sponsor anybody.
Speaker 1: Ardelia Taylor:  Nah.  She means if someone you...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Like they may have been...
Speaker 1: Ardelia Taylor:  She meant that wasn't glamorous, you made them look glamorous.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  You know, like...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Sarah Vaughn.
Speaker 2: Okay so go on.
Speaker 1: [chuckling] Sarah Vaughn used to wear a little halo around her head.  I took it off and put a wig on and she looked gorgeous.  I went down to see her with Barney Joseph I think was her manager at the Downtown Cafe [New York].  So Sarah Vaughn and all like [HM] Ruby Dee.  She was my customer.  All of them.  Ella Fitzgerald, all of them.  They came in.  Lena Horne.  I got pictures in there in one of the books of Lena Horne.  One of these folders I'm gonna give you from my life story.  I'm telling you my life story.  But I have my life story verbatim from the age of ten up to 1976.  I have it.  I meant to mail that to you, but I didn't.
Story_ID: 71429
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about... How did you meet Joe Louis?
Speaker 2: Oh I went on a junket to Las Vegas [Nevada] when they opened the Moulin Rouge [Hotel].  They had all the press.  Nothing but the press and famous people that they flew out there for free overnight.  And I was on this plane and I got like seasick.  So Joe Louis looked down the list and he saw my name on it.  He said, "Rose Morgan!  What you bringing her out here for?"  So the public relations said, "You don't know who Rose Morgan is?"  He said, "Yeah I know Rose Morgan.  Who is she?"  You know, [chuckling].  "What are you bringing her out here for free?"  And when I got off the plane, they said Joe [Louis] was there.  And the first girl got off.  He said, "Did Rose come?"  She said, "I'm here.  You asking about Rose and you asking... I'm here.  My name... You know who I am."  So when I got off the plane, I didn't even look at Joe [Louis].  'Cause I was like airsick.  I went on to a hotel.  And I saw him the next day.  So when we got... went down for the dinner, they had the music and seating arrangement for everybody. And I thought that I was gonna be seated with the people that I came out with.  I went over to this table.  And they said, "Rose did you look to see where you're going to be seated?"  Said, "You have a seating assignment.  We all have seating assignments."  So I went over to this table and they said, "your seat" ... Man escorted me.  Took me upstairs.  And I could look right down on the dance floor.  I said, "Where are my friends?"  So the people at the table said, "I don't know."  I didn't know these people.  So by the time the show started, who walked down the aisle but Joe [Louis].  And he sit down beside me.  He never said a word to me.  I never said a word to him [chuckling].  So when it was over he got up he said, "Well did you like the show?"  "I thought it was great," I said and left and went on down to find my friends.  Left him standing there.  And when he found me, I was at the black jack table.  And I had won about five hundred dollars.  He said, "Are you gonna try and win all the money?"  I said, "That's what I came out here for, you know?"  So a friend of mine came up and said, "Girl we'd like to see what this... what is it?  The strip on Downing,"  'cause you know, this was this hotel they were opening up. The Moulin Rouge [Hotel], Las [Vegas, Nevada].  We wanted to see what the strip was like.  So he drove us down and we saw all the bright lights and everything.  And when we came back, it was about oh about... the sun was shining.  You know.  And I rushed on off the ho... off this elevator.  He said, "Here you're going... you can come to my room."  I said, "No man I got to go to sleep."  So I rushed to my room.  And my... Jerry Major was the editor of Ebony and Jet. I rushed in there and got about a couple of hours' sleep.  Then our plane was ready to leave. So we left.  And my phone started ringing when I got home.  Joe [Louis] called me for three months before I could see him.  I told him, "No, I can't come to Las Vegas [Nevada].  I'm busy."  "I can't come to Chicago [Illinois]." Wanted me in Chicago [Illinois].  "I can't come, I'm busy."  So when he finally got out here, he had to make an appearance on television.  And... on 'Name That Tune' and something else.  So then he went up to Buffalo [New York] for something.  And he asked me if I would come up to Buffalo [New York].  So one Saturday, I finished with my business about eight o'clock.  I got up there about twelve thirty.  And he and his business partner, Billy Rowe, were standing waiting for me.  And that's how we got started.
Speaker 1: Okay we're gonna change tapes.
Story_ID: 71430
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: And then...
Speaker 1: I wouldn't see him for three months.  So he [Joe Louis] finally came to New York.  And he was on the 'Ed Sullivan Show'.  And he asked me if I would meet him.  So I went and met... He called a friend of his and we went downtown to meet him.  So the next day he was on... the next night he was on the 'Ed Sullivan Show'.   And he left to go to Buffalo [New York].  Because he had to go up there for something.  And he called from Buffalo and asked me if I would come up to Buffalo where he was gonna wrestle [box] or something.  Anyway, I went up to Buffalo on a Saturday night.  I didn't get there 'til about twelve o'clock.  And after, the next day, he asked me if I would marry him.  I said, "Joe, I don't know you.  I know you from your fighting.  But you wanna marry me."  And I said, "You don't know what I'm like."  You know.  So I started thinking about it.  I said, "Gee whiz! I got one identity.  I'll have another identity [Laughing]."  So I thought about it.  And I said to him, "Yes."  What - did I say that?"  He called Billy Rowe, his public relations man.  Inside of five minutes, it was across the country in all the newspapers.  So the next morning I flew back down to New York.  And when I...   I was living in Long Island [New York] in that big house.  When I got there, all these photographers and newspapers were on my doorstep waiting for me.  When I got home for the interviews, "When we were gonna marry?  When the date was gonna be?"  And Joe [Louis] had called me.  He said, "Look Rose, we're getting married Christmas Day."  We married on Christmas Day [1955].  He said, "Now you can invite thirteen people."  I said, "That'll be my family."  So he said, "That's what you can invite."  "I'll invite ten."  My house was a... That big house you see in this book.  All the press, all the television, all the newspapers photographers.  It was filled with people.  And people were two blocks down the street.  You know, they couldn't come in.  They were around.  Because they heard that I was getting married to Joe Louis in that house on the corner.  They were all out in front.  It was the biggest thing you've ever seen.  But they couldn't come into the house.  It was really something.  Quite exciting.
Speaker 2: So you...
Speaker 1: You see me there getting ready for it.
Speaker 2: Right.  No, it's a nice...
Speaker 1: [chuckle].
Speaker 2: You're saying there were only twenty-three people are at your ceremony?
Speaker 1: He said, I could invite that many.  But the rest were press.  Newspapers like the dailies and all of the televisions, all of the cameras.  Oh it was crowded with people.  It was really something.
Speaker 2: So what did your family think when they heard that you were gonna...
Speaker 1: Well they also were out there.  They were there.  Oh they were excited.  All of them were there.  All my brothers and sisters.  Except Fred didn't... Fred Junior and Michael [Morgan].  They didn't come.  Just the older ones. My two older brothers and my two sisters.
Speaker 2: So you did... You guys really didn't have a long time to talk about what the married would be like.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: It was a whirlwind romance.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: In many ways.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm, um-hmm.  It was.  And that's what it was like.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: This is what it was like.
Speaker 2: [Laughing].
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] [Laughing] I had the dress made and had this fellow down there giving a roller pin to Joe [Louis] for him.  A roller pin [unclear] [Laughing].
Speaker 2: So where did you guy... Where did you honeymoon?  Did you take a honeymoon?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: You didn't.  Okay.
Speaker 1: He had to go back to Las Vegas [Nevada].
Speaker 2: And then you had to go back to your business.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm, um-hmm.
Speaker 2: So how was... How was life after that?  Because you were both... He had to be in Chicago [Illinois].  You had to be in New York.  Or that... you know.
Speaker 1: And we spent... After we were married, we spent time together.  'Cause I lived in the house on Long Island [New York].  We spent time together.  But sometime he would have public appearances he would go to.  I wouldn't see him for a couple of weeks.  You know.  But it was alright.  And we used to walk down the street together.  And people would say, "Oh hello Miss Morgan.  Hello Mr. Louis."   They never said Mr. And Mrs. Louis.  They never called me Mrs. Louis [Laughing].
Speaker 2: And did you take his name?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: [Laughing] Okay.
Speaker 1: I did.
Speaker 2: But.
Speaker 1: But people never called me Mrs. Louis.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: No.
Story_ID: 71431
Speaker 1: So now... What... But the marriage lasted how long?
Speaker 2: Almost three years.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But how did you even get it annulled if it only lasted...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Oh no.
Speaker 1: But that's what it said in here.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah, we did get an annulment.
Speaker 1: But how could you get an annul...
Speaker 2: Well we pulled some strings and we got an annulment [1958].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We didn't live together the... really.  'Cause I mean he was in Las Vegas [Nevada] and I was someplace else.  So we got an annulment.  And...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] But an annulment versus a divorce.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now why was that?
Speaker 2: Well we could get it without having to go to court and with a trial and everything, you know.  But I still had to have a jury trial for the annulment.  And they wanted to know what did I do.  I said, "He wanted children and I didn't want children."  I didn't... He said, "What did you do not to get to get children?"  I said, "Now judge."  [Laughing]  I had a jury trial.  That's right.  A jury trial.  All the reporters when I walked out of that courtroom.  I had an exciting life didn't I [Laughing]?
Speaker 1: So what was life like with him?  Were there things where he made you really happy and other things where it wasn't as good?
Speaker 2: I'll explain that to you.  He'd be gone often. I wouldn't know.  I'd wonder, "Where on earth is this man?  Had something happened to him?"  You know.  But that's why we decided that we were not for one another.  I was on one side of the streets and he was on the other.  I valued the dollar and he did value the dollar.  You know.   We had been places.  If he had two hundred dollars in his pocket and people would come up and say, "Joe, I need one hundred dollars."  He'd go and give 'em one hundred dollars.  Somebody'd come along and want thirty-five dollars.  He'd give it to 'em.  I would say, "Joe, how you gonna pay the check?"  He'd say, "Don't worry about it."  'Cause he would tell a bar tender or tell the people, "I'll pay the bill."  He would give his shirt away.  That's why he didn't have any money.  He gave his money to people.  Anybody wanted money; Joe gave it to 'em.
Speaker 1: I read that about him.
Speaker 2: Yeah.   That was his life.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And that made him happy.  That's what he wanted to do.  And he wanted me.  He thought I'd make him happy.  So we were happy the time.  'Cause I needed a time to myself too, anyway, you know.
Speaker 1: So... And up to that point, you were definitely... 'Cause it refers to bachelorette.  You know.
Speaker 2: I was a bachelorette.
Speaker 1: Right.  And did people... did people make you... Did people say, "She's just too driven."  And, you know, "She's not gonna get married."  Or, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Did those... they say those things about you?  Or...
Speaker 2: No.   They knew I was busy.  You know.  And I had a nice boyfriend.  There were some artists and I had an escort.  You know.
Speaker 1: Now so when you... The two of you got your marriage annulled, were you... was that a reflective time?  Were you upset about it?   Or you both just sort of... It was...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] We agreed.
Speaker 1: You agreed on it.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now I had to have... have a jury trial, and he was not there.  And I had to answer all kind of questions.  "Why I wanted the annulment?"  Because he wanted children and I said I didn't want children.  I was too old to have children [Laughing].
Story_ID: 71432
Speaker 1: Do you... So at that point this is 19- what?  This is 1955.  1958 when you got divorced.  Right?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And was... And you had had by this time; you had had your salon [pause].
Speaker 2: My business.
Speaker 1: Your business for about fourteen years now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  It was a little longer than that.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And had the business changed much by then?
Speaker 2: Only bigger.
Speaker 1: Only bigger.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you closed the business in 1970?
Speaker 2: '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: '73 [1973].  Okay.
Speaker 2: I closed the big shop [Rose Meta House of Beauty].  I actually closed in 1975 I actually closed.  See I closed down the big shop and had a smaller shop.  And I sold it to a girl.
Speaker 1: Ardelia Taylor:  You sold the big shop in '73 [1973].  That's when you opened up on 7th Avenue.
Speaker 2: That's when I closed it.  I didn't sell to her it.  I sold the building.
Speaker 1: Ardelia Taylor:  [unclear] building.
Speaker 2: I... Yeah.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: '73 [1973], and I kept it until [pause] Hmm.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, with [pause].  What would you say were the prime years of The [Rose Meta] House of Beauty?
Speaker 2: 1945 through 1970. When I... '70 [1970], '73 [1973].  I closed down... I sold that building and moved into a smaller place.  And then I sold the name and sold it to a girl.
Speaker 1: Did you find like in the '60s [1960s], you know, with the coming of the Afro, what were your thoughts about the Afro?
Speaker 2: Oh we made money with the Afro.  'Cause we had to do the haircuts and we had to shape.  We made money with it.  They didn't cut the hair themselves.  Our customers when they wore an Afro, they had to come in and get their hair cut.  Shampooed and treatments and shaped.  We made money.
Speaker 1: So you were... You rode the... whatever the... You rode the tide.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When the wigs came in, we sold the wigs.  I used to get three hundred fifty dollars for wigs.  We sold wigs.  I had a wig shop.  We serviced wigs.  Whatever came, we did it.  But you had to have an imagination.  Now is this what the lady wants?  This is what we must give her.  And when I saw the ending coming, I sold.  I closed my shop and sold that building.  I sold the building I built for something like three hundred thousand dollars or more.  And went into a small place with about ten people until I closed it.
Speaker 1: So when you saw the end, what was... Why did you... Why do you think things ended at that point?   Was it that...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Booth renting.
Speaker 1: Ooh!!
Speaker 2: I was training these people for them to go out and rent themselves a booth.
Speaker 1: I see!!! So...
Speaker 2: I didn't rent booths.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so they figured they could make more on their own.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Uh-huh, right.
Speaker 1: By renting a booth.  And so...
Speaker 2: And I gave 'em my blessing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I see.  Okay, okay.  I see.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] but I could see the end for me.  So I said, "Now there's no point in my continuing."  I sold... I traveled all over the world.  Even my business didn't stop me.  All over the world.  Even in 1960, I was traveling.
Story_ID: 71433
Speaker 1: And what were some of your favorite places that you saw?
Speaker 2: Well I went around the world in 1960.  I went to San Francisco and then to Hawaii, to Tokyo [Japan], to Kyoto [Japan], up in mount... to see Mount Fuji [Japan] and then into Hong Kong [China].  From Hong Kong to Calcutta [India].  From Calcutta to New Delhi [India].  You had a hi... Your Prime Minister [U.S. Ambassador to India, 1963-1969] was Chester Bowles at the time I was over there then.  And from there to Agra, India.  And then into Cairo [Egypt].  From Cairo to New Delhi [India], New Delhi to Greece, Athens and up in Damascus [Syria] and back to New York.  But then I went to England and I went to a whole lot of places.  I didn't let it stop me.  I had bookkeepers.  I had people working.  And there was a set up for... If I caught 'em stealing, they went to jail [1955].
Speaker 1: And the trip that you took.  The trip that you took to Europe.  How long was that trip?
Speaker 2: A month.
Speaker 1: I mean... I'm sorry.  The trip around the world was a month.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.   Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 71434
Speaker 1: Now were there... When you got to 1973, were you... 'Cause that... By that time, that's thirty years.  You know.
Speaker 2: I was cooling down.
Speaker 1: You were cooling down.  Okay.  And is this... At what time did you start the bank?
Speaker 2: In 1965.
Speaker 1: 19... Okay.   Can you talk about how that even came about?
Speaker 2: Eight of us got together.  And we pooled our money and got the charter.  And after we got the charter, we sold stock and raised more money.  And we had to get the place where we had the bank renovated.
Speaker 1: So who were the eight?
Speaker 2: [HM] William Hudgins, Frank Schiffman that owned the Apollo Theater, Jack Blumstein that owned the Blumstein's Department Store, Sam Pierce was a lawyer [pause].
Speaker 1: Off camera voice:  Jackie Robinson.
Speaker 2: yeah, Jackie Robinson and Bruce Llewellyn.
Speaker 1: That [unclear].
Speaker 2: You know of Bruce Llewellyn, [HM William] Hudgins... yeah, Hudgins.  A fellow that was in real estate.  It was eight of us.
Speaker 1: And you're the only woman.
Speaker 2: Hmm.  Another woman that was a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't think of her name right now.
Speaker 1: And af... So how did that come about?  Were you... Was it because someone else had started a bank?   Or they had...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I was... had started with a bank in Newark, New Jersey.  Newark, New Jersey.  And I resigned and gave my seat to somebody who lived out there.  Because they wanted me on this Freedom National Bank.  So I sold her my seat.  And got the... Each of us had to put up a certain amount of money to get the charter for the bank.  And we didn't make any money.  We lost our money when the bank closed.  Because see our money was the money that we put up to open the bank.  When the bank closed, we lost our money.
Speaker 1: Now you were... That appealed to you.  The bank appealed to you because it was a different...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] It appealed to me because it was the only black commercial bank that was open.  They had one down in Washington [D.C].  I mean in New York.  We had a federal savings and loans, which was a Carver Federal Savings and Loan bank in New York.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: So that was the only commercial bank.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And not because I thought that I was gonna make a lot of money.  But I was thinking in terms of the people who needed a bank... who needed a black bank but they just thought a freedom Bank, I can go and get some money [Laughing].
Speaker 1: And what things do you think didn't work right with the bank then?  Like on hindsight?
Speaker 2: Well I tell you, we just didn't get in the beginning the first six-month we had something like a one hundred fifty thousand shares we had sold.  You know, that was a lot of money.  And I don't know.  I don't know.  We caught some people stealing money too.  You know.  So.
Speaker 1: So it was the management of the money.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Story_ID: 71435
Speaker 1: Okay.   And now [HM] Jacoby [Dickens] owned... At that time he had also... Around that time he own... didn't he own...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Who?
Speaker 1: [HM] Jacoby Dickens.
Speaker 2: Ah....
Speaker 1: Did he own Seaway [Bank] at that point?
Speaker 2: No, no.  [HM] Jacoby [Dickens]  was trying to buy the bank.  He's the one that called me back here and said, "Rose, you know your bank is gonna close?"
Speaker 1: Ardelia Taylor:  No, no Rose.  She means Seaway [bank] opened up around the same time.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] right.
Speaker 1: Ha?
Speaker 2: Ardelia Taylor:  Starting.
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: Off camera voice:  I think Seaway...
Speaker 1: Didn't Seaway bank open?  Didn't he... Didn't he open... Well he didn't open up Seaway. But wasn't he... I was wondering if he had bought into Seaway at that point.
Speaker 2: Didn't he open... Was it...
Speaker 1: No.  There was someone else there.  And then they brought him in to... as an investor or something.  And then he became Chairman of the Board.  But there was someone else...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Well he and a man that owned some grocery stores owned the controlling... [Ernest T.] Collins owned the controlling stock.  So he owns the controlling stock in Seaway now.  You say he was not a part of the opening up of it?
Speaker 1: No.  Not at the very beginning.
Speaker 2: Oh I see.  I didn't know.
Speaker 1: But I think they brought him in because there were some issues.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: But you're...  But I'm saying so did you... How did you first meet [HM] Jacoby Dickens? Was...
Speaker 2: Date.  He was a date for me.  Wasn't he [unclear]?
Speaker 1: He was [Laughing]!
Speaker 2: He didn't know I was as old as I was [Laughing].
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] [Laughing].
Speaker 2: [Laughing] Here out in Chicago [Illinois].  'Cause he came and took me to dinner.
Speaker 1: Ardelia Taylor:  Yeah Helen and friends.
Speaker 2: Soul Queens restaurant.  They were friends.  And he took me to dinner [Laughing].   Too bad I wasn't a young woman.  If I'd been young, Oh boy!  Jacoby and I would've been shaking the earth [Laughing].  But [HM] Jacoby [Dickens] was doing it.   Ooh!  Jacoby had some much it's not even funny.
Speaker 1: [Laughing] I know.
Speaker 2: Ooh!
Speaker 1: [Laughing].
Speaker 2: He owned this beautiful place on Fisher Island [Florida].  Oh he got this beautiful place in some part in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Ardelia Taylor:  Olympic Fields.
Speaker 2: Olympic Fields.  And he owns a lot of real estate.  He just... Ooh!! He's a rich man.  Rich, rich man.  How did he make so much money?
Speaker 1: You know what, I can [Laughing] tell you this story.  But [Laughing] I'll tell you [Laughing].
Speaker 2: [Laughing].
Speaker 1: [Laughing] That was really real estate.  That's where he made his money.
Speaker 2: Really!!
Speaker 1: Really, really made his money.  I mean...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Woo!
Speaker 1: Really owned a humungous number of buildings.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And [unclear].  And that's really set him.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Woo!
Speaker 1: Not the bowling alley so much, or the bank.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Nah!!
Speaker 1: 'Cause really his money...
Speaker 2: Oh he's a rich man.
Speaker 1: [Laughing] Okay.
Speaker 2: Too bad I wasn't young.
Speaker 1: [Laughing] Any way.
Speaker 2: But I told him, "Well man, you know, I'm an old lady. We're just gonna be good friends."  And, you know, I'm one of his best friends.  I'm one of his best friends.  He was saying when he come back... He was having [unclear].... He was doing something for the house.  He said, "We're having you for dinner.  You have to come out here for dinner."  [Laughing]  I was down on the island to see his first house.  Down there on the [Fisher] Island [Florida].  He got a nice little condo down there.  It's very nice.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's what I heard.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah, Oh yeah.  She plays golf now.  And he had to come up last week.  He called me on the phone when he got in.  I said, "Is Veranda with you?"  He said, "No.  She told me, "I had to do the business, not her."  [Laughing] She was around there playing golf.  Oh she's a lucky little girl.
Speaker 1: [Laughing].
Speaker 2: She's just forty.
Speaker 1: [Laughing].
Speaker 2: [Laughing].
Speaker 1: I know she is [Laughing] She hit the jackpot.   But she's nice too.
Speaker 2: Oh she's a lovely person.
Speaker 1: [Laughing] I shouldn't be heard saying that   [Laughing].
Speaker 2: We had a party.  I had a party around... maybe about six or eight weeks ago.  And I had about twenty people.  And he came in with his tuxedo on, because they were going to a dinner at the Urban League.  And he came in and he had his tuxedo on.  He said, "I'm Rose's butler."  He's a nice man.  And he is the best friend I have.
Speaker 1: Wonderful.  That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: Isn't that wonderful?
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: Now I could've spoiled that.
Speaker 1: That's right  [Laughing].
Speaker 2: I didn't spoil it.  I knew better than that [Laughing].
Speaker 1: [Laughing] Now so... But he's the one who told you that your bank was going?  That it was about to shut down.  Is that what you were saying?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah.  He was out there trying to buy it.  And I was out here.  And he called me on the phone and said, "Rose, you know your bank is gonna close?"  I said, "What!"  I said, "I better come out there and get my little money out of there [Laughing]."   Yep, that's right.  Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: You know...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] And he got this apartment for me.  That's how I happen to have this apartment.  I told him I was gonna come out here to stay.  And I said, "Nothing big, 'cause I don't have a lot of money."  I said, "I want something I can afford, and not have to think about paying my bills [Laughing]."  And I bought the... I bought it cash."  Took my money that I was gonna have in CD's and bought my apartment.  And I got it for a pretty nice price.  'Cause now it'll sell for about three hundred and something thousand [Laughing].  Yeah.
Story_ID: 71436
Speaker 1: So now what... When you... So there really hasn't been someone coming behind you, you know, who did.... Do you think the business has changed with the... Well I have a couple of questions.  One:  Why didn't you try to do in Chicago [Illinois] since you had so much family here, what you did in New York?
Speaker 2: Well, all you can do is so much.  You can spread your wings too thin.  And you won't do anything.  My sister wasn't gonna do the business here.  You know.  She came out there and stayed about six years.  And I bought a building.  And she had a salon in Long Island [New York] and she wanted to come back here.  And I said, "Now..."  I helped with my family here.  My family had a six flat building here, you know.   And it was six members of the family.  They all pooled their money and they bought the building.  They lived well.  And we just let it be that way.  I didn't bother 'em.  Couldn't.   You see, if I had tried to do something in New York and something in Chicago [Illinois], then I'd be... I wouldn't be in this apartment [chuckle].
Speaker 1: And did you... How do you think New York changed you?
Speaker 2: Well it changed my way of thinking.  It made me think big.  And the people were different from Chicago [Illinois] people.  You people here were country people.  Those people were [Laughing] country.  Everybody thinks themselves [unclear].  Everybody.  That was years ago.  And I helped to change the people.  I don't think I could have done in Chicago what I did in New York.  I would've had a shop.  But it would have been a small shop.  But [unclear] employed maybe almost a hundred and some'n people.  One hundred fifty, one hundred sixty people.  I couldn't have done that here in new... in Chicago.
Story_ID: 71437
Speaker 1: When you look at hair styles today and all of that, do you have any thoughts about, you know, what people are doing with, you know, either, you know.  With how they present themselves?  You know, now... Even now a days, there's a tendency to dress down.
Speaker 2: They've done that in New York also.  I think this is a changing time.  I came along a time that people were glamorizing themselves.  And I came along at the right time.  I wouldn't've made the money now and...  Well I meant they weren't paying much money then.  Now you go in to get a haircut and a shampoo, it's four, seventy [dollars]. [Laughing] I was getting maybe five, fifty [dollars] [Laughing] shampoo and haircut.  Hmm!  Not now.  It would have been different.
Speaker 1: But if you... Are there... Do you have any views about the... Do you have any views about how women are conducting themselves and, you know.  And how... Do you have any thoughts?  Do you think it's fine the way the new generation is doing?  Do you...
Speaker 2: Oh they've gone backwards!  The new generation don't care about what they look like any more.  I mean they don't have any hair on their head.  Very few people who really fix their hair up any more.  I... 'Cause you see, I've been going to the boat a lot.  And I see all these people with their hair all cut off with no hair on.  And I said, "They look just like hell [Laughing]."   They're not trying.  At least they could have it cut short and in style.  You know.  But they don't do that anymore.  No.  I don't think... I don't think I'd wanna be in business now.  I wouldn't.  Because I wouldn't be... I wouldn't not have been able to employ the people that I employed.  Now 'cause people would take things.  The [unclear]... Not the razor, but the shears and just cut the hair off.  Or take the clippers and...   I see these baldhead women out there with no hair.  So I wouldn't've made any business [Laughing].
Speaker 1: Okay.  We'll go to the next tape.  [Laughing] Do I have a couple of minutes?
Videoprapher: It's twenty-eight minutes
Speaker 1: Okay, the other thing I wanna... Then what do you think about braids and extensions?  Do you have any thoughts about all of that?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I think that's the only way they're making money today.  I think it's a great thing.  Because some people are paying four hundred to five hundred dollars and making more money than we made.  Well, of course, they can't do more than two a day.  But they can... A girl that's working for herself can go make a one thousand dollars like that.  And if she wanna work long hours, she can make money for herself.  And everybody works for themselves [unclear] now.  Nobody works for anybody.  They all rent booths.  So they're making money because [unclear]... I see an awful lot of braids out there.  And I know all these braids are not done at home.  But it takes them about four or five hours to do them.  But they're getting the money.  And if you just go in for a shampoo and a set you're gonna pay seventy-five dollars.  So we just gotta encourage anybody who has built a business can make some money.
Speaker 1: And if you were advising someone [unclear] I'm sorry.  Okay.
Story_ID: 71438
Speaker 1: ... It never dawned on me people were... I'm sorry.   Okay.  It never dawned that people were spending so much on braids.  So I just sort of put braids... [unclear] Especially since people... Kids...  You know, mothers were getting their kids done.  So I didn't think they were spending this type of money.
Speaker 2: But I would not have been able to get anyone to work for me.  Everyone today wants to work for themselves.  They are renting a space for themselves.  I wouldn't be able to make money renting the booths.  You can make some money.  But you don't make any money.  I made money having the people to work for me.
Speaker 1: Right.  But what I'm saying to you is I believe today, that if someone could do... Let me... In the black Salons.  I think if someone could have a salon where they offer really good service, and they can control and they can get people in and out on time [Laughing], and be a, you know, and do nice hair.  I think you could make money on...
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think you could fran... And I think the new way might be franchising.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The new Rose Morgan might be a franchise operation.  Because the beauty industry for black people is like... really [unclear] but most of them are small shops.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: Most of them.  You know.
Speaker 2: um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Even people like...  There's a guy named [HM] John Atchison in New York.
Speaker 2: Ha!!
Speaker 1: You know, who's bright.
Speaker 2: [excitedly] I know him.
Speaker 1: Okay...
Speaker 2: I know him.  He's in California and New York?
Speaker 1: Right.  But people come to him.  But he has a small shop.  If he could take and franchise himself, you know.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] But he splits [unclear] working out in California and working in New York.  I know [HM]John [Atchinson].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: [Laughing] Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: [Laughing]  So what I'm saying to you, but he's still a small operation.
Speaker 2: And he's an old man now.
Speaker 1: [Laughing] You know, he's become a minister now.
Speaker 2: Did he!
Speaker 1: Yes.  He took... recently become a minister.
Speaker 2: Hmm! I know.  Becaus  we were along together.  He's not young [Laughing].
Speaker 1: He's not young!
Speaker 2: [Laughing] Nah!  [Laughing].
Speaker 1: [Laughing].
Speaker 2: [Laughing] John must be about seventy-five now...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] No!
Speaker 2: Or seventy.  Yes.
Speaker 1: He doesn't look it!
Speaker 2: Maybe.  But he's got to be seventy years old.
Speaker 1: I can't believe that.  Wow!
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 71439
Speaker 1: Okay.  He certainly [Laughing] doesn't look it.  Okay.  So... Like you.  But anyway what I'm saying is that, you know.  But are there other thoughts you have about the, you know, the beauty industry and now and trends that you see?  Do you see anything that's positive or negative?  Or a reflection back on... I mean because you were also very much a business.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: I mean you were a businesswoman.
Speaker 2: From the beginning.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I'm wondering why do you think... What do you think made you a good businesswoman?   Business person?
Speaker 2: I've always thought that a hundred hands could do what these two hands could do.  I could take these two hands and have a hundred hands to do what these two hands could do.  Which two hands can do, can't do so much.   If you want production, you got to have people to have... to make production.  And I never wanted to stand up and just do it myself.  I wanted to see other people doing it.  But I wanted to give them the knowledge to do it.  I wanted them to do what I could do.  And I thought I could teach hundreds of hands to do what I wanted to do myself.  But today, I don't think anybody wanna teach anybody to do what they can do.  You see everybody out there want to do it themselves.  Do you see any big shops anymore?  You won't see any big shops any more.  Just think, my having ninety people working in one place and eighty in another.  You will never have that today.  And people coming in not because of that operator.  They're coming in because of that name.  They said, "If you want to have blown hair, go to Rose Meta."  They didn't say go to Miss Jones.  Go to Rose Meta [House of Beauty].  What I meant blow hair, go over and shape your hair with not a lot of... not having a lot of oil... grease in it.  'Cause we didn't put grease in the hair.  We put... sprayed the hair and brushed it dry.  We didn't put the dryer on and let it blow that hair.  And you'd have to straighten it to get the kinks out.  When we finished with it, that hair was straight by brushing it.  So I don't know what they're doing today.  And I've decided I wanna rest my mind at this particular phase of my life.  I want to just look out and see how... what's happening out there and do what I wanna do, and not have to make plans to do it.
Story_ID: 71440
Speaker 1: Now do you... The fact that you thought... you could conceive of a hundred hands doing what your two hands did, meant that you were also good at identifying and training people.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's what I did.  When you came to my door, no matter how experienced you were, you had to learn my method.  I had to show you how to change what you were doing, and to do it a better way.  See many people don't wanna teach you what they know.  They wanna keep it.  If I kept my secrets to myself, I wouldn't have not... I would not have been able to employ that many people.  I would not have been able to have that many people coming through my doors.  They came through my doors to get the Rose Morgan system.  Because they knew if I gave them an operator, I was giving them an operator that could do exactly what I had been doing.  And please believe me, I felt in my mind, "What you can do, I can do better.  What you were doing out there, I can improve on it and do it better."
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And I did not keep it to myself.  It didn't matter to me who I trained and who left me.  I said, "If somebody came in and I taught them what I could do, they went out and made somebody look better."  That was the feeling I had.  Is improving the people out there in the street.  And do you know, it didn't hurt me.  I still had people from all over the country.  When they'd come into New York, they had to come to Rose Morgan or Rose Meta to get what they wanted done.  I didn't lose anybody.  And when I saw that I should give it up, I gave it up.  I said, "Let somebody else carry on."  And here I am standing here before you and say I'm ninety years old [Laughing] and love it.  Because if I had been selfish, I would not have been... I would not be able to sit here and talk to you.  Because I would have to do all of this myself.  I trained people what I could...  what these two hands could do.
Speaker 1: So you really believe that in business...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: If you are generous that it will come back to you.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  You can't receive.  You've got to give to receive.  How are you gonna receive if you don't give?  And that has always been in my mind.  In order for me to receive, I got to train you to do what I can do.   Otherwise I couldn't get all those fifteen or twenty people coming in here if I'm going to have to do it.  I don't want to do it.  I want to go around and see what you are doing.  If you're doing exactly what I did.
Story_ID: 71441
Speaker 1: Now in your salon, did you espouse a certain philosophy?  Were there things that you always told your, you know, your staff in terms of how they should handle customers?  What they should do?  What the rote was?  What the way of doing things were?
Speaker 2: Correct, right.  I trained each person to call you by your last name, Miss so-and-so.  I trained each operator to call her operator friend by her last name.  When you came into my place, if I had ninety people, you never called anybody Lucy, Sarah or Rose.  Whatever your last name, they had to call you by your last name.  And kept a formal attitude in that shop and you felt it when you walked in there.  We had someone to take your coat, check your coat.  To... You had to have a check to go back to get your coat.  Nobody took care of themselves.  It was always service.  We gave you the best service that we could give you.  Now when you get that kind of service, you wanna go to a place, you're gonna get that kind of service.  And I had to walk through and see a person doing something.  If I saw it was wrong, I'd say, "Oh that's beautiful.  Let me show you.  I'm a trainer, I'd do it this way."  You know.  I didn't say you're doing something wrong.  And when I did that, the customer was glad to have me put my hands on her.  You have to have a system.  You have to have in your mind what you want things to go... how you want things to go.  Now if you were sitting in that chair and you had a girl working on you and you knew I was the owner of the shop, and you've heard about me.  If I walked over and say to you, "Oh hello, Miss Jones.  How are you?  Oh I like what she's doing to you.  But I'd like to have this going this way."  You would be glad for me to do it.  Wouldn't you?  That's what I'd used to do.  And that's what the people appreciated.
Speaker 1: Because they knew that you would take care, and you paid attention to detail too.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Every person.  Every person.
Story_ID: 71442
Speaker 1: Is there anything... Okay.  So when you closed... When you closed your... Or you down... You closed your main store in 1973 [Rose Meta House of Beauty].
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: You just ca... You still stayed in New York.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: For... and so what was... What was your life?  You know, you said, "You downsized to a smaller place."  Right?
Speaker 2: Well [unclear] yes.  Well in 1973, I closed the big salon.  All... I sold the big building.  Closed up [unclear] kept the small place, and had maybe about twelve or fourteen people and had a manager in there.  And I would go in and see what was happening.  Then I decided to sell to a person and get out of it all together.  And she was going to really keep the place going.  And I told her; "I would stay with her six months, in and out during the day to see what she was doing."  But she saw that she was supposed to own a shop.  She's the owner of a shop; she didn't have to come in when she wanted to come in [Laughing].  But you can't run a shop that way.  So she didn't... She failed.  So it was closed.  And when she closed it, well, of course, I did stick with her six months.  And I lived out into New York; I lived out in New York about eight or nine years, before I came out here [Chicago, Illinois] to live.  I just lived.  Did all the things I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: So what was your life like at that point?  Because you had worked for the... you know.  From the age of ten really.  I mean you had been working...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] No, but I wasn't working as such.  I never denied myself of anything.  I traveled all over the world.  I did all the things I wanted to do.  I still had a nice social life when I worked.  I went around the world.  Went around the world for twenty-four days.  And then I just traveled all over everywhere.  So I had good managers.  I had good people working for me.  I guess I was put here on earth to do that.  But you've got to still put into your business what should be there.  You've got... If you're not there, the business has got to feel as though you're there.  You've got to have people that are good enough for... not to... for you not to be missed.  You know.  How do you think these people own these big companies?  They're not there.  They're not there all the time.  They do what they wanna do.  But they got good people.  And I had good people working for me.  But today I don't think the beauty business is geared in that direction.  I think everybody wants to be their own boss.  That's why you don't have many shops that employ people.
Speaker 1: Now when you...  So what are you... Where are you at, at this point in your life?   I mean what are you... Say you reflect back, you know.  What are you... What do you think?  Are you... Are you [pause].
Speaker 2: I still wanna socialize.  I still have a social life.  I play cards.  And I go to social events.  I go to the casino.  I gamble.  I go some times and win ten thousand do... I won more than ten thousand dollars one night [Laughing].  I went to one machine and hit four thousand eight hundred dollars.  I went to the next machine while I was waiting for 'em to pay me, two thousand and something.  I went to the third machine and made it come to ten thousand dollars right together.  And about four or five weeks ago, I won about eight thousand dollars.  But I don't go and throw my money away.  If I see I'm losing, I quit [Laughing].  So I have a pretty good life.
Story_ID: 71443
Speaker 1: And your father [Chaptle Morgan], he died you said at [age] sixty-seven.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] He did.
Speaker 1: Right?   Now how old... When... Where were you in your career when he passed away?
Speaker 2: When he passed away I was going very... pretty big.  Because I was in... When my father passed away, I had my place on [9 West] 125th Street [New York]. Yes. I had my father to come out.  I shall never forget.  The world...
Speaker 1: [unclear] One second.
Speaker 2: Okay?  [pause]
Speaker 1: Go on.
Speaker 2: I had my father to come to New York for the World's Fair.  It must have been in 1933 [1939 New York World's Fair].  I think we had a world's fair in '33 [1939 New York World's Fair].   I had my father to come out.  And my father was so proud of me.  I had this shop with eight operators.  I didn't have a big shop.  And he came out and saw what I was doing.  He was so happy.  And I had one of my friends to take him to the World's Fair, and he had a good time.  But my father had a heart attack when he was sixty-nine [sixty-seven] years old.  But he was very happy with what I had done.  Because I had everyone to come to New York.  All my sisters and brothers.  Had 'em all to come out to New York.  And they all came out to see what I was doing.  Even before I got really success.  And I never forgot my family.  Whatever my family needed, if I could help, I would help.  I shall never forget.  One of my fr... my family pooled their money and bought a six flat building.  Each one of them had their own six-room apartment.  And I had a brother [Fred Morgan] that was a fire chief at the fire department here [Chicago, Illinois, 1881].  And he decided he no longer wanted to live there.  He wanted to buy his own building.  So he said he was leaving.  They wanted to know, "What are we gonna do with your apartment?"  He said, "It's up to you all."  So they called me and asked me would I take the apartment.  I said, "What the heck will I do with an apartment in New York?"  I said, "Okay.  I'll give him his money out of the apartment."  So I took the apartment.  So I had an apartment in New York.  So we have all...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] You mean here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: I mean here in Chicago.  We have always stuck together.  You know, how many brothers and sisters can you find who will pool their money and buy a building and each one have his own six room... Was it six rooms?  Yeah.  Six room apartment.
Speaker 1: So your father really was a very imp... I mean you... he and your mother worked as a team.  But he was a pretty forward thinking guy.  And yet at the same time, remember you said, "He saw something special in you."
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: And did he ever articulate what he saw?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: [unclear] helped me with whatever I wanted to do  when I was at that age.
Speaker 1: And your other siblings, what did they say about you?
Speaker 2: My other sisters and brothers?  They never commented.  They never felt that I was a favorite.  'Cause I was young.  You know, and they were all doing things themselves.  You know.   And they never thought anything about it.
Story_ID: 71444
Speaker 1: But when you think about the fact that you, you know, went from Mississippi, you know.  From this little town in Mississippi...
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: To the 'belle'.  You know, to really sort of taking over New York.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.  You mean Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: No, I'm talking about New York.  You took over New York.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And, you know, you were the place.  You were a destination.  You were the place... You were New York in many ways.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.  Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So I mean when you think about that, what...
Speaker 2: When you call Rose Morgan's name in New York, it was just like I think talking about your Mayor of New York [HM David Dinkins] [Laughing].  Percy Sutton.  Percy Sutton and all of those people catered to me.  Whatever they wanted; they'd come to me.  And I supported them all. It's a very good feeling to know that you have done that.  You've been able to participate with all the people who have been successful.  All the people out East who were successful, I was able to participate with them.  Not in a way that I had to give them a lot of money.  But in ways that I could help them period.  I remember my sister and her husband flew out for something I was having at my house.  Raising money for [Mayor] David Dinkins.  People flew out there from Chicago [Illinois].  Some donated one hundred dollars, some donated two hundred dollars, some donated one thousand dollars for [HM Mayor] David Dinkins.  I shall never forget [HM] Jacoby [Dickens] coming out there giving one thousand dollars to [HM Mayor] David Dinkins.  And all these people out there.  So they felt that any time they did something, please call Rose Morgan.  Because I would always help.  See I've been helping since the age of ten as I said.  You know.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And now I'm sitting down talking to you at the age of what?  Ninety.
Speaker 1: Ninety.
Speaker 2: [Laughing].
Story_ID: 71445
Speaker 1: Miss Morgan, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: What do you mean?
Speaker 1: Legacy.  What do you wanna be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Helping people.  All the people I helped.  All the people I have employed, all the people I've helped in the family.  Willing to put their children through school.  Help is what people need.  If we would think today how one another could help one another, we would be in a better position.  Don't you think so? But people don't think about how they can help other people today.  Some people.  I will say that.  I take that back.  People don't think about... but some people don't think about it.  They're very selfish.
Story_ID: 71446
Speaker 1: Hmm.  Are there people that you have admired in your life besides your fa... I mean I know you admired your father.  [unclear] but are there other people?
Speaker 2: Yes.  There are people in my family that I've admired.  I have a brother [Fred Morgan] that was a fire chief [1981].  The first [second] fire chief in the Fire Department here [Chicago, Illinois].  His son [Fred Morgan, Jr. also a fire chief]... the first time in history there was a father and son fire chief at the same time.  And with his three children, he made sure that they were in something that they would not regret doing it.  One of his sons was in the Police Department.  The other one a fire chief and the other one is in the hospital.  I thought that was wonderful.  That he would see that his children made something of themselves.  What else would you like me to say?
Speaker 1: No.  That's good.  Is there anyone else?  Or anybody who you think has had great impact on the black community?
Speaker 2: Oh many people.  But I just can't call their names.  You know.  How much are you gonna remember when you get ninety?
Speaker 1: I'm not gonna remember anything.
Speaker 2: [Laughing].
Speaker 1: That's gonna be the problem.
Speaker 2: [Laughing].
Speaker 1: [Laughing] I'm not gonna remember... That's   why I'm having trouble right now.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] [Laughing].
Speaker 1: And I'm forty-seven going on forty-eight.
Speaker 2: [Laughing].
Speaker 1: I'm not gonna remember anything.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] [Laughing].
Speaker 1: [Laughing].
Speaker 2: Oh [unclear].
Speaker 1: [Laughing] This brain is... Okay.  Anything else you wanna say?
Speaker 2: [pause].
Speaker 1: 'Cause you're still very youthful. That's the thing.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  I like to go dancing.  I like to play cards.  I like to gamble [Laughing].  Well I won't say gamble.  I like to go to the boat.  I won't say I like to gamble.  I don't like to gamble.  I just like to go to the boat [Laughing].   And I still like parties.  I like to go out.  I like the theater.
Story_ID: 71447
Speaker 1: And do you have... Just one last question.  Any hopes or do you have concerns for the black community?  You've lived a long life.  You've seen a lot of changes in your life.
Speaker 2: Well I just hope that they keep moving forward, and have a progressive mind.  Think of all the things of what should be done for the next person beneath him.  See people... We don't think about one another.  We've got to think about helping people. See my mind has always been geared to helping people.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: If I didn't help people, I wouldn't be where I am today.  All the people who walked through my doors that worked for me, I trained.  I didn't train 'em per se.  But they had to learn my method and I promoted them.  And everybody who worked in my business, had to call you Miss Jones or Miss Brown or Mr. Jones.  No one in there called you Mary, Lucy or Sam.  It was Miss so -and-so.  Didn't anyone call you by your first name.  They kept a nice formal attitude.  No talking, no laughing.  I'll show you some picture how they worked in the shop.  Do I have...  I don't have it in here.  I think I have it in... I have it in something else.
Story_ID: 71448
Speaker 1: Oh one last question.  You may or may not have an answer.  But it goes to the fact... this training that you did.  And a lot of times the perception in the black community was that we were not... You know, we were not a cultured people.  That we didn't appreciate the finer things.  And I was just wondering, how you would address... You know, that we were just like just off the farm and, you know.  And having babies and, you know.  Loud and boisterous and shouting.
Speaker 2: I don't think I can really express myself there.  I wouldn't like to.  Because you see, I've dealt with a certain class of people.  The people who worked under my supervision and the people who'd come into the shop.  And the people who came into my shop had to act according.  They didn't hear loud talking; they couldn't come in there and do it.  I don't think I can really give you a correct answer on that.
Speaker 1: But you did.  In what you did, you did really train people and train them as to the right way and the...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Right, right.
Speaker 1: Proper way.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.  Now I haven't been frequenting any beauty salons and public places to see exactly what's happening out there now.  [unclear] a few minutes ago.  I play cards in there with women of status in their life.  They're nice people.  I really don't know what's going on out there.  And when I'm not doing those things, I'm resting my body [Laughing].  So I can walk [Laughing].
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're done then.
Speaker 2: right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you Miss Morgan.
Story_ID: 71449
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Who it is, where it was taken the date, if you remember?  Anything you remember.
Speaker 2: That was done in 1951.  When I was selling "My Man" cologne, and I used that for an advertisement of Joe [Louis], holding the "My Man" cologne.
Speaker 1: That's right, you created that.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, "My Man" cologne.  That's when we were married.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: See, of course, I'm dressed as I'm going out, and he's holding the cologne.  And I'm telling him to splash it on himself.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, go ahead.  That's [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson, [HM Reverend] Al Sharpton, and Rose Morgan at a fundraiser in New York.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And do you remember the approximate date, year?  Two on the (unclear), is it?
Speaker 2: No, about seven years ago.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: So like 1995.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.  Fundraiser, the same year that [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson was there with [President William J.] Clinton.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DICUSSION):
Speaker 1: Wait, you mean Monica, no, no (laughter).  Who were you referring to?
Speaker 2: That's the same year of [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson and Ralph [sic, HM Reverend Al] Sharpton.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  So, '95' [1995]?
Speaker 2: Ninety-five [1995].
Speaker 1: And this was, President [James] Carter.  He was honored this night at a dinner.  Oh, that was about ten years ago.
Speaker 2: ADELIA MORGAN:  Longer than that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  He was president then.
Speaker 1: Was he president or was he there?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  He looks like it was after he was president, but he looks older, doesn't he?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he wasn't president.  He was at the affair.  I don't remember that affair.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And who's the person on the left?  Do you recall?
Speaker 1: It was just a person, who wanted to get in the picture.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Another guest at the event.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay, unidentified.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's Rose Morgan.  That's me.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And where was this taken?
Speaker 1: Last year.
Speaker 2: ADELIA MORGAN:  About two years ago.
Speaker 1: Was it two years?
Speaker 2: So 2000.
Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And what was the occasion, do you remember?
Speaker 1: Yes, it was a luncheon.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, very good.
Speaker 1: A luncheon for what?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: During the Christmas holidays, between the holidays.
Speaker 1: ADELIA MORGAN:  Irma's Party?
Speaker 2: Irma's party, yeah.
Story_ID: 71450
VIDEOGRAPHER:  [Background talking]  Describe your mom's photo here.  Is this your mother?
Speaker 2: Huh?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Is this your mother?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  So tell us who this is and (unclear) (background talking)-- Dee, when was this picture taken?
Speaker 2: ADELIA MORGAN:  Mama's was taken--well, they both was taken the same time, 1927, I think-
Speaker 1: Nineteen twenty-seven [1927]?
Speaker 2: ADELIA MORGAN:  Twenty-eight [1928].
Speaker 1: Really?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Do we already have your mom's name and the spelling?
Speaker 1: Win--, W-I-N-
Speaker 2: Yeah, Winnie, Winnie Morgan.
Speaker 1: Yeah, W-I-N-N-I-E, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: But you should spell it, though.  That's what he's trying to get you to spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Oh, W-I-N-N-
Speaker 1: ADELIA MORGAN:  --I-E.
Speaker 2: --I-E.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: Oh, he was a handsome boy.  Look at him with his hair shaved off.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, and could you spell your father's name for us?
Speaker 2: C-H-A-P-P-
Speaker 1: ADELIA MORGAN:  L-E.
Speaker 2: --L-E, Chapple.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Very good, next.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): [Background talking]
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, Ms. Morgan, I'm rolling tape and ready for you to give us a description of this one, if you could.
Speaker 1: That's [HM] Charlie Rangel and myself.  He was being honored out here in Chicago [Illinois].  I don't remember for what.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, you can go ahead now.
Speaker 1: My brother.  He was the first fire chief in the fire department here in Chicago [Illinois]--no, no, not the first.  It's the first time a father and son--did you see another fire chief out there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm gonna get that.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Which brother is this, Ms. Morgan?
Speaker 2: Fred, Fred Morgan, Sr., fire chief.  And he went in there and got a lot of blacks in.  It's the first time in history there's been a father and son fire chief at the same time in the same department.
Speaker 1: And that was here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: In Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: 'Cause there weren't--being a fire chief, a black fire chief in Chicago [Illinois]-
VIDEOGRAPHER:  For the description, officially on the mic, please?
Speaker 1: He's the son of Fred, he's Fred, Jr., the son of Fred, Sr., the first time there was a father and son fire chief at the same time in the fire department, in the Chicago Fire Department.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Do you know--I know this is a tough question.  I couldn't answer this off hand, but do you know approximately what year this was taken?
Speaker 1: Do you know, Dee?   He had been-
Speaker 2: ADELIA MORGAN:  The picture was taken?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.  When did he retire?
Speaker 2: ADELIA MORGAN:  Fred, Jr.?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: ADELIA MORGAN:  It had to be about-
Speaker 1: Ten years ago?
Speaker 2: ADELIA MORGAN:  More than that.  Fred passed in '86' [1986].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):  Oh, you were thinking, just tell us--just say late '80's [1980s], late 1980s.
Speaker 2: That's the same picture, isn't it?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE 2):  You wanna go back, right?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  No, I just wanted to--late 1980s is the date I'm--(unclear).
VIDEOGRAPHER:  All right, Ms. Morgan, please describe this picture?
Speaker 2: Oh, that is Earl Jones.  He was a commercial artist out of New York.  He was a boyfriend of mine.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):  Do you remember when this was taken?
Speaker 2: That was taken 20 years ago would be what then?
Speaker 1: It would be '82' [1982].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Anything else you wanna add.
Speaker 2: No, he's dead.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: [HM] Charlie Rangel, Percy Sutton and [HM Mayor] David Dinkins.  That's when [HM Mayor] David Dinkins was running for mayor [New York], and they were all at my house in New York.
Speaker 1: We were supposed to do his interview.  He had agreed, but it was around September-
Speaker 2: That was at the Waldorf, no, it was a theater in New York on--Carnegie--no.
Speaker 1: ADELIA MORGAN:  Rockefeller?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Radio City?
Speaker 1: Radio City.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Radio City?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, and what was the occasion?
Speaker 1: She was being honored.  It was up in the--it wasn't in Radio City.  That was up in the dining room, had cocktails.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Can you tell me the year, roughly, approximately?
Speaker 1: Fifteen years ago.
Speaker 2: ADELIA MORGAN:  Longer than that.
Speaker 1: Twenty years ago.
Speaker 2: ADELIA MORGAN:  Um-hum.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, early 1980s.
Speaker 2: ADELIA MORGAN:  Early in 1980s.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.  Okay, description, please.
Speaker 2: That was a boyfriend of mine in New York, about twenty-five years ago.  Look how young I look.  Oh, God, my mind is going a point blank.
Speaker 1: You were sixty-five.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Describe this one, please.
Speaker 1: That's me and-
Speaker 2: Who's that?
Speaker 1: From Georgia.
Speaker 2: [HM] Andrew Young.
Speaker 1: [HM] Andrew Young, and I don't know the girl's name, friend, same time as [President James] Carter [photo].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Yeah, that's the same woman that was in that photo with President [James] Carter.
Speaker 1: Yeah, same time that President Carter.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next one.  Okay, tell us about the painting?
Speaker 1: Oh, that's a painting that some Merchant Marines went to Naples, Italy and they had seven artists.  They set the paperback sign.  Some did the face, the shoulders, the arms, the body.  It's exactly like the paper they cut out of the newspaper of the Pittsburgh Courier.  I was fifty years old there.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Seven different people worked on this all at once?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, seven different artists.  I don't have the paper for you to--it's on the wall out there.
Story_ID: 71451
Speaker 1: I've got it, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, State Labor Department.  I raised the minimum wage an hour from sixteen dollars to twenty-six dollars.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Wait one second.  We're rolling.  Let's--can we talk about this diploma here.
Speaker 2: What is that?  I don't know what that is.
Speaker 1: From Shaw, Shaw University.
Speaker 2: Oh, Honorary Doctor's degree from Shaw University [North Carolina].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Nineteen seventy [1970], does that sound right?
Speaker 2: Nineteen--yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: Is that picture from Shaw [University, North Carolina]?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, that's the time I got the doctor's degree-
Speaker 2: That's 1973, that says on the bag, I think.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  I think it says MCMLXX on the diploma, which--would that not be 1970.  Let me do a little bit tighter shot.  Okay, great.  Next, Ms. Morgan.  Thank you for being so patient.  If you could describe this diploma, State of New York, Department of Labor.
Speaker 2: Oh, I helped to change the minimum wage of the, minimum wage from sixteen dollars to twenty-six dollars.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.  When did that happen?
Speaker 2: Oh, my God.  I think the date's on there.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, let me see if I can find it and read it here.
Speaker 2: What's the date?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  February 19--what is that?  It's on the bottom right.  It's written in pen, 19, something eight, 19-
Speaker 2: It's 1947.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Nineteen-forty seven [1947], okay.
Speaker 2: It might have been sixteen dollars a week.
Speaker 1: So, it was a week?
Speaker 2: To twenty-six dollars a week.  That's a--(unclear).
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, so this goes with the other one, with the diploma that we saw.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Great, okay, next one.
Speaker 2: We have two more, and then we'll do the (unclear).
Speaker 1: That's in 1955.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Hold on.
Speaker 1: That's 1955.  Joe [Louis] and I, that's our wedding day.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Cool dress.  So do you recognize the person in the back?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, Billy Rowe (unclear).  He was a writer for the Pittsburgh Courier, one of Joe [Louis]'s buddies.  Oh, he didn't want-
Speaker 2: What?  He didn't want him to marry you?
Speaker 1: [No audible response].
Speaker 2: I had a feeling that's what you were gonna (laughter) say (laughter).
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And that was at--did you say that was at your house?  Where did this take place?
Speaker 2: This was in my house.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, 'cause this is for the people who will take the photo and make the caption for it and tell on tape which house this is.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry.  That's the house, I lived in Long Island, St. Albans, New York, St. Albans, Long Island.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And during what period of time did you live there?
Speaker 2: I lived there from 1950 to 1961.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  All right, thank you.  Okay, I'm rolling now.
Speaker 2: That's one side of the salon where there's about sixteen people who are really working.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And is this Rose Meta or Rose-
Speaker 2: Rose Morgan, Rose Morgan.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Can you tell, I mean it's gonna be difficult, but can you recall or can you tell what, approximately when this was taken?  Can you tell from the hair styles or-
Speaker 2: It was taken in 19--when did I open the shop?  Nineteen, 1944.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, great.  Thank you.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, Ms. Morgan, we're rolling again on this new photo here.
Speaker 1: That's in my office at the salon.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Rose Morgan?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, in the 1950s, do you think?
Speaker 1: It was 1950.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Great, okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's 1940s.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, can you tell us anything else about it?
Speaker 1: It's just a picture that was taken at the salon.
Speaker 2: She makes it seem so easy.
Speaker 1: See how young, see that young face.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  How old were you, twenty-five, thirty years old (unclear).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  This is simply twenty-five, thirty years younger.
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  And she looks that.
Speaker 2: Oh, you mean each one she says-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  Yeah, she goes, I'm fifty, I'm-
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  --I'm thirty.
Speaker 2: And you didn't tell me you painted?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  I paint, oh, I really can paint--out of Teterboro [New Jersey] up to New Rochelle [New York], I endorsed that plane.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Sorry, say that one more time, Ms. Morgan.
Speaker 1: Oh, I endorsed a plane.  I was flown up to Teterboro [New Jersey] airport in New Rochelle, New York.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And the year would have been?
Speaker 1: Oh, that was done, oh, that was done in 1950.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, very good, next.
Speaker 1: You don't want me to start talking yet?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, you can talk now.
Speaker 1: Every woman that came into the salon got one of those brochures, 1950.  See how young I am there?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And this is the back of the brochure that-
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  How did you learn-
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty [1950].  See, I was way ahead of my time.
Speaker 1: You were way ahead of your time.
Speaker 2: Twenty-five.  Look at those nice hair styles.  I wasn't ahead of my time-
Speaker 1: You were.
Speaker 2: --I just had a great imagination.
Speaker 1: Well, you call it a great imagination, but I don't know if it's a great imagination--visionary because you implemented.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Where do you think you got your imagination?
Speaker 1: Oh, I just had a smart brain.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what they're using today too, you know.
Speaker 2: So [HM] John Atchison, 'cause I thought he was-
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: --I thought he was sixty, [HM] John Atchison, he said that he was--go on.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: John Atchison?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  The place, the time, what the occasion was, who the people are?
Speaker 2: That was about 1945.  She was the society editor of Ebony Magazine, and the, he was a reporter, and we were on, we were on television when I had this sign.  We were talking about business, and I was saying "It can be done".  I had the sign.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, very good.  Thank you, next?
Speaker 2: A plaque from, I don't remember the name of the organization.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  When was it and who are those people you are with?
Speaker 2: Maybe we'd better not do that one.  I don't know the names.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Caption person disregard the glare on this photo.  This is caption material for the previous shot of the same photo.  This is the Harlem, what the "Committee for Friends of Culture"?  The Harlem Committee for Friends of Culture and the plaques that have been presented to Leonard Parker, Rose Morgan and John Straghan, S-T-R-A-G-H-A-N and that's from left to right.  So Mr. Parker is on the left, and Mr. Straghan is on the right.  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: No, I'm being interviewed on radio, for some radio.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Do you remember when and what they were--why they had you on?
Speaker 2: It might be a date on the back.
Speaker 1: Maybe you'd better not use that one, huh?
Speaker 2: Well, it's okay.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  We don't always have to--we just, we try to get as much information as we can, but from there, we-
Speaker 2: And they were interviewing me on business because I think, at that particular time, I was employing something like one hundred eighty-something people.  And they were talking about business.
Story_ID: 71452
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Yeah, that'll work.  Okay, next.  Okay, Ms. Morgan, could you describe this one for us?
Speaker 2: That's my bookkeeper.  We're going over books and business, checks.  Something has happened.  See how serious we are (laughter).
VIDEOGRAPHER:  When was this?
Speaker 2: That was in 1945.  Wait a minute, where is that at?  Let me see that, no, that was 1950.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And the bookkeeper's--can you lean back for me just a little bit?  And the bookkeeper's name [background talking]?
Speaker 2: Calvin Plater.  He just died about a year ago.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, and his last name is spelled?
Speaker 2: Calvin Plater, P-L-A-T-E-R.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think that was brought into the airport.  They gave me flowers.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, so Buffalo, New York.  What year?
Speaker 2: Is it on there?  No, no, in the front.  See it?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  Welcome, to Queens City, [New York], nah, no, no year.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  It has to be while you were married though because it says "Wife of heavy-weight champion, Joe Louis".
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it must have been about 1951.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's a good one there.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  This one?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, I served on the minimum wage and hour board.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Do you know, kind of like--I hate to do this to you, but I don't think I really finished getting that other one.  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: It was a committee from the group that invited me up, and it's a welcoming sign there.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, good.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
VIDEOGRAPHER:  All right, go ahead.
Speaker 2: This was the minimum wage and hour board for the State Labor Department for the beauty industry.  And I was on the board.  We went from Buffalo [New York], back down to New York with public hearings.  We raised the minimum wage from sixteen dollars a week to twenty-five dollars [sic] a week.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And do you recognize who the other people are?
Speaker 2: I know this--names, you mean?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Yes, exactly.  Here, you are here, second from the left.  Do you remember either of these other women or this man here?
Speaker 2: That was the judge, oh-
VIDEOGRAPHER:  We're referring to the man on the right.  He was a New York State judge or-
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a judge.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, and were the other two women, were they also operators, owners or operators of salons?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Of the industry, they were on the board.  They had a board to go from Buffalo back to New York, all the little towns in between with public hearings.  We were having public hearings to see about the minimum wage.  Oh, my God.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  That's great.
Speaker 2: The fall fellow was Ralph Morrison, my nephew.  He was one of my managers.  Next to him is a bookkeeper.  Next to her is Rose Morgan, and then the man is a bookkeeper, Calvin Plater.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And what's the occasion there?  Everyone's holding gifts.  Is that Christmastime?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's Christmastime, where they're giving gifts to the employees.  You can't see them.  They're over on this side.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, and what year do you think this would be?
Speaker 2: Ah, this is in--when did Ralph leave, Dee?  It was in, that was about in the '70's [1970s].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, so this was some time during the '70's [1970s]?  Does that sound right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about 1965.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Opening up a wig salon.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And who are those other people?
Speaker 2: They are, they came to the opening.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, so they're customers or guests or clients?
Speaker 2: Right.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And was this the first wig salon that you opened?
Speaker 2: No, that was the second wig salon.  But that was in a beauty salon that I had, but I opened up a department in it for just wigs.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  When did that happen?
Speaker 2: That happened in 1955.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Very good.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: I was one of the incorporators of Freedom National Bank.  And I served on the board for twenty-five years, and I was resigning.  And that's what they gave me, that portrait.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  I saw that hanging in your hallway.  Now, what year did this take place?
Speaker 2: Was that '89' [1989].
Speaker 1: ADELIA MORGAN:  When you resigned?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, or was I-
Speaker 1: ADELIA MORGAN:  (Unclear), it must have been--
Speaker 2: It closed in '89' [1989].
Speaker 1: ADELIA MORGAN:  Eighty-four [1984], I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 19--it was in 1984 but see, [HM] Jacoby Dickens was out there, trying to buy the bank.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And do you remember some of the people in the photo?  The man who's holding the artwork on the left here, do you remember who he is, this guy?
Speaker 2: Had the real estate company.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Do you remember who the man at the podium is here, next to you?
Speaker 2: [HM] Ed[ward] Lewis that owns Essence Magazine.  He was president then.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, and then how--do you remember this man here who's standing over the artwork?  I know it's like (laughter) (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: The one that's standing over it?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  This guy right here, young guy in the-
Speaker 1: Give me the picture.  He was a president.  I don't remember his name.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is Jim Dowdy, owns a real estate company.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, the man on the far, far right in the photo is Jim Dowdy.  That's D-O-W-D-Y?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  And this is [HM] Ed[ward] Lewis who was the president at that time.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Second from right at the podium.
Speaker 1: Um-hum, and, of course, that's me.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  That's you.
Speaker 1: And this is, oh, God.  You know his name.  I told him if he, give him all the (unclear), he'd throw 'em all out and keep "I".
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
VIDEOGRAPHER:  This gentleman here?
Speaker 2: He's a real estate company.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, that's it for that photo.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Story_ID: 71453
VIDEOGRAPHER:  I mean you already told everyone, but for the record on the tape, tell us about this photo and the relationship it has to the painting being shot on the wall.
Speaker 2: There were some Merchant Marines, cut this out of the Pittsburgh Courier newspaper in the United States and took it to Naples, Italy.  And they had seven artists to paint the picture that's on the wall up there.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Now here's the question.  Why did they do that?
Speaker 2: They did it for me (laughter).
VIDEOGRAPHER:  How did they know you?
Speaker 2: They didn't.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: They didn't, and that's the picture they brought back from Naples, Italy.  It's on the wall.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):  The handwritten note says: "With pleasure, we painted the picture of the Lady Rose Morgan.  We hope that the portrait will find the approval of her Ladyship Morgan and of anyone who may see it."
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, Rose, tell us about this photo here?
Speaker 1: Which one?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  The one on the monitor, the building front.  What should we know about that?  "House of Beauty".  Is that-
Speaker 1: You've had, you've taken that.  That would be repetitious.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  I have--I don't think I've done that one yet.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  We were gonna do the one in the book, but we haven't actually gotten there yet.
Speaker 2: Oh, I see.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Tell us the location, the approximate--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: One hundred forty fifth [145th] Street between Broadway and Amsterdam [New York].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And in the interview, I'm still trying to clarify for myself and also for people who will, you know, see this, when you said that there was a Rose Morgan and a Rose Meta, which one is this?
Speaker 1: Rose Morgan [House of Beauty].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: It says up there, Rose Morgan [House of Beauty].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Oh, it's at the very top, okay.  Very top of the picture.  Did I cut that off or does the time--the clipping cuts it off.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  The clipping cuts it off.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  At the very top, you can see the word "Morgan" so that that's the Rose Morgan branch.  Okay, what else-
Speaker 1: I thought you had taken that.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, can you describe this one for us, Ms. Morgan?  We know that this--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: That's Earl Hines [Earl "Fatha" Hines] and his wife and myself.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, and what year do you suppose this would have been?
Speaker 1: That was 1950 in San Francisco [California].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, very good.
Speaker 1: I can't read that down there.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, it's you and [New York Governor] Nelson Rockefeller.  Governor [Nelson] Rockefeller and his wife called on Rose during the election campaign last year.  She didn't publicly support either candidate.  Okay, what year were they, is that?  Do you remember?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  It says on the magazine, 1975.  It's in the Ebony [Magazine], I think.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, '75' [1975]?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  September of '75' [1975].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, this would be September of 1975.
Speaker 1: Um-hum, what's inside that cover there?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, that was Joe Louis' office, and I made it into a Rose--it's two floors.  I made it into a Rose Meta House of Beauty.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And where is that located?
Speaker 1: A hundred and twenty-fifth Street, 9 West 125th Street [New York].  I had eighty-seven people working in there.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, very good.
Speaker 1: Oh, tell you about the cosmetics?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Um-hum.
Speaker 1: It was a complete line, but I only showed in the magazine, one item there, which was a, it was a skin cream, cosmetics, glorifying the woman of color (laughter).  That's what it says there.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Now, what magazine would that have been in?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Mine.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Oh, your own magazine?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Well, what's up with that?
Speaker 2: Well, that wasn't--that was one of the brochures for a fashion show.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Oh, okay, and this looks like the '40's [1940s], gauged by the style of the type and the ad, '40's [1940s], '50's [1950s]?
Speaker 2: No, in the '40's [1940s].  Around 1945.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, well, tell us what's the--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Dee--(simultaneous)-
VIDEOGRAPHER:  --about the Essence Magazine article.  We're looking at the beginning of the article here, but when did this appear and why was it in Essence and-
Speaker 2: My life story.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Oh, okay.  And does it-
Speaker 2: Deanie, don't you have it there?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Tell me, Carl, from looking at that, what year this is in Essence, what year, what month?
Speaker 2: Dee, we had it last night.  It's a folder that, I said she didn't have that.  I didn't send it to her.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  June of 1981.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Yeah, this is--excuse me one second.  This is June, 1981 Essence Magazine article-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  By Mike Moore, article by Mike Moore.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  More is spelled?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-MALE):  M-O-O-R-E.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, M-O-O-R-E, Michael Moore.  Okay.
