Story_ID: 35474
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: Yes.  My full name is Alford L. McMichael, A-l-f-o-r-d, L, for Lee, L-e-e, McMichael, M-c-M-i-c-h-a-e-l.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is 24 February 1952.  Place of birth is Hot Springs, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: My present occupation is as CEO of McMichael Services Group, a company that provides consulting to military contractors and federal protective service to federal buildings in the metropolitan area of Washington [District of Columbia], Virginia, and Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And it's correct you were the first African American sergeant major in the United States Marine Corps, right?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't the first African American sergeant major in the Marine Corps, but I was the first African American to be appointed the sergeant major of the Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right.  That's a distinct--and because the sergeant major of the Marine Corps of which--I think you're the fourteenth, right?
Speaker 2: The fourteenth sergeant major of the Marine Corps., meaning that thirteen other elite individuals were appointed before me, but once you become sergeant major of the Marine Corps, there's no enlisted person above that rank.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, and, sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: I don't really know.  May 22nd, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35475
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions that we always ask that only require a short answer.  First one is:  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My favorite food would be fried chicken.  Sometimes what's good to you is not good for you, but fried chicken is my favorite food.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes.  South of France.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Springtime.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  "Teamwork makes your dreams work."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35476
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side separately, then we'll put them together.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Rosa, R-o-s-a, D. McMichael, M-c-M-i-c-h-a-e-l.
Speaker 1: And what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: My mother was never married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right.  So, McMichael.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her place of birth is Hot Springs, Arkansas.  I'm not sure of her date of birth.
Speaker 1: Do you think it's in the 1920s or--?
Speaker 2: Well, let me put it this way.  My mama is exactly twenty-five years older than I am.  Twenty-five years and one week older than I am.  So I was in 1952, so, yeah, she was about '30 [1930], 1930-something, I guess.
Speaker 1: Well, 1923, I guess.  I don't know.  Or it's otherwise '28 [1928], I guess, yeah, '28 [1928].  Okay.  And what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side, and are there any stories about that?
Speaker 2: It's--let me say, when I think about my mom's side of the family, which is the side that I only know about, but my mom was the only child.  She was born to a couple by the name of Ida Taubert (ph.) and Sherman McMichael.  Sherman being her father, and Ida Taubert (ph.) was her mother, who married Sherman and became Ida McMichael.  Her father, Sherman McMichael, was a mechanic in Hot Springs, Arkansas, who pretty much lived under the guidance of his father, whose name was Alford McMichael, and for which I was named after, who married a woman by the name of Rosa Williams, and Rosa Williams and Alford McMichael had two daughters and one son.  The son was my grandfather, Sherman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, your great-grandfather, then was Alford McMichael, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And great-grandmother, Rosa Williams.  Now, they go back--now, they would have to go back to the nineteenth century, right?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, Alford's father--not Alford's father, but Rosa Williams' father came to Hot Springs, who was actually a porter on the trains, who came from, I think his birth certificate shows that he was African American, African with the British accent, who came from one of the islands and ended up in New York, and from New York, migrated to Arkansas.  And there he had his son.  His wife's name was Jeanna (ph.) or Gena, but they married and had Rosa and Rosamary.  Alford--and Alford had Sherman, and Sherman had Rosa, my mom, and my mom had me.  So we're probably back in the 1860s or 1862 as far as I can go from family history.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, are there any stories from that time about where your great-great-grand--great-grandfather was from and about what island he was from?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't know how he--what island he come off--we were able to trace it back to know that he was an African with a British accent, that ended up on one--in the islands, and then from there he ended up in New York and became a traveling man, I guess, you can say, being a porter, which meant that he was at that time, in the season of our world or country at that time, and probably pretty decent job to be a porter traveling around the country.  But somehow, he got off that train in Arkansas and got wrapped pretty tight, because we all started to come a part of life from there.
Story_ID: 35477
Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories about Emancipation or slavery on your mother's [Rosa McMichael] side?
Speaker 2: No.  Actually, my grandmother, my mom's mother [Ida Taubert (ph.)], who came from Little Rock [Arkansas], who left Little Rock to move to Hot Springs [Arkansas] and then married my grandfather Sherman [McMichael], her grandmother, who she lived to see was a free slave during that time.  So, and that's not uncommon, you know, with--if my grandmother was somewhere about 19--1906, or whatever her birth was at that time, you take her mother then her grandmother, the timeframe fits pretty easy.  And--but her dad--her father, Sullivan Selus (ph.), we always thought his name was Sullivan (ph.), because that's what we were told, but later found out his name was actually Selus.  He and his brothers, four brothers, came from Mississippi to a place called Little Rock, Arkansas, and the Taubert--Selus Pete Taubert, and from there, he had a daughter, my grandmother.  And he had his wife, my grandmother's mother, Della, who passed away when my grandmother was a child.  And my grandmother and my great-grandfather lived together until he remarried.  But my grandmother, at an early age, left because she was actually the girl, but actually the boy.  She was a girl by gender but worked like a boy by her dad.  So she left Little Rock and went to Hot Springs, the "city," as they would call it at that time and met Sherman McMichael, and they got married and there comes my mom.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35478
Speaker 1: Now, did you know your [maternal] grandmother [Ida Taubert (ph.)]?
Speaker 2: Oh.  I lived with my grandmother all my life.  I was born in my grandmother's home.  I lived with my grandmother until I was about the age of seventeen, and her father was hit by a car on Good Friday of 1969 in Little Rock [Arkansas], crossing a major street, busy street, and passed away before Easter Sunday.  But, yes, I knew my grandmother.  My grandmother was actually the pillar of our family, because my mom [Rosa McMicheal] lived with her mother, which is my grandmother, and we lived with our mom in our grandmother's house, who made us all feel like it was our house.  We never knew that it was anything different than to be around your grandmother and be loved and taught in morals and ethics and character-building; all came from the pillar of our family which was our grandmother, my grandfather's wife.  So we--even though we carried the name McMichael, our real--our being my older sisters and brothers, our real fiber of who we are was instilled in us by our grandmother Ida.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And she'd been Ida Taubert before?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 35479
Speaker 1: So--now, did your mother [Rosa McMichael] have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: I don't--no, my mother did not finish school, and I'm not sure what grade my mom completed.  It may have been ninth grade.  It may have been seventh grade.  But I'm almost positive my mom never graduated from school nor my [maternal] grandmother [Ida Taubert (ph.)].  And my great-grandfather, my grandmother's dad, couldn't read or write, but he said he had something more valuable; he called it "mother-wit," [ph.] and was a very successful individual in Little Rock [Arkansas], or north Little Rock.  He, you know, he owned acres and acres of property.  He had his own little business, and he did all the things-I'd never seen my great-grandfather work for anybody but himself.  And so, I always thought that was amazing to be in a phase or a season of life in our country at that time, and he was still in a part of the country that still was dealing with segregation and fighting for human equality, he was able to be his own man.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, did your mother have any stories about growing up or your grandmother?  Did they share stories about what life was like in that area, you know, as you were growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother didn't share a lot of stories.  My mother issued a lot of rules (laughs).  That means my mom was by no stretch of the imagination an iron hand of raising kids by herself.  My grandmother was the storyteller.  My grandmother was the philosopher.  She was the dinner table information source that would take you down memory lane, that would take you to her uncles and to her grandparents, and to her cousins, her first cousins who she grew up with, and tell those stories so clear and vividly that you felt like you're in a movie theater.  You knew those stories.  They were always paramount and upfront, you know, of how someone met, it's last days on Earth or how they grew up to be who they are.  Even if you've never met them, you felt that you and, you know, because she could tell those stories to keep you informed of who you were and where you came from.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of those stories or any significant stories that come out of those?
Speaker 2: Not that they were so significant about anything that created a path for a change in the world, but other than an opportunity to know who you are, and we are who we are today because of those people working hard, doing the right thing, understanding that you are somebody because you do what you're supposed to do and not what you want to do.  It was a good lessons taught, you know.  She never made us feel like we had to meet anybody's expectations other than the Good Lord above, and how things were difficult during the [Great] Depression, and how they held the family together, and how they bought the home that we all grew up in, which, one of my younger siblings still live in that home today.
Story_ID: 35480
Speaker 1: They [McMichael's maternal grandparents, Ida Taubert (ph.) and Sherman McMicheal] bought the home back in the 1930s for $800 and it was significant, because they said it was a double lot, meaning that it was the biggest lot on the street.  That tells us about this house was special because it had high ceilings and, you know, it wasn't the normal ceiling from the floor to the ceiling that other house had; that it was something special.  But what was more special to me than that was what my grandmother went through to keep that house.  My grandfather was more of a drinker and having a good time, and they were at the brink of losing the house, but my grandmother worked hard to save the house, to keep the home what we, today, know as foreclosure or eviction, and they didn't, and she did what had to be done to go down to the bank or the loan office where they purchased the house and work a deal and assure them that she would make sure that the payments were there on time.  Now, as a grown adult with children and grandchildren of my own, I can imagine how frustrating that was and how much stress that was on her to think, we have a nice home here, my husband is not doing his part and making sure we keep it, I can't lose this house, where would we go, what will we do.  She did what was necessary to keep it.  And she used to tell the story of how the people that she--they were buying the house from constantly wanted her to take my grandfather's name off the deed, but she wouldn't do it.  And at the age of forty-five my grandfather passed away with cancer, and at that time, cancer was the, I guess it was as an uglier word as AIDS [Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome] were in the early eighties or whatever the case may be.  Nobody truly understand (sic) what cancer meant.  So my grandfather was--laid sick for quite a while suffering with cancer.  And now I learned more that it was more prostate cancer.  But, you know, you can think back in the '50s [1950s], what did we know about prostate cancer.  But I always remember how devoted and dedicated my grandmother was to my grandfather.  She would get up in the morning, and we took the--make sure he was comfortable, and she'd go off to work, and then she'd be home for lunch by walking by walking because she didn't have a car, and she would walk home from lunch to take care of him and then go back to work and be home by five o'clock in the evening to make sure that--this was every day.  This--and never, never seen her complain about it.  As a young kid, just seeing this devotion and commitment to her husband.  Now--I didn't understand it then, but I understand it more today than ever.  My grandfather passed away, and his--he passed away and his sister, his--the youngest daughter of the three of them passed away some days after, because they both had their funeral on the same day.  But the significant thing about that was the fact that my grandmother never remarried.  She just became the strength of that family, you know, to hold us all together, and watch us grow, and teach us right from wrong, and give us a sense of respect for religion and faith and belief, and it really shaped my--what I consider, my character, you know.
Story_ID: 35481
Speaker 1: I was just, I guess, from what I understand about Hot Springs [Arkansas]--I've never been there, but Hot Springs is sort of a resort town.  We were talking about that before we started.  Is it--because it seems as though, back in the days when--and this is serious.  I mean, women were always concerned about men drinking too much and spending the paycheck and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that's why the Prohibition Movement, you know, was pushed, because working-class women's husbands would spend the money, you know, and get drunk.  They'd gamble the money away or get caught up in street life.  And Hot Springs, seemed like a place where there would be a lot of street life, correct?
Speaker 2: Hot Springs was a nurturing bed for that.  You know, the story goes that they brought a [U.S.] Marine colonel in to help clean up the city and how much it did, I don't know, but the essence of it--I mean, it was beautiful, you know.  You go downtown, you had Central Avenue where all the nightclubs and strips were; Park Avenue, and then one street over adjacent to that, parallel to that was Malvern Avenue, where all the African Americans would be at the same thing.  But, as the night go on, there wasn't a white side of town or a black side of town, it was just one, you know, just these two avenues that were running certain circuits, because, you know, the B.B. Kings and the Bobby Blue Blands and all of those would come to town and play.  Aretha Franklin's father would come for National Baptist Conventions, and every Baptist minister known to--of importance would be in town.  You go on the other side of the street, and you'd have the Elvises [Elvis Presley] and the Perry Comos and the Dinah Shores and so forth.  So, the bellhops and things in the city were very connected to get you whatever you wanted, when you want it, the way you want it.  And people left what we would call substantial jobs to go work in the hotels, in the bathhouses, and things of that nature because the money was flowing, the tips were great, and you could really, really make yourself a good living.  Though, you thought people actually leave things like school teaching positions to get into that lifestyle.  So it was a--it was a time, a season, of our country, but a time that you didn't really--we were separated more than segregated.
Story_ID: 35482
Speaker 1: And what I say is that, when my [maternal] grandfather [Sherman McMichael] laid on his sick bed and people would come to visit him, there were just as many caucasians or white citizens of that city [Hot Springs, Arkansas] that would come to see him every day as it was black, African Americans that really loved and cared about how--they didn't call my grandfather by his name Sherman.  They called him Smokey.  And they would come to see how Smokey was doing.  He had a phenomenal reputation in the city.  And you didn't realize that until many years later.  You could go anywhere in the city and say his name, and people would know who you--what you were about and what they could do for you.  My wife traveled from Denmark--Copenhagen, Denmark, to the United States to visit her family in Richmond, Virginia.  And she realized that my family had not seen my daughter, which was about eighteen months old.  So she flies to Arkansas to Hot Springs, little airport there in the city.  She gets off the plane, not really sure where she's going.  She gets a taxi and she tries to give him the address, and the taxi driver asked here, "Where you going?"  She gives them the address.  He said, "Oh, that's Smokey's place."  My grandfather had been deceased since I was five [years old].  Here I've got a daughter coming back, but they still knew him.
Speaker 2: Oh, twenty years later, you know.
Speaker 1: More than twenty years.  Yeah.  I mean, I was five years old, and, you know, so, but--the point that was amazing to her is that, how would he know, you know, that she knew what he meant when he said Smokey, because she's heard me talk about my grandfather.  And so she said, "Yes," and took her right to the house.  Boom, you know.  She goes to the market to buy something, and at that time, we traveled with travel checks, you know, the old travel checks, and she wanted to pull out an I.D. to show the people at the grocery store that travel check was really hers because she came from an environment where we had to, not only have proof, but you had to verify that it was right.  And so they said, "No, no.  We don't need any proof.  You with those two guys.  Those are Smokey's grandsons.  You know that those are Rosie's boys.  You with them, you're good."  And they were my younger brothers who were about five or six years old; maybe seven at the most.  But they went to the store with her.  So, you know, that was the environment we grew in.  So when I say we were separated, not segregated, because we had to live together.  Who wants to come to a city to vacation and you got race riots and fighting and so forth.  So the people were astute about this.  So we kept the city clean.  Now, that doesn't mean that President [Dwight] Eisenhower didn't have to send the 101st in Little Rock for the Little Rock Nine.  But some of those things that were happening on the outskirts of other cities around us were not happening in that city.  And if it was, it wasn't blatant, because we had to learn to present ourselves as citizens of that city so that others from Chicago [Illinois] or New York or Detroit [Michigan] or wherever they came from--Dallas, Texas, or Kansas City [Missouri] would still want to come there and feel safe, you know.
Story_ID: 35483
Speaker 1: I think of the time of working three days in a row in the military, and a youngster just joining the military in Hawaii and during the Vietnam War, and all of a sudden we got a day off, and Elvis [Presley] is having a big concern in Hawaii for cancer, raising money.  And all my colleagues that were, "Oh, we're going to HIC, the Hawaiian Center to see Elvis."  I said I didn't want to go.  Not that I didn't want to see Elvis, but because I was tired.  I'd worked three days.  Have very little time off.  I'm dragging, you know, even at eighteen, nineteen years old.  No sleep, hard work, even at eighteen you get tired.  But they misinterpreted that as "Well, he just doesn't want to go see Elvis Presley."  But what they didn't know is I'd seen Elvis on a regular basis.  Elvis come to our city [Hot Springs, Arkansas] and walk up and down the street, and there wasn't a paparazzi.  There weren't people following.  Tony Bennett, Frankie Avalon, Dinah Shore.  All these people, that was their hangout.  That was their place that they could come and do what they wanted and have a wonderful time, a beautiful city, and then go back to their la-la lands of, you know, Hollywood [California] or [Las] Vegas [Nevada] or wherever they came from.  So it was a--it was those types of exposure--that type of exposure to those type of people that you really didn't get star struck because you'd seen, what we would consider, a star, because it was the nesting bed for them where they would come.  You know, your presidents, all presidents came there to bathe in the bathhouse.  The Roosevelts came and the Trumans came there, and quite, naturally, [President] Bill Clinton still comes there (laughs).  So.
Speaker 2: So is--yeah, so it is a jumping place, and it's a place where, I guess, race relations there you said are mollified by the tourist nature of the town, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  At that particular time, that was true, you know.  People had to make sure that they help their livelihood alive, you know.  In 1968, '69 [1969], they voted to stop gambling.  They closed gambling, and get it out of the city, and from '68 [1968], '69 [1969] to where we are today, the city took a big hit, you know, because if you think about it, that was the lifeline of the city, and you take it out, the city dies.  And the city, itself, the inner city, there is a--and I haven't been back in a year or so, but it's hard to revive it, but the outskirts out on the lakes and, you know, the outer limits, parts of it is beginning to flourish again.  Beautiful homes, expensive homes are coming up, and people are moving there.  I was at a shopping mall and I see all the cars in the shopping mall, and so many of them had military decals, stickers on them indicating that they could go in and off of military installation.  But it also told me that they had retired and moved there because of the quality of life there, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But they had moved out on the lakes and bought nice homes in these, what we would now call, suburbs, away from the city.  Though the city itself doesn't have the glare and the flash that it had in the '30 [1930], '40 [1940], '50 [1950] '60s [1960s].  But it all came about the vote in the late sixties, '69 [1969], '68 [1968], when they took gambling.  They still have the racetrack there, and it's seasonable, but there simulcasts going all the time so that you can follow other races, the Preakness [Stakes; horse racing] or the Derby or whatever the case may be.  But that still brings a lot of people in.  But it's nowhere near it was when you had the casinos than to falling in the night, nightlife, and the glamorous things.  The restaurants were at its peak, you know, so that's all kind of dried up.
Story_ID: 35484
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I don't know who my father was.  I can tell you that it had been alleged over the last four years that my oldest sister's father is my father.  There's nothing to substantiate that.  And, of course, he lived in Little Rock [Arkansas], and he has children, and he has a set of twins that's maybe a year--year younger than I am.  But I don't know who he is.  I never met him that I know of, and I never spent any time with him.  I know that for a fact.  But it's said that he's my father, but, you know, that's nothing that I would go on.  You know, there's been no DNA.  There's been no documents or anything to substantiate that, other than most of the girls, his daughters who are my age or a year younger, we all have resemblances compared to the actual children that I grew up with in my home as my sister and brothers in Hot Springs [Arkansas].  But--so I have no knowledge of my father or what my father did or would have done.
Speaker 1: So you're--all right now.  There's several different strains here.  So, you're really not sure that this person is your father.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And the second thing, you look like him, and--
Speaker 2: I don't know if I look like him (laughs).
Speaker 1: People say you do or--
Speaker 2: No.  They don't say I look like him.  They--I just have some closer features to his children than I do to my mom's [Rosa McMichael] children, which is the children I grew up with.
Speaker 1: All right.  And your mother never clarified it for you or talked about who your father was?
Speaker 2: That's it.  No.  That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so I take it their relationship was not that strong.  Anyway, they did not have a good relationship apparently.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  They may have had a good relationship.  They may have had a perfect relationship.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They may have had a relationship that says, "I understand what you're going through, and you understand what I'm going through, and I'm not going to disrupt your life, and you don't disrupt mine."  I don't know that.  So I can't say they didn't have a great relationship.  I know that the individual that now, about five or six years ago, they said, "He's your father.  We're your sisters.  We're your family." I know that their father had children by other women.  He, you know, my great-grandfather married a lady that had his oldest son, which would have been my great--my grandmother's stepbrother, who would have been my half-brother, you know.  So you think about how all of that played out and you put it in the timelines, you put it in the season of how we grew up back in those days, it's not hard to understand how could all of this happen, you know.  But those are the things that you look into today.
Story_ID: 35485
Speaker 1: My wife would say, "Well, don't you want to know who your--."  "No.  It [knowing who McMichael's father was] is not going to change who I am.  And it's not going to make me any better or any worse."  So I really didn't--it really--doesn't care.  I was not going to spend my life being who I was, worried about where I came from.  You know, I was comfortable.  I was one hundred percent content with the fact that my mom [Rosa McMichael] was my mom and that was my family.  My [maternal] grandmother [Ida Taubert (ph.)] was my grandmother, which was my rock.  And my sisters and brothers, who lived in the same house and ate at the same dinner table and wet the same bed that I did, was my family.  And that's all I need.  And, though I didn't find that as falling off the cliff and saying, "Oh, I didn't have a dad when I grew up," and, "Oh, my life is all screwed up."  You know, I just grew up with the mindset this daddy-stuff is overrated.  My buddies that had daddies, they do--misbehaved at school, they go home, their mom meet them at the door and tell them the teacher called and, you know, you're going to be in big trouble and why did you do it.  And then they wait around three hours until their dad come home and get it all over again.  I go home, my mom make amends, get it right, and it's done.  The next thing I know, three hours later I'm eating dinner, watching T.V., and going to bed.  So I eliminated a whole piece of hell that my buddies were going through, I didn't have to.  They sat down at the dinner table, they can't have the breast of the chicken, because that was reserved for Daddy.  I sit down at the table, and whoever got it first, it was yours, you know.  So I used to tell them, "Hey, hey, you got a daddy, but that stuff is overrated."  You know.  "You always complaining about the things your dad do to you, I don't have to complain for that, you know.  I don't have those problems."  So I didn't find not having a dad as a reason not to be somebody.  I didn't find growing up without a dad a reason to think that I was second best.  What I did find, that I was different, to make a difference.  Not different because I didn't have a dad.  I was different because I can make a difference in what I do in life in what life I have.  So that was my motivation.  I never crawled in a hole to look at what I didn't have as the reins to hold me back.  It was my motivation to work to get what I--and somebody thought I shouldn't have and what people--other people thought I would never be able to achieve.  That fired me up inside.  That made me box with the biggest and run with the fastest.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 35486
Speaker 1: So, in what respects to you take after your mother [Rosa McMichael] you think?
Speaker 2: If it's told, all my (lip?).  And I think everybody thinks that we all, at one part of our life, one part of the day, one part of the hour, Rosie come out of us, 'cause my mom was a no-nonsense person.  She didn't take any prisoners, you know.  You can say, "Well, your mom had ten kids, never married.  Oh, wow.  What kind of woman was she?"  Well, let me tell you what kind she was.  She was a great woman.  She was a mother that never walked around with her hand out, never depended on someone else to help her take care of her children.  We weren't threatened with orphanages or homelessness or didn't have food on the table or went to bed cold or woke up not able to take a bath or go in the bed.  All of the essential things that made you a human being, she worked to make those.  She may have caused the bed that she laid in to be hard, but she had a bed to lay in.  You know, my mom got up in the morning and went to work to get home to make her day job.  She got off her day job to make sure that she got the night shift so that she could make extra money so her children could have everything all the other children had.  So, she--you know, if society say she wasn't a good mom because she had ten kids with no husband, her children say she was a great mom because she had ten kids that didn't need a husband to have the things that were expected of them.  Did we go to school?  Yeah, we went to school.  Did we learn?  Yes, we learned.  Were we obedient?  Did people see us on the street knew we were Rosie's kids because we had manners; that we knew how to say yes, ma'am and no, ma'am; yes, sir, no, sir?  And we didn't steal from people.  We didn't mistreat people.  We carried ourself (sic) like we were taught at the dinner table, with dignity and respect, you know.  So, you are different, but you're different to make a difference.  You're not different so you sit at the back of the bus.  You're not different so people can make fun of you because you don't have a dad.  But you got on the same, latest clothes as everybody else.  You got the same bats and balls in your house that your neighbors have, you know.  You--kids come to your house to play with your stuff because you have what they don't have.  I never felt anything less than what my parent--my mom made us feel.  And she made us feel like we were most important people on the face of the Earth, you know.  And people will tell you.  My brother-in-law, who married my second oldest sister, would always say, "Something unique about you guys.  All of ya'll have the same thing.  All of you see something you want, and you'll go get it.  You'll work hard for it."  You know, that's how we were taught.  You--if you sit and wait for a handout, you'll get nothing.  If you move your feet and move forward, you'll get whatever you want.  And that was our--that's the way we were brought up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35487
Speaker 1: Now, can you name your brothers and sisters for us, starting with the oldest and put yourself in order, for us.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My oldest sibling is--was Ida McMichael.  Ida was six years older than me.  My second oldest was Ruby, and then the third oldest was Sherman, my oldest brother, the oldest boy in the family.  And then came Al, Alford McMichael, me.  Then I had a brother by the name of Michael.  Michael was unique in his own way.  He never walked a day in his life.  He had an oversized head, you know.  And I say oversized, it was a medical term for it.  They called it--and we just--we--you know, if--that's really knew what love was about, because of how just being around him just made you want to kiss him every day, make sure everything that he wanted he could have or make sure he smiled because he was happy.  And they said he wasn't going to live to be three [years old], and I think Michael left us at the age of 22; 21, 22.  I was in the [U.S.] Marine Corps at the time, and--but he was--he was unique.  He was special to me.  It was--I think of him with a smile, and always thought if he could have been outside running and playing with me, he would have been my best friend.  He would have been favorite because we were the only--we were so close in age, and--but--then--but he's no closer than my older brother.  My older is about eighteen months older than me.  Michael was about eighteen months younger than me, so.  And then after Michael came another brother by the name of Bobby.  And then after Bobby came my third sister, Myrtle.  And then my other brother by the name of Joseph, and we called him Joe.  And Joe passed away as well, so.  But, then my baby brothers were twins, Byron and Brian, or Brian--Byron and Brian.  And that's the McMichael clan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was our--that's what we did.  We leaned on each other, we depended on each other.  We had one rule.  You don't come home and tell Mom [Rosa McMichael], Sherman got in a fight because the next thing she's going to ask, "What were you doing?"  You know, so (laughs).  If you tangle with one of the McMichaels, you had to deal with all of us, because we couldn't tell Mom we watched you having a fight and we wasn't a part of it, you know.  But, it was a beautiful sister and brother relationship.  Grandmother [Ida Taubert (ph.) McMichael] taught us if one have, you all have, you know.  Sisters and brothers don't fight.  You love one another.  Those were the rules of the house.  We were taught to love each other unconditionally, be there for each other.  And as they started to get older and have kids and grandkids started to come in the picture, and great-grandchildren for my grandmother, that same philosophy started to get--I could see it in them when my sisters Ida and Ruby's kids were growing, like sister and brother and not like first cousins.  I don't think they, even today, realize they are cousins, because they were always together like sister and brothers.  They were always at my mom's house being nurtured and shaped like we were.  So--and it still goes on today.  When I go back and see their kids, my nieces and nephews by my sisters.  Now there're my grandnieces and nephews brought up the same way.  These kids are together all--all the time.  So the McMichael way of life is still being injected into the life of three generations later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35488
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean from day one that I can remember, it was, what can I do to put a smile on my mom's [Rosa McMichael] face.  You know, it was always, you know, from--my mom kind of pampered me a little because I had pneumonia twice as a kid and hospitalized once.  And so while the other kids could go out and roll on the ground and have fun, I was forbidden, you know, to do those types of things.  You know, you almost had to walk around in the summertime with your long johns on, you know.  Of course, kids today don't have a clue what long johns are.  They're too busy showing off their underwear other ways.  It was just how my siblings attached themselves to me, how my peers attached themselves, how my neighbors attached themselves to me.  But it was--it's funny.  I go home now and people will say, "We knew you were going somewhere.  You were different from all the rest of us."  I wasn't different, I just refused to be like you if being like you was wrong, you know.  So if you want to go out and cut class or you want to go out and do something that wasn't acceptable by rules, laws, or instruction, I wasn't for that.  Because I couldn't bear the fault of being a failure to my mom.  She worked too hard for me to have her spend her hard-worked money bailing me out of jail or getting a lawyer or whatever it took to keep me out of trouble.
Story_ID: 35489
Speaker 1: Did your family eat dinner together?
Speaker 2: Every--yeah.  I mean, we ate dinner together.  You didn't just come to the dinner table.  You had your assigned seat.  You sat at a specific seat at a dinner table that was big enough for all of us, all eight kids at that time.  And, you know, we--the furniture didn't all match; all the chairs didn't look alike, but you knew that--and my oldest brother kinda sat at the head of the table.  Used to twerk my jaws because he sat at the head of the table like he was the dad, and he was only eighteen months older than me.  He couldn't tell me anything that I didn't already know, and I could tell him things that he should be doing, and he should have known.  My second oldest sister and I used to poke fun at him just at the table, because we knew we could get a rise out of him and get him in trouble or get ourselves in trouble for teasing him, because it wasn't allowed in the house, but we'd do it anyway.  But, you know, it--so, we had--we, every night, Mom [Rosa McMichael] would have dinner, and our dinner was based on the meat.  What are we having for dinner?  Nobody starts off telling you you're having broccoli or, you know, that's--you started, "What's for dinner?"  We either had pork chops, chicken or ham or roast beef or chittlins', or whatever the case may be.  That was the foundation of your dinner.  But the beautiful thing is, if you didn't like something like that, Mom had a side dish for you.  You didn't like spaghetti, she might cook pork chops for you so that you could have it.  The other kids didn't have that luxury.  You ate whatever the parents put at the table and that was it.  In my house, Rosie McMichael believed in feeding you so that you could leave the table happy and full, and you didn't have to--you know, it wasn't like--one of my good friends or the only friend that hung around our house a lot was a guy named Robert Smith.  And Robert would--we'd play in the backyard and have a good time feeding the animals or playing basketball or pulling weeds; whatever it was required, but he would be right in there, sleeves rolled up doing whatever my grandmother [Ida Taubert (ph.) McMichael] had us doing, he would do it with us.  By the end of the day, he'd have dinner with us.  Robert liked that dinner.  He started hanging around.  He was there for dinner every night (laughs).  He'd eat at our dinner table every night.  But the point is, you could just walk in and say, "Hi, Miss Rosie.  How you doing?" "Have you had anything to eat?  Come on back here and get--fix you a plate."  There was never a dinner where it was just enough to get by.  There was always enough to get you full with some to come back, to get you reacquainted to that stretch of the waistline that my mom would do.  She took great pride in--this lady gets up in the morning, and she might cook two pound cakes, you know; her favorite, buttermilk pound cake.  She may throw a banana pudding on the side or an apple cobbler.  But there was a special table in the dining room that just kept fresh pastries there all day long, you know.  And kids, like, come over and, "You got anything to eat, Miss Rosie?"  "Yeah."  You know, she didn't go back there and cut for you.  "There it is."  Tell them, "Go in the dining room and get you something to eat or something on the stove in the kitchen."  Kids used to buy my mom pots and pans for Mother's Day 'cause they know she (laughs)--they knew she knew what to do with them.  So yeah.
Story_ID: 35490
Speaker 1: And so your grandmother [Ida Taubert (ph.) McMichael] was there, too, right?
Speaker 2: Grandmother didn't cook.
Speaker 1: She didn't cook?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Grandmother was the outdoors person.  She taught us how to saw, nail, hammer; you know, how to fix things.  My grandmother grew up a girl in a boy's world with her dad on a farm, you know.  My grandmother had, in the backyard, chickens and ducks and rabbits and geese and Guinea chickens and goats and cows.   And she taught us how to respect those things and raise them and feed and breed them and nurture and what the season was for nest sitting; you know, from a chicken sitting on an egg for three weeks, a duck or a geese, it might take four weeks before they can hatch an egg.  We were good at that stuff, you know.  I mean, Easter come along, we out there robbing the chicken nest to make sure we had more eggs than my sibling, you know.  So you put them away, you know.  The eggs drop out of the chicken, you got it, right in there and snatch it out of the hen house, out of the nest, put it in the basket, and by four or five days, you got ten, fifteen eggs; your brother got five or six eggs, and, you know, and he beat you out there.  By the time you get to Good Friday, you all got a whole basket of eggs and, you know, they didn't come from no--didn't come from a grocery store.  They came right out of the backyard.  You clean them up and dye them, you know.  So that was (unclear), you know.  You watch the birth of your animals, like your goats or your sheep or your cows or your rabbits or, you know, not--you know, you watch your rabbits have little rabbits, and next thing you know, in a couple of--a week, no less than two weeks, they're bouncing around in the coop with their mom.  You know, you watch little goslings come from the geese hatching eggs, and you know the time of the year they would come.  You get out there and you plant your garden and you nurture it and, you know.  It gets to the fall of the year and you cover up your big collard greens 'cause you want the fall to hit them so they could be a little more tender when they come.  So that was the types of things that we were--we were out in the--outside of the house with my grandmother.  You know, my grandmother, "Your mama ain't going to get her hand dirty, but she'll come out there and pick all my greens or she'll come out and get this or she'll come out and pick the beans or whatever."  And, you know, you go out there and pick a big 'ol--the large--we don't have them now, but large, brown paper bag of string beans, or get you a couple of those bags of mustard greens or turnip greens, or go over and pick your tomatoes, and you get it all fresh, and go in and you prepare it for dinner that evening.  Or Grandma say, "We're going to get--get those two chickens right there," and you take those chickens and you kill them, and you clean them and get them ready for dinner that night.  Yeah.  We had a lot of pets, but they're only pets 'till the day come for them to have to (laughs)--you know.  You know, you didn't see one of my sisters and brothers crying when one of the chickens or ducks or whatever, rabbits or whatever, it was time for them to put--go from the pen house to the plate, you know.  So, we would always take one of the calves, because we didn't kill the old cows.  I mean, we didn't have a lot of cows.  We'd have one, raise it; or two, and take them to the slaughter, the slaughter house.  They'd butcher him and cut him up and put all the steaks and things in packages just for the size of our family.  You know, so you reach in--we had a big, deep freezer that was about long as this wall and deep, and it was just loaded with meats and food, you know, whether it was chickens, whether it was steaks, or whether--whatever it was.  You know, we actually raised a couple of sheep right there in that same backyard, you know.  Goats, we'd take them out in the vacant lots in the neighborhood and tie them out, and they would clean those lots up just by eating the honeysuckle vines off the fence lines.  You know, the city didn't come down that street to, you know, to put a bush hog in to cut down the weeds.  So we'd take our goats or our cows, walk them down the street like big dogs and tie them out there and just make sure you go out a couple of times a day and replenish their water, and they'd sit out there all day and graze, 'till Grandmother say, "Go bring the animals in."  You bring them back, and, you know, you get up in the morning, you milk the goat or milk the cow.  We had--summertime, we grew up on more goat milk than we did cow milk, you know.  So that was kind of the outside part of the house.
Story_ID: 35491
Speaker 1: But when you sat at that dinner table, you reflected on all of the things that would strengthen as a person, as a sister or brother, as a child, as a good neighborhood, and as a good citizen.  See, in my house, we were never taught to disrespect anyone.  We were never allowed to disrespect anyone, and we were never taught to not love everybody.  We, you know--and if you think about it, in the '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s], race riots and segregation and President [John F.] Kennedy, President [Lyndon B.] Johnson; they still hadn't got to the point that the Civil Rights Movement with Dr. [Martin Luther] King; none of these things that we are privileged to as a way of life now were in stone yet.  But in my house they were.  You know, we weren't allowed to go out and say, "Well, those people don't like us because we're African American.  The man's got us down."  We weren't allowed to think like that, you know.  You compete, and you be true to yourself, but you don't have to be angry, you don't have to be aggravated; you just have to be motivated.
Story_ID: 35492
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what about school?  Now, where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I went to elementary school in Hot Springs, Arkansas; a school called Golstein [Elementary School]. I went to high school in--two high schools.
Speaker 1: Well, let us just start at Golstein.  I just want to ask you about elementary school first.  Did you go to kindergarten?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?  Okay.  Okay.  Did you like school?
Speaker 2: I loved school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you have a favorite subject or activity?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Recess, dismissal--no.  I'm just kidding (laughs).  I had favorite--I loved science.  I loved physical science or civil science, you know.  I loved history and I loved civil science.  I loved understanding what made cities and organizations run.  I loved the history of where something came from to where it is today and try to take and imagine where it's going to take us.  I've always been fascinated over history and the civil--the leaders in our society, whether you're the mayor or whether you're the governor, you know.  I grew up in a state that I didn't know we--you changed governors, 'cause Orval Faubus was the governor [of Arkansas; 1955 to 1967] almost my whole entire childhood, you know.  And so, you know--
Speaker 1: In fact, I guess, the year you start--you were born in '52 [1952], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you started school in '58 [1958], I guess, first grade?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was the end of '59 [1959], '60 [1960], was the first grade.
Speaker 1: '59 [1959], '60 [1960].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So before you started school is when they had the crisis in Little Rock [Arkansas].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Made national news.  Orval Faubus was the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --governor of Arkansas.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  But Faubus was governor when I was a kid.  Long before--long after I was in school, you know.  It was--I don't know exactly what year he was beat out by Governor White and so forth, but we didn't change governors like people change underwear in Arkansas.  Faubus was there, and Faubus was there to stay, you know.
Speaker 1: So, now, the school you went to, Golstein, that was a segregated school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  And so, were all your teachers black, too, as well as the student body?
Speaker 2: At Golstein?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the students--
Speaker 2: First through sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, did you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: No, I just--I think Ms. Johnson, my second--fourth-grade teacher was--no, she wasn't fourth grade.  Ms. Johnson was my second-grade teacher.  She--I think she's deceased now, but she was one of my favorites, I guess, because she was eloquent, she was tall, she was pretty, you know, and she was firm.  You know, she wasn't (unclear); kind of that mother figure, "I tell you to do something, get it done, but if you don't understand, come here let me show you how."  You know, she would sit at--sit by your desk, put her arm around you and show you how to get the answer rather than scold you for not knowing the answer.  And to me, that resonated, you know.
Story_ID: 35493
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now was church a big part of growing up [in Hot Springs, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I started out in a little church--little corner church, really, and a guy named Reverend Patterson was the pastor of the church.  And the guy across the street was Reverend Reed.  I don't think he ever ministered--pastored an actual church, but he always asked myself and my brothers did we want to go to church with him.  We--my mom [Rosa McMichael] would let us get dressed up in our suit and ties, and we'd go to church.  And it started, you know--the things you heard at the dinner table were being taught to you in a Sunday School class, and like, "I know that."  You felt--
Speaker 1: About how old were you at this point?
Speaker 2: Eight, nine years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the name of the church, do you remember?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So a small though, was it Baptist?
Speaker 2: Yes (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35494
Speaker 1: And you were talking about before, when we were describing Hot Springs [Arkansas], you were discussing the--you had mentioned the fact that the National Baptist Convention came.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did they come when you were a little kid or--
Speaker 2: Oh, they came all the way up until about 1967, '68 [1968]; '66 [1966], '67 [1967], when they took the glamour out of the town, the gambling and the horseracing and all of that.  And, you know, all the ministers would come.  The James Clevelands, the Reverend Franklins.  It was the National Baptist Convention that would embark on the city around the October, November time frame.  And I always vaguely--clearly remember it because it was always time that the teachers would take a teacher's break.  You know, it was funny that they would coordinate during the same time, but (laughs).  But it was a--you know, the minister would come and they stay at the Baptist building or another black established hotel, the Pythian, or whatever the hotels were there at that time, or they would stay in the homes of other Christian people that wanted to put up one of the ministers, you know.  That was bragging rights.
Speaker 1: So, is this a regional meeting of the National Baptist Convention?  Because I know they used to have their national meeting in different locations.  I know in '61 [1961], they were in Kansas City [Missouri]; I know that one, but I don't know about all of them.  I know they--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But actually, I don't know if it was the National Conventions at the National Baptist Building.  They had an actual building built there.  It was in the--
Speaker 1: Oh, so was Hot Springs the headquarters--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for the National Baptist Convention?
Speaker 2: National Baptist Convention.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the largest black organization in the world.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: National Baptist Convention.
Speaker 2: They come there, and that's where--and the building was built there on Malvern Avenue.  In the corner of Malvern (unclear), they had doctors' offices in there, black doctors; and they had a restaurant in there ran by Alvin Smith.  I don't know who initially started the restaurant, but Dr. Collier (ph.) was the black doctor that had his office there.  And I'm quite sure that some of the aldermens (sic) and so forth, all were in there.  And then they had hotel rooms, and then they had, you know, a couple other black hotels right next to it.  And, quite naturally, right across the street and right side to the hotels were the black strip, then, where the African American businessmen had their club, the nightclubs and things were there.
Speaker 1: Now, this is interesting, too.  This is something we don't really hear that much about.  But, not every town has black hotels.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: This was actually a hotel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  This was not, you know, where they had to go in and there were signs that said, "Colored water fountain."  This is your hotel, you know.  You come in here--the B.B. Kings, the Bobby Blue Blands and all the big-time entertainers at that time would come that would be there at the Baptist Building or either at the Pythian Hotel.  Right next to it was where they put them up at.
Speaker 1: The Pythian Hotel.  Okay.  This is Knights of Pythias--named for that part (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I don't know where the name came from.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know that Knights of Pythias is a Masonic organization, black organization.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Probably did.  And it was right next to the National Baptist Building.
Speaker 1: Pythian Hotel.  Okay.  I've read about some Arkansas historical figures.  I remember the Knights of Pythias, you know, black figures.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, there was one black hotel or was there--
Speaker 2: No.  It was a couple there.
Speaker 1: Oh, a couple. Okay.
Story_ID: 35495
Speaker 1: The entertainment, how many theaters were in that area [Hot Springs, Arkansas] ?
Speaker 2: Well, three movie theaters in town, but they were not--not for us.  Well, I mean, exclusively for us.  It was--you could go in the Malco (ph.) or the Central or the--they had another one uptown.  I can't recall the name, but you could go and you could go in the backside and go to the balcony, but you didn't mix down in the actual part of the movie theaters that--but it was always good to go to Malco Theater.  I mean, (unclear) was somebody, even though you went in on the Malvern Avenue side, not the Central side.  The white kids went in on the Central side through the main door.  We would be on the back side right off of Malvern Avenue and go in the back door and go up the steps to the balcony, sit in the balcony and watch, you know, watch the same movies at the same time that they were; we just wasn't allowed to mix.  That's why I say we were separate but not segregated.  We were separate, but you could come out and walk home with the same kids that were downstairs that you couldn't sit with.  Are you kidding me?  I mean, you say that now, but that was just the way of life, so you didn't question it, you know.  So, but you weren't barred from seeing the same movies.
Speaker 1: So you had segregation, but as you said, you didn't have really a--I mean, the people, you know, they would mingle--
Speaker 2: We had to, you know.  I mean, how can you not mingle if my mom's cleaning your mom's house.  Your mom comes to pick up my mom, and I'm standing in the yard with my mom as she goes in; you're not going to acknowledge me, but you want my mom to think that she's important to you.  Or my mom's going to come in your house and clean your house, but she's not going to acknowledge your children or treat them with respect, but she's--she come (sic) home to us and treat us with respect.  And so the kids started to connect through Rosie, through Dr. Jackson or Dr. Clue (ph.), or whoever she was working for, you know.  We had those relationships.  And then in 1969 when the city fully integrated and the schools were no longer separate but one, we started to go to school with these same kids that were my mom and--their parents were my mom's employer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Hot Springs desegregated the schools in '69 [1969].  Now--
Speaker 2: But we was--we were integrated or desegregated.  We just wasn't fully blown integrated to go to each other's school (sic).  What happened is that, see, when I left elementary school [Goldstein Elementary School], I went to a school called Langston High, the Mighty Bulldog.
Speaker 1: Langston High.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Of course, you know that name came from Langston Hughes.
Story_ID: 35496
Speaker 1: Across--a few blocks from that was another high school called Hot Springs High [School], after the city [Hot Springs, Arkansas].  And that's where [President] Bill Clinton went to school.  Bobby Mitchell, the Hall of Famer for Washington Redskins, went to Langston High [School].  We had our own culture.  We had our own pride.  Hot Springs High was struggling to win a football game.  Langston (wasn't?) known for not winning a championship.  You know, we were dealing with the James Harrises of the world.  Long before the Doug Williamses.  We were playing the--we were a nest bed for people like Eddie Robinson and Grambling [University] and Jackson State [University] and Arkansas A M and N [College], Pine Bluff [now, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff].  And all of those schools that would come and draw athletes from our school.  You know, we had young men in our school that played for the New York Jets, played for the Dallas Cowboys.
Speaker 2: So did James Harris grow up there?
Speaker 1: No.  He was one of our competitors.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: His high school and my high school clashed.
Speaker 2: Where did he go to school?
Speaker 1: Monroe, Louisiana.
Speaker 2: Oh, Monroe.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Monroe, Louisiana.  We went to--see, I didn't know that growing up in Langston we didn't play fifteen schools in the city.  I went to California in the [U.S.] Marine Corps, and they playing--they had enough schools in the city that they had a full schedule.  I didn't grow up like that.  We played Marshall, Oklahoma.  We played Sherman, Texas.  We played Monroe, Louisiana.  We played several schools within Arkansas itself.
Speaker 2: So you played other black high schools in the region.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in the whole--yeah in the region (laughs).
Speaker 2: Now, in those days, I know, in segregation times, and it was even true in Ohio prior to 1950, black schools would play each other.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And they weren't allowed to even compete with whites.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the way we were.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Exactly, you know.
Speaker 2: So Bobby Mitchell was local at--
Speaker 1: Bobby Mitchell was--
Speaker 2: --Hot Springs.
Speaker 1: --my head coach and Bobby Mitchell were teammates that left to go to college in Illinois.  And they played in Illinois.  Bobby went on to play pro-ball, and Charles Butler came back to be football coach.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah.  Bobby Mitchell is in the pro-football Hall of Fame, one of the greatest halfbacks (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And the man who integrated the Washington Redskins.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: He was the first black player for the Redskins.  And we'll probably interview him at some point, too, along the way.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He's right here in Manassas, Virginia.
Story_ID: 35497
Speaker 1: So, at Langston High [School, Hot Springs, Arkansas]--now, so Langston High dealt with middle school all the way through high school?
Speaker 2: From seventh grade--
Speaker 1: Seventh grade--
Speaker 2: --to twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: All right.  Seventh to twelfth.  Now, were there any special teachers or mentors along the way at Langston High?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We--Langston was more than a school.  It was a culture.  You know, you had our teacher, Warren Frazier.  We called him Pop Frazier because he was truly had a Ph.D., but he was also our defensive football coach.  And Pop Frazier, Warren Frazier was, he was a no-sense--no-nonsense-type guy, you know.  He could have made it well in the [U.S.] Marine Corps.  He could have been a great drill sergeant, you know.  He took all these big goons, these big unbelievable athletes and he kept them humble.  He kept them understanding when Pops said jump, you said how high.  You didn't say, "Who do you think you are?"  It wasn't that Coach Butler was about six-eight.  He was the head coach who had played with Bobby Mitchell in high school and college, but he was the gentle giant, you know.  Coach Butler never really got aggravated with you.  He never really yelled at you.  He never really (unclear).  And then we had our offensive coordinator.  Our offensive coach was Warren Rosbourgh, and he was the darling of the coaching staff.  Every football player loved Ross.  Ross was the, you know, he was just everything to all of us.  He was the guy that would visit all of the boys who didn't have a father.  He would teach them how to be respectful to their mom.  He instilled in them that, no matter what life offered you, you never disrespect your mom, you always love your mother.  And you could see it in how he reacted with his own mom, you know.  And his children went to school with us.  His son was a ballplayer.  And his daughters--his youngest daughter, and his oldest daughter, we'll still like sister and brother today.  We had a special bond, special relationship.
Speaker 1: Now, his last name was, R-o-s--?
Speaker 2: R-o-s-b-o-u-r-g-h, Rosbourgh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Rosbourgh.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was the motivator of the team.  You know, kids wanted, you know--and it came October, whatever, we play a football game on his birthday, whatever age he was, he expected you to score that many points or better, you know.  I mean.
Story_ID: 35498
Speaker 1: I was in Hot Springs [Arkansas] a few years ago.  I'm checking into a hotel, and the bell captain comes over and he sees it's me, and "Wow.  It's Al McMichael.  How you," you know, "boom-boom."  So he introduced me to one of his colleague and colleague got to take my bags up to my room, and he was putting them out and said, "How long has it been since you've been here?"  I said, it's been several--it's been a while."  And he says, "What school you go to?"  I said, "I went to Langston [High School] then I went to Hot Springs [High School]."  He said, "I remember Langston back in the day.  They used to go get those guys out of jail on Friday so they could play football on Friday night."  I said, "And who told you that?"  And he said, "Oh, everybody knew that's how they won so many football games."  Said, "Let me give you a history lesson.  Never repeat that false statement again, because Langston didn't look for the living amongst the dead.  Those young men that played at Langston was (sic) in class.  They were at pep rally.  They was bussed out to the stadium, Sam Gwynn Stadium (ph.), and we hovered there to get instruction from the coach on how we was going to perform.  Now how we were going to play, but how we were going to perform as gentlemen when we got on that field.  Then that myth that they were telling you as a kid, they're good because they got out of jail, that wasn't true.  I was one of those kids, and I didn't spend a day of my life in nobody's jail.  I've never been handcuffed or put in the back of a sedan or chewed out by an officer of law for any misgiving, and I was just one of my--one of the individuals like my colleague that I play with."
Speaker 2: Now--I'm sorry.  Did you start playing in junior high school--I mean in, you know, in the seventh, eighth grade?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  We, you know, we had--you--everybody wants to be on the team.  You wasn't nobody if you didn't play ball, some type of ball at Langston.  You know, you--the Langston Bulldogs was a--they still have their Langston Reunion.  And it's so funny.  There's people that graduated--African Americans that graduated from Hot Springs High that won't go to Hot Springs' class reunion.  They never spent a day at Langston, but will go to Langston's reunion because of the mystic of the Bobby Mitchells, the James Whites, the--all these great athletes and scholars that left that school to go on to other places and do extremely well in their life.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  So position did you play in football?
Speaker 1: Any one they would give me, but I preferred quarterback.  That was the most glamorous position for me, is trying to make a team as a quarterback, and never got on the field in high school, but didn't really blossom until I got in the [U.S.] Marine Corps.  And that's when I really played what I had seen and been taught in school, you know--.
Story_ID: 35499
Speaker 1: Because Langston [High School]--what happened is, in 1969, Langston became a junior high.  [President] Bill Clinton's high school, Hot Springs High [School], became a junior high.  And they created a new school for all of us to go together, and they called it Hot Springs High.  When we migrated from our two high schools and was merged into one, then at that time, I didn't play any ball.  I went strictly to work.  I went to school and then I went to work.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you were--up until your--so your junior-senior year, you worked and then went to--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I left Langston--for me Langston became a junior high in my--when I left my sophomore year, tenth grade.  So when I got--and what happened is, they built a new Hot Springs High from downtown to--sort of on the outskirts of town.  But then you couldn't do that--couldn't take federal money to build the school unless it was integrated.  And that forced integration in schools.  And you say, "Wow.  But this is 1969."  The Return of the Titans ['Remember the Titans'] right here in Northern Virginia didn't happen until 1971, you know.  But we were already--we didn't have to get a--and when we went to school as one, we didn't have the race riots in school.  We didn't have the "who are the black kids, who are the white kids," because we already knew each other.  Now, society had caught with our mentality.  Those same kids that live in the house that my mom [Rosa McMichael] cleaned every day, the same black kids that saw their mom go to work, are now classmate or now teammate.  And nobody came to school and said, "Well, I'm going to be the starting quarterback because my dad owns the, you know, the business down the street," or "My dad owns the hotel or the motel on the strip."  We didn't go through those difficult times.  Cindy Ebel was just Cindy Ebel.  Her dad owned the motel that our coach worked at during the day and coached at night, you know.  But she and I had a great relationship.  You know, we could, you know--it wasn't like, "Oh, well, I can't talk to you.  You're a busboy in my dad's restaurant."  It wasn't that, you know.  We--it just--to me it was a great time to grow up in a difficult time of the nation because you can talk about those same times from a positive standpoint where others had to suffer through difficult memories.  And we didn't have that, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Story_ID: 35500
Speaker 1: Now, Dr. [Martin Luther] King was killed in 1968.  I guess you were a freshman then at Langston [High School, Hot Springs, Arkansas].
Speaker 2: I was at Langston.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All-black school, one white--two white teachers; Ms. Johnson and Mr. Hearst (ph.).  Mr. Hearst was phenomenal.  You could see him struggling trying to figure out the culture of these kids that he was around.  But it wasn't defeating him.  You know, he was the type of teacher that made me feel like I could learn more, you know.  And he lived on a street right around the corner from [President] Bill Clinton's high school.  And when I would go to that high school in the evenings, I would walk past his house because I'd be walking home with my grandmother [Ida Taubert (ph.) McMichael], who was a maid at Bill Clinton's high school.  She cleaned that high school, fourth floor.  And he seen me walking with her and he's "Duh."  He thought it was my mom [Rosa McMichael], and he came out to tell her what kind of kid I was and how he was proud of my progress, what I was doing.  Ms. Johnson, you could see her.  She was a white teacher, and she was teaching at Langston, and, you know, I could see the black girls watching her comb her hair, and she was doing something called "teasing," you know.  She was teasing her hair.  Black girls don't tease their hair.  They plait their hair, you know.  We were trying to wear Afros at that time, you know.  So this was unique.  So it was much of a lesson to them as it was her to watch the black kids go about how they lived within their life.  They fit very well.  They must have been handpicked or uniquely picked or blessed that we were--we was--had that type of exposure, because they didn't come in looking down their noses at us or came in thinking that "Let me help these poor kids because they're ignorant and they ain't."  They realize that this is a great environment here.  But Dr. King's assassination, the reason I mention it is because, you know, the next day, it was April and, you know, that night when Bobby [Robert] Kennedy announced the fact that Dr. King was assassinated in Memphis [Tennessee], not far from Hot Springs, Arkansas, you know, at the Lorraine Hotel, Room 306, the kids were a little, you know--it touched us.  It was different.  The atmosphere was different.  And, plus, you're in an all-black school anyway.  And I can remember kids saying, "They killed our King," you know, "They killed our King."  You know, he was going to be president of the United States or whatever, you know.  They had big dreams.  And then watched the school and the teachers and all talk to the kids about where we had to go and what now was at stake, and why it was important to an education, and why it's important not to be a statistic in incarceration but a new statistic in education, and you know, the Miss Williams and Logans and Neil Blakeys, and all of the teachers that we just marveled of watching.  You loved these teachers, you know.  They were like you, but they were smarter than you.  They were like you, but they were bigger than you.  They were like you, but they had a purpose of doing something.  And you just, you know, you were comfortable in that environment.  And so Dr. King's assassination, we called it a death, but he was killed.  He was--they took his life.  He didn't just die, you know.  It was a strain on us for a while, but we got through it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35501
Speaker 1: Now, were African Americans voting in Arkansas in those days?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we still had poll tax, you know.  My grandmother [Ida Taubert (ph.) McMichael] struggling to get around to pay her poll taxes so they could vote or, you know, people calling your house saying, "Hey, are you voting for, you know, whoever candidate.  And if you say, yes, then they'll you back and said, "I thought you were voting for me," and then.  So they would play those type of silly games with you, you know.  So if you running for state office or something, you know, and these people didn't even live in our city, but they had the magical phone line going.  "Let's find how many of these black votes we can get?"  Then you're trying to--you trying to be--you couldn't ride the fence or don't answer the phone."  You know, we didn't have call-waiting, you know; I.D. [call identification], you know, as you had in these past elections where you just, another politician calling to interrupt my dinner, you know.  Yeah, but--yeah, voting was--well, voting was essential then, you know.  I mean, people took pride in voting.  You know, you see the neighborhood people that own cars provide transportation to the polls.  It wasn't like you just went on your own.  "I'll be back to pick you up, and pick you up, and Ada and Gladys and Nancy and Sally, and all of them, they go down to the poll and they vote together, you know.  It was a ritual.  It was necessary if you wanted things to get better.  You wanted things not to deteriorate.  You wanted to get--have an opportunity to have civil rights that everybody else had.
Story_ID: 35502
Speaker 1: Now, did--was there a segregation of public accommodations that--I mean, did that go away around the same time as the school integration?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Actually, my grandfather Sherman McMichael, "Smokey," worked at a service station on Grand Avenue [Hot Springs, Arkansas] right next to a nightclub, right next to a liquor store, and the liquor store was manned by Mr. Page and Miss Peggy.  They were a white couple, and they loved my grandfather, they loved my grandmother [Ida Taubert (ph.) McMichael] .  My grandmother walked past their establishment coming from the high school, 'cause the high school was two blocks up the street on the hill, and my grandfather was two doors down on the same street.  But they knew them outside of that, not just the location.  They knew them--for some reason they were very close to my grandmother and grandfather.  And my grandmother cashed her paycheck there every payday, and my grandfather probably spent his there every payday.  But they knew all of us kids.  They loved us.  You know, we could go in that liquor store and buy--it's just a shame that kids say today, "I walk in and people start watching me as if I'm going to steal something."  We could walk in that.  That was the white establishment.  This was before desegregation.  This was before the Civil Rights Bill was passed.  This was before the voting (unclear).  We walk in that store and Mr. Bob standing behind his counter and do whatever the heck he was doing.  He didn't stand up there and watch us when we come in.  We could go back by the Coke machine or over in the candy department or what else can you do in a liquor store, you know.  But they trusted us.  They had respect for us.  We respected their establishment.  You couldn't go in there and misbehave, you know.  Your mom, grandmother and grandfather were part of that pillar.  So I hear kids saying they can't even go in a Walmart and somebody follow them around.  Heck, even before desegregation, we could go in those places and still didn't have that kind of mentality of treatment.  You know, we come in they knew us by name.  "Hey, Al, how you doing?  Where's Bobby?  Where's Sherman?"  "Oh, they coming."  You know, you come in there with a little paper carton of six empty bottles of Coke, you put them back there on the thing, get a full carton, you pay your thirty-two cents, maybe get you a Hersey bar, you know; a little Hersey brown paper, silver writing, Hersey; break them off, by the time you get home, it's already gone because you going to give your brother one little square, you going to take a square, you know.  That's the way it was, you know.  I mean, this was--what a life, you know.  You don't even have to be in modern day to say that, "That'll work for me."
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Story_ID: 35503
Speaker 1: Now, were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was a good student.  I wasn't an A plus student, but I strived to have good grades.  I studied.  You know, education was paramount in my family.  People monitored your education.  My parents boasted about our honor rolls or our good grades to the people that they worked for.  They'd come in, say "Oh, I hear you made the honor roll.  Keep up the good work," you know.  They didn't care who encouraged you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when--in '69 [1969] when you moved over to--
Speaker 2: Hot Springs.
Speaker 1: --Hot Springs High School, they built a new high school--now, what's my point here?  Let's see.  So when you went over to the new high school, were you--did you have any trepidations or anything about going there, or did you have any fears about, you know--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --a new situation?
Speaker 2: No.  Because there was nothing to fear.  You know, I mean, most time people say it because they fear the uncertain--unknown.  Nobody you were going to school with that you didn't already know.  Keep in mind, my grandmother [Ida Taubert (ph.) McMichael] worked at the white high school that I went to every day to help her clean up.  As I told Janet Coyne (ph.), who had a race reconciliation conference in D.C. [District of Columbia] in 2008, August of 2008, and I was invited to speak there.  John Lewis, and the great Dr. Dorothy Heights and were there, and Lou Gossett; and just a whole litany of people.  Some of the Little Rock Nine was there and (unclear) wife was there; she was there, and all of us were doing--my part was to say "Went to the same high school with former President Bill Clinton.  I went to the same high school that former President Bill Clinton attended."  (Unclear) "Oh, wow.  You attended school with the president."  "No, I didn't say that.  I said I went to that same school, but I went after hours to clean that school.  I went after hours to see that they had different books than I had over at Langston [High School] and so forth."  But it was a motivator, you know.  Later, those same teachers that President Clinton had ended up--some of them ended up being my teachers.  His principal, Johnnie Mae Mackey and my grandmother were very close.  My grandmother worked at the school, but she also worked on weekends for Mrs. Mackey.  And Miss Mackey passed away with my grandmother holding her hand in her home.  She was there, you know, with her (unclear).  Lori Jean Ledwood (ph.) was the music teacher of that high school, who ended up--my grandmother worked for her; my mom [Rosa McMichael] worked for her; my oldest sister worked for her, you know, and doing what most people called domestic work; being their maid or cleaning their home.  But it's not what they did, it's how they was treated by them as--they all treated us like they--we were their family.  They knew us.  We wasn't just, "Rosie got some boys over there," or "I just got grandkids," or whatever.  They knew us.  They had followed us.
Story_ID: 35504
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your last two years of high school [in Hot Springs, Arkansas], you worked.  Now, where did you work?
Speaker 2: I (laughs)--first, I had three jobs.  The first job was a carpool job.  The second job was a busboy at a restaurant.  The third job was a spice, season, coffee mill, where they roast the coffee beans and bagged up spices from oregano to sage to pepper to salt to sugar, and they served all of the restaurants in town.  You could get the real stuff.  You didn't have Morton Sugar box, sugar--I mean, you know, all that stuff would come--you order it from this establishment called the Hot Springs Coffee Mill.  And so I worked there.  I made sixty-eight dollars a week.  I worked in the hotels and I could make about a hundred--seventy-five to a hundred dollars a night, working with the waitresses and the servers as their, you know, busboy and so forth.  And then I'd made at least thirty, forty dollars a week in--
Speaker 1: At the carpool?
Speaker 2: --carpool.  And the carpool was unique, 'cause see now, we don't go to Langston [High School] anymore.  You can't walk to school.  New high school out here on the outskirts of town, there's no buses that run out there, no matter what Rosa Parks said, we still didn't have buses that just, you know, boom.  And it wasn't that reliable.  You know, same identical bus that you see in the museum of Rosa Parks was riding the streets of Hot Springs, Arkansas.  So I'm saying to myself, "You know, I,"--first of all I saved my little money mowing grass, you know, and cutting yards and doing odd jobs, and I bought me a car; a 1964 brown Chevy Impala.  Wasn't no bucket seats as you know, big couch seats in the car, and--
Speaker 1: This was 1964?
Speaker 2: 1964, gold-brown--I call it golden-brown Chevy Impala, four-door.
Speaker 1: About what year was it?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: About what year was it?
Speaker 2: 1969.
Speaker 1: Oh, you bought a--I thought you said in 1964 you bought a--
Speaker 2: No.  I bought a 1964--
Speaker 1: '64 [1964] car.
Speaker 2: --car.
Speaker 1: --in 1969.
Speaker 2: In 1969.  And--see all my buddies was trying to save their little money to buy a motorcycle.  I didn't see any value in riding a motorcycle through rain, and it get cold in the winter, it's too hot in the summer, and it could rain any time.  So that would limit.  But I also saw a way--I buy this car.  All my other buddies, they had cars too, but it was either their mother's car or their parents' car or they bought a car that they and their brothers had to share.  This was mine.  It was like having your own bicycle.
Story_ID: 35505
Speaker 1: So I decided, my car notes are $46.36 a month, and that's including insurance.  How am I going to pay this car note.  Now, I got the car and think, and the bank done gave me whatever, 'cause I had to be paying a bank.  All I knew that I was paying a car note at Arkansas Trust--Bank and Trust.  So I went and found me some clients.  It was the girls that went to school with me, 'cause I knew girls had to get to that school, too, and I figured the last thing they want to do is stand on a bus stop and let their 'fro get wet or their makeup run, and they'd like to be able to be picked up right at their doorstep, driven to school and no hassle.  So I went to their parents and said, "I can drive--I can take your daughters to school, five dollars a week."  Five girls, five dollars.  Five times five, twenty-five.  You get a tank of gas for less than six dollars.  And so I'm making money.  I have to go to school also, but the parents fell in love with it because they knew the kind of a person I was, you know.  Being a junior deacon in church, you know, going to BTU [Baptist Training Union], singing in the choir, Boy Scout, you know; doing all the thing--I wasn't doing them to build a resume.  Those just things that I prefer to be involved in.  And so these girls get in the car, I assigned seats in the car (unclear), everybody get in; you sit here, you sit there, you know, none of this.  I ain't got time for this hassle about I want to sit by a window, my hair may blow, ba-ba-ba-boom.  Here, you sit here, you sit there, and they was put in the car based on where I stopped to pick them up.  I'd take them to school, let them out.  Be here at 3:15, butts in seat, you get home by 3:30, good to go.  Well, my sister was working downtown on the strip doing hair--she work in the bathhouse, when I would give her a ride she had to pay, being that she smoked, she had to pay extra, because couldn't smoke in my car, nobody want that smell.  And then my other sister was married to my brother-in-law, who was off in the [U.S.] Navy.  Though I would go pick her up on weekends and drive her around, take her a little shopping here and there, and she'd fill my car up. So I already got a tank of gas, I already got money coming in from my sister, her best friend.  A grown adult wanted--"How do you get to work?"  "Al takes me to work."  Well, she wanted to go, but she thought because she was an adult and I was a kid, she could ride to work just because she was an adult.  You ride to work, you got to pay.  Pay the same price my sister pay.  So my sister and her pay, but she didn't pay the same price because my sister had to pay a little more because she was a smoker.  And my other sister would give a tank of gas.  So I'm set to make--everything I made off of my colleague, my fellow students was all profit, all profit.
Speaker 2: For a $46 car note, I mean a $64 car note, but you're--
Speaker 1: No.  Forty-six dollars, thirty-six cents.
Speaker 2: Oh.  Forty-six.  I'm sorry.  Forty-six, not sixty-four.  I wrote an error.  But you're making, like, over a hundred dollars a month.
Speaker 1: I'm making money, man.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I got clean money.  I didn't know you could steal to get money.  I didn't know that you had to beat somebody up to take money.  I knew that you could present yourself as a decent person and make money.  My money, I could--I enjoyed letting people know I had money because it was made the right way.  I earned it, you know.
Story_ID: 35506
Speaker 1: I go in there and I work my butt off in the restaurant at night making you, the waiter, look good; things that you didn't want to do for a customer, I would do and do it over and over again that they come in looking for you to get me. And they'd get me a little extra tip on the side, you know.  And then at the end of the night, you didn't mind giving me my share because you know that I made your day all night at that restaurant easy, you know.  And then I go to work in the Hot Springs coffee mill, I'm just a kid.  Mr. Seafords (ph.), he took me on as a kid to come and work after school in this wholesale place, which was the Hot Springs coffee mill.  You roast peanuts.  He taught me how to make mayonnaise, he taught me how to make all these other gallon jars of dressing and stuff that he sold to the restaurant, and I was the only one there other than him that could do it.  So, he's an older gentleman.  He had to be in his sixties or even older.  Old Mr. Seafords, and he would walk around, be in his drawers and a T-shirt up in the loft making this stuff, and I'd be right there with him, helping him do it, and he's teaching me, "Come on, Little Bit, do it this way, do it that way," and I'd learn to roast coffee beans, then if all of that was caught up, then I'd downstairs to the first floor where people were putting orders together.  I could read.  When he said, you need a gallon of mayonnaise, you needed two gallons of dill pickles, you needed some sage, you need some paprika, you needed half a pound of cheese or whatever the case maybe, I go to walk in, boom, boom, boom, I put the order together, put it in the box, put it on the conveyor belt, it's out the back door ready for the truck drivers to pick up and deliver, you know.  And they're like, whoa.  The women, these women that was working there, like, "Alvin, Little Bit, down here working.  We don't have to worry.  Everything is going fast."  So I felt like--the more I learn about this place, I could be somebody.  And they loved it, you know.  If nothing going on, I get a broom and sweep the floor and keep it clean.
Speaker 2: What's this now--your day would go--so you're making money on the way to school--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --because you say you're picking up carload--
Speaker 1: That's exactly right.
Speaker 2: --that's an extra $25 a week.  When you get (laughs).  When you get off from school, you're going to--where--you go to the--
Speaker 1: The wholesale place.
Speaker 2: Wholesale place.
Speaker 1: I'm off there by 4:35.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Then I go to the restaurant and work 'till ten, ten o'clock at night.  And then the restaurant closed at ten, then I go home.
Speaker 2: All right.  All right.  Now, did you--I mean, then you go back to school the next day.  So--
Speaker 1: Next day back to school, yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.  So you were really industrious.  So--
Speaker 1: So my motto was, save seventy-five cents of every dollar.  If I make a dollar, I put seventy-five cents in my savings and twenty-five cents in my pocket.  So I had a big--and I--they had a little saving bank books that was about big as a credit card, and you know, you go there and the ladies put your money--deposit your money in the bank, and she'd write in your book how much you got.  That motivated me.  I loved seeing that grow, you know.  I was stingy about spending, but I was fruitful about saving it, you know.  I'm going to put seventy-five cents in savings, a quarter in my pocket.  But I could go to school, I had hundreds of dollars in my pocket, you know.  I didn't have to gamble with you, I didn't have to beg you, I didn't have to beat you up for your lunch money.  I was too busy protecting my own money, you know.  I had money.  And then to be able to buy my own clothes and buy my own car and didn't have to ask Mom [Rosa McMichael] for gas money.  You know, parents are pretty fruitful.  They say, "Yeah, you can go to the movie."  And you get your girlfriend, you go to the movie, you can't get in because you don't have any resources to get in with, you know, because you forgot to ask mom and dad for money to get in.  You just asked for permission to go.  They allowed you to go, but they ain't giving you nothing to get in.  You come back with your mouth poked out.  Me, I didn't have those problems, you know.  Tell Mama I'm going to the movie, said, "Fine."  And I go pick up your daughter, got to the movie, you know.  Whatever, you want, I'm the man.  I'm doing--I'm having a good time.  It was a beautiful life, you know.
Speaker 2: Now, you mentioned--now, did any of this interfere with school?
Speaker 1: No.  No.  Absolutely not. (Simultaneous)
Story_ID: 35507
Speaker 1: And now, what were your aspirations in those days in terms of school?  What did you--did you see yourself going to college?  Did you see yourself--now, you said you'd been a Boy Scout.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, was that a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: No.  It was--you know, those things--kids today, they got to be in organized sports, they got to do Boy Scouts, they got to do Girl Scouts, they got to sell cookies, they got to go down--I just did those things because they were available; but not because I had to have those things to shape who I was.  I would get involved in those things to show people that they could be done without pain.  These are fun things to do.  So I didn't bank on any of those things.  My goal was, I want to go to college and get a degree and make something of myself.  I want to one day work in a building like all these other people without a mop and a broom.  I want to be able to work in that building where you come to my office and sit down.  I want to wear a coat and tie to work.  I don't want to wear an apron or any--.  That was my motivation, you know.  And, as much as I love my hometown [Hot Springs, Arkansas], I couldn't see myself getting there, you know, in the time frame that I wanted to.  So I thought that, I could stay here and work in the coffee mill, I could stay here and do this or I could go work for Arkansas Power and Light like all my other classmates who were getting good jobs work--you know; if there was a tornado or rainstorm and the power went out, they climb the line, fix the generators or whatever they did.  So I said, I don't want to do that either.  So nobody really nurtured you towards going to college or tutoring you and telling you, you have to do this to be able to go to school from where I sat.  So I joined the military.  My brother came home from Vietnam, you know.  He was a Vietnam veteran.  He had been wounded in Vietnam.  He had been well decorated from the Vietnam War, and he was my older brother, you know.  And my thing, I said he abandoned me 'cause he didn't to go to Hot Springs High [School] like I did.  When we integrated the schools, he dropped out of school and went and joined the [U.S.] Marine Corps.  Then so, while I'm finishing school, he's finishing a tour in Vietnam.  And so, he comes home for a leave and from his--he had been home from Vietnam about a year, so he come home for leave, and I tell him, "Hey, I think I'm going to join the Marine Corps," because the same guy that recruited him came looking for me.  And, though I weighed the situation, said, "If he can make it in the Marine Corps, maybe I can."  So I tell him I'm going to join the Marine Corps.  He's a sergeant, he five (sic), he had been promoted four times, five times in the Marine Corps.  He come in as A-1, well decorated in Vietnam.  And, you know, so I tell him I'm going to join the Marine Corps.  He says, "You'll never make it.  Marine Corps not for you."  (laughs).  Says, "Your temperament, you know, you'll get upset with people if they not doing things the way you want them done, and you don't get to do that in the Marine Corps.  You do what you're told."  I said, "What are you talking about.  I always do what I'm told."  He said, "But I know you," you know, so.  I went back and saw him--we drove over to see my grandmother [Ida Taubert (ph.) McMichael], and my grandmother at that time was living in Little Rock [Arkansas], 'cause she had left Hot Springs to go back to Little Rock to take over her father's property and stuff, because he was killed on, as I said, and died on Saturday before Easter the year before.  And so I said, "I still think I'm going to join the Marine Corps."  He said, "Okay.  You going to join the Marine Corps, join the Marine Corps.  But let me know when so I can go down and get four more days of leave."  So he wasn't encouraging me to go to the Marine Corps, but since he couldn't stop me from being motivated by it, he thought he'd get something out of it.  So he'd get to stay home a couple of more days because he could then present me to the Marine Corps as, you know, he found me to join.  So I left and went to the Marine Corps because I wanted to find a way to reach a state of my goal of going--working in an office setting, being in charge of something, making things work, making things happen.  And the Marine Corps gave me that opportunity.
Speaker 1: Now, is this before graduation [from high school]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: This is after you graduated?
Speaker 2: After I graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So I just want to make sure you--(simultaneous)
Story_ID: 35508
Speaker 1: Because, while I was in [high] school [in Hot Springs, Arkansas], I was still waiting on that opportunity to go to school--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to college, you know, and some of my friends, who were girlfriend--they weren't girlfriends in the state of dating; they were just girls that were friends of mine that wanted me to go to their college.  They wanted me at their college with them because they felt safe around me.  They said, "Well, if you--you go to college with me, come on, you know, go up here,"  This good friend of me, Paulette Hunter (ph.), now Paulette Riley, she was going to this called the School [College] of the Ozarks in Missouri, Point Lookout, and she wanted me to go to school up there.  She knew if my brother come up here and go to school with me, I'll have a good time, and so, it didn't work.  I joined the Marine Corps instead and pursued my education through the Marine Corps.
Speaker 2: So you didn't have any--what did your counselors tell you?  Did they encourage you to go to school, to college, or did they--
Speaker 1: No.  It wasn't that setting.  You know, nobody--well, you went to the counselor, you got some, or you didn't know how to go to a counselor, or whatever the case may be.  But I don't ever remember sitting with a counselor saying, you know, "Here's your--take this for SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test], do this thing," you know.  I just thought you passed, you get promoted to the next grade, don't get in trouble, have good citizenship, and your mom and dad had money and you could go off to college.  I didn't know there was ways you could work within the process to get scholarships or grants or, you know--
Speaker 2: Nobody pulled you aside to tell you?
Speaker 1: No.  So, but that wasn't no reason for me not to be ambitious enough to try to make something on my own.  But I knew staying there doing what I was doing every day wasn't going to be satisfact--satisfying for me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 35509
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about the [U.S.] Marine Corps.  What was your introduction to the Marine Corps like?  Now, did you go with your brother to the--?
Speaker 2: No.  Actually, I joined the Marine Corps, my brother was--went on back to his command in the Marine Corps.  I didn't see him anymore.  I go through basic training, dreaming every night that, I wonder if he went through--lived in this building, I wonder what it was like--
Speaker 1: Where were you (enlisted?) in?
Speaker 2: In San Diego, California.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he, too.  That's where--because in the Marine Corps, you have west of the Mississippi and east of the Mississippi.  If you're from Chicago [Illinois], you're going to San Diego.  If you're from New York, you're going to Paris Island, South Carolina.  If you're from Arkansas, you're going to San Diego.
Speaker 1: Okay.  San Diego, California.  This is camp?
Speaker 2: This was San Diego, California.  Marine Corps [Recruit] Depot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, of course, on the east coast, they sent you to Paris Island, the Marine Corps Depot; Paris Island, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well, tell us about your arrival at the camp--at the depot.
Speaker 2: At San Diego.
Speaker 1: At San Diego.
Speaker 2: I get to San Diego, you know, I'm on Delta Airlines.  I'm flying on an airplane.  I'm already ahead of the curve.  You know, here's a little black boy from Arkansas that dreamed of one day working in a building and wear a suit, and I'm already flying on an airplane.  And they take--and I lived in a hotel the night before, before they shipped me out.  This can't be bad.  This got to be where I'm supposed to be.  So I fly and I get off the plane in San Diego.  They meet you at the airport, nice and kind and gentle.  Give you--take your little brown package that they gave you at the recruiting headquarters called the MEPS [Military Entrance Processing Station] Station, and MEPS Station is where all of the individuals that join the military is gathered, and then they send you off to your own branch of service.  So I get there, I get off, he takes the package, looks in it, makes sure that I'm supposed to be there, then turns me over to this guy that's a Marine.  I ain't different.  I know my brother was in the Marines, but I didn't know anything about the Marine Corps.  I didn't even know anything about the military other than, if he can do it, I probably can do it.  And so they started yelling and screaming at you and telling you to hurry up, do this and keep your mouth shut, and all this chaos is going on.  It was, you know, pandemonium going on.  You get on the bus, and then they stand at the--and "Everybody sit your butt in the bus, get your head and eyes straight, don't say anything to anybody, keep your mouth shut, don't talk--."  I said, "Wow.  I seen this on prison movies."  The guy standing at the door of the bus, "If there's a first word out of your mouth to be sir (sic), last word out of your mouth will be sir, you understand?"  And you say, "Do you understand?"  And everybody's, "Yes, sir."  And so, you get--they bus you over from the airport in San Diego to the MCRD [Marine Corps Recruit Depot], San Diego, which is--they parallel with each.  The fence separates the Marine training--recruit training, basic training from the airport in San Diego, only a fence.  And they get us there, we get off the bus, they make you stand on the yellow footprints, and you're in your civilian clothes or whatever you had on when you left home, and they yelling and screaming at you and tell you to strip down and march you in and shave all your hair off.  If I was like I am now, I'd been ahead of the game even further.  They shave all your hair off and put you--wash your nasty body down and put you in clean underwear and a Marine uniform.  And that day, Basic Training begin (sic).  And it's--so, you know, you don't--you don't go to sleep.  It's about 4:30, five o'clock in the morning, they march you over to--walk you over to the dining facility.  You eat breakfast.  You think you're in a restaurant 'cause you grew up working in restaurants.  You filling your little tray, you can take all you want, but you better eat everything you take.  Okay.  So when you get there you sit down and you think, "Oh, you got all this food on your plate, and you haven't eaten in a day or so," you wolf'in it down, wanting to lollygag, so to speak, relax and eat.  They tell you hurry up, get out.  "I only had three bites.  I didn't even finish though."  "Get out."  You know, they get your regimented to realize this is no game, this is real business.  We're getting ready to transform you from that low-life civilian life to hardcore military understanding.  So you rush out feeling like, "Wow, that could have been good, but I didn't get to eat much."  You know, the next time they take you to the dining facility, you don't waste time or looking at nobody to your left or right or wanting to hold conversations.  You're eating as fast as you can because any minute that dime may drop and say, "Get out."  Of course, they start to stretch it out, but the first day is to get your attention.
Story_ID: 35510
Speaker 1: And went there [U.S. Marine Corps Recruit Depot, San Diego, California] and it just kept going.  And the more it start going and they take you out and start getting you conditioned for physical training, "Oh, I like this.  This is good.  We get to run and jump and climb.  All these crazy obstacles and slide down ropes and jump over barricades."  And my brother-in-law tells this story, he knew I was hooked.  I was going to be it the Marine Corps and enjoy it, because I wrote my first letter to him.  He was in the [U.S.] Navy in Alaska, and he said he read the letter and knew I was hooked because I was talking about how enjoyable the physical training was (laughs).  He tells the story, he's kind of comical.  "But anyway, I knew it was done.  You wasn't going anywhere.  You--."  But it was so easy.  Everybody--the guys from Chicago [Illinois] or Detroit [Michigan] or San Francisco [California], the big cities had very--were having problems adjusting.  They weren't used to doing what they were told to do the way they were told to do it.  I grew up in a household.  You did what your mom said the way she wanted it done, when she wanted it done, and, you know, you didn't get to negotiate.  You didn't get to vary from the standard.  Here, this is a piece of cake.  This is the Marine Corps.  This is easy.  All you have to do is what they tell you, when they tell you, the way they tell you to do it.  And they don't even yell at you.  Your mom would say, "If you don't get it done, I'm going to put that belt on you--"  You know, "I'm going to do this."  And she meant it, because you been that road and you only want to go that road with her once, you know.  You don't want to be the kid that gets your butt beat by your mom, not my mom [Rosa McMichael], on a regular basis.  That--you wouldn't have much to offer the world 'cause, you know, 'cause she--my mom never seen butt that she didn't enjoy beating, you know, especially if you were out of line.  So the Marine Corps would just tell you what to do, they may yell at your once or twice, but they ain't, you know, that's about it.  It's a piece of cake.  And they going to pay you too?  And they going to let you wash your clothes and wear your clothes?  Oh, I'm comfortable.  I'm having a good time.  I was--I was smooth.  Everybody else was dreading it, you know, "Oh this is horrible."  And I always could remember watching the guys from the big cities.  They had the hardest problem.  They had the hardest--me, it wasn't hard at all.  Guys that came from Louisiana, Oklahoma, Arkansas, from small communities that were accustomed to hard work and as--held responsible to carry their load so everybody else could fit, we didn't have a problem.
Speaker 2: So most of the people that washed out of it, would you say were big city guys?
Speaker 1: But they didn't wash up.  It took longer for them to adjust.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so--yeah, some of them washed out.  Dave Garcia was from Chicago.  Dave was different.  He was about 5'6", 5'7" [height], little fireplug, couldn't get anything through to him.  And he went to jail in the military.  And so one day we were sitting in our bunk or he was out, and, you know, they send you for a week, twenty-one days or whatever, you know.  It's not like you're going to civilian jail.  It's not on your record.  It's non-judicial punishment.  So I'm sitting here and I'm badmouthing the guy in charge of us, you know.  Good looking guy, blond hair, crystal blue eyes, fit as could be; but he was a grown man.  His name was Ron Tronson (ph.).  And Ron was all over me in my first duty station, because now I stationed in Hawaii.  And he was just ugly to me.  Everything, you know, I seemed like I did was wrong to him.  And so I'm sitting there with Dave Garcia, and Dave just out of the brig, the military jail.  And he said, "Shut your mouth.  I wish somebody had been on my butt like that when I came in.  I wouldn't had to spend my time there.  He's only on your butt because he see something in you that could be worth having."  And from that day on, I never complained about anyone that tried to correct me in something in the military, 'cause I realize there was a--it was a different environment.  That's what leadership--there they see you going, having difficulties, see you going in the wrong way, or see you at the break of failure in the military, they pull you back up and put you on your feet so you can be successful.  And in school, the thing, if I could beat you at something in sports, then I beat you all the time.  And I took pride in beating you.  In the military, you don't want to beat your colleagues.  You want to encourage them to be you so that you're strong across the board.  And his words "Just shut your mouth.  If someone had told me what he's telling you, I wouldn't have had to suffer the time I had in there."  From that day on, I never complained.  Never, you know, no matter how difficult it was or how unpleasant it may have seemed to be, or even if there was parts of it that may have appeared to be unfair to what I thought was fair, I would find a way to work through it, rise above it.
Story_ID: 35511
Speaker 1: Now, was that the toughest part of boot camp [U.S. Marine Corps Recruit Depot, San Diego, California] was--or was it the unfairness that you perceived--
Speaker 2: Well, boot camp wasn't unfair.  Boot camp was just a process of more than you can handle to make sure that you didn't break.  But if you broke, they knew you didn't deserve to be there.  And to me, boot camp was fun, because it was everything--you were told to do everything, you were taken to every place you needed to be.  Everything that--all you had to do was one thing, a form.  That was boot camp, basic training.  But when I got out of basic training, you had to do more than perform.  You had to blend in.  You had to be responsible to think nobody hand-carried you anywhere.  There was no chaperone.  As much as the drill sergeant--in Marine Corps we call the drill instructors, would be on you, they were actually placing you in every spot you needed to be, giving you everything you needed.  And, but now, you have graduated from basic training.  Now, you're wearing the uniform of a Marine.  You have to live to the standards of a Marine.  And nobody's there to tell you, you know, and so that's where you start to learn how to be a Marine.  You know, the basic is over.  Now, you got to develop into the core of what Marines expected.
Story_ID: 35512
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us about your first assignment.
Speaker 2: My first assignment was in Hawaii.  We was scheduled to go to--my platoon or the people I'd finished my MOS [Military Occupational Specialty] Training, you have boot camp that teach you how to be a basic [U.S.] Marine.  Then you go to your Military Occupational Specialist.  Whatever the [U.S.] Marine Corps decide they want you to--whatever field they wanted you to serve in, they decided that they wanted me to be an infantryman, a rifleman, which all Marines are basic rifleman.  And then you end up being MP or IT or Food Service or truck driver or--whatever the case may be.  So, we're ready to go to Vietnam to be a Vietnam--Christmas replacements, get diverted to Hawaii, Pearl Harbor.  And I get off the plane, I'm in my uniform, I thought I was looking cute.  I had my little khaki-colored uniform on, summer trops, and the Hawaiian girls meet you at the ramp when you walk down on the tarmac there, and place a lei on you, and then kiss you on the side of the cheek; oh, I'm Mr. Man.  I'm a Marine, and I got a uniform on, girls kissing me in Hawaii.  Honolulu, here I am.  And I get to my duty station, and Ron Tronson, the guy that I was telling you about that was--I thought was just hateful, he chews me out because I didn't have my cover, the hat, that we wear on properly.  But, I just got off the airplane, you know, and I saw all the other Marines wearing it under they (sic) belt.  And you put it under your belt and flop it over.  You probably seen it in the movies.  In the Marine Corps you don't that.  You wear it on your head or you take it off and you place where it's supposed to be.  So he tells me, "Get that cover, your hat, from under your belt.  The only thing you wear under your belt is your shoes," whatever.  So, right away I'm like, this guy is going to be a pain.  I can see it coming.  And so I go through processing, and they take me over to the office, the headquarters, where they going to send you through all the paperwork and make sure you're the right person there to do the things, and the first sergeant is looking through my records, and he says, "McMichael.  McMichael.  You have any relatives in the Marine Corps?"  I said, "I have a brother in the Marine Corps."  And he said, "What's his name?"  And I'm saying, is this guy crazy.  I mean, is he a moron?  What's his name?  If my name McMichael, his name is--.  I said my brother, his name--but so, you know, so he wanted to get more than just his last name, you know.  Well, come to find out, my brother was upstairs working.  My brother was a Sergeant of the Guard upstairs.  And so, the first sergeant sent one of the clerks up to get my brother, and my brother comes downstairs.  He was immaculate.  He was sharp.  He was, you know, had his gear on.  He was--had the same uniform I had on, but he looked a hell of a lot better in it than I did.  I mean, like, wow, 'cause I'd never seen him decked out, you know, and he come down.  So I wanted, "Hey."  I wanted to go over and see him and so forth.  And he says to me--the first sergeant instantly move me from that company and sent me to another duty station fifty miles away, a place called Wahiawa Canal.  It was in a little village called Whitmore Village, where Dole Pineapple's fields are, where they raise the Dole Pineapple.  And we guarded a building, a building where they monitored all of the action, at that time, that was going on in Vietnam.
Story_ID: 35513
Speaker 1: So, finally, about a week, I get acclimated, and I get to a phone.  And back then, we didn't have cell phones and that.  So you get to a phone, you dialing the number, rotary-type, (unclear), and, of course, it's a military phone, so you got some extra steps that you didn't have in private.  So I called my brother up, and they get him to the phone.  I said, "Hey, Mack."  He says, "Who is this?"  I said, "Al."  And he said, "You're an NCO?" meaning that, are you my equal?  And I said, "No."  He said, "click."  He hangs up on me, because if you're not an NCO, I don't want to talk to you.  And I'm like, wow.  So I'm devastated.  I call my mom [Rosa McMichael] and I said, "Oh, I called Sherman and he--."  Said, "Don't worry about it baby.  They do that in the Army."  I said, "Mom, I'm not in the Army.  I'm in the Marine Corps."  Of course, now, I'm acclimated to be Marine, not just in the military, I'm Marine.  So she wants to accuse me of being the Army.  I'm not in the Army.  Said, "Whatever they do in the Salvation Army, I don't know what you guys do in the (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughs).
Speaker 1: --so, I mean, the stock is going downhill fast.  So, finally, I say to myself, "You know, he's a Sergeant in the Marine Corps.  I'm a PFC [private first class]."  There's four ranks in between us, me at the bottom; here I am down here, here he is up here.  I'm an E-1, he's an E-5.  Boom.  And, you know, I could sit here and mope about it, call Mom and tell her he didn't treat me right, whatever the case may be or I could do something about it.  I removed myself from that frame of mind and went into the frame of mind to learn everything I could about the Marine Corps.  I ran every day, I studied everything the Marine Corps had.  I got so good at it that you could ask me something, I'd say, page 3, paragraph 2, (as far as the word is?), you know.  Any ordinary thing that I was required to know at my pay grade, I knew it inside and out.  Anything that had to be done, I did it to the (max?).  Long story short, within eighteen months, my brother and I were the same rank.  I went from the bottom to being his peer rather than his subordinate in eighteen months of--
Speaker 2: Is that unusual, I mean, the time to achieve that?
Speaker 1: Oh, very unusual.  But it's not unusual if you dedicate yourself.  I didn't do any partying, I didn't do any running the streets.  I didn't do anything but work and study.   It wasn't uncommon for me to dedicate myself to a vision, you know.  In high school, I went to school, I made money, I went to work, I went to work, I went home, I went to school, I made money, I went to work, I mean.  So, once I get in that trend that that's where we're going to go, that's where I went.  So now we're peers, we're equal.
Speaker 2: So you're an E-5, too, and so is your brother.
Speaker 1: Actually--
Speaker 2: This is the brother that used to sit at the head of the table?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Absolutely.
Speaker 2: He's the one (laughs).
Speaker 1: Yes.  Now, we're peers.  He gets married and he loses a stripe.  So now he's my subordinate, you know.  Now, then he gains it back, and we don't see each other for a while.  And he's in North Carolina and I'm in California.  We both left Hawaii.  He goes to North Carolina, I go to California.
Speaker 2: So you didn't go directly over to Vietnam after [McMichael's assignment in Hawaii]--
Speaker 1: No.  I didn't go to Vietnam because I got diverted to Marine Barracks, Hawaii.  But he [McMichael's older brother] goes to North Carolina.  I go to California.  And then he's going back overseas again to a place called Okinawa, Japan.  He's coming through California to get to Japan.  So we meet.  I pick him up.  I'm hosting him for a day or so before his transportation to leave Marshall Air Base to go from California.  He said, "Let's go to the club."  "Okay."  So I take him to the NCO [non-commissioned officer] Club, but I'm a step behind him.  Now, I've been promoted again.  I'm what they call a Staff Non-Commissioned Officer.  I'm an E-6, he's an E-5.  I'm senior to him, and when you go from E-5 to E-6, it's totally two different lifestyles in the Marine Corps.  You know, you've arrived.  So, I've been accelerated, promoted up the ladder.  Accelerated, promoted to an E-5, E-6, you know.  I mean, boom, boom, boom.  I'm making it quick.  And my payback was, "Yeah, we'll go to the club."  I let him out at the club.  He said, "You coming in?"  "No.  I can't go in that club.  I have to go to the big boy's club over on the other side."  So that was my way of saying, "Remember that phone call when you hung up on me?"  But we went on to never really soldier together as Marines under the same command.  I stayed there and continued to train recruits at the same depot that I went through my basic training--.
Story_ID: 35514
Speaker 1: So you become a drill sergeant [in the U.S. Marine Corps]?
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I became a drill instructor and in charge in San Diego [California; U.S. Marines].
Speaker 1: Drill Instructor.  D.I., right?
Speaker 2: And that was unique to me, and I thought, well, I went--came from Hawaii, I went to the infantry; it just wasn't getting there.  They just, you know, I mean, everything that they're doing here I already, I know.  And it's not changing, you know, the weaponry, the tactics, and so forth.  So I decided I wanted to go somewhere else.  And I went back to San Diego from Camp Pendleton in California, which is about thirty miles north--twenty-something miles north of San Diego.  Then I go back there, and I become a drill instructor and start working with young kids, young boys that were maybe four years younger than me.  But now I'm the drill instructor.  Now, I'm teaching.  Now, I'm--
Speaker 1: Now, I mean a drill instructor, is that something that you asked for or do they select you?  Or in your case, did they select you or did you ask to be one?
Speaker 2: Both.
Speaker 1: Oh.  Okay.
Speaker 2: You can ask all day, but if you don't make the cut, you won't get selected.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was in the Infantry Unit in Camp Pendleton, I'd asked.  Didn't get selected.  And one day, an officer came and said--the company commander, Captain Holcomb, and he says, "You know, you could be a good drill instructor one day.  Why don't you--you know, they got a drill instructor screening team coming through.  Why don't you go see the (unclear)."  I said, "Sir, I've been in screening team.  They said I'd be a great candidate, and I submitted my paperwork, but I never heard anything back."  Well, my immediate officer, my platoon commander, never forward my paperwork up because he didn't want me to leave the platoon, you know.  So to make sure that I stayed in the platoon, not to submit that, then he would have me for the full time.  So he checked on it.  The next day I get called to the company commander's office, and he tells me honestly what happened, "That the platoon commander was just so in to you that he didn't want you to leave," so, boom.  So they processed (me?).  Next thing I know, this was September.  By November I was in school, going to D.I., Drill Instructor School.  And, of course, you can't just become a drill instructor or drill sergeant just because you want to.  You have to qualify.  Then when you qualify, you have to go through training.  And then you go through training, you have to graduate.  And then you go.  I graduated on ten o'clock, February 22nd, 1974.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35515
Speaker 1: So, now, what we've all seen, you now, those of us who have never been in the military or in the [U.S.] Marine Corps, have seen, you know, movie drill instructors.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Jack Webb [director].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Guy on Gomer Pyle [television character].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know.  And they get in people's faces and they really--.  So you see this and you say, "Well, what in the--," you know.  But what is it like from the other side?  What is a drill instructor trying to do with a recruit?
Speaker 2: He's trying to transform him.  The drill instructor's purpose is to transform a young man or woman from civilian life into a new life, called the Marine way of life.  And all of that in-your-face, that shock factor is important at a point.  But it should never be the basics of your twelve weeks in boot camp, in--that's Al McMichael's opinion.  That's why you couldn't beat me.  You spent more time trying to emulate Jack Webb.  You had spent too much time trying to be the image of what you see on T.V.  I saw, as a drill instructor, an opportunity to train and educate my recruits to better than their competition and to prepare them to be a warrior next to me one when we're no longer in a training environment.  So I was hung up on the point that how wonderful for it to be to graduate.  I knew the feeling I had just a few years ago when I graduated from boot camp.  This is 1974.  I graduated in 1970.  Not that much difference.  Not enough change for me to not to know what they were going through.  They're eighteen [years old].  I'm twenty-one.  Not much.  Come on.  Though, while you were telling your recruits to get down and give me fifty, do all these crazy things that made you feel like you were the Jack Webb, the Great Santini, because they made a mistake, I would--different philosophy.  Mine was, if you made a mistake, come around me, schoolhouse circle.  You're my flock, come around.  While everybody else is over there sweating and getting angry and mad because they've been, I would say, not abused, but used an opportunity to make you sweat and hurt because I made a mistake.  How did that correct the mistake?  There's been no instructions to show you where the mistake was so that you could better.  Where I came from, in the high school and teachers and Langston [High School] and those things, people always tried to tell you what you were doing wrong so you could do it better.  So I would bring them, put them in a schoolhouse half circle and show them what they were doing wrong so they could do it right and be better for it.  And then I would say, "Or you can look over there at your sister platoon and see what they're doing.  They made the same mistake you did, but do you see them being corrected?  They're being punished. Now I can go and punish you, but I prefer to teach you."  They get back up, put them back together, give them the instruction to perform; they execute properly.  Kept us--every time you do that, you're one step ahead of your competitor, because when they got up from doing push-ups or whatever they did to make them--punish them, they were still as ignorant about that mistake as they were when they got down to be punished, you know.  So I didn't see it.
Story_ID: 35516
Speaker 1: So in San Diego [California], it's hot in the summertime.  My Marines would go and they're marching in that heat.  The California sun, you now, he's not going to protect you from the sun.  You're going to get sunburned.  You're out there.  You're not just running from building to building.  You're marching.  You're out there in that heat all day long.  Well, I would make them put on sunscreen.  I'd make them, and they'd say, "Oh, man.  What are you doing, man.  Your recruits smell like--."  I don't care what they smell like.  But when they're performing, they're protected.  That allows them to perform for me even better.  I taught them how to look the best in their uniform.  I taught them how to appreciate being clean and fresh and sharp and starched and spit shine.  Therefore, they never want to be anything less.  You going to teach yours that at the end of the cycle, and that means they have no respect for it because they haven't had to do it.  Mine have done it every day of the part of their life.  So I found ways to make them soldier for them self (sic), so the Marine Corps could benefit from it, rather than trying to make them soldier for the Marine Corps and nobody benefit for it, because they would say the Marine Corps too hard.  And the next thing you know, you're washing them out.  Somebody, some parent sent their son and daughter to you with the thought that you were going to make them a better person.  Not expose their weaknesses and then send them back a broke person.  And I couldn't do that.  Though my--now, I don't say that as if I was an easygoing drill sergeant.  I had hard demands.  But I had processes of being hard and stages where I had to be nurturing and tutoring and compassionate to my fellow human beings to one day being my battle buddy.
Story_ID: 35517
Speaker 1: Are there competitions (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --in terms of--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  From day one you're competing.  You know, who can get their platoon to march without holding hands first.  Who can--who shoots the best score on the rifle range.  Who fights the best in the circle of pugo sticks where you take your simulated rifles.  They're like big, old Q-tips, and you get in.  You see them on Knock-Out or whatever, and you're fighting.  The platoons are fighting.  Who can win at drill competition.  All of that.  Knowledge competition.  All of that.  But for me, rather than make you fear or be afraid of not knowing something, it was better for me to teach you how to appreciate knowing everything you could know.  So I found motivating ways to get my recruits to absorb the knowledge and retain the knowledge so they could perform the actions.
Speaker 1: So, how do they do in terms of--
Speaker 2: We win everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You couldn't beat us.  And I used your showboating as medicine to make my people better.  I remember I was given a position to lead--to be the senior drill instructor.  It's a big responsibility and a very prestigious responsibility, 'cause you come in as a junior, and you might sit at the junior level and never get to wear the black belt and be the leader of the platoon and of your fellow drill instructors.  They gave me the black belt, and they gave me what they call the fat bodies; all the kids that were not physically ready to go into training.  So they had been at the depot for a few more weeks so they lose their weight.  And when they get at the right weight, then they can go into training.  Now, do you look at that and say, "They gave me all the broke stuff, so now--and given all the other black belts who'd been around a while the best candidates to (perform?)."  You can look at it that way.  I didn't.  I chose to look at it, if that kid just got off the bus, what does he know that you didn't know when you got off the bus at eighteen [years; age]?  What did you know at eighteen [years; age] when you got off that bus?  And the answer to myself was nothing.  Then he knows nothing.  But these kids over here that's been on this depot in this environment know where the chow hall is, know where the laundry is, know where the barracks is at; and they've had to learn to march to get there, because you just can't walk over there.  Once you get there, somebody is working with you to get you (down?).  So, who's really the better candidate?  The one that's been held up for a couple of weeks until they can get his weight down, or the one that just got off the thing, unknown products?  I used that longevity to be a deal breaker, a winner.  So I would look at them and tell them, "You are considered damaged goods.  Theirs are considered the best goods--thing going because they just got off the bus.  But if I told them to face to the right and forward march, and don't stop 'till we get to the dining facility, how many of them would know where the dining facility is?  I can tell you to get in formation and you march them to the dining facility, and I can stand up here and watch, because you know where it's at, and you know how to march."  So I capitalized on what was already there and made and kept you that much ahead.  And you think, now I've been there for three weeks or two weeks, you think I'm not studying the rank structure.  You think I'm not studying the military acronyms?  You just got off the bus.  What do you know about an acronym?  You don't know anything.  You got to learn that stuff.  You already know it.  So all the things you already knew, I make you feel good about it and then make you strive to be, to maintain that.  Bill Belichick, New England Patriots' superiority.  You know you're good, now let's go win.  You know.  And so, you're chewing them out because they can't fire the weapon on target?  I find out what's the difficulty.  What was causing you not to hit the target.  Fix that rather than stand behind you, "You're missing again.  You're missing again."  You know.  Okay.  So, to me, how is that helping?  I'm already disappointed in myself.  I can't fire as well as the person to my right or to my left.  But now I got you standing--I'm on my belly at the prone position firing a weapon down (range?), and all I can hear is you yelling at me about I'm not doing it right.
Story_ID: 35518
Speaker 1: Speaking of yelling, now is it compensatory to call Marine recruits maggots or--?
Speaker 2: At that time, we did use terminology of scumbags and maggots and lowlife, you know.  I would think today they've refined that to a point that--but.  Or you will make them feel the worst they could ever feel.  But I was Big Daddy.  I wore the black belt.  I made you feel good about being there.  I made you feel good that I walk in and you see my presence.  Now, don't think that that was the way it was, because I tell my juniors--I had two juniors that were, you know, "Make their life miserable.  I'm going home today."  Then they come back the next day, "How is life?"  You know, I told the junior drill instructor to make sure you made a phone call home or you got to write a letter, and I know you--why are you not happy, you know, what's going on?  And then you can find out who were the snitches and who wasn't.  (laughs).  You know, they--you know, those things went on.  But my whole compass, focus of that, was to make sure that they understood that my goal was to get them through boot camp, not kicked out of boot camp.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, you were a Drill Instructor in San Diego [California] for how long?
Speaker 2: 1974 to 1976.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's two years.
Story_ID: 35519
Speaker 1: And then what happened?  What was your next assignment?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I was supposed to be three years, but the [U.S.] Marine Corps had a cutback on some things during that time, as you know, as you're familiar with today, draw down to the--withdrawals and cutback.  So they sent me back to the Fleet Marine Force.  Took me out of a training command and sent me back to my military occupation command which was infantry.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the end of the Vietnam War, '74 [1974].  Did that impact what was going on?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Because in '75 [1975], we went to an all-voluntary service.  Now, you're training kids that volunteering to come in compared to young men and women that were forced in through a draft.  Not women, but men that came in to duck the--to get by the draft.  So--
Speaker 1: There is a difference there.
Speaker 2: A big difference.  And people think, well, back in the day, you know.  Boy, I'm going to tell you, I'm not so sure that the draft era was any better or if it would even come close, 'cause you put people in it against their will, if you finally get through to transform them, they did just enough to get by, and then never stayed a day past what they were required to stay.  And when you volunteer for something, you know what's at stake or you expect it's going to be more than a walk in the park, and you endure a little longer and perform a hell of a lot better.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So what did the Marine Corps have in mind for you then?
Speaker 2: I went back to the Infantry.  I went to Camp Pendleton [California]. I'm still on the West Coast in California, called the 7th Marines.  They were going through some very trying times.  But we made it. And then one day, I found out that I didn't belong in the 7th Marines.  My boss or the commander and the sergeant major came over and said, "What are you doing in this command?"  "What do you mean?  I'm an 0369," meaning that I'm an infantryman that had made it to the staff non-commissioned officer ranks, we call staff sergeant, which is a big cut from being a sergeant.  It's a much bigger step than--the biggest step you make in the enlisted rank, to go from NCO [non-commissioned officer] to a staff non-commissioned officer, because the responsibilities are different and the expectations of you being a leader are different.  So my thing was, I'm (unclear), so he gave me some pretty smooth (unclear) about I didn't know what I was doing.  I'm there.  Then he tell me, "You been involuntarily moved out of the infantry into a logistical field."  A field that--it's known as a landing support where they rush ship to shore movements, and air departure field, and load aircraft, and load ships, and work in drop zones when helicopters come in to drop things or take your artillery from one site and flight it by helicopter to another flight.  And you'll see the helicopter appear, and the artillery piece hanging under the middle, or they moving cargo, netting it up.  And so, this was all new to me, you know.  I've been in infantry all my life other than drill instructor.  And now I've got to learn a whole new job that most people learned from their basic days.  But I did, you know.  And I took the same mentality that my platoon was going to be the best platoon out of all six of these platoons in the company, and I was going to be the best leader of the platoons.  And next thing I know, I did that, and I'm now in the Marine Corps about six and a half years, and I decided to get married because now I'm a staff non-commissioned officer.  I can actually afford to marry somebody, and not marry someone and make your daughter, you know, a failure because she got tied up with some guy in the military that couldn't take care of her.  I feel now I can do that.  I've seen the accelerated promotions come.  I'm a staff NCO, I was meritoriously promoted to staff NCO.
Story_ID: 35520
Speaker 1: I was accelerated and promoted to staff sergeant [U.S. Marine Corps], which is a, as I said, a big jump from being an NCO [non-commissioned officer] to a staff non-commissioned officer rather than just a non-commissioned officer [NCO].
Speaker 2: Now, this is a--this also is a juncture where, I guess, a few years before you decided you were going to make a career of the [U.S.] Marines?  You could have just been in for--
Speaker 1: Four years.
Speaker 2: What, four years and left.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But you--and after four years, you decided to stay?
Speaker 1: Well, because I made staff sergeant just as I was coming to the end of my four years.  I came in 1970, I get promoted to staff sergeant 1974.  That's a major.  There's people that's been in the Marine Corps almost twenty years that can't say that they--they're retiring at E-6 staff sergeant.  And here I am, four years, and I'm an E-6 staff sergeant.  My brother had been in two years senior to me, and he's still a pay grade below me.  So I felt proud.  This was a very proud day to become a staff non-commissioned officer in the Marine Corps, and to be accelerated, promoted to that rank.  You know, not just on time, because if it was on time, I probably had to wait another four years before.  And so being a staff sergeant, and they send me to a new MOS [Military Occupational Specialty], and I'm saying, "Okay.  They got me here, now they're going put me in a position where I really become stagnant because they're going to make me start all over at this peak."  Because I don't know this MOS.  I have to learn it, and it's totally different from--
Speaker 2: This is the logistical job [3rd Marine Division, where McMichael served as a shore party chief with the 3rd Division Support Group]?
Speaker 1: The logistical job.  But I learned it.  It wasn't difficult.  I learned it and became good at it.  And then they shipped me off to Okinawa, Japan.  I'm sitting in Okinawa, Japan, as a staff sergeant and someone comes in and they say, "You know, I think you got promoted to gunnery sergeant."  "Are you kidding me?"  I mean, I've been in the Marine Corps six years going on seven years, and now I'm looking at--that's almost a promotion per year.  That's a stripe a year.  That's unheard of, you know.  Well, luckily, it was true.  I was a staff sergeant.  I was a gunnery sergeant.  I was on the promotion list.
Story_ID: 35521
Speaker 1: Now, gunnery sergeant means in the [U.S.] Marine Corps, it doesn't mean that you're just in charge of gunnery or anything.  It's a different--
Speaker 2: No.  It's a E-7.  You go from E-1, E-2, E-3, E-4, E-5, E-6, E-7.  It is one of the most glamorous jobs--ranks in enlisted ranks for Marines, because you get to be hell on wheels.  You're the beans, bullets, bandages.  You're the guy logistically, administratively, motivatively (sic), all is expected of you, you know.  You've got to be the duty expert in everything, at the same time, knowing that there's still more for you to learn by the guys above you.  And we call them the Gunny.  The Gunny runs the show, you know.  The Company Gunnery Sergeant sometimes run the show that makes it so easy for the First Sergeant and the Company Commander that, you know, the Gunny is the highlight of the day.  And so, now, I'm a Gunnery Sergeant and--
Speaker 1: So the gunnery sergeant, from what I understand, makes things--makes sure that things get done?
Speaker 2: Makes sure everything gets done.  A company commander with a good gunnery sergeant is a happy company commander.  I mean, absolutely happy, 'cause the troops are controlled by him, but he connects to the administrative side of the house that is controlled by the first sergeant, who is in charge of the whole company, that the company commander can do their thing and be a commanding officer rather than a confused officer about why is everything falling apart.  We're getting ready to go to field, there's no food for them to take, there's no ammo for them to train with, there's no training area coordinated for them to train on, there's no transportation for them to board to get there.  The company gunny makes sure all of that stuff is done.  That gunnery sergeant, you know.  And when you're good at it, you're good at it.  You're proud of it.  You're the director, you know, action; you know, go.
Story_ID: 35522
Speaker 1: But I felt like staying in the logistic field at that point, because I grasped it easy and I understood it, and I was good at it, but I didn't feel growth, you know.  I didn't--it's got to be something more.  It's got to be.  So I realized that I'd been a drill instructor, which is considered a special duty assignment for the Marine Corps.  You got to be able to climb some--a hell of a high mountain of no's to get to that E-S to go to D.I. School.  Now, I'm getting a little above myself.  I want to go work in embassies.  I want to go--I've heard about this embassy duty where they wear a suit, and they wear--work in these big buildings.  That's kind of my aspiration since a kid.  So found out all the requirements, and I make sure I meet the requirements.  Okay.  I meet and exceed.  So I'm going to apply.  Nope.  No way.  I apply again and find out that I had been accepted, I just hadn't been told yet.  So I'm in Okinawa, Japan.  They find my orders.  They--1979, '78 [1978], I'm married now--it wasn't nine, it was more '78 [1978], and I'm married now--
Story_ID: 35523
Speaker 1: Now, where did you meet your wife?  Can you tell us how you met her?
Speaker 2: San Diego.  In San Diego, California, while I was a drill instructor in San Diego.
Speaker 1: Now, was she someone that was in the [U.S.] Marine Corps?
Speaker 2: No.  She wasn't.  No. Absolutely not.  She had left Richmond, Virginia, to come to live with her sister, who was working at the military base there in San Diego at the depot, and she wanted me to meet her sister.  And I didn't really care about meeting.  Me, I was focused on my career and trying to do--but then I got promoted meritoriously to staff sergeant, and, you know, a year went by and you're not enjoying your accomplishments in your career because you have no one to share it with, you know.  I mean, so you take your accomplishments in the trunk of your car and go home, eat dinner, watch T.V., get up, and go back to work again.  That's not bad, but it was getting old.  You wanted someone to share it with.  And so my wife didn't--I mean, we started dating and three years later we got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so--
Speaker 1: So 1979--
Speaker 2: Well, we got married in 1977.
Speaker 1: '77 [1977].  Okay.  All right.  So you were in Okinawa [Japan] when you got married or was that you were on your way to Okinawa?
Speaker 2: I got married in--don't ask for something in the military, because surely, you're going to get it.  I wanted to ask the question, when was I going overseas.  I'd been in the [U.S.] Marine Corps for seven years, and I'd been to Hawaii, but then the rest of my time I spent three years in Hawaii, and the rest of the time was in Southern California.  Hawaii, California.  Not bad.  Not bad locations for a Marine Corps career.  You know, and you can get all the Marine Corps jargon you want and all of the things, but I want to make sure that if I'm going to marry your daughter, that I'm going to be around to be a husband, not, you know, not a deployed guy that marry, then ship off.  And he say, "No, no, no.  You're going to be there awhile."  This is in July.  I get married in August.  I got orders to leave in September (laughs.)  If I had probably had never said anything, it probably--but I put a--I highlighted myself with a red flag by calling to ask how long is it going to be before I go to sea, and they looked, "Well, this guy has never been--time to get him."  So we married for a year or so, and then sent me overseas to Okinawa, Japan.  Long, horrible year for as, I'd been away from as a newlywed, I'd been away from my wife, but a great year to soldier in that logistic MOS [Military Occupational Specialty] and do the things without any interference.
Story_ID: 35524
Speaker 1: And I came home to go to Embassy School [Marine Security Guard School].  Now, you can apply for Embassy School, but you better have your act together to get selected.  Once you get selected, you better know how to perform, because they're going to send you to an eight-week school to prepare you.  Because 75 percent of the instruction at that time for embassy duty was the State Department Training.  The other 25 percent was [U.S.] Marine Corps training to make sure you understood how to perform as a Marine on embassy duty.  So I get to the school, I didn't graduate from the school, my wife and I get orders to Pakistan.  I'm sorry.  Bogota.
Speaker 2: Columbia?
Speaker 1: Columbia.  But they have a bombing at the embassy.  So they changed my orders to Copenhagen, Denmark.  So I go to Copenhagen.  We get to Copenhagen and then my wife gets pregnant, so--or find out she's pregnant.  So now we're in a foreign country.  We really haven't had a lot of time together as husband and wife, 'cause after we got married I went off to Okinawa, Japan.  Now, we're back and she's expecting.  And my daughter was born there in Copenhagen.  The doctors were superb.
Story_ID: 35525
Speaker 1: And I'm working at the American embassy.  I'm not really at a Marine Corps environment.  I'm working in the embassy, the United States of America's embassy, going to work every day in a coat and tie in a big building.  Boy, did I think I had arrived.  This is--this is all that I've--this is what I was striving to be.  Someday be able to have my own office, running, you know.  I'm on the third deck with the ambassador.  The ambassador comes down and everyday we're having conversations.  I'm providing security to make sure our ambassador is safe, and the people, the diplomats in this building are safe, and my Marine detachment is conducting themselves properly.  The Marine detachment was pretty low on the totem pole.  Out of all the embassies in the world, I think they were like third or fourth from the bottom of the worst embassy in the world.  We ended up being number one.  The number one embassy, because you come in and retool and reshape, get rid of the garbage, implement new stuff, better stuff; and then treat them (unclear).  Then I ended up being Deck Commander of the Year.  So my--my Marines were awarded, I was awarded, you know.  The show gets an Oscar, but the lead--you know, you don't get anything, but I got selected as the Deck Commander of the year.  Before my Marines did it, I didn't want it.  How can you make me the Deck Commander and you don't make them the number one detachment?  But the process was still--the system was still going.  So they ended up being the best detachment, I was the best NCO [non-commissioned officer].
Story_ID: 35526
Speaker 1: And from there, you know, this was during the Iranian--Ayatollah Khomeini era.
Speaker 2: Right.  That was in 1979.  I guess, for the record, that the Ayatollah Khomeini--
Speaker 1: Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 2: The--I mean, Islamists under his, I guess, his influence surrounding the American Embassy took hostages, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: There was what, how many?  Twenty or something?
Speaker 1: Hundred and twenty-some hostages.  American hostages for 440-something days of captivity.
Speaker 2: Jimmy Carter is the president.
Speaker 1: Jimmy Carter is our president, and we're bringing--we had two releases.  First release, we brought the African American and females home, because they didn't want to keep them, and they kept all the Caucasians there in (unclear).  I was part of the--the part that brought--that was working from Denmark to get them there.  Our information people were working, and I'll never forget it.  We went to meet the hostages, the first group, the African American and females, and they landed in Denmark, and you go up on the plane, the commandant and everybody has told us how to approach them.  And I get a call that night, and my mom [Rosa McMichael] said, "Boy, I saw you on T.V.  What you doing?  You in trouble?"  (laughs).  I said, "No, Ma.  I'd doing what you would want me to do.  I'm trying to do well.  I'm trying to do some good things."  So she was very proud of the fact that I was working in an American embassy during a time when our country was experiencing hostages taken from--and then--
Speaker 2: And it was also a time, just to point out, a time when you saw a young African American man on television, he usually was in trouble.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Absolutely.  And then, you know, you're going through a lot of changes.  But Jimmy Carter left office.  [President] Ronald Reagan came in.  They released the hostages and they all came home.
Story_ID: 35527
Speaker 1: And at that time, the [U.S.] Marine Corps decided to bring me home from the American embassy in Denmark, and they thought they would bring me home and make me and instructor at Quantico [Virginia], at the school that trained Marines to go to embassy duty.  So now I'm back in the training mode again.  So now, 1981, I'm at the Marine Security Guard School and having a good time.  Every so many days you bring in a hundred-plus students to go through the training.  These are quality guys.  They've been drill instructors.  They've been recruiters.  They've been top-notch infantryman.  They've done all these things.  And they come to this school and can't get past--can't get through it.  So I wanted to change that image.  If you were good enough to qualify to get to this school, then I should be strong enough to find a way to get you through the school.  So I worked diligently every day to keep my students, because they take the class of students and break them up amongst seven other instructors.  And each one of the instructors have their group of people that they work with so that they can graduate.  I took pride in trying to get all of mine, not to graduations, but to be successful when they went out to their embassy, wherever it may be, out of the 300 and some-hundred embassies we had at that time around the world.  And I always knew that I was successful when they were--talked about bringing one of my students back to be an instructor.  Not that just my teaching made him that, but somewhere I had given them the right tools to succeed and to survive in a very demanding--because you're not a Marine anymore.  You just can't turn to another Marine and say, "Hey, Joe.  How do we do this?"  You know, you're turning to a diplomat who (unclear) really cared whether you were out there or not.  You're just a guy in the military in my way, you know. And to bridge those relationships was always magical to me.  To get the embassy people to fall in love with my Marines, to respect what we do, and to work with us, was always a challenge for me that I was willing to take on.  And we succeeded in that.  So I finished up at the instructor staff at the school, training Marines to go to embassy duty.
Story_ID: 35528
Speaker 1: And so now, I have to go back to the logistics side of the house.  Go back and do logistics.  And, "Man, I think I can do that with my eyes closed.  I'm going to do something else."  So I ended up at the University of Minnesota.  I go to the University of Minnesota--
Speaker 2: Now, what year is this now?
Speaker 1: 1983.
Speaker 2: Okay.  University of Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  March of--May of '83 [1983].  And I get to the University of Minnesota, and now I'm an instructor to train and educate college students to become officers in the Naval Service; in the [U.S.] Navy or the [U.S.] Marine Corps [McMichael was the Assistant Marine Officer Instructor for the NROTC (U.S. Naval Reserve Officers' Training Corps) Program].  And we had a battalion of about 360 midshipmen.  Eighteen of them were destined to go to Marine Corps.  The rest of them were going to the Navy.  So we started working with them.  I'm very proud of these young kids.  They got to be smart, they're in college.  They're in the University of Minnesota.  It's not a bad school to be saying that you're getting your degree from.  And--but one thing that I didn't like, is that the eighteen that wanted to be my replacement or to be my future boss, thought they were better than the other 300-plus midshipmen that wanted to go in the Navy.  So every competition, you're competing with other universities around the world.  I only had eighteen bodies to compete with, whether it's physical fitness, whether it was shooting, whether it was drilling.  It was always just those eighteen.  Intramural competition.  And I'm looking around campus and I'm looking at formation, and there's 360-plus people here, surely we can find more talented people than we have just in 18.  Let's cast the net.  So I investigated the instruction, and it didn't say I was there to train Marines.  It said I was there for ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] instruction.  That meant every kid in that school that was in the ROTC program, ROTC program, was available to play on my team.  We went from a losing team to winning everything on the national level, because I started to get more talent from a bigger basket, rather than thinking, "Well, I'm a Marine, so I'm only going to deal with the Marine options, the one--."  And that, I always had to remind them.  "They call you a Marine option.  Because you've taken the option to be a Marine, doesn't mean you are one, see.  I have to make you a Marine.  But while we're making you a Marine, I'm going to let you understand all your other sisters and brothers here at this university that could be an asset to you."  So we went on and it turned out to be great.
Story_ID: 35529
Speaker 1: Some of my midshipmen went on to be admirals and generals in the [U.S.] Marine Corps.  Very proud of them.  A lot of them I stay in contact with today, working for IBM and other big corporations around America.  But they still call, and they still--now that they call me Sergeant Major, but they used to still call me "Gunny."  One of my midshipmen, he was the commander of the--of his peers.  He was the senior one that was in charge.  And I always thought he was very good.  And his girlfriend, who now is his wife, was very good.  She went to be a JAG [Judge Advocate General's Corps] officer.  He went on to be a great Naval officer himself (unclear).  His father was the Ambassador in Iran, captured in Iran; Chip Langley.  And I meet him at the military base in Virginia, at Fort Myer.  We were shopping in the commissary.  And he sees me, he says, "Gunny."  And I said, "Midshipman."  We had to laugh about that because now I'm the Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps, but he still remembers that was my Gunny when I was going through basic training.  And I say to him, how is Laura, how she doing.  How did law school work out for her.  He said, "You remember that?"  "Yeah.  I remember that, because you were not just my work.  You were part of my life.  I invested in you guys.  You know, I wanted you to succeed."  At that time, he was a writer for the Secretary of the Navy, and you know, he was a Navy captain, still looking good, still just as I'd expect him to be, a front-runner, a long ball hitter.  A very polished, intelligent Naval officer.  And just to see of all he had accomplished and what he was still getting ready to accomplish made me feel very, very proud of him.  And I was sitting on a board, with an organization called "Call for Duty."  They make video games that kids buy and play with every day.  And he said--he was from Minnesota.  And he said--and I told him about my tour and the university.  "Do you know, I know it's a small world and you probably--probably don't even know this individual, but did you know a guy named Chip Langley?"  And I, "Yeah.  I know him well.  He was one of my midshipmen."  "You got to be kidding me."  He just threw it out there because he and Chip were good friends, and we went through that on the elevator. Just on the elevator, you know that--to have a good elevator speech?  In that, we went through Chip's whole life from the time we went from the third floor to the lobby, because he was excited that he threw the name out there and I really knew him.  And we got it going, and I asked about his wife and his kid, and he, wow.  But, you don't engage in these kids' life and they're not kids, but, you know, they're either your future boss or your fellow battle buddy.  You don't just think of them as an acquaintance that you--you know, really become connected.
Story_ID: 35530
Speaker 1: So I left the University of Minnesota [McMichael was the Assistant Marine Officer Instructor for the NROTC (U.S. Naval Reserve Officers' Training Corps) Program] in 1986.  And I left because--what happened, I was--it was '86 [1986] and I was--a good friend of mine called who I was in logistic field with.  And he called me up and he said, "Hey, man, I hear you out in Minnesota."  I said, "Yeah."  He says, "How is it working in a college environment with those college kids?"  "It's great, you know.  You get to shape and mold them and let them know that we're not bad people because we wear a uniform, and, you know, trying to get through to some of the battle scars that Vietnam let on our society, and being in Minnesota, that's even a bigger challenge as you probably could imagine, being in Minnesota and you're talking about you were in the military during the Vietnam era."  And he said, "You know the promotion board is out."  "Hey, yeah."  And say, "I tell you what, good luck, man."  He said, "Naw, naw, you should call and see if you got promoted."  I said, "Look, I'm a gunnery sergeant, you know.  And I've only got about thirteen years in the [U.S.] Marine Corps, so they're not going to make me--promote me to master sergeant or first sergeant."  Said, "You should call and check."  So I called headquarters, Marine Corps, based on his pushing and demanding.  And the lady that runs the promotion board, as she tells the story at her retirement last year, after forty-something years of working in that field, and she says, "Want to tell you about this young man who later ended up being Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps.  He called me up and said, 'My name is Al McMichael.  I want to check to see if I'm on the promotion list.'"  And she said, "What's your last four--I give her my social security number, and she checks and said, 'Naw, baby, you're not on the Master Sergeant List.'"  In the Marine Corps, when you go from gunnery sergeant to E-8, you take a path.  You can either be the first sergeant or the master sergeant.  We're the only service that do that.  We got a two-track.  You can take the first sergeant route or you can take the master sergeant route.  First sergeant means that you're going to be responsible for the company in whole; the master sergeant route means that you're going to continue to be the keepers of your military occupation.   You're--it's almost like you become a master sergeant, you got license to say I got my Ph.D. in this job; whether it's making eyeglasses or putting heels on shoes.  I've been doing this since I joined all my whole career, and I'm going to do it until I get out.  So there's nothing in this job that I don't know.  The first sergeant has to give up all of that he's learned over those years and move into a more executive side of it, trying to dilute or--and look into the policy and regulations and what's the next step for him to go.  But the master sergeant continues to look at that product.  So anyway, she looks at the promotion list and tells me the bad news, said, no, I wasn't selected master--I'm perfectly happy with that.  I only got thirteen years in the Marine Corps.  No big deal.  I shouldn't be getting promoted anyway.  So she said, "But--," I said, "Well, thank you Miss J., I appreciate--."  She said, "Naw, wait a minute, baby.  Wait a minute.  You a--they made you a first sergeant."  "What".  I'm first--you know, I'm here at the University of Minnesota teaching midshipmen, I've been drill instructor, I've been on embassy duty, I've been in the infantry, I've been logistics; and now you tell me I'm a first sergeant.  So I'm feeling good.  And I'm saying, "Well, wow.  I'm not foreign to being promoted ahead of my peers, you know, it's kind of been a track record for me.  So I said, "How many they promote--."  I said, "What's my number," which tells you when you're going to get promoted.   She said, "76."  I said, well, 76, that's not bad, you know.   I said, "How many they promote?"  She, "76."  (unclear).  Well, that's 75 people better than me.  I didn't understand the promotion process.  It wasn't about who was better than you.  It was about your longevity.  And there was many, many of them in that field that may not have had the qualifications.  So they had to reach down and get someone else.  They reached down and pulled me up.  Well, quite naturally if they going to pull out of the non-select zone to put you in the selected zone, you're going to be at the bottom.  So, then I realized, "What?  Are you not grateful for the fact that you get the opportunity to be a first sergeant of Marines?  Come on, you got to be kidding me."  So I retooled my mindset instantly and said, "Wow.  That's pretty good, because if I go to work for you as a company commander, now you and I are--I don't work for this, I work for that company commander.  I am your right hand, and the gunny is my right hand."  So I'm saying, "They don't know if I was 76 or number 1.  All you going to know when I walk in that command is that I'm your first sergeant.  And you're not going to say, 'Well, McMichael, you get to make all the mistakes in the world because you were the last one selected.'  You ain't going to say that.  I walk in there the first sergeant, you're going to expect one thing of me: performance of a first sergeant."
Story_ID: 35531
Speaker 1: So, I leave there.  I get--leave the University of Minnesota [McMichael was the Assistant Marine Officer Instructor for the NROTC (U.S. Naval Reserve Officers' Training Corps) Program], go to school, and end up in Okinawa, Japan, again.
Speaker 2: This is as a first sergeant, right?
Speaker 1: As the first sergeant.  Now, I'm getting ready to get my first assignment as a first sergeant.  And I'm in Okinawa, Japan.  There's four jobs open for first sergeant.  And all the other guys that were selected with me, they want these jobs, but they don't want the job that's left on the table.  And that was a reconnaissance job, to be recon.  They want the other job, and they get them.  But I take the recon job.
Story_ID: 36696
Speaker 1: But in Okinawa [Japan], I became First Sergeant of 3rd Reconnaissance Company--Charlie [C] Company (ph.), and Charlie Company was a struggling company.  Turning the company around was a lot of fun.  We became the standard of what was supposed to be--we kind of thought that, at that time, Okinawa had an image of just running and having a good time.  But I wanted to get back to the basics.  Keep in mind, I'd been at these training environment--boot camp, drill instructor, embassy duty, NROTC [U.S. Naval Reserve Officers' Training Corps], and OCS, Officer Candidate, and all this stuff.  So I wanted to make sure that we didn't lose what it meant being a [U.S.] Marine.  The sergeant major left a little early, and the commanding officer had been my boss when I was on embassy duty as an instructor teaching at the Marine Security Guard School.  So he made me the sergeant major--interim sergeant major.  So as a first sergeant, so the battalion got to live my life through my eyes rather than, say, only Charlie Company get to do that because McMichael's over there now.  McMichael is the acting sergeant major, so we're all going to do it.  We're going to do it together.  But it turned out to be a very successful tour, and I was assigned to a place from Okinawa to 1996.
Story_ID: 36697
Speaker 1: I left Okinawa [Japan] in '96 [1996; was it 1986?] and went to a place called Roosevelt Roads [Naval Station] in Puerto Rico.  And it was a Marine barracks that Puerto Rico provided security for installations there on the Naval Base.  And after--now, I've got my second job as a first sergeant, and all these young Marines coming to Roosevelt Roads right out of basic training and trying to teach them how to be security at the gates and at buildings and secure this installation, Naval installation that had one of the biggest hospitals on it there in the Caribbeans [islands].  Was a great job watching young kids grow, young men, especially Marines coming to Puerto Rico.  The last time they seen a girl in--that thought they were somebody was probably their senior prom, and they had to buy a corsage and a limousine to get them to go to prom with them.  Now they come to Puerto Rico, fit, you know, healthy, standing the gate.  Young, beautiful Puerto Rican girls coming through, they all want to date, they all want to get married, and so forth, and you got to convince them that it is not the time.  It's not the right time.  Not that you can't get married, but it's not--you're not ready to take someone's daughter under your wing and give them at least what their father or mother can give them.  Unless you can do that, I have no problem with it.  So what I would do was have them and their future fiancee or their fiance since last night, to come and see me, and I would put them a little sequence of questioning, you know.  And I tell how lovely she is.  That was always without question.  And, but I would ask, "Where you going to live?"  And they would tell me, "Well, I'm going to be with," whatever his name was, and I said, "Fine.  Let me ask you this:  how much discretionary money do you have?"  Well, she has no idea.  All she knows that when he comes over, he can take her to Pizza Hut, he can take her to Burger King.  They can go out in town and buy dinner, and then he takes her back home.  And I said, "The problem with that is, I'm looking at you, your nails are extremely beautiful, you have your toes painted, you have lipstick on, you have your hair done, and you're dressed quite eloquently."  Now, then she would look at me and say, "Yes.  I take great pride in myself."  I say, "Okay.  Now, I just ask you to follow this."  And I shift to the Marine and say, "How much does a bottle of nail polish cost?"  "I don't know."  "How much does a pair of pantyhose cost?"  "I don't know."  "How much does it goes to have her go to the salon and get her hair done?"  "I don't know."  "You have to know, because that is your discretionary funding that you've been buying dinners with.  All that dinner that you've been wooing her with?  Now has to go into maintaining her."  And then I'd turn to her and say, "Do you want--you come as a ready packaged, all glamoured, and he's going to take you and take you into mediocre, 'cause then you got to take your nail polish off, you got to take this off, (unclear).  So he makes you normal because he can only keep you there.  So think about it."  You know, I never would tell them not to get married.  I just make reality.  Make them realize that what they were getting ready to face from a financial standpoint, from the responsibilities standpoint.  "And, when you guys get ready, I'd love to get that invitation to your wedding."  Two days later, I say, "Well, what did your fiancee say?  Ya'll think of that?"  "Well, we're not dating anymore.  I mean, we're not--."  So, you know, you kind of deter that with facts, real cold, hard facts that the young lady can understand.  And, of course, the Marines only got one thing on his mind.  "I got a beautiful girl on my arm, and I'm going to go back to the States and say, 'I snatched one,'" and then three years or so later, he's probably sending her back or she's run off 'cause he can't--.  I didn't want someone's daughter to go through that simply because he was in a moment of lust or whatever the case may be. So I had to be hardcore and lay those things out so they could both see them.  Whether they can do those things today or not, but I did them.  And it slowed down the marriage way and prevented some of them from getting married without telling them they couldn't get married, because all they were thinking about, "Well, you only got $25 at the end of the week, and you're taking me out for $15 of it, and then you know, you got to get your hair cut, and da-da-da-da-da.  But if I were your wife, I'd have to get my hair done, and what's left for me?"  "There's nothing left for you, sweetheart.  Nothing but hard times, 'cause that's all he can offer you."
Story_ID: 36698
Speaker 1: So I left there, [Roosevelt Roads Naval Station] Puerto Rico, in '88 [1988] short.  I was supposed to be there for three years, and I got sent to Southern California as a Deputy Director of the--
Speaker 2: Is this--I'm sorry.  Is this '88 [1988] or '98 [1998]?
Speaker 1: '98 [1998].  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: '98 [1998].  Okay.
Speaker 1: And I leave there, and--no.  It's '80 [1980]--it's '88 [1988].  It's '88 [1988].
Speaker 2: It's '88 [1988].  Okay.
Speaker 1: No.  We ain't in '90 [1990] yet.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you're in Okinawa [Japan] from '86 [1986] to--
Speaker 1: No, I was in Okinawa from '87 [1987] to '86 [1986].
Speaker 2: '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  '87 [1987] to '86 [1986], I was in Okinawa.  I left Okinawa and I went to Puerto Rico.
Speaker 2: And then in '87 [1987] and '86 [1986] is--I mean '86 [1986] to '87 [1987]?
Speaker 1: No.  I'm sorry, '85 [1985] to '86 [1986].
Speaker 2: '85 [1985] to '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: '85 [1985] to '86 [1986].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Then, that's when I got selected as first sergeant .
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  All right.  I'm sorry.  I just want to make sure.
Speaker 1: Then I go from Okinawa to Puerto Rico.
Speaker 2: Southern California.
Speaker 1: Mm-mm.  And then from Puerto Rico to Southern California in Orange County.  So I'm north of Camp Pendleton now.  I'm moving on up.  Then I get there and I become the Deputy Director of the Leadership Academy in Puerto Rico--I mean, in El Toro, California.  And it's an academy where seasoned Marines, NCOs [non-commissioned officers], and staff non-commissioned officers come to strengthen their leadership talent.  And I'm teaching and I've got a staff there.  And once again, I get to dress up and go to a big building with an office, my office, you know.  And so my dream is every day been fulfilled in different ways, you know.  So, I'm working there, and then as the Deputy Director, as the First Sergeant--keep in mind, I was the First Sergeant in Recon [Reconnaissance], and then I was the First Sergeant in Puerto Rico; now, I'm a First Sergeant in Southern California, the Deputy Director.  So I've got three billets that I've the opportunity to serve and hone my craft as a first sergeant.  You know, I'm in the minors--to become a sergeant major they're going to move me into the major league.  I'm playing big boys with the sergeant major.  But I--lot--but what had happened, when I get ready to move, I've had enough experience down there.  My batting average is really good that I should be able to handle sergeant major work.  Well, I'm in Puerto Rico.  It's '88 [1988].  I go back to California, and they make me the Deputy Director of the academy.  I get selected sergeant major, 1989.  I'm sergeant major.  Are you kidding me?  I'm, you know.  I ain't even twenty years [in the U.S. Marines] yet.  I'm, you know, I'm first--I'm the sergeant major of [U.S.] Marines.  And now, what are they going to do with it?  Are they going to send me down the street back to Camp Pendleton, south of--north of San Diego, south of El Toro.  And "No.  We're going to make you the director.  You're going to take over the school."  "Whoa."  "Taking over the Staff Noncommissioned Officers Academy, you're going to take over the academy here and be the director of the academy."  There were a lot of senior sergeant majors there that was heading the other academies across the country, now here's one that just got promoted that's going to lead the academy on the West Coast.
Story_ID: 36699
Speaker 1: And I was very proud of that and worked very hard to make all of these students that came through the arches of that academy [Staff Noncommissioned Officers Academy, El Toro, California] knowledgeable.  And I wanted to help them be successful, 'cause if they graduate from this academy, their careers would stay on track.  If they failed the academy, it was for sure their career was going to find some derailing, if not, come to an end.  Don't want to do that.  These are individuals that had anywhere from six years to fifteen years in the military, you know, that was going to school to make sure they had what they needed to get the next promotion to stay in for more longevity.
Speaker 2: Was it very likely in those days that somebody actually would wash out of that?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  Yes.  Very much so.  You know, and it was as much a physical fitness academy as it was an academic academy.  Even though, I believed in physical fitness, I strived on getting them the education to be a leader.  That's what the academy was.  It was a leadership academy.  And so we worked--
Speaker 2: These guys--no, but these [U.S.] Marines are in their what, late twenties or early thirties [age]?
Speaker 1: Early thirties.
Speaker 2: Early thirties.
Speaker 1: Some of them in their early twenties.  The academy didn't--wasn't just a course.  It was a course that took corporals, it was a course that took sergeant E-5, it was a course that took staff sergeants, and it was a course that took gunnery sergeants.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I was just thinking about the physical fitness aspect of it--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and how old they were, I guess.
Speaker 1: Well, in the Marine Corps, it didn't really matter.  They had one size fit all in the Marine Corps.  So you don't get to say, you know, "I'm a twenty-year veteran."  You're in the NFL [National Football League], you're a twenty-year veteran, they trade you 'cause they say you can't keep up with the, you know, with the guy that's going to the (unclear).  Or you can't keep up with our new rookie here.  In the [U.S.] Marine Corps, the older you get, the more expected of you.  You got to lead those guys, you know.  So they don't give you a watered-down version of physical fitness.  That's why you see some of these old Marines walk around with so many injuries 'cause they're so busy trying to compete with our eighteen year olds, and our twenty years old, and our twenty-five--I'm forty-eight years old.  I'm trying to compete, you know, I'm out there leading kids that half my age, but I still got to be out front.  You know, I don't get to say "Do as I say."  I get the, "They do as I do.  Follow me."  And I enjoy every bit of that.  I loved that school.  I mean, to me I was like, I'm at the top.  So then it came then, now I'm a sergeant major.  I'm running the academy, and I get orders.  And I'm supposed to go to the [U.S.] Naval Academy to teach at the Naval Academy.  But they get cancelled, and they send me to Quantico, Virginia.  And I go to Quantico as the sergeant major of Officer Candidate School, young kids coming out of college that want to be officers in the Marine Corps.  And I had a wonderful tour there working with these kids.  Some of them came in for twelve weeks; some came for eight weeks; some came in the wintertime; some came in the summertime.  These kids are all college graduates.  They walk in--they're unbelievable.  My commanding officer was a Medal of Honor recipient.  For the first year and a half that I ended up with a great commanding officer who ended up retiring as a 3-star general, and we--nurtured these young kids.  Some of them couldn't make it through Officer Candidate School, and people wanted to wash them out.  And my thing was, if they can't make it, we should praise them for at least trying, because tomorrow they not be a be a Marine officer, but they just might be a representative of this nation.  They may be the person that's working in the halls of [U.S.] Congress.  They may be a representative in the Senate.  If we abuse or bruise their ego here because they didn't make it in an environment that nobody--everybody is not supposed to make it, and they go on to do something else, we'll never tap into that value.  That was my thinking.
Speaker 2: So what year is this?  This is '89 [1989]?
Speaker 1: No, no.  It's '91 [1991], '92 [1992].
Speaker 2: '92 [1992].  Okay.  '91 [1991], '92 [1992].
Speaker 1: No.  I stayed there until '94 [1994]; '91 [1991].
Story_ID: 36700
Speaker 1: Now, the Gulf War is going on during this time.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Yeah.  The Gulf War started before I left California.  The Gulf War started in 1990.  But I was there at the academy [Staff Noncommissioned Officers Academy] to keep the pipeline of leaders.  Then I went from there to Officer Candidate School to keep that pipeline of officer leadership going.  And so, yes, you're exactly right, the Gulf War was going on.  And my brother, who had just left, Camp Pendleton, California.  Now, he'd been to Vietnam, now he's on his way to Desert Storm/Desert Shield.  So he comes back from Desert Storm/Desert Shield and he's in Camp Pendleton, and I'm at El Toro, California.  We're about, you know, thirty-five minutes away from each other.  But now, we're both senior leaders in the military, enlisted part of the Marine Corps.  And we're really close with each other.  And on the return back from Desert Storm/Desert Shield, my brother gets promoted to sergeant major.  Now you have two Sergeant Major McMichaels in the Marine Corps, you know.  And we were very proud of that, even though we never really served together.  He was always somewhere else, and I was somewhere different from him.  And my tour at OCS [Officer Candidate School] came to an end.  I was supposed to stay there for two years, and I ended up staying three.  And I left there in July of 1994.  We were in conflict with North Korea.  [President] Jimmy Carter went over and resolved the issue.
Story_ID: 36701
Speaker 1: And I left to go back to Okinawa, Japan, but the difference this time, I was going with my wife and child.  I was going as a family.  In '94 [1994] to '96 [1996], I stayed in Okinawa with an organization called the 31st MEU, the Marine Expeditionary Unit, Special Operations Capable, and became Sergeant Major of that.  And, you know, deployed with on a big deck called a--on our ship, and we went out and we came back, and then the next thing I know, I was being reassigned again, and I became the Sergeant Major--didn't leave Okinawa, but I became the Sergeant Major of First Marine Aircraft Wing and all of the aviation components for Hawaii, Okinawa, Japan, in Iwakuni.  So I had a big radius to cover, you know, and a lot of our stuff was deployed down in Australia.  So I got to see that part of the world as the Sergeant Major of 1st Marine Aircraft Wing.  But then in November of 1996, I get orders to leave Okinawa and return to Washington, D.C.  And Washington, D.C., I came back to be the Sergeant Major of Manpower and Reserve Affairs, and that's the part of the Marine Corps that detects--controls your assignments, your pay, your program--any programs other than operational, we were in charge.  The Marine Corps had about eighty-three programs at that time, and I was destined to learn all of them.  I wanted no rock unturned.  I didn't want no orders that I wasn't aware of.  I wanted to be the duty expert so when I went with you and did things with you as my commanding general, at this point, I'm working for a 3-star general now.  I'm no longer working for company commanders or battalion commanders or regimental commanders.  I'm working for flag officers (unclear).  In Okinawa, I worked for my first general officer at 1st Marine Aircraft Wing.  So now, I'm bringing all of my knowledge of being an infantryman, being a logistics guy, being on embassy duty, being a drill instructor, being at the academy [Staff Noncommissioned Officers Academy], being at the university [University of Minnesota; NROTC (U.S. Naval Reserve Officers' Training Corps) instructor], being at OCS [Officer Candidate School]; of this stuff now, I get to be at decision-maker rather than an executor.  I get to shape these programs, were based on how I think that they could best prosper.  So I no longer had to ask somebody why can't we have orders shaped like this so we can get better crop.  How can we--we can do this.  So now I'm at a position where I'm truly a conductor, I thought.  So I'm there enjoying every bit.  The Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps is one step away from me, and he goes out and he works with the Commandant in the Marine Corps, the Senior Officer of the Marine Corps; and they're talking to the troops about orders, they're talking about the next program, they're talked about the status of a program, they're talking about exceptional family members, they're talking about suicide, they're talking about budget cuts, they're talking about assignments, they're talking about next location that we might have to send people to.  All of these things.  I was good at it.  I knew these things.  I was--I took great pride in it.
Speaker 2: Now, was this at the Pentagon, itself?
Speaker 1: Well, it was at Quantico [Virginia].  We moved--
Speaker 2: Quantico.  Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --we moved--we were across the street from the Pentagon at the Navy Annex, and they are tearing that down now.  But right there by the Sheridan Hotel on 995, 395.  So we moved to Quantico in '97 [1997] in a building there.  And that's where the Headquarters, Marine Corp real (unclear)--I call it the HR of the Marine Corps, because that was where all the manpower stuff was seen.  If you got orders as a general officer, if I got orders as (unclear), how many people we needed recruited off the streets of America, we were recruiting 40,000 men and women a year from the schools and churches and playgrounds of America.  I was there to help orchestrate that.  That was what my job was.
Story_ID: 36702
Speaker 1: And so now, it turns into 1999.  I'm feeling very good about this.  I'm getting close to retirement now.  This is Manpower [and Reserve Affairs Division] Sergeant Major.  I can go home.  I had bought a house out the back gate of Quantico, Virginia.  I'm going to stay in Virginia.  I can just, boom, go straight out this gate and take my retirement papers, my DD2-14 that tells you everything I did in the [U.S.] Marine Corps and all the schools I attended or what my DNA is, you now.  Can't lie about the DD2-14.  I can read a resume or bio, it might say something, but that DD2-14 doesn't lie.  So I'm ready to get my DD2-14, head out the gate and maybe somebody might give me a job.  I've been at Manpower Marine Corps.  Well, in 1999, the summer of 1999, I was selected as Sergeant Major of the entire Marine Corps.  Everything changes.
Speaker 2: Now, is there--do you know how that happened?
Speaker 1: In the process--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of selecting the Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps.  There's a cutoff of all the sergeant majors in the Marine Corps.  They'll say the top 100 are actually qualified.  They've been working in a flag general officer's level.  They've had certain billets or jobs that they've accomplished or achieved that puts them in--and then there's a short list, as we call it of five finalists.  And the incoming commandant, the guy that's going to run the Marine Corps for the next four years, gets that five names, and he looks at them and decides which one best fits what he wants to accomplish.  It's kind of--I won't put it on the same level, but it's kind of like getting your vice-president on your ticket, you know what I mean.  Okay.  And this guy soldiering me so we can get to where we need to go or not, you know.  "Can you help me accomplish the things that I want to accomplish in the Marine Corps or not."  And out of that five, that short list, I was selected.  And, of course, there was a lot of buzz going around the Marine Corps probably when I was at Manpower being the senior African American sergeant major at that time, that maybe the Marine Corps will select an African American a sergeant major this time, you know.  Sergeant Major McMichael probably'll get it.  He, you know--that was some of the rumors that were going around the Marines.  You know how people start putting that stuff out there.  They campaign for you better than you can campaign for yourself.  And it wasn't something I wasn't campaigning for, but when it was time to interview, I went to meet the incoming commandant, who was General James L. Jones, who became the commandant, and then later, ended up being the Supreme Allied Commander for NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] and first Marine officer to do that.  And then ended up being President [Barack] Obama's National Security Advisor during his first term.  So General Jones selected me as the 14th Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps, and we took off on our mission--
Story_ID: 36703
Speaker 1: What is Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps, and now, this really separates you from all the other sergeant majors in--but what are your--well, explain the rank and explain the duties and why there're only fourteen in the entire history of the [U.S.] Marine Corps.  I mean at that point.
Speaker 2: At that point, it was only fourteen because the billet (ph.) was only created in 1957, and the commandant of the [U.S.] Marine Corps needed to connect with the majority of his Marines which are enlisted.  And he didn't have anyone to make that connection for him.  He could talk to general officers, he can talk to officers all day; but unless you are with the mailroom guys, the receptionist, you don't know what they need or how they need to be done.  So the billet was created to be an asset to the commandant and to bring the message of needs to the commandant from the people that the Commandant led.  As Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps, you're selected out of a group, an elite group of other people.  Any one of the five of you could actually do the job.  But the commandant chooses--selects the one that he feels that can be the best personality, the best temperament, and so forth.  You take that job with a platform of what you want to do and how you want to do it, and lock step with what the commandant's vision is, and the commandant's vision was to strengthen the Marine Corps family, then to strengthen the operational side of the Marine Corps, to be more effective training to our Marines so they're better prepared for combat if we're ever asked to do again.  You testify before [U.S.] Congress twice a year, most of the time on the quality of life of the Marine Corps, the state of the Marine Corps, all the issues that you feel that Congress can help you with, and all the things that you have done successfully, and you want to make sure Congress know that it was a success, and you want to thank them for that so that you can get more of it.  You take the message of the commandant out to the world.  Most people think that the message of the Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps is just to Marines.  But I found the most effective way to take the message out of the Marine Corps was not just to the Marines who look like you, think like you, think like you, and act like you, but to the people that Marines come from, our civilian organizations, the non-military organizations, the (unclear) Club, the Chambers of Commerces (sic), and schoolhouses and things, so they cannot have a misconception of what today's military is about or what the Marine Corps in today is about, though.  And then be able to articulate that message at a moment's notice, because you never know where the Commandant is going to be somewhere and they turn to you, and be able to deal with the media from a positive standpoint.  Never be bashful to talk about what your Marines are doing, as long as you're not giving away trade secrets that can put another service member or their family in jeopardy.  Sergeant Major Corps has to be open enough that it's not just about the Marine Corps, but it's about how the Marine Corps fits within the armed services of a great nation.  And then, he never can, or she one day it will be, a thought process that it's all about the Marines.  That means, that wear the uniform.  To me, it's about the whole entire Marine family; the wife, the spouse, whether either a husband or a wife, and the children.  And as long as you can shape things in the Marine Corps to fit the Marine family, in include the civilians that work side by side with us every day.  Those civilians who may have never one day wore the uniform, but they wore the badge of honor of being a Marine and working in Marine environment, because everything they do, they want to make sure if they're a part of it, it assisted the Marine, not only to go to war, but to come home alive.  Not only to have a weapon to fight with, but one to win the fight with.  Those are what our civilian Marines do, and one-third of them have never--one-third of the Marine family is our civilian, and they've never worn a uniform.  But I will tell you, nobody knows or care or love or more dedicated than Marine Corps than the what we call our civilian Marine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Story_ID: 36704
Speaker 1: So, this is 2000, '99 [1999] or 2000?
Speaker 2: '99 [1999] to 2003.
Speaker 1: 2003.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I had the privilege of being the [14th] Sergeant Major of the [U.S.] Marine Corps.  And as you know, as Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps, once you have hit the pinnacle of your career, there's nothing else.  You know, you leave, you go home, and you're happy that for the rest of your life, you'll be known as the Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps, you know.  Not a sergeant major.  Not just a Marine.  But you are the Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps.  It didn't happen that way for me.  In 2003, upon ready to retire and leaving the Marine Corps as Sergeant Major of the Corps, I asked to stay on active duty and go and create a new billet in NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and be the first Sergeant Major of the Supreme Allied Command of Europe.  And I did from 2003 to 2006.  And that was the first.  And I really loved that because, when I talk about NATO, I wasn't the first African American to become the Sergeant Major of the Supreme Allied Command.  I was the first Sergeant Major period.  Isn't that the whole goal, is one day you can be just the first person to do something, not the first African--that no one had ever did it before me.
Speaker 1: So no other Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps had achieved to that level?
Speaker 2: No Sergeant Major--nobody period.  No--
Speaker 1: That's 2003 to two-thousand and--
Speaker 2: Six [2006].
Speaker 1: Six [2006].  Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, there you went to NATO.  They had nineteen countries.  They have grown to twenty-something countries now.  And all of them were now there for your leadership at the senior listed.  And it was foreign to them because they had never had a Sergeant Major.  They've always had the Eisenhowers to the Joneses, as President [Dwight] Eisenhower as the Supreme Allied Commander started that--was the first to lead that organization in NATO.  And now, you've got a senior enlisted leader in 2003.  What will he do.  Why do they need it.  What will his purpose be.  My job was to be just as I was to the commandant, who happened to have been my commandant.  When General [James L.] Jones was selected as the Supreme Allied Commander, he went to NATO, and then asked me to join him as his sergeant major.  And it's always amazing to me when people say, you know, you made history by being the first African American to be Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps.  You made history by being the first Sergeant Major of the Supreme Allied Command-Europe.  And I said, No.  I was history, but I didn't make it.  Jim Jones made history by selecting me.  If he had never selected me, I would never been able to be part of history.  The credit really goes to the man that saw the value in Al McMichael and opened the doors to give him an opportunity.  So yes, I am very proud to have been Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps.  I'm very, very proud to have been the first Sergeant Major to serve as the Supreme Allied Command of Europe, but I'm equally or more proud of the fact that a man of Jim Jones', General James Jones' stature would see the ability in me and then give me the opportunity to display it.
