Story_ID: 465096
Speaker 1: I'm Jacques Lesure and I'm the interviewer today.  Neculai Burghelea is the videographer and Julieanna Richardson is the observer.  Ma'am, could you please state your name, full name, and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Armelia, A-R-M-E-L-I-A, McQueen, M-C-Q-U-E-E-N [HistoryMaker Armelia McQueen].
Speaker 1: And your date and place of birth please?
Speaker 2: I was born in North Carolina, Southern Pines, January 6, 1952.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Oh today is (laughter) April 3rd, 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we currently located?
Speaker 2: We are currently located in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], North Hollywood, which is called the new NoHo of California.
Speaker 1: And your current occupation?
Speaker 2: Actress, singer.
Story_ID: 465097
Speaker 1: Okay I have a few questions I would like to ask you that we consider People magazine type questions and they just let us know about you a bit more in depth.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food.  Macaroni and cheese.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Do you have a phrase or a saying that--that you use, a favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: That I use, oh, no, not really.  I have--I just--I have words that I use a lot but, you know, they're not a favorite ones I just--general (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How about your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Maui [Hawaii].
Story_ID: 465098
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're gonna go into your life a bit and we'd like to start with your mother.  What was her name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Kathleen McCall [Kathleen McCall Brown].
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in North Carolina also.
Speaker 1: Do you have stories that your mother may have shared with you about her life growing up as a child, her, her life as a child?
Speaker 2: Her life as a child.  My mother was very fiery.  She was lots of fun and, and she was a darer, she would just do things on a dare, you know, not bad.  But, you know, she was very explorative I guess you would say.  And she was a, a comedian so she kept her family laughing quite a bit.  And her mother constantly chasing her because of her smart mouth, (laughter) so she was quite wonderful, she was quite wonderful (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did she share any stories with you in particular that you can recall, any incidents in particular?
Speaker 2: God, my mom died when I was young, so I don't have a lot of stories, but I remember her saying that she was supposed to be cleaning the house and taking care of her brothers--her brother and, and sisters, they all were doing it together.  And they had a fireplace in the house.  And my grandmother came home and was questioning her about some things that were going on in the house and, and she said, "Well why is your brother--why is your brother crying?"  And he--she says to him--to her mother and said, "Well he couldn't put his head in the salmon can."  (Laughter) I don't--I don't think her mother appreciated it very much.  I think she just kind of threw her in the fireplace, the fire wasn't on, but she just picked her up and threw her in there.  My grandmother's name was Mary [Mary McCall] and she was a little bitty woman, but she raised children, about nine kids by herself.  Her husband [Joe McCall, Sr.] was killed.  And so she ruled the house with an iron fist and she did not allow people to like drive up in her yard and you know, she had a shotgun, she had all, you know.  So my mother had a little bit of her fire, you know.
Speaker 1: How would you personally describe your mother in regards to your opinion on her personality?
Speaker 2: Wonderful, very personable.  She was a beautician so she worked with the public a lot.  And, she was just very loving, but she was fiery.  She didn't, she didn't back down.
Story_ID: 465099
Speaker 1: How about your father [James McQueen]?
Speaker 2: My biological father, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We left at a very early age.  My father, which I don't like to say stepfather, but my father that I know is an absolutely wonderful man who is still alive.
Speaker 1: His name please?
Speaker 2: His name is Robert Brown [Robert Brown, Sr.], and he lives with me.  He's eighty-eight years old and he's extremely strong, and he still plants collard greens in the backyard and cuts the trees and whatnot.  So he's very good.
Speaker 1: Where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in South Carolina, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned that your mother [Kathleen McCall Brown] passed away at an early age of your, what age was that?
Speaker 2: My mom died when she was forty-two.
Speaker 1: And your age at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh my age, I was sixteen, seventeen, seventeen.
Speaker 1: So that would've been 19--?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969] I think or '68 [1968], yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know how you--how your mother and father met, stepfather met?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Could you give us a little more information on Mr. Brown, his childhood growing up, and what you might know about him?
Speaker 2: His childhood.  He had a--not a very good childhood growing up.  He was the son of a twin who died when he was I think about nine months old.  And he was given to the other twin to raise.  So he didn't get to know his sisters for many years, and his father raised the girls 'cause that was about all he could handle to raise 'cause they were older than he was.  And he rai- the--he raised them.  And so, but he would come always to let him know that he was his father and he wanted him back.  And the people that raised him, it's a very long story and, and I think it would be very hurtful, didn't want to give him back to his, his father.  But he finally got him back.  'Cause every time he'd come to see him they would take him away for the day.  He'd have to go to another town or whatever, and then he--he would just miss them until finally he was told that, you know, when he saw him I said, "I was there and I brought you this, I brought you that and you didn't get it."  And he said no he didn't, you know, 'cause he never responded to the note or whatever.  But they finally got it all straightened out, but he lost a great deal of time because of that.  So now he makes up for it kind of with his sister, my Aunt Dell who is ninety-three and they are very, very close.  And the other two sisters that were alive, they have since passed on, but he got to be with them and learn, and you know, know about them a great deal.
Speaker 1: Now where did he grown up?
Speaker 2: South Carolina.
Speaker 1: South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And his siblings were named--?
Speaker 2: Oh god, well Aunt Dell is alive, Delphine Patton [ph.].  He had a sister Emma Ruth [ph.] and a sister Estelle [ph.], and a brother, god what is, I didn't know him either.  I'm sorry I can't think of his name right now, it'll come back (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you know the birth order, the birth order of his siblings?
Speaker 2: No I don't, I--but I think Aunt Dell was the oldest, and she's the one that's alive, you know.
Story_ID: 465100
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And did your mother have any siblings?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, she had four sisters and two of them are still alive.
Speaker 1: Their birth order is--?
Speaker 2: Oh god, what is it, I'm probably not--let's see there's--Aunt Lola [Lola McCall] is still alive and she's in her seventies.  Aunt Lela [Lela McCall], she's alive and I don't know how old she is, but she's, you know, in that--in that category.  And Aunt Ethel [Ethel McCall], did I say Aunt Ethel, I did, okay, Aunt Ethel, she's passed on, you know and then it was my mother, so it was four girls and one brother [Joe McCall, Jr.], and he's also passed, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents [Kathleen McCall Brown and James McQueen] met?
Speaker 2: No I don't.  I, I, I think it was through friends.  You know, I think it was through friends and they went out on a kind of a group date, and that's how I think they started seeing each other.
Speaker 1: Now let's go back a bit to your grandparents.  We heard you mention your maternal grandmother.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Tell us more about her?
Speaker 2: Mary [Mary McCall], Mary.  I don't know a lot about her.  She was, like I said, very fiery and she was able to raise all the kids by herself.  And she did a good job of it, and she died when she was eighty-two.  They brought her to live with them, you know, some of the daughters and, and so that's how she was able, you know, to live so long after a while because she was tired, you know, it, it was a lot.  But everybody, you know, ch- they were well fed, well taken care of, well-educated.  And they had a sense of business because of her.  You know, my uncle who had passed away owned his own business, grocery store business and then--he started as a box boy and worked himself up in Brooklyn [New York] as a matter of fact.  He was manager to a certain stores, the A and P [The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company], you know all of that stuff.  So they, they did pretty good, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you have any personal story that you--that you can recall about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: No.  Like I said, I do- I didn't know her that well to be wi- I just know of her.  I, I'm told I'm like her, I have a lot of her traits.  I got a little more involved with her in her later years.  And by that time, she was getting a little senile and I just remembered the wonderful joy was when I went to see her finally, she knew who I was.  And I was just stunned by that, that she knew my name.  And--but then at the end when I was getting ready to leave, she asked could she go with me, and that hurt me a great deal.  It hurt that I couldn't bring her back, you know.  And her sister came at that time, Babe [ph.], her name was Babe.  And when I first saw her she frightened me 'cause I, I thought it was a man, 'cause it's the Cherokee [Native American] in my family and she came up and she had on man's pants and suspenders and a hat with a feather in it and two big braids and a cane.  And I thought well this man is the old man who's come in here to see whoever.  And it--she started talking and she had this light voice (laughter) and, and then I was like what.  And then they fought.  But I, I understand it was the senility because my grandmother could remember things from right now, but she couldn't remember things way back or vice versa, you know.  And they fought over sweet peas, you know, and then she asked to go home with her.  And so that wa- and that was just, you know, too much for all of us to bear, you know.  But, you know, she had a good life, good life.
Story_ID: 465101
Speaker 1: Now the family resided in North Carolina for how long, your [maternal] family?
Speaker 2: The--all of the ones that are still alive, forever.
Speaker 1: And I meant your immediate family, you and your siblings, how long did--when did you all move to New York?
Speaker 2: Oh god--
Speaker 1: At what age possibly for you?
Speaker 2: God, I don't remember, I, I think I was like sixteen months old or almost two years old, you know, when we moved to Brooklyn [New York], you know.  And there's--I have many family members in North Carolina that I don't know, you know, which I'd like to do my family tree one day and find out.  Because I met Richard Roundtree, and he says he's my cousin.  And then he had his book of his family after he did 'Roots' and there was my family name, McQueen, there and I thought wow, okay.  So I'd like to find out more about them.
Speaker 1: Do you know why your family moved to Brooklyn?
Speaker 2: A better life.  A better life, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there some opportunities for employment or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes.  It's lot--there was lots, you know, in reference to my mom [Kathleen McCall Brown] wanted to go to school to be a beautician.  My dad [Robert Brown, Sr.] was working for--was going to work for the Brooklyn Navy Yard [New York, New York], you know, and at that time, you know, it was, you know, in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] that the Brooklyn Navy Yard was there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your earliest memory growing up when you were--wha- what's the earliest memory you have growing up as a child?
Speaker 2: Well I just I always sang, that much I do know.  And I'd--I would sing on the steps, you know, and, and just do--and play the rabbit, you know, "I'm late, I'm late, I'm late for a very important date.  No time to stop, I'm late, I'm late, I'm late."  And I used to do it all the time up and down the steps and you know, it was in Brooklyn, so you know, I always had a little crowd (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was your family musically inclined, the rest of the family?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, they were not.  We had, you know, people that sang in--in--in choirs and stuff, but no one that was going to be in show business.  I mean they thought that was like what, you know.  They recite a lot, they used to recite poems and things.  And we--they're talking about the spoken word now, you know, my family did it, they did it in church though, you know, so it's different.
Story_ID: 465102
Speaker 1: Now did you have siblings?
Speaker 2: I have brothers, yeah, two brothers.
Speaker 1: And their names and their birth order?
Speaker 2: I have a brother Robert Brown, Jr. and he is fifty-seven I think now, and then I have another brother, David [David Brown (ph.)], and he's forty-one, yeah, forty-one, forty-two years old, he's gonna be forty-two.
Speaker 1: So what was family life like in, in your home at this time with, with your two brothers, what was?
Speaker 2: It was great, you know, we had a good time, you know.  We were just trying to survive like everyone else.  You know, we weren't poor and we weren't rich.  You know, my mom [Kathleen McCall Brown] worked late hours once she finished school.  You know, she used to go to school to be a beautician (background noise) and my--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: And before we go forward I'd like to talk about, you said that there's a connection possibly to Richard Roundtree.  Di- were you able to verify that as far as, as what your cousin or lineage was?
Speaker 1: He was.  He has a book that the Mormons did.  He had his family tree do--and so when he opened the book, 'cause we're working together and he said, "Ms. McQueen [HistoryMaker Armelia McQueen]?" and I'd just met him that first, first, second day.  And I said, "Yes?"  He said, "I think we're cousins."  And I thought okay and we just kind of laughed about it.  And I said well you know, the families and whatnot.  And he said, "Here," and he opened the book and he had the family tree, and he had I think it's Richards some- and then he had the lines drawn and it had McQueen and it was in North Carolina.  So, they, they were married, you know.  So he, he has the information.
Story_ID: 465103
Speaker 1: Let's come forward, now we--you said--I was asking you to describe your family life in, in Brooklyn [New York] around that time with your two brothers and how things were?
Speaker 2: It was good, it was good.  I mean, you know, we--like I said we didn't know any difference that, you know, we were pinching pennies or whatever, but it was hard for a family of four, you know.  And my mother, like I said, was going to school and my father [Robert Brown, Sr.] was working at the Brooklyn Navy Yard [New York, New York].  He was also trying to get an extra job learning to be a butcher.  You know, so he was going--is it culinary--it's not culinary school, but anyway, you learn to cut meat, put it that way (laughter).  So he was going and doing that.  And, and we always used to eat together and, and it stopped.  So we'd eat together, like either on Saturday and Sundays, but during the week everybody was doing their thing and our neighbors or cousins or whatever would take care of us until they got home, yeah.
Speaker 1: What street did you grow up on?
Speaker 2: Oh god, first it was Nostrand Avenue in Brooklyn, and then we moved to Jefferson Avenue, and then that's where we stayed and we went to church [People's Institutional A.M.E. Church, Brooklyn, New York] there and school and everything.
Story_ID: 465104
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights, sounds and smells in Brooklyn [New York] around that time as a little girl growing up, what can you recall for us?
Speaker 2: The bakery.  There used to be a bakery.  Oh god, I don't know if it was called Bond's [Bond Bread; General Baking Company], but Tasty Bread [Tasty Bread Company], do you--I don't know if anybody knows anything about, but there used to be a bakery not far and they used to make Tasty Bread.  You could smell it and you could also get little loaves of bread, they're little tiny and I would always remember that, it's just wonderful.  Hot bread you could get for almost nothing.  And the schools would get them, you know, you'd get your own thing of bread.  And they made cakes, so you could always smell that.  And then also in the area, people--you could smell people cooking, you know.  More so cooking on the weekends, you know, you'd smell the, the chicken or the greens or the smothered this or the liver, you could smell all of that always, you know.  And it was a community, you knew everybody, you know.  And, so it was good, you know.  I, I can't complain about my life, you know, as (unclear).  I--my family was not abusive, you know, we had a loving family.  Sundays would be when people would come by and visit.  Saturdays would be the same thing when they would, you know, party, turn on the record player, at that time it was called the Victrola, you know, all of that stuff.  And my mom [Kathleen McCall Brown] and dad [Robert Brown, Sr.] would make potato salad and chicken and pig feet, and deviled eggs.  And the neighbors in the building, you know, would come up and they'd play cards.  And it was just a riot.  I mean you could just--you, you, you were afraid that they were gonna fight, you know.  But that was when everybody got together, you know, and they'd and they'd buy whatever they were drinking or somebody was making wine or something, you know.  My Aunt Clara [ph.] used to make homemade wine, you know, and so they'd have that, you know.  And it, it was just really, god I just remember that, she'd strain it and you'd see like a white cloth, cheesecloth, and she'd pour the wine through it and it'd, it'd be stained red, but that was her, her, her working area, you know.  So she make homemade wine, and, and they'd have brandied peaches.  They'd make--get fresh peaches and then you put them in the jar and pour brandy over them (laughter).  And I used to love to do that, 'cause I'd stick my finger in them, you know.  But there's also with peppers and I'd stick my finger in that and put it in my mouth and burn up, you know, and then I'd rub my eyes and then it--that would be on fire, you know.  So, those are the things I remember as a child.  I was always into stuff, you know, taking tops off, tasting and whatnot.  And, just a good time.
Story_ID: 465105
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who were some of your neighbors, anyone of note or can you recall any of the names of the neighbors?
Speaker 2: A lady named Corinne [ph.], you know, and she kind of talked with a high voice like that.  She--but she was really great, great lady, Ms. Corinne.  And so she used to watch us sometimes and she'd always make sure we'd have, you know, candies and stuff that she'd bring from wherever, you know.  And Dot [ph.], her name was Dot, I don't know what her real name was, but they called her Dot.  And she'd play cards.  And she was really great because she was like really tall and thin, (laughter) and she got--she'd like cross her legs and she'd play cards and smoke, you know.  I just remembered that picture of her, that image of her, it was so fabulous, you know.  And, and, god I--there were, there were--I can't remember the other lady's name.  There's quite a bit, you know.
Speaker 1: Any friends that you had, particularly in children?
Speaker 2: Friends as a child, yes.  You mean going to school with or--?
Speaker 1: Or in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Oh, the neighborhood, I don't remember their names, I just would see them.  But as far as friends going to school with, they're still my friends, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did your family go to church?
Speaker 2: All the time, yeah--
Speaker 1: And what church was that?
Speaker 2: --on Sunday.  We used to go to People's Institutional A.M.E. Church [Brooklyn, New York] and that's where I grew up in, in there, you know.  And singing in the different choirs.
Speaker 1: At what age did you sing in the choir?
Speaker 2: Oh god, I think I was like ten.  I started signing in junior choir and it's kind of worked up to the, you know, young adult choir, celestial choir.  The glee clubs, you know, New York City glee club [All-City Glee Club] that they have once a year and stuff, yeah.
Story_ID: 465106
Speaker 1: So when you started school, what school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I started at P.S. 44 [Marcus Garvey Elementary School, Brooklyn, New York].
Speaker 1: That would've been kindergarten?
Speaker 2: Ye- no I didn't start kindergarten, I missed kindergarten because my--I'm a January baby and so I had to go to first grade.  'Cause if I'd wait too long, I'd be too old, you know, so I went to first grade.  And so I missed kindergarten, you know.
Speaker 1: So you started with the first grade at P.S. 44?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you recall any of the teachers?
Speaker 2: Mrs. Briggs [ph.] who was a great teacher and she died as soon as I left school, she died, (unclear).
Speaker 1: What did you like about Ms. Briggs?
Speaker 2: Oh she was just kind of a lovely lady, kind of soft-spoken woman.  But no nonsense, you know.  But she was just really great and she used to help me with, you know, my words and things.  And Mrs. Mckin- McKinley [ph.].  She was also a very nice teacher and one of the two of the few black teachers at that time, you know.  And so they were just--they were just kind of really good women, you know.
Speaker 1: How many teachers were in this school, and how many were black?
Speaker 2: In elementary school we only had, I think three.  Yeah, I think it was only three.  That was Mrs. McKinley, Mr. Phillips [ph.] and Ms. Briggs.  And then when I went to junior high school there were more.  But those were the only three at that time.
Speaker 1: Was this the trend at that time for most of the schools in Brooklyn [New York] to have--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, yeah.  When I got to junior high school, which was 258 [J.H.S. 258 Nathaniel Macon Junior High School; David Ruggles Junior High School, Brooklyn, New York], but somebody said that they changed the name, it used to be Nathaniel Macon Junior High School and I think they changed it recently, recently because Nathaniel Macon was a slave owner or something, I'm not sure about that, but I, I think they'd changed the name of the school.  And there we had a lot of black teachers which were fabulous, you know.  And they kept the school together, tip sh- tip-top shape.  People learned y- they--the teachers would almost duke it out with you, you know, they didn't, they didn't play.  You know, you, you had to get your lesson.  And the sad thing about it, then they would divide it and so the school became another thing, you know, interesting.
Story_ID: 465107
Speaker 1: Describe the overall Brooklyn [New York] racial, racial tenu- tempo at that time, was it a mixed crowd in Brooklyn or--?
Speaker 2: In Brooklyn, well they were still separate, yeah, you know.  The blacks lived in their neighborhood, the Italians in theirs, the Germans lived in theirs, you know, everybody had their pocket.  But in the black neighborhoods, there was still white owners of the stores.  Like we had a ma- a nice man call- Sal [ph.] was his name, he was Italian and he had a store in Brooklyn on the corner from where we lived.  And everyone liked him and, and his family knew everybody.  And so that worked out very well.  We also had Chinese who owned the Chinese restaurant and they lived in the area.  And everyone knew them.  And then later it changed, you know.  Sal got older and then his son took over and then they moved out and this, you know, as neighborhoods do.  You know, but it was--the people were civil to each other and, and, and when the--Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], you know, everybody was in there together, but people live separately.  But then they had stores in, in the neighborhoods, you know.  But nobody ever bothered them.
Story_ID: 465108
Speaker 1: Now you were at P.S. 44 [Marcus Garvey Elementary School, Brooklyn, New York] for how long?
Speaker 2: Just six, six years, yeah.  You know, you do the six years then three and three yeah.
Speaker 1: Who are some of your friends at P.S. 44?
Speaker 2: My good friend when I was--started school in the first grade, Sheila, Sheila Woods [ph.] and she's still my friend today.  My girlfriend Alex [ph.], we went to junior high school [J.H.S. 258 Nathaniel Macon Junior High School; David Ruggles Junior High School, Brooklyn, New York] together and we're still friends today.  And my girlfriend Erma [ph.], we lived across the street from each other and she was in high school when I started junior high.  And so the three of us--four of us are still friends today.  So we're talking about forty years of friendship, yeah.
Speaker 1: Are any of these ladies also in, in show business?
Speaker 2: No, no.  They have as they call quote unquote straight jobs.  One's a homemaker, and one's a school teacher, and the other one works for the sanitation department.
Story_ID: 465109
Speaker 1: So after sixth grade [at P.S.44 Marcus Garvey Elementary School, Brooklyn, New York], what happens?
Speaker 2: I went to Junior High School 258 [J.H.S. 258 Nathaniel Macon Junior High School; David Ruggles Junior High School, Brooklyn, New York].  And you know, it's, it's your teenage years, you try to figure out who you are, where you're going, what do you wanna do.  And, and you're not sure of any of that.
Speaker 1: Did you have any ideas or aspirations at this point?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I always wanted to be in show business.  But at that time, your families, families were saying no.  Because my girlfriend, Sheila [Sheila Woods (ph.)], wanted to be a model and go to Europe, but her family was just totally against it, you know.  And, and it was also fear, they didn't want you to get hurt or anything to happen to you, a young girl going on your own or whatever, and I understand that, you know.  So I concentrated on bookkeeping, you know, accounting, and office work in, in studies.  You know, you learn how to type, you know.  So I got a typewriter (clears throat) for Christmas, you know.  And I, you know, it was fun, I enjoyed doing it, but my heart really was in performing.  So I performed at church in the choirs [at People's Institutional A.M.E. Church, Brooklyn, New York].  And also if they had Christmas shows or Easter shows I, you know, I played in that.
Speaker 1: Did your family also have a--shy away from you being in the business?
Speaker 2: Oh very much so.  Very mu- (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were some of the comments?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: What were the comments about that?
Speaker 2: Oh, you--you know, you'll get hurt, you know, nobody's gonna come here in Brooklyn [New York] and see you, you know.  You really, you know, you have to really learn a trade so you can support yourself.  And other family members, distant family members, were like, you know, well you know, why, why did she wanna go into show business?  So I kind of didn't talk about it a lot until when I got into high school [Central Commercial High School; Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York] it was still on my mind, but I was also working, you know, learning to do bookkeeping and, and you know, a little part-time job on Saturday and whatnot in a store, you know.  And so I learned that.  But once I got out of high school, I went to colle- I also liked to design clothes.  So I had lots of little, you know, projects that I was doing.  And so I went to college for almost a year in fashion at--fashion design at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] and then I quit.
Story_ID: 465110
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before we go there--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --let's talk about those junior high and high school years.  So let's discuss for a moment what--who are, are your mentors or role models during this time period?
Speaker 2: Du- during the high school time?
Speaker 1: Or junior high also?
Speaker 2: Junior high school.  Well, we had a wonderful teacher, two, Mr. Yearwood [Elmer Yearwood] who was in 258 [J.H.S. 258 Nathaniel Macon Junior High School; David Ruggles Junior High School, Brooklyn, New York].  He was in charge of music, you know.  Mr. Motley [ph.] was in charge of music and Mr. Motley, you know, was very encouraging about singing, you know, that's how I got into the glee clubs because he would say, "Armelia [HistoryMaker Armelia McQueen], go and sing, go and sing, go and sing."  A wonderful man by the name of Professor Caldwell [Lyndon Hoffman Caldwell] in the church [People's Institutional A.M.E. Church, Brooklyn, New York] wanted me to do opera, classical singing.  So he pushed me, he and his wife.  And that's how I kind of got the bug.  And I would sing, I sang at funerals, I sang at weddings, you know, and anything that somebody would ask me to sing at, I sang at it, you know.  And, and I just enjoyed it.  My mom [Kathleen McCall Brown] and my dad [Robert Brown, Sr.], they were very happy that I sang in the church and, and you know, in different places, but they just didn't want my schoolwork to suffer from it and they didn't want me coming home late at night, you know, so.
Speaker 1: What kind of a student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a good student.  I don't think I was the brightest student (laughter) book wise, but I, I always had common sense, you know, so things worked out for me, you know, and my teachers were very supportive.  So if I had trouble in reading or, or really reading, the teachers used to help me with that, you know.  And then some teachers didn't care at all, they just passed you whether you got it or not.
Speaker 1: Were you taking formal lessons for singing at this time or were you studying?
Speaker 2: No.  I was not studying at that time.  I didn't start studying until late high school and Professor Caldwell used to coach me, he and his wife.
Speaker 1: Now between P.S. 258 and high school, what was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Central, Central Commercial [Central Commercial High School; Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education] in Manhattan [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And you were there in 19--?
Speaker 2: I think I started 1963, '64 [1964], yeah.
Speaker 1: While you were in school, were there any, any other notable--outside of the friends that you've mentioned, any other notables that, that we might know you'd share who came--went to school with you?
Speaker 2: No, (shakes head) unh-uh.
Story_ID: 465111
Speaker 1: So, you're i- in high school [Central Commercial High School; Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York] is where you got your--the bug solidified itself you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so what do you--what did you think now toward the end of your high school career?
Speaker 2: Well I was trying to figure how could I get into show business, you know, because again I'm in Brooklyn [New York].  How do you get in show business from Brooklyn, from Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York]?  And other than singing in the glee club, that was kind of your way out when you got to go to Manhattan [New York, New York] to sing or you got to go downtown Brooklyn, Flatbush [Avenue], you know, at--it wasn't Erasmus [Erasmus Hall High School, Brooklyn, New York], I can't think of the, the Masonic Temple [Brooklyn Masonic Temple, Brooklyn, New York]--that, you know, that you sang at.  The glee club would sing at the all-chorus glee club [All-City Glee Club].  You know, how do I do that?  And the good thing about going to school in Manhattan, that's when I went to high school, Central, I used to take the train to go to 42nd Street where the school was.  And there you go, you know, you're on the train getting out of Brooklyn going to Manhattan.  And you just, you know, you, you, you see the papers and there was a Backstage show business paper and--and you know, you just kind of go through it and see what's there, what can I do.  And a lot of the things, you know, experience, experience, and so I didn't get to do that.  And when I got to college, which is FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology], which is downtown Manhattan, you meet people and they tell you different things.  And oh you can go here, oh there's, there's a showcase, oh there's a this, you know, or they're looking for a non-experience singer or actress or whatever.  And so that's how I started going and then that's when I decided to quit college, you know.
Speaker 1: During your high school years were there any people that you were listening to commercially that, that were mentors of yours or that you wanted to be like?
Speaker 2: Like--that I wanted to be like?  Certainly, Gladys Knight.  You know, Gladys Knight and, and Aretha [Aretha Franklin], but I didn't sing like Aretha, you know.  I didn't really sing like Gladys Knight either, but I always liked the way she did the lyrics, you know, you understood what she was saying.  And you were moved by it.  So I liked her a lot.  And I did listen to Marian Anderson recordings of her because of Professor Caldwell [Lyndon Hoffman Caldwell] and different other opera singers, you know.  Leontyne Price and Beverly Sills because they told me I had too.  And I'd listen and I thought, oh they have great voices and so I listened to them a lot.  And then I thought, oh okay, well I'll go be a classical singer, you know.  And so when I started to--at the Brooklyn Conservatory [Brooklyn Conservatory of Music, Brooklyn, New York], which was right outside of high school, you know, I was just getting ready to get out.  And because I would just joke so much, 'cause I had a sense of humor, musical comedy, they asked me to leave because they thought I'd do better in musical comedy then classical music.  Because I me- you know, you--you'd start to sing an aria or something and I, you know, a classical song and I would just--started laughing because, you know, you'd have to do the runs, you know, (singing) and I'd just keep on and just laugh.  And not meaning to, but it struck me as funny, you know, how your stomach was moving, how your diaphragm was moving, and you remember all the things they were telling you to do.  It was just so many things like rubbing your head and singing, you know.  And so, the teachers were very kind, they would say, "You can do much better in musical comedy.  You have the voice, you can always come back to classical."  And so, that's when I went to acting school.
Story_ID: 465112
Speaker 1: How did you find yourself at the Brooklyn Conservatory [Brooklyn Conservatory of Music, Brooklyn, New York] after--right after high school [Central Commercial High School; Norman Thomas High School for Business and Commercial Education, New York, New York] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because of Professor Caldwell [Lyndon Hoffman Caldwell].
Speaker 1: And had he wanted to do anything in, in a larger way, Professor Caldwell, do you know of any other mentoring or any other students?
Speaker 2: That he sent there?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: No, no.  From the church [People's Institutional A.M.E. Church, Brooklyn, New York] I was the only one, you know.
Speaker 1: So you graduate from high school, now what happens?
Speaker 2: Now what happens is that I get a job, you know, working at stores, you know, in the bookkeeping department, and as the- at that time they called it record keeping, you know.  And learning how to do the beginnings of the computers, stuff, you know, that they had.  I think they were called NCRs [National Cash Register] at that time, you know, that's back in the day, you know.  A different kind of machine.  And I saved money to go to the Brooklyn Conservatory, I was paying for it.  And then I entered college [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Prior to college, what did you learn at the Brooklyn Conservatory, how was that different 'cause you'd just been singing at yourself at this point?  So how was formal training?
Speaker 2: I learned--formal training is how to support your breathing and not just use raw talent.  That you--if you're going to sing every night you have to know how to support it.  Whereas if you're singing just raw talent, you're just singing out there, you know.  You don't know how to control the sound or anything.  You can, but you can't do that eight times a week to the back of the house.  So, I learnt how to do that, you know, and to really focus upon the work, to study and so the Brooklyn Conservatory was very good for me, you know.
Speaker 1: What was the racial makeup?
Speaker 2: And it's good for any--for anyone to go to school and learn that.
Speaker 1: What was the racial makeup at the conservatory?
Speaker 2: Conservatory, it was integrated, you know.  There were not a lot of blacks, but that was because they couldn't, you know, people weren't spending their money to go there, you know.  And a lot of people were not spending money to go for classical training.  You know, its rhythm and blues, you know, or just you know, gospel music, so they learnt that in church, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, Professor Caldwell had been instrumental, you said, sending you to the conservatory.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you really have a love of classical music?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, I did, I did.  But--and--but when you're young, you, you kind of try to pick out lots of things, oh can I do this, oh yes I can do this.  Oh can I do this, I like jazz, oh yeah I can do this.  But what am I good at, you know.  So you're trying to find yourself that's, you know, that's you know, what goes on as a teenager, a young, a young adult.
Speaker 1: So how long did you stay at the conservatory?
Speaker 2: I don't think I was there a year.  I don't think I was there a year.
Story_ID: 465113
Speaker 1: So when you leave, you go where now?
Speaker 2: When I left the conservatory [Brooklyn Conservatory of Music, Brooklyn, New York] I was entering college--I was in college really doing two and three nights a week learning to, you know, make clothing and which was also difficult because there're many members on my family who were seamstress, so I learnt from them how to do it.  But then when you go to school, they go by the book.  And I had surpassed that.  You know, it was like, oh please, what are you talking about?  I mean we were doing, you know, you had to do an apron.  I had already know how to do a skirt with pleats in it.  So that was just boring the heck out of me, you know.  And I--what I did learn was how to make the garment and fit it on a form so that was--and cut a pattern, that was really great for me, how to cut a pattern from scratch.  But as, as far as making clothing, I had al- I had already made clothes, you know.  So that was a sort of a tense time in the school because the professors would tell you one way and I knew another way.  Seeing that my Aunt Dell [Delphine Patton (ph.)], who is still alive now, cut Vogue patterns from, you know, couturing stuff down in the Garment District [New York, New York].  So that was like, please let me out of here.  So I had a good time and also I was doing clothing for large women, which they were not accepting, you know, back in the '60s [1960s] you know and so it was just quite a time, but you know, I learnt a lot from being there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why did you initially choose fashion design?
Speaker 2: 'Cause I liked it and I could do it.  You know, making clothes.  I make--still make clothes today, you know, my own clothes, some of them, you know.
Speaker 1: So how long did you attend the fashion college?
Speaker 2: I attended one year (laughter).  You see I went to school for one year all over the place (laughter), you know.  Well okay, I'm out, okay I'm out.  Because my true calling was to be in, in the business, and that's what I realized much later on is--.  I can't say I wasted time, because it wasn't wasted; I learnt a lot.  But I only stayed in, you know, the conservatory for almost a year and then one year at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York].
Story_ID: 465114
Speaker 1: Were you doing any singing or acting at this time while you were in FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: No.  I was singing just in, in choirs, you know, but I wasn't like singing publicly anywhere, you know.  It was just so, I couldn't do everything, you know, it was hard, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you stayed for a year at F- FIT, what did you do after that?
Speaker 2: I entered Herbert Berghof [Herbert Berghof Studio], which is a dramatic school in Manhattan [New York, New York], down on Bank Street, and I stayed there for three years.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that experience?
Speaker 2: Fabulous.  I was taught by Eugene Brice who is a wonderful teacher, voice teacher, by his brother [Jonathan Brice] also.  And I learned musical comedy.  Learned how to do makeup, stage makeup.  And scene study with Earle Hyman.  Earle Hyman was the father [Russell Huxtable] on Bill Cosby's show ['The Cosby Show'].  He played his father, if you remember that character.  A wonderful man.  So I studied with him for two years.
Speaker 1: Herbert Berghof drama school, are there any other notables that attended that school?
Speaker 2: Oh god there's, I mean there's a list of them, I mean (makes sound).
Speaker 1: Any, any that you are personal friends with that, that we might know?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  I mean it was a revolving door, you know, like--I think it was Al Pacino and, and you know, all of the--[HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, all of the heavyweights at that time and way before that.  And I think Marilyn Monroe, you know, people just came in through the doors, you know, but I don't know any of them as good friends.
Speaker 1: So what caused you to enroll in this school, and how did you get there to this particular school?
Speaker 2: I got there because of talking with someone that I had met, a friend, and I was telling them what I wanted to do and that's how I got there.  They told me well go to this school because they will teach you to do this, this and this and it's a good school, has a good reputation, you know.  And everything you want is all under one roof.  And so that's why I went there.
Speaker 1: Do you recall that friend's name?
Speaker 2: Jerry, Jerry Bailey [ph.], yeah.
Speaker 1: Are they in the business?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Is the school still there today?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes it is.
Speaker 1: So you were there three years at Herbert Berghof and you learned different, as you said, all the different aspects of it?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, very much so, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what is working like looking for you now, what is the work looking like for you now?
Speaker 2: At that time, very good.  Because with the training you have enough confidence to go out to some of the auditions for theater, for TV, for film and nightclub work.  And I did it.  I went out and I started auditioning, you know.  And I traveled back to Brooklyn [New York], you know, late at night and my father [Robert Brown, Sr.] did not know it.  I'd be on the train sometimes late.  And but I'd go and I'd sing in clubs.  They have open mic, they call it open mic now, and then they called it showcase.  You do three songs, an up tempo, a ballad and, and a comedy number or a rock number.  And so I'd do them, I'd do them every Monday and sometimes in the--before the weekends I'd go and sing, you know.  And then I started auditioning for showcases and shows, and you know, and I, I would get them, you know.
Story_ID: 465115
Speaker 1: How were your parents [Kathleen McCall Brown and Robert Brown, Sr.] now seeing that you were in this school and that you were doing this, were they more accepting?
Speaker 2: No, 'cause I have to back up, my mom had passed away--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and so--
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: My mother passed away in, I think it was, was it '69 [1969], no not '69 [1969].  God, wait a minute.  Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were at Berghof [Herbert Berghof Studio, New York, New York] at this time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: How did that affect you?
Speaker 2: It was horrible.  You know, I came home one day from school, music school, you know.  And she just said, "Oh I don't feel so good," and I whoa okay.  I put my things--my books away in the back and I came back from my bedroom and she was just lying across the bed.  And my dad says, "Oh she is laying down for a minute, you know, and go tell the neighbor to take care of the baby," you know, Ms. Parrish [ph.] was my--a friend of our family's and my girlfriend's mother, "and take the baby to Ms. Parrish and then to tell her to come back."  And so I did.  And so when I came back with her, Ms. Parrish talked with him and I--and I was gonna try to dress my mother.  At that time, they used to have, I guess they still have them 'cause I, I've never bought one since then, is the dressing gowns that zip up.  So I was gonna put that on her and Ms. Parrish said, "No, I'll put it on her, just go next door and get Ms. Washington [ph.]," I think her name was, I'm not--I don't remember anymore, "and tell her to come back because we're gonna help you get her clothes on her."  And I said, "Okay."  And I went and I came back, but my mom was already dead.  But my dad didn't want to say that she was dead at that time until the neighbors came and then they called the church [People's Institutional A.M.E. Church, Brooklyn, New York], and you know, the police and everything.  So that was very hard.  I just couldn't get my head (clears throat) excuse me, wrapped around that, you know, because she died suddenly.  And she died of a massive heart attack, you know.
Speaker 1: And you would've been the oldest child at this point?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: And how did your two brothers [Robert Brown, Jr. and David Brown (ph.)] take it at that t- point?
Speaker 2: Not good, not good.  We were devastated.
Speaker 1: With this devastation, how did that a- affect your, your studies and, and your role as the oldest child in the family?
Speaker 2: Well I had to I think take her place, you know.  I felt, you know, I had to take care of the family, you know.  My dad was young, he was a young man also and he's a widower with three kids, you know.  And so I just kind of like took over the house, you know, and, and took care of things and whatnot.  But I also still wanted to perform and I felt that the only way we could ever get out and get--you know, because we needed to move from that house, because that house was just filled with joy and it was a brownstone and we lived on the top floor and another family lived downstairs.  And it was not a good place for any of us to come home to every night 'cause that's all you could think about, you know, that my mother died in the house.  And I, I just thought that I would be the breadwinner to be able to move them.  And so it just gave me more determination.
Speaker 1: What was your father doing for employment at this time?
Speaker 2: My dad was now at this time working at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] in the maintenance department 'cause the Brooklyn Navy Yard [New York, New York] closed down.
Speaker 1: So you were assisting him with taking care of your brothers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and getting things together, you know.
Speaker 1: And you're still trying to go to school at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I'd go to school on Saturdays, you know.  On Saturdays and one day a week, well I think it was like a Tuesday and that was only like for an hour, only an hour, you know.
Story_ID: 465116
Speaker 1: So you said that you stayed there for three--you stayed at the school for three years (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Three years, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Then what happens to you?
Speaker 2: Well then I start working and making money.  So I was able to help the family get out.
Speaker 1: Now you say making money, tell--explain your first position?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, well I was at Herbert Berghof [Herbert Berghof Studio, New York, New York] and, and my teacher, Earle Hyman, which was my acting coach, was a wonderful man and I hope he's still alive, I don't know, I'm not sure.  But he said, he says, "You know, I--I've taught you all I can teat--teach you, now go and apply it.  And then whatever we have to work on and tweak we can always do that, but you just can't stay here as a student."  He did it to all of his students.  "Go and get the work, and apply what I've taught you."  So I did.  And I go--I got a showcase called 'Hot and Cold Heroes,' where I was like the second lead.  And it didn't pay very much money, but it was something and it was recognition, you know.  And then I went and I got another show called 'Joe's Opera,' where I played the female lead at that time with a husband and a little girl, and we were an integrated company.  And the bad guy in there, which is wonderful, a big star today, is Victor Garber, you know, Victor Garber is a major star.  And so we just had the best time learning music and doing the character work.  And then from then on, I just got one job after another, after another, and I was able to do that.
Speaker 1: Earle Hyman, what kind of information did he teach you as far as that you can really say today that was ver- very instrumental in your career, what important, important aspect of his teaching or tutelage?
Speaker 2: Well he called it woodshedding.  If you get a script and you have--you get the breakdown of your character, you know, you go somewhere and you learn this.  You learn about the character.  You don't have to become a drug addict to play a drug addict.  But you learn what makes this person tick.  What touches this person's soul.  What does this person do to other people surrounding them.  He also said if you ever take your clothes off, you better follow it up with something damn good.  Because, you know, when you take your clothes off you're exposed to the world, you know.  And you, you better have some tall acting to follow that up, you know, for the rest of the two hours, you know, on stage.  So he, he had a lot of good things and he said and also, play hard and work hard.  So those are some things that I go, you know.  You were asking for the favorite word, that is one of the words that I always say too is that, you know, work hard, play hard.
Story_ID: 465117
Speaker 1: Who are some of the other people you are seeing at auditions now or that you're, well we won't say competing with, but that you're going up against with in, in New York [New York] now at this time for plays and roles, who are some of the people that you seeing that we might know?
Speaker 2: Oh.  [HistoryMaker] Hattie Winston, she used to be the nurse [Margaret Wyborn] on 'Becker,' and also 'The Nurses' [sic. 'Nurse'].  Loretta Devine who you've seen in 'Dreamgirls,' and, and she's on a new show now called 'Eli Stone,' you know.  And you've seen her in many, many films, you know.  So we go up against each other.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Jackee Harry, she's a HistoryMaker.
Speaker 2: Jackee Harry, Jackee Harry and I just finished working together in a show called 'Damn Yankees.'  And we had, you know, we had a time with that, we had a good time with that.  And oh god, Jenifer Lewis.  Vickilyn [Vickilyn Reynolds], Vickilyn in 'Colored Museum' ['The Colored Museum,' George C. Wolfe], you know.  There's a lot of women that have--we've all been out here, you know, for a while.
Speaker 1: Were you involved in the workshop, Ms. Harry mentioned a workshop that everybody used to go to.  It's an underground movement, but like the name escapes me now, but it was a workshop where all the actors went and--to, to read basically.  She said it was a reading workshop?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no.  I think that's a new one that they're doing.  Where they--this, you know, they keep their, their tools oiled up by going to the cold readings, you know.  No, that's--some of that's kind of new now, where a lot of the actors because there's no work, they meet once a week and sometimes somebody will write the, the play that same day and give it to you and then you have to go and read it and make, make soup out of it (laughter).  Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you got your first role in 'Hot and Cold Heroes.'
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Your first paycheck.  What was that like for you the experience of getting some money for that?
Speaker 2: Oh it was great.  Yeah, it, it was great.  When you get--you know, I got money for singing, I thought wow that's fabulous.  And it wasn't a lot of money 'cause these were showcases, they don't pay a lot of money.  They would pay you some money, almost like twenty-five dollars or fifty dollars and food, you know.  And when I started to book bigger shows like the rock opera 'Tommy' ['The Who's Tommy,' Pete Townshend and Des McAnuff] you know, I just remembered getting all my money and, and they gave it to you in cash, you know, if you wanted on the road.  I just took the cash and laid it out all across the bed and just looked at it (laughter), you know, so.  I don't get any cash anymore, I get, I get the check, you know.  But it, it was just a wonderful time and I could explain it to my dad [Robert Brown, Sr.] and he was like, you know, he couldn't believe it, like, "What, you got how much?" you know.  And I promise, I said, "I'm gonna, you know, we're gonna move."  I--and--you know, and so we did, you know.  And I promised him I'd buy him a brand new car, and I did.
Story_ID: 465118
Speaker 1: Supermodel, they want it overnight, they don't wanna have to work for it.  And in some cases they don't; it's just given to them, you know.  And, and so you arrive at that space and you don't know how you got there or how to sustain it.  So then people just kind of slowly unravel, you know, which we won't name names, but you see people unraveling and that's just one of the, you know, persons that, you know, you can't handle it.  But everybody gave it to you.  You know, if you're a twenty-year-old and you had no money and all of a sudden you're getting thirty-five, and forty and fifty thousand dollars a week even a basketball player, you know, it's a lot of money how do you juggle it, what do you do, where do you go with it, you know.
Speaker 2: So roles are increasing for you so at this point, are you still working a regular nine to five?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, but until I get a job that takes me on the road and then I don't have to do that anymore.
Speaker 2: Now what job is that?
Speaker 1: That was 'Tommy' ['The Who's Tommy,' Pete Townshend and Des McAnuff].  The rock opera 'Tommy.'  I was one of the--I was the nurse and I was a cover for The Acid Queen, you know, so that--
Speaker 2: Who else was in that--in that production with you?
Speaker 1: Oh, Camille Saviola, who is a good friend of mine still to this day.  Teddy Neeley [Ted Neeley] did 'Jesus Christ Superstar' [Andrew Lloyd Weber and Tim Rice], but he also came in at different times I think to do the rock opera 'Tommy,' if I remember.
Speaker 2: Now you said this was your first road job so to speak.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Could you explain what that--how that was for you?
Speaker 1: Well you leave home, you leave home and you do the show.  You rehearse the show in New York City [New York, New York] or L.A. [Los Angeles, California], but it's usually New York at that time.  And they pay for the rehearsals and the airplane tickets and the bus trips, it's all paid for.  You get paid your salary and you do eight--excuse me--eight shows a week.
Speaker 2: Now you being in the role, you said earlier as mother, how does this affect your--the rest of your family and your father [Robert Brown, Sr.] so to speak?
Speaker 1: Well I had to go.  And I explained it to them.  I had to go.  I had to get on the road because this was going to help us be better, get better, you know, not to worry so much.  And my dad was able to deal, you know, he was dealing with it, he wasn't happy about it, but he dealt with it because he is a widower and he also has a young baby, five year old, you know, that he's gotta put in school, you know.  And so the family, cousins and aunts and whatnot, you know, kind of pitched in, some of them.  You know, and the neighbors especially.  My girlfriend, Erma [ph.], her mom, Mrs. Parrish [ph.], they stayed across the street and so David [David Brown (ph.)], you know, would be there when he had to go to work, you know.  And the same thing with Mrs. Woods [ph.], she used to keep David, you know, at night and whatnot in the neighborhood.  So that's how we were able to survive.
Story_ID: 465119
Speaker 1: How hectic was the rehearsal schedule [for 'The Who's Tommy,' Robert Townshend and Des McAnuff] and, and juggling bef- before you left what--how was that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was hard because the rehearsals start at ten [o'clock] and they were finished at five, five or six in the evening.  And you'd do that every day except Sunday if there was no Sunday rehearsal, and sometimes there was.  And then, you--your day off usually was Monday, I think.  So you didn't have to rehearse that day.  Unless you, you know, whatever the rehearsal period is, four weeks, five weeks, six weeks, and then you go.
Speaker 1: How was your adjustment to this rehearsal schedule?
Speaker 2: I, I just loved it 'cause it was what I wanted to do and I was in it.  I was finally in it and it was hard because you, you know, you learn something then you have to put it on its feet and so that was, you know, the brain, you know, and it was just wonderful.  And, and at night I was exhausted.  But of course when you lay down you hear the show in your brain so you're not really resting.  And you get up at the crack of dawn and you try to do whatever you're gonna do, make lunch or whatever and try to help out at the house and then you're gone, you know, to your job, you know.  So--
Speaker 1: So after the rehearsal it's time to leave, and go--where, where was the first destination?
Speaker 2: Oh god I don't know where the first place was, it could've been Washington [D.C.], you know.  The cast members, of twenty members, you know, and you fly of John F.K. Airport [John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York, New York] and I just thought that was, you know, fabulous, you know, we're flying and you know, you got your luggage and you got your this, you got the other and so you go, you know.  And then you go--we, you know, we went over like Ohio, Chicago [Illinois], and--
Speaker 1: What size venues were you playing at this point?
Speaker 2: Oh big, you know, two and three thousand seat houses and I can't remember in St. Louis [Missouri], is St. Louis twelve thousand?  Big, because it's a rock show, so it's a rock concert, you know.  So it's bigger than a the- you--most theaters, you know, at that time.
Speaker 1: Could you describe your first opening night in another city when you saw that crowd?
Speaker 2: I couldn't breathe.  I just--my breath just stopped, you know, 'cause it was all of those people, I mean you know, and so I, I didn't see that well in--with all the lights so it was kind of good, that I could just stand to the mic [microphone] and not see the audience, you know, because you know, you get the butterflies, you gotta go to the bathroom, you gotta throw up, you know, all of that stuff.  And--but you get through it.  And had I not been with the group, on the--and we all stand on stage together, by myself I think I would've been terrified, you know because it was so many people.  But, you know, with the group and then after the first night you just keep going, you know.  And you build up that armor so to speak, you know.  But you still get stage fright.  I, I still do today, you know, before you start out.
Story_ID: 465120
Speaker 1: As you progressed on this tour, were there reviews coming back out about the show ['The Who's Tommy,' Pete Townshend and Des McAnuff]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  They liked it, you know.
Speaker 1: And, and were there any particular about you that you can recall?
Speaker 2: When I--my first show, the only thing they said that I was round.  I, I always remembered that.  That--was that all you could say, you know, you know, and, and [HistoryMaker] Armelia McQueen as the nurse, the round nurse.  Something like that to that effect, you know.  And I'm like what, you know.  So those are the things that you kind of remember that one little thing, you know.
Speaker 1: If we may for a moment, I can remember other actors saying because of ladies, especially African American ladies being of, of, of size or whatever, that there was a--that there were a point in times, a real trend or a worry about your size if, if--you know, for a plus size woman in--during--that there--was there an issue with that for certain roles or do you think there still is an issue with that?
Speaker 2: At that time yes, there were major issues with that.  Because if you were overweight, you were the mother or the grandmother or the aunt.  At that time I was young, but I was big.  So my face didn't read mother or grandmother or aunt, you know.  It was just a big ole baby face at that time, you know.  And--but the body was there.  So on stage, you could get away with it and, and, you know, powder and making yourself look older on stage it reads, on camera it doesn't, so you don't get the roles; it doesn't match up, you know.  And so at that time I was doing theater so it didn't bother me, bother me as much.  And also I had a lot of guts 'cause I even went up for Sally Bowles in 'Cabaret,' you know, and that's a white role.  And you know, I--it didn't stop me.  I went in and audition, and the people were like--of course when I walked in the door they were like looking to see if there was any role for a black woman my size, you know, the other actresses.  And, you know, I didn't let it stop me, you know.
Speaker 1: Do, do you think that same thing persists today?
Speaker 2: Today it's a little better, because women are fighting, people are fighting because there're women of all different sizes now.  And we make up the world.  You know, and it's just in America that we have a lot of that.  If you go to Europe or Africa, they don't deal with that at all, you know.  But, it's a little better now, you know, in, in reference to black women being overweight, being accepted.  White women, which you would--never seeing white women overweight getting roles, and now you do see that, you know, 'cause they had their fight also with it.  So the coun- this country is very hung up on weight issues, you know.  And, so it's a little better, yeah.
Story_ID: 465121
Speaker 1: How long did 'Tommy' ['The Who's Tommy,' Pete Townshend and Des McAnuff] run?  How long was that, was that tour for you?
Speaker 2: That was about six months and then, you know, we came in, it was over.  And you know, go out something else.
Speaker 1: And after 'Tommy' ended, what was your next, your next foray?
Speaker 2: My next, after 'Tommy,' I did 'Jesus Christ Superstar' [Andrew Lloyd Weber and Tim Rice].
Speaker 1: And what year was that?
Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974], wait a minute.  No, it was in '73 [1973], because in '74 [1974] I went to South Africa, I did 'Hair' ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical'].
Speaker 1: Let's talk about 'Jesus Christ Superstar'--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a very large musical.  How did you get that role?
Speaker 2: I auditioned for it.  The audition came up and I went up and I auditioned and got it.
Speaker 1: And was it just flat out a regular audition for you or did you know anyone inside or--?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  It was just a flat-out audition at that time.  And they were looking for the girls for, you know, for Judas [Judas Iscariot], you know, Jesus Christ, the three girls, which were like The Supremes, you know, at that time.  And so I just went up and I auditioned and I got it.
Speaker 1: Now that particular play, at that time period had a lot of connotation, political things attached to it, also people were, because what it, what it was talking about and those different things.  How did that affect you or those that knew you were in it or, or what do you recall from that time period?
Speaker 2: I--it didn't bother me at all, you know, it didn't affect me when reference to any kind of criticisms or anything.  It--the time with 'Jesus Christ Superstar' and with the rock opera 'Tommy,' there was all kinds of criticism because of the drug and the--especially in 'Tommy' the drugs and also almost kind of incest with the uncle in, in 'Tommy.'  And with Jesus and Judas, and, and you know, it was that time.  The same thing with 'Hair.'  When I did 'Hair,' even though it was a later company of 'Hair.'  It--all of those shows had political overtones and racial overtones and, and religious overtones that people were not happy with.  We--and we went to--when I was doing 'Tommy' we were in the southern states and they didn't wanna serve us when the bus drove in.
Speaker 1: Remember--what state was that?
Speaker 2: I think it was Tennessee.  They closed the restaurant, you know, (laughter) when the bus drove up because everybody on the bus had long hair and you know, like hippies and the whatnot.  And when 'Jesus Christ Superstar,' Superstar, our Jesus was a blond and he had very, very long hair.  And they--we were in Florida and they were not that thrilled about it, but it's what it was, you know.
Speaker 1: You find yourself in a lot of plays of, of--in the rock opera type play, what, what why do you think that--that was attributed to your power of voice, what was?
Speaker 2: Yes it was.  Because since I did study classical music, I could do first soprano, second soprano and tenor, and, and alto at that time.
Speaker 1: That's a long range.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So I could, you know, do the soprano for a while and then I could go and do the tenor parts with the guys and then the alto parts later, you know.  And so I got a lot of the operas.  So I had high belts, so I got a lot of the rock shows.
Speaker 1: 'Jesus Christ Superstar,' what were the reviews like for you in that?
Speaker 2: The- there were not really.  I mean they didn't really pick out any of the women except Mary [Mary Magdalene] because she was the lead woman.  And Jesus and Judas were the lead men, you know, so they got most--and it's a male show, so most of the men got the reviews, you know.
Story_ID: 465122
Speaker 1: So at this time period, now you're on--this is your second large performance--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you're traveling again with this particular production you've become (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I stayed on the road.
Speaker 1: Stayed on the road.  Now how's family life at this point?
Speaker 2: Family life is okay.  They're, they're, they're surviving, you know.  I'm sending home money and helping with a lot of the bills and you know, and so it was okay, you know.  But my dad [Robert Brown, Sr.] missed me and my brother [David Brown (ph.)], baby brother, you know, wanted me home.  So whenever I could I, you know, would send for them, you know.  If we're gonna be in a--in a certain city for a sit down for two weeks or more, you know, if my dad wanted to come, which he did, he would come and he'd bring the baby, you know and they'd be there for a couple of days.  It was hard because then they didn't wanna leave, especially my brother, you know.  But he did, you know.
Speaker 1: This is about possibly ten years after you had said what you wanted to do and now you're doing it.  How are you feeling inside now at this time, because now you're an actress?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I, I, I think, if I remember correctly, I was doing good, you know.  I felt good about it.  I wanted more, you know.  And that's part of the business, you get greedy, you want more.  You know, what's my next job, you know.  And even though at that time I enjoyed them when I was doing them as opposed to now, most of the kids are in a job, they're looking for a job while they're in the job.  So they're not enjoying the one they are in.  So I, I, I'd never had that, you know, so.
Speaker 1: How long was that run from that particular production, 'Jesus Christ Superstar' [Andrew Lloyd Weber and Tim Rice]?
Speaker 2: It only ran for two months, Octo- October and November 'cause by Christmastime we were coming back home.
Story_ID: 465123
Speaker 1: Now as you mentioned looking for the job while the job is occurring--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so we know that that ended, and what did you do next?
Speaker 2: 'Hair' ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical'].
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us about the 'Hair' audition?
Speaker 2: 'Hair' audition I went up and auditioned for that and I told them I wouldn't take off my clothes.  And so it was the first company to go to South Africa, first integrated company to go to South Africa to play before an integrated audience in Lesotho.  And so I got in that company and we left (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year was that?
Speaker 2: That was '74 [1974], '73 [1973], '74 [1974], yeah, think so.
Speaker 1: So now, apartheid is in full effect at that point?
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: And maybe even the, even the common American sensibility toward it hasn't really hit us there, we're not--nobody's really paying that much attention during that time period.  But you go to South Africa with "Hair."  You're a qualified actress, but tell me about the experience there when you get to South Africa?
Speaker 2: Well when we got--I didn't know it was such a long ride, I'd--I had no idea, you know.  My father [Robert Brown, Sr.] was not happy about it at all.  And, but I had to go, I was like no, this is gonna be a great experience, you know.  You know, I'll be fine, I'll be fine, and, and--
Speaker 1: What was your role in 'Hair,' what did you play in 'Hair'?
Speaker 2: I was one of The Supreme girls and later I played Hud, and they called me Hudra, you know, because our male lead got sick.  So I played that role.  And, and we traveled, I think, it was either fifteen or nineteen hours to South Africa and we got to Johannesburg [South Africa].  At the airport of Johannesburg [Jan Smuts International Airport; O.R. Tambo International Airport, Johannesburg, South Africa], and we had to spend the night to go to Lesotho the next day, Maseru [Lesotho], and they locked us in our room.  (Laughter) We were in the airport and there's hotel suites in the airport and they locked us in the room overnight (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From the outside?
Speaker 2: On the outside.
Speaker 1: When you say they, who would you be referring to?
Speaker 2: I guess it's the, the authorities that were in Johannesburg, you know.  I had never seen police with guns, you know, the [U.S.] Army with guns, you know.  And they're there and they were there in Johannesburg, we went to Johannesburg for one day.  But just getting to, getting to Lesotho, we got to Lesotho the next day.  And as we were arriving it was their winter, and we came prepared for summer.  So the people there met us, I guess whoever they--from the hotels or whatnot, and we were freezing.  And I remember that they gave us blankets to put on, you know.  'Cause we had on cotton clothes, you know, we had all our clothes, but it was cotton clothes on there, and they said, "Welcome home."  And I just thought oh my god.  And you know, welcome home.  And so we all, this was a, a integrated company and we went to our hotels, you know.  There's, there was two main hotels there, the Holiday Inn, which was brand new and then a smaller venue that we could stay in.  And I, I just was just stunned by just the idea that I was in Africa and the kids in the, in the show which was g- who are friends of mine still today, is Robert Rubinsky and his wife, Zora Rasmussen, they were married and they are Jewish and they had a harder time, you know, with the government there, you know.  And, and Steve, I can't remember, I think his last name was Shockett [ph.], I'm not sure, Steve and they, they had a hard time.  You know, they were followed a lot, you know.  They followed us, but not so much.  They were interested in what we had to say.  So when--Demaris Gray [ph.] was the other black lady that was in, and so they would listen to what we'd have to say, you know, when we were talking to people.  We talked to the women and whatnot.  And so that was like very wonderful.  And we met a wonderful Brazilian band that played for us in the show.  And we met both black and white kids from, oh it was called Rhodesia [Zimbabwe], Rhodesia at that time and they were fighting at that time.  And so, it, it was just a wonderful company, and I use that word a lot, wonderful, because we had black, white, French, English and South African all together.
Story_ID: 465124
Speaker 1: And so when we opened that night, you know, we crawled through the audience, it's part of the 'Hair' ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical'], you crawl through the audience and the audience had never witnessed anything like that.  And the black and white audiences sat together because the Holiday Inn in Lesotho is the equivalent of Las Vegas [Nevada].  So they could come there and they could come with whomever they wanted, and they could also buy Playboy magazine, the government didn't take it there.  And, and they gambled and so it was, you know.  It, it was interesting because we were there for nine months, and I won't--I wouldn't trade it for anything.  Even though we had to stay there, we couldn't go to Johannesburg [South Africa] so easily.  They gave us a twenty-four-hour, hour pass--visa to go to Johannesburg.  It takes almost twelve hours to get there.  So we got there, just out of spite, we were like we're going.  And we drove with a English crew and whatnot.  And we got there and we could only really stay for one hour and had to turn around and come back, you know, for that long period of time.  But the people could not have been nicer.  They knew we were coming, they prepared food, and rest, you know, areas and stuff for us.  And, and, you know, we had a good time there.
Speaker 2: You mentioned Demaris Gray [ph.] earlier, were, were you the only two black females in this musical at this time?
Speaker 1: From America?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  There was another lady, but she did not wanna stay, so she came back.
Speaker 2: And did, and did Ms. Gray go on to any other thing that we would know of that was of--
Speaker 1: She did 'The Wiz.'  You know, she did 'The Wiz' yeah, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: You spent nine months in, in South Africa--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --a much different place then what you lived?
Speaker 1: Oh my god, yes.
Speaker 2: Are you communicating with your family a lot at this point?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Letters, you know.  And you'd call now and then.  Yo- it was hard to get the calls through from South Africa sometimes.  But, you know, I'd call my dad [Robert Brown, Sr.] and you know whatnot.
Story_ID: 465125
Speaker 1: What personal transformation occurred for you or, or aspect of you of where you come from--or where you have been living as an American citizen and where you were now, what did you actually experience inside of yourself at this point?
Speaker 2: I had a great deal of strength, you know, to see where people--where our people had come from, our people had come from.  And to be thankful for what I had. Because we went to church one Sunday and it's--like I said, it's winter, and Demaris [Demaris Gray (ph.)] and I went to church and we walked there.  And when--it was a small church.  It had, oh god--the heat was, oh god, what is it--it's, it's in a canister, you know, it's like gasoline, they call it petrol, you know.
Speaker 1: Propane.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and that's how they heated the church in this, in this stove so to speak.  And they passed the plate after the service was over, they thanked us for coming, we stood and all that kind of stuff.  And the church, they, they had like pennies, rands, they called them rands, you know, and--their money.  And we were making money in South Africa so we put in like I guess it was like ten, twenty dollars each, and of course the minister came out--not of course, the minister came and said, "You--do you know how much money you put in?"  'Cause he thought we didn't know the money difference between rand and American money.  You know, how much that was.  And we said, "Yeah," you know, "this, this is, you know, our offering."  And he was so grateful and he said that was enough heat for almost a year.  You know, you're like (gesture), you know, and the kids there were very happy, seriously for pencils and books, and you know, a scarf if you took your scarf off and gave them a scarf and whatnot and, and 'cause this is an independent black country.  You know, so they don't have the same kind of money.  And they were smart, they spoke French, they spoke Spanish, not Spanish--Italian, and then their native Xhosa, you know.  And our kids here can't even go to school.  You know, they show up with no pencils, no bags.  So there were just different things, you know, that you, you saw that, you know, god, this, this country is amazing, you know, America is amazing.  And how much we have and how much we throw away, you know, and--'cause that--with eating, you know, you get small portions in, in, in Africa or Europe and you know, we're used to having the big steak or big break and whatnot, and you get a little portion there and you think it's not gonna be enough, but it is enough and we would throw away food and people were like, oh.  And you could see that the attendants--the peo- didn't wanna take your plate because you were gonna throw away that food and somebody could eat it, you know.  So I learnt a great deal.
Story_ID: 465126
Speaker 1: As an actress now, how are your skills now, you be- are you seeing yourself as a better actress now?
Speaker 2: Yes, because of all of that, you get in touch, you know.  All of, all of the shows that I did I learnt something, which you're supposed to as just a human being, you get in touch more, you know.  And you realize, you know, this is nothing in the real scheme of everything, you know.  So, it was good.
Speaker 1: And how were, how were the reviews for 'Hair' ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical'] during that time period?
Speaker 2: Oh they were wonderful.  'Hair' was wonderful.  I got good reviews.  Most of the American kids had--all got good reviews 'cause they had not seen anything like it.  Because with the company, some of the other members of the company were very restricted because they hadn't learned the freedom that we had.  That from being American you have a great deal of freedom and the kids from the other side s- didn't have it.  They eventually learned it, a lot of our (laughter) bad habits, you know.  But Sam Bodivee [ph.] and Sammy Brown, they were big singers over there.  And, and they learned how to fight a little more because of it.
Story_ID: 465127
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had mentioned being in So- South Africa being a different place than it is now, that at that point I believe Nelson Mandela was still in jail at that point.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you explain the, the tenor at that time, the, the climate?
Speaker 2: Oh he was still in jail and the people were loving him still.  He was a martyr, you know, so to speak, you know.  And the South African, from what I was told, police treated him very nicely because he had been there so long.  And his wife [Winnie Madikizela-Mandela], I never met her, but she was around and about with all the people that supported him and supported their movement and trying to get him freed, you know.  And I did want to meet him, and I wanted to meet him, but I, you know, never did.
Speaker 1: Did anybody in the cast meet him that you're aware of?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh, no one did, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: So how long was your run there with 'Hair' ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical']?
Speaker 2: My h- my run was nine months.  Demaris Gray [ph.] and I decided that we were tired and ready to come home, you know.  Nine months was enough to be away from your family and, and, and friends and whatnot.  And you were in Lesotho so you couldn't go anywhere else to visit, you know.
Speaker 1: You kind of went to it earlier, but what were the audience's reactions to, to what they were seeing?
Speaker 2: Shocked, you know, and excuse me, they had never seen white performers or black performers stripped nude in a show.  Some people had never seen a show, you know, and, and it wa- you know, like I said it was like Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada], you know.  And they loved it, but they were stunned by it, absolutely stunned.  And at that time, '73 [1973], '74 [1974], 'Hair' was old here in the United States 'cause it was in the '60s [1960s] when 'Hair'--you know.  But there was an independent producer who wanted to do it in South Africa, 'cause he knew that he could make a lot of money and, and it was new to there, you know.  As opposed to now, where 'Lion King' ['The Lion King'] has gone to South Africa, an elaborate production is over there.  So, we were, you know, sent there.  We auditioned and got the positions, and then we went there, you know.  But it was time to get out after a while.
Story_ID: 465128
Speaker 1: And you and Demaris [Demaris Gray (ph.)] left?
Speaker 2: We left.  We decided that we'd go to Cairo [Egypt] and Nairobi [Kenya] to see some more of Africa.  So we went to Nairobi first and to see there, and we got--we were going to leave, sorry, and go to Cairo, which we wanted to see.  But when you leave, I don't know if it's still in existence, every time you leave a country in Africa you have to pay a tax, and that's a huge tax on your luggage and your body.  And so we paid money coming out of South Africa, coming out of Maseru [Lesotho].  Then we went to Nairobi and then we're gonna pay money coming out of Nairobi to go to Cairo.  That was all our spending money that we had, you know, set aside for it.  Because the other monies that you had saved all those nine months you were sending home through at that time Barclay Bank [Barclays Bank International Limited; Barclays Bank PLC] I think it was called, Barclay Bank.  So, you were just praying that your money was there (laughter) when you got back.  But I--it, it, you know, it was legitimate.  And so we went to Nairobi and we were gonna get ready to board the plane to go to Cairo, and they asked for an enormous amount of money.  And we're like no, we're coming from this place, that place and we've already paid, we had our stubs and everything.  And they were like, no you still owe us, you know, so much money.  So we--
Speaker 1: Now is this the airlines or the government, what is this?
Speaker 2: It's the government.  And so we opted to not go to Cairo.  Turned the tickets in and send the luggage straight from Nairobi to the United States, instead of making a st- you know, a stop, stop, stop and stopping in London [England] and then stopping in the United States.  So we sent our luggage straight through.  We got our tickets to come home, to come to the United States.  And when we got to the, the American counter, they said, well these tickets are not paid for, and we're like oh yes they are because we were (makes sounds).  And they were like, no, these tickets--you've been flying on tickets that have not been paid for.  And we said well we have to get home and we are American citizens and we gave them a whole story.  And they let us come home.  They let us come home on those non-paying tickets.  And when we got to the United States, we were like, whew, kiss the ground.  And then we called back to South Africa and spoke to the American kids that were there to tell them that their tickets are not paid for.
Speaker 1: So, so the promoter or his--
Speaker 2: The promoter did not pay for the tickets, you know.  And we don't know if he was mad because we left or not, but it was time to go, you know.  And they brought in a company, you know, another--it was half of the original company that was there and then some new people.  And Robert Enzorro [ph.] left also, they were behind us.  I forgot where they stopped, but they were behind us.  And they ran into a lot of trouble with their tickets, you know, so.  (Shrugs shoulders) You know, it's--
Speaker 1: So you (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) but it's what is what happens, you know.
Story_ID: 465129
Speaker 1: You get back home and return to your family--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I'm sure after nine months, so how was that reunion?
Speaker 2: Oh it was great, it was just great being home and seeing everybody, and, and telling all of my stories, you know.  My brother [David Brown (ph.)] had grown, you know--
Speaker 1: The youngest brother?
Speaker 2: The youngest brother.  So we just, you know, we talked and, and just had a great, you know, time together, you know.  And I was trying to tell them that I was gonna try and stay home more 'cause I was on the road a lot, you know.  But that's where you were making the money, you know, there was no stationary job at that point.  And I think--
Speaker 1: So now what year would this--without cutting away, what year is this when you got back?
Speaker 2: This is '74 [1974]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is '74 [1974].  And like mid-'74 [1974] and I remember that Demaris Gray [ph.], we, we'd all met at her house to have kind of a reunion and talking about what we've done with some other actresses, and you know.  'Cause we learned to do (unclear), you know, and rapping and whatnot.  And there was an audition for 'Sparkle.'  And I said, "Oh I wanna audition for that."  And, and I remember them saying, "Oh you can't audition for that, that's a movie," you know, that the people want, you know, not stars necessarily but to get in was gonna be very difficult.  And that was all you had--always had to say to me, was that you can't do it, and I went right down there and I auditioned (laughter) and I got it, you know.  And so people were like, oh my god, you know.  And so it was just the, you know, there's no fear, there was no fear then, you know.  So that's what I did.
Speaker 1: So 'Sparkle,' now that was a film?
Speaker 2: That was my first film.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that?
Speaker 2: I hadn't done, I hadn't done a Broadway show yet, I had done tours, and this was my first film.  I went in, Warner Brothers [Warner Brothers Entertainment, Inc.], they had the audition at a theater, Midtown [New York, New York].  I stood on line and then I went in and I sang.  And when I finished singing, the man came up to me and he said, we want you to come back this afternoon.  And so I was like, okay.  So I left and I walked around town to try--you know, for hours because my call wasn't until late afternoon and I thought, what am I gonna do until then.  So I went, you know, looking in stores, and I sat someplace and had some soup and you know, I made myself busy until the time.  And then I went back in the afternoon and I sang, and they said, thank you, and then I left.  And I didn't hear from them.  They said they were looking for a girl to play Tune Ann, the next-door neighbor.  So I did not hear from them, and I was having trouble with my nose, a deviated septum, I used to have constant postnasal drip, when I came back home I had that.  So, it was about a month, I think, before I heard from them and then I decided to have this done before I heard from them.  And I, I think it was--I went in the hospital to have it done and they called and said that I had gotten it.  And I was like freaking out because I needed to have the, the postnasal drip taken care of, but I also needed to sing, you know.
Speaker 1: How long was your recovery time supposed to be?
Speaker 2: The recovery time was a short period of time, but they pack your nose and all that kind of stuff, and so I had the surgery done.  And Demaris [Demaris Gray (ph.)] came to see me in the hospital, you know, it was just like overnight.  And she said, "I don't believe you got that film," you know, and I'm like, "Yeah, I got it, I got it," you know.  But I've got to get well.  I've got to get well, you know, and I was willing myself to get well faster.
Story_ID: 465130
Speaker 1: I was out of the hospital and, and you know, there was a long process of you know when I was gonna come and whatnot, and the information that they needed.  And I got it and I was on the plane like in a matter of days with my sore nose and sore throat so to speak.  And I went to Warner Brothers [Warner Brothers Entertainment, Inc.].  And I was just--I've made it, you know, your mind just says, oh you've made it, your first movie ['Sparkle'] and whatnot, and at that time Lester Wilson was alive.  He was a very famous choreographer, black choreographer.  Michael Peters was alive at that time also.  He was the assistant.
Speaker 2: A famous choreographer.
Speaker 1: Yeah, famous choreographer for all of Michael Jackson's stuff.  And then I'm just like oh god this is great.  So I went with my music and my tape recorder and my pencils and you know, they came in the door bam, all right, let's hit it, you know.  And they showed you the steps and we started learning that day.  And that's when I met Irene Cara and Lonette McKee, and Phillip Michael Thomas, and Dorian Harewood, you know, and I thought yes, yes, you know, I'm gonna be a big star, you know.
Speaker 2: 'Cause at that point they had had limit--limited successes in their own--
Speaker 1: Yeah all of them were brand new.  And, and we were told from Warner Brothers that we were going to be the next 'American Graffiti,' you know, they made stars out of all of those stars that were in that movie, you know, and we were going to be that answer to that, you know.  The black answer to that, you know.  And Aretha [Aretha Franklin] laid the tracks, you know, and, and Luther Vandross--
Speaker 2: Did you meet those too, did you meet them?
Speaker 1: No I didn't meet her, I met Luther, you know.  And Luther and I just had great conversations and we went to Roscoe's [Roscoe's House of Chicken and Waffles, Los Angeles, California] to eat.
Speaker 2: Which one?
Speaker 1: The one that's on Gower [Street] and Sunset [Boulevard], and we just sat and talked and laughed.  And at that time, he was very young and very large, and we were like okay now we're gonna lose weight, we're gonna do this and we're gonna do that, and he was saying, "You gotta do your record (unclear)," you know.  Just a wonderful, great time, you know.  And that's when the business was like really starting for us, you know, all kinds of opportunities were there, you know.
Speaker 2: You're in Hollywood now--
Speaker 1: We're in Hollywood.
Speaker 2: --now what does your family say?
Speaker 1: Couldn't believe it.  Couldn't believe it, you know.
Speaker 2: Could you believe it?
Speaker 1: No, yes and no at times.  I'm like I don't believe this, but I was afraid like I'm gonna wake up and this is not gonna be true or whatever, I'm, you know this is Hollywood so this is different from theater, you know.  I don't wanna be too big and I don't wanna, you know, all of that, you're taking your brain.  But after a couple of days of shooting and whatnot, I, I, I, you know, I had it, I knew it, you know.  And as a matter of fact, the lady who did my hair I worked with her on 'Bulworth,' a film which was done several years ago and she remembered.  She says, "I remember when you first came and I had to press all that long hair."  And I thought, yes, you know, I remembered that, you know.  And I didn't want to have my hair pressed in front of everybody.  I wanted to be behind the screen, you know, (laughter) so she did it.  Just little things like that, you know.  So it was really good, really good, you know.
Story_ID: 465131
Speaker 1: What was the difference in shooting a movie in which you have been used to as far as your rehearsal and working conditions were concerned?
Speaker 2: Well, it's camera (gesture) so it's tighter.  So you learn to bring it all in.  So that was something I had to learn, you know.  'Cause on stage you have a lot of energy and you're bigger than, you know, you're bigger than life practically.  You know, but on the camera you had to bring it in.  You didn't have to talk as loud, you know projection, because you had the sound, sound, you know (laughter).  You know, and the dance numbers, of course, you did them out, you know and you did the musical numbers but it was a little more controlled, you know for camera.  So it's another technique, you know, so, learned that.
Speaker 1: What about the work schedule, the rehearsal schedule for a movie versus (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, it was, well at that time it was easy, you know.  We worked in the day.  'Cause I think Irene [Irene Cara] at that time was sixteen, she was either fifteen or sixteen, you know.  And her mom [Louise Cara] was our chaperone, you know.  Mary Alice, you know, played the mother [Effie] and, and so we just all just kind of sat around the pool and I thought this is the life, this is what I'm going to do, you know.  Anything you want you could get, they'd give it to you, you know.  And you'd go to restaurants, you know, as a whole group, you know, and it was just people look--who's that, who's that, or they're doing this new movie ['Sparkle'].  So it was really quite wonderful, it was a good time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now how long were you--how long did the movie shoot before, before it was released?
Speaker 2: I don't know how long that movie shot.  It didn't shoot that long, maybe six weeks, you know, different yeah.  Yeah, it wasn't.  They, they used another film that they had never used before so the film came out dark, you know.  And so I don't know if that had anything to do with it or not.  You know, I just don't know.  I just remember going to see the dailies, which I had never done before, had never seen, I didn't know what it was.  And you'd go to see what work you had done that day, you know, or the day before.  And I remember sitting there and saying, "It's too dark, it's too dark," you know I had a big mouth, "It's too dark, it's too dark."  And they were like, "Oh it will be lighter, you know, they haven't finished working on it," but they never did.  They, they had a, like a Fugi [Fugifilm Holdings Corporation] kind of film, it was brand new and they didn't know how to light black people with this film.  And it--'cause it's, it's a great film, but it's too dark, you know, the lighting was not good.  And it's a classic, you know, so.
Story_ID: 465132
Speaker 1: So the film, when you, when you were done shooting it wa- did you stay or did you return back to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: No, I went back home after that.  'Cause we were getting ready for it to open and there was supposed to be a lot of publicity and fanfare and whatnot.  And I was a supporting role so it wasn't any evidence if I would be the one going on the road.  But then 'All the President's Men' came out and all the--and that they got our publicity money.  So the publicity for 'Sparkle' was very small, you know, it got, got pushed, you know.
Speaker 1: You came back home after shooting the movie, now what did you do while you were waiting for this to be released?
Speaker 2: Well, I just tried to settle in and see what else I could get into, you know.  That was just such a high, you know, shooting a film.  And then I g- I went back to theater and, and then I went to do--is that '74 [1974], '75 [1975] the film came out.  Just, you know, doing theater, you know.
Speaker 1: Anything of note that you'd like to mention during that time period after 'Sparkle'?
Speaker 2: No, 'cause I didn't do--I did 'On Toby Time' [Harley Hackett], which was gonna be pre-Broadway.  That was '75 [1975], yeah.  And I played female lead in that, which was great with Maurice Hines [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.], we're still friends, we're, we're good friends.  Amii Stewart who--she did 'Knock-' 'Knock on Wood,' she, she did a repeat of that song and she moved to London [England].  Do you remember that song?  Obba Babatunde, Hinton Battle.  Hinton Battle is a wonderful choreographer, wonderful dancer.  He was in 'Dreamgirls.'  I don't know if you know him.  George Hillman, the Hillman brothers [George Hillman and Christopher Hillman] from way back in the day.  And I say way back in the day, they were like the Nicholas brothers [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas], the older men, and he was my partner.  And we were like Desi Smith [ph.], you know, kind of era.  I learned to tap through him you know for this particular role and whatnot.  And, and so we were, like I said, pre-Broadway bound, but it never took off because of money, a lot of money situations got into that.  And then I went to do 'Guys and Dolls,' and that's when I met Ri- Richard Roundtree.
Speaker 1: Now the movie comes out--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what is that like for you in New York now?
Speaker 2: Wonderful because in the neighborhoods, all of the neighborhoods, people recognized me.  So people would just call my name out, Tune Ann, you know, driving the cars, "Oh aren't you Tune Ann, aren't you that girl in the film?" you know.  And I was like, "Yes," you know.  You know, and my brothers [Robert Brown, Jr. and David Brown (ph.)] and my brothers were like (gesture), and my dad [Robert Brown, Sr.] was the same way, you know.  Very excited about it.  And you know, it's different from being in theater, you get recognized more with film.  Many thousands of people see it as opposed to theater, you know, and so it was a lot of recognition with that.
Story_ID: 465133
Speaker 1: After you do 'Sparkle,' after you do some various roles around, waiting for that to be released, then you go do 'Guys and Dolls.'  Tell us about that one?
Speaker 2: That was on tour.  I was back out on tour again with, it was Richard Roundtree and Maurice Hines [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.], Debbie Allen, Leslie Uggams, and, and myself.  And, and we'd do a tour, which was supposed to be a national tour, but it, it was--it ended sooner than, than it was supposed to.  And that was, that was fun, and it was the first time I had been in an all-black company, you know.
Speaker 1: Now at this point, Richard Roundtree had he already done 'Shaft'?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So he was--had already completed that?
Speaker 2: He di- yeah, he did that and he also di- he had done 'Roots,' Leslie Uggams had just completed 'Roots,' you know.  And, and I think she was up for an Emmy [Emmy Award] 'cause see she left and that's when--oh my god, the woman that came in to replace her, Ernestine Jackson.  Ernestine Jackson came in.  And, but the tour was, you know, coming to a close, you know.
Speaker 1: Describe working with, with Mr. Roundtree and Ms. Uggams and Ms. Allen, how was that working with those?
Speaker 2: You, you know, you stood and you watch, you learned.  You know, they were all new.  Debbie Allen was kind of new, and she was doing her thing.  And, and Leslie was being recognized for 'Roots,' and she had been on many shows.  So you would like to watch her do her craft, you know.  And incredible voice, you know.  And she her own charts to the, to the show.  So that was great and you watched Debbie do her, her number, her comedic number from the Hot Box girls, you know.  And, and Maurice, I think that was the first time he had done a romantic lead.  So he was finding his self, you know, and, and what worked for him, and (Unclear) and Debbie.  And Richard Roundtree just had to come out on stage, he didn't have to do anything.  He just came out and the audience would just scream, you know.  And so watching him learn theater, because he'd done film was an education also because he had to learn to project more and what works, you know, 'cause again subtleties don't work on stage, you have to do it much bigger.  So he learned, and it was great, 'cause we'd all sit and talk shop some nights, you know.
Speaker 1: So you were like an instrument in helping him see the transition point being 'cause you had experience in both?
Speaker 2: Yeah I did.  But, I, I, I didn't offer too much up.  You know, because this is a famous movie star.  The only thing I could ever say to him is that, don't forget to face down stage, you know, because he'd go up stage, you know, to talk.  You gotta come down stage, you know (laughter).  You know, because the mics [microphone], you know, and whatnot.  But I didn't have a lot to say to him because he, he learned.  And once you told him something, he quickly got it and then he learned what worked and what didn't work, you know.
Story_ID: 465134
Speaker 1: So at this point you've done several, several large productions--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you've done a movie ['Sparkle']--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --'Guys and Dolls' is getting reviews, what are you gonna do next at this point?
Speaker 2: At, at this point, I went into--what did I do after this show.  We did 'Guys and Dolls.'  Oh, I--when I came back I auditioned for a show, my agent at the time called and said there was gonna be a new show called 'Ain't Misbehavin'' [Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.] and they were looking for a Lena Horne-type.  And of course I'm, you know, physically I was not that, but he sent me anyway 'cause he knew I was like that (unclear)--sent me anyway, let, let me show you what I can do and the you decide.
Speaker 1: Who was your agent at this point?
Speaker 2: Dan Guerrero who is my friend now, still, thirty years.  And I don't get rid of friends, I have good friends (laughter).  And so I went in and at that time, just before that I wasn't working and I had my apartment with my friend Sheila [ph.].  We had shared an apartment together.  And so I couldn't spend a lot of money, you know, 'cause you're living on a budget and whatnot.  And at that time, the bus fare was fifty cents in New York City [New York, New York].  And my audition was a day that it rained and I used to wear suede boots, which the girls call Uggs now.  They were suede boots then, you know.  And I had a Persian lamb coat, a second-hand Persian lamb coat, 'cause you know you wore vintage clothing.  And the day of my audition it poured down raining.  And the audition was supposed to be on seventy--was on 71st Street and First Avenue, and I thought it was 71st Street on Broadway side.  And I didn't have another fifty cents (laughter) to get back through the park.  So I walked, you know, I walked through the rain.  And so I got to the audition and by that time my coat was smelling because it was lamb, Persian lamb so it was stinking up and my suede boots were soaking wet.  And I got in there and I started singing and dancing, you know, and I just sold the top, you know, the top part of my face, (makes sounds).  And the guys were like, you know, and I sang and they liked it and I left.  And so by the time I got back home, my coat had started to, to peel.  The, the arms were (laughter) starting to come out of the Persian lamb coat and the suede boots were (makes sounds), you know.  And I thought oh what the hell I didn't get that 'cause I didn't feel any great about it.  But then I did get it.  I did get the show.  And that was another.  And, and let me just back up because, before--after the 'Guys and Dolls,' and 'On Toby Time' [Harley Hackett] and all that, there, there was like a couple months where I didn't work at all, you know.  So I was saving every penny, so that's, that's one of the reasons why I didn't have the money to--extra money to pay for a car fare, two car fares, you know.
Story_ID: 465135
Speaker 1: Who were some of the big names in the, in the show in that particular production of 'Ain't Misbehavin'' [Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.] besides yourself?
Speaker 2: Oh the Broadway show.  Well that was Nell Carter, the late Nell Carter, [HistoryMaker] Andre De Shields who played The Wiz, you know.  [HistoryMaker] Ken Page was also in 'The Wiz' and 'Guys and Dolls.'  And at the--when we did the workshop, it was Irene Cara, and then when we went to Broadway it was Charlayne Woodard did that role, you know.
Speaker 1: So you got--you have this show now and this is about your fifth or sixth major Broadway production at this point?
Speaker 2: No, no.  This is my first Broadway show.
Speaker 1: Oh your first Broadway show.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  All the other shows were tours, national tours, you know.  And I did a movie ['Sparkle'] before I did a Broadway show.  This is why, you know, you kind of say you usually do the Broadway show and then you do the movies, you know.  It was reverse, yeah.
Speaker 1: So is it fair to say within a ten to twelve year period possibly from the time you said what you wanted to do and now you've done a movie, a Broadway show, been to South Africa, done quite a few things that people still dream of.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.  Yeah I did.
Speaker 1: Nell Carter.  Who was the choreographer of 'Ain't Misbehavin''?
Speaker 2: Arthur Faria.  Yeah, he's in Florida I believe now.
Speaker 1: And this show went on for how long?
Speaker 2: Oh, three years.  Three years.  But I, I didn't do it for totally three years, I think I only did it for two years.
Speaker 1: But during that two-year period that you were there, wha- what were the awards that you received or the show was nominated for?
Speaker 2: Well the show was nominated for Tonys [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Broadway Theatre] and we won all the way across the board.  And we also did the NBC special of it and we won the Emmy for that--nighttime Emmy [sic. Primetime Emmy] for that.  And I won a Theatre World Award, that's my first Broadway show, I got a Theater World Award, so I was really excited about that, you know.
Story_ID: 465136
Speaker 1: Ms. McQueen [HistoryMaker Armelia McQueen], 'Ain't Misbehavin'' [Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.], what's the storyline behind that particular musical?
Speaker 2: The storyline was about Fats Waller, famous pianist, comedian, singer.  And they decided that they wanted to honor him and do a musical about Fats Waller, who was not well known in, in our community during that time, in the '70s [1970s].  Back in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] he was known.  So they wanted to bring some of his music to light.  People know the music like, "Sit Down and Write Myself a Letter" ["I'm Gonna Sit Right Down and Write Myself a Letter"], "It's a Sin to Tell a Lie."  But they didn't know who did it, who wrote it.  And so they decided that they wanted to do this musical about him.  And Luther Henderson who is a great, who has now passed, great musician was our conductor and arranger.  Murray Horwitz, it was his idea.  Richard Maltby [Richard Maltby, Jr.] was the director and Arthur Faria was the choreographer.
Speaker 1: And what was your role?
Speaker 2: My role was of Aremlia McQueen is a role that I established.  And it was a woman with a chameleon, many characters.  I played many characters.  And it's a woman that would be in that day and what she'd do and, and--each of the women, the "Squeeze Me" girl was, you know, a, a sweet candy little woman that men would, you know, love to bite and squeeze, you know, so I, I came up with her.  You know, because of the song, the song dictated it, you know, what 'cause it's "oh daddy squeeze me and squeeze me again."  So you, you, you form your characters from the, the music.  And "That Ain't Right" lady was that lady who we'd talked about playing cards and cursing and you know, eating chicken, but yet she was a lady, but she got down low, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you actually formulated these characters outside of the music, the characters been totally written or did you kind of go into the song themselves and decide?
Speaker 2: The characters were never written.  All the characters that we formed that we did, we did ourselves, so.
Speaker 1: Oh, could you--could you sing a piece from a, from a, from just a small portion of one of those songs, just anything?
Speaker 2: Oh my god.
Speaker 1: How about the daddy squeeze me?
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, wait a minute.  You put me on the spot.  (Singing) "Oh daddy squeeze me and squeeze me again.  Oh papa don't stop 'til I tell you when.  Oh daddy squeeze me and kiss me some more just like we did before.  Your papa cupid is standing close by.  Oh daddy don't let your sweet baby cry, just pick me up on your knee I just get so, you know, oh when you squeeze me."
Speaker 1: Bravo (claps hands), that's beautiful (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh god, I haven't done that for years.  And you never forget it though, you know, never forget it.
Speaker 1: It's good.  So, so those characters, so everybody developed their own character?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So they gave you the freedom to do that?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And what did they say when they saw the character development, wha- what did the writers--'cause you know they have their idea?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the director and the choreographer, they were just happy for you to come up with that, you know.  Then they could, they could then mold, you know.  The character of Fats Waller was really kind of established because of my dear friend [HistoryMaker] Ken Page who looks like him, you know.  And of course who is a wonderful comedian, actor, so he captured him, you know.  Because this man was alive, he was real and so he captured him.  The other characters, we were like people from that era, you know.  And Nell [Nell Carter] was like, oh I don't know the character's name, but Luther Henderson called her name, you know, it reminded him of those women.
Story_ID: 465137
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nell Carter at that point, you know, we mentioned her earlier, what kind of personality was she, describe her personality?
Speaker 2: Bigger than life.  Bigger than life, you know.  Complex, you know, wonderful, wonderful talent, you know.  You loved her and then she could drive you crazy, you know.  So you gotta--so it was five people and it was like brothers and sisters, you know.  And Andre [HistoryMaker Andre De Shields], he reminded me a great deal of oh--Bill Robinson and some of those characters back there.  But out, even further out, you know, in, in today's life.  And full of energy.  And you never knew what was--he was gonna come up with.  So you were always kind of, you know, watching him.  And because--but, but the shows were lock- once they were locked, they were locked.  We didn't deviate from them.  So you kne- counted on another person of what they were gonna do, you knew what they were gonna do.  And Charlayne [Charlayne Woodard] came in later.  Her character was kind of formed because of Irene [Irene Cara], but then she brought her own stuff to the table with it of a wacky lady, you know, so.  It, it was, it was a, a very, very talented company, not just because I was in it, but it was.  Because these people created from no script.  You just had the songs and you created from that.
Speaker 1: Broadway, Broadway, Broadway now you're there--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is it different from, from what you expect?
Speaker 2: Not really.  The wonderful thing about it is that you are on stage every night.  You are stationary--in a stationary position.  This is your home, your dressing room is your home also, you know.  You know the stage like the back of your hand.  You know all of the people the--surrounding the theater, you know, the ushers and the crew.  You know, you form your own family, you know.  On, on the road, you, you go to different houses.  You're always in a different place, you know always, so.  That was the difference, but you finally make it, you make it to Broadway.
Story_ID: 465138
Speaker 1: You spoke about [HistoryMaker] Andre De Shields and Nell Carter's personalities and you had little antidotes about them, how about the rest of the cast [of 'Ain't Misbehanin',' Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Anecdotes.
Speaker 1: The cast, since there was only five of us, we were everything.  We were the singers, the dancers, the band 'cause you know at the end we do the band number and we become those instruments.  And everyone worked very hard to form their characters.  You know, we, we started at the Manhattan Theatre Club [New York, New York] as, as a workshop, and I think we had about fifty songs, and you, you sang--you learned the songs, and the director [Richard Maltby, Jr.] and the man who thought of the, the project would decide what songs they thought was better, what would work together as an ensemble piece, the thirty-two songs that they had to pick from.  So, you know, if my s- my song was "Squeeze Me," and somebody else's song was the "Yacht Club" lady ["Yacht Club Swing"] that we would know how--they would know how to put them together.  The cast members directed themselves.  They formed them, their characters themselves.  No one gave us this to do--I mean directed us in it.  They put it together, but we f- made the characters up.  The choreographer [Arthur Faria] staged it, you know.  So, there was a, a huge fight about who was the director and who came up with the ideas.  And I have to say hands down, and I also have testified to this at some point in court, that the cast members, each came up with their characters.  You were given the songs and you came up with the character and then the director put it together.
Speaker 2: So the, so the creative process was done in--through the actors themselves?
Speaker 1: The actors themselves.  It, it would be like we sat down and we wrote all of this ourselves, you know, for each person, you know.
Speaker 2: And the director directed what you had written?
Speaker 1: He put it together, you know.  So there's--is--big debate about that.  But I remembered the late Michael Bennett came to my room and knocked on the door and we talked and whatnot, and he said, "You all did this yourselves didn't you?"  He said, "Nobody can direct you in this?"  And I said, "Yes."  You know, I said, "Yes we did, we did it ourselves." But you know, that's another story and that's another day.  Andre was very precise and exact about his character, because in the show all of the characters are our names.  We are the original people, we are the ones who put it together.  So the Andre De Shields character was very precise.  If it was, if it was just taking his gloves off in a certain way, that's what he did and that's what cl- who comes after him has to do, you know.  To the smallest thing, you know.  Even how much time it would take for him to get from one chair to the other chair to sing the line, you know.  He did it with the help of the choreographer saying that you got ten beats or, you know, so many measures to get to where you have to go to.  What are you gonna do between that time and then you did it.  You know what I'm saying?  So, there was a lot of honors that were taken and they did--and people didn't do what you thought they did I'll just say that, okay.  Charlayne [Charlayne Woodard] had, like I said, was already her, her character was established, but she came to the table with what she wanted to do and how further she could go with it.  She was directed because we--four of us had already had it.  She had to fit in to make the fifth finger, you know, make the complete hand.  So she was directed more of how to fit in.  You understand what I'm saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 465139
Speaker 1: My characters [in 'Ain't Misbehavin',' Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.], I had--I did the "Nylons" lady ["When the Nylons Bloom Again"], who was an opera singer, I studied opera and, and my character would be kind of like Kate Smith 'cause she was a patriot of the, the [U.S.] Army and whatnot.  She sang the national anthem and whatnot, you know.  So I, I pulled from that, you know, from that woman, those really bad opera singers because she, the character, the opera singer, was a bad opera singer.  You know, so I pulled from that.  From--then you go to the church and you'd hear those women who would sing sharp, (Singing) "I love you truly."  So you, you know, you just pull all of that stuff like oh I know this woman, you know.  And she's crazy, she's singing about nylons, you know.  And, and the "Squeeze Me" lady, like said was the candy woman, you know.  And she's gonna tease you and I'm gonna let you smell my perfume and, and, you know and so on.  And to find out what they like.  When Nell [Nell Carter] and I sang, we were trying to top each other.  I got a better man then you got, I can get my man, I can show him this, I can, can you do this, can you bend over, you know, just, just, you know, and so we worked together, you know, and she was like, "Oh that's good, that's good, and I'll do this, you know, I'll show you my thighs, you wanna see thighs?" you know.  And so it was a woman's, you know, the game that we play to try to ge- trap a man, you know.  And, the Walled Off ladies ["Find Out What They Like"].  [HistoryMaker] Ken Page, like I said, as Fats Waller, which he'll probably tell you more about, you know.  Everything was tongue in cheek, double entendres with him, you know.  So and he was a devil, I mean he'd pinch you in the back, you know.  When you pass buy him he'd grab ahold of your dress so to speak, you know.  And you're like, oh, you know.  It was just, it was just a really good company, which could've been a bad company because the egos, the, the, the talent was so enormous, but they all fit together like a hand.  And, and Luther Henderson was really the sixth finger, he was a part of the hand, you know, because he was on stage with us and he played the music.  And he, he would be the one sometimes to say, "Well, I don't know, think about that note, you know, is it a blue note?" you know.  And, and so you've got input from him.  And--and the different cast members would sometimes say, "You know what, if you don't move over there you will be stronger, you know."
Speaker 2: Was it always well received, the interjection, the criticism or guidance?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes.  We all were.  Everybody was very open to any information that was coming in to you, you know.  And you think about it, you work on it, and come back the next day and you hit it again, you know.
Speaker 2: And you did that for how many years?
Speaker 1: Yeah it was really two years 'cause we did--well I guess it was three years the show ran.  'Cause we did it as a workshop for a couple of months and then the producers saw it.  We were a hit before we even opened.  So we opened I think it was like J- January or February and we had to close down 'cause it was a workshop.  We closed down and then we opened back up for just a few more weeks, and then we shut down so they could build the stage and the costumes, and then we opened in April, and that is not done normally.
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977] and '78 [1978].  The end of '77 [1977] is when we auditioned, '78 [1978] is when we opened.
Speaker 2: As you said earlier, there were all kinds of awards and honors and accolades for this, for this (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, all, across the board.
Story_ID: 465140
Speaker 1: And about two years later you decide to leave, or what happens to cause you--?
Speaker 2: We (laughter), we did the show ['Ain't Misbehavin',' Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.] and in seventy--the end of '78 [1978], beginning of '79 [1979], they broke the company up.  They wanted us to go to London [England], and Nell [Nell Carter] and myself and Ken [HistoryMaker Ken Page] decided we didn't wanna go to London, but Andre [HistoryMaker Andre De Shields] and Charlayne [Charlayne Woodard] wanted to go to London.  So, the two of them went to London and they added on to their cast and the three of us stayed here and we added two people to our cast, which was Alan Weeks and Debbie Allen.
Speaker 1: And Debbie you had known her from previous experience?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: How was that working with her?
Speaker 2: Oh it was good, it was good because she wanted to do the show, but she was doing another show at that time.  I think it was 'Alice in Wonderland' [sic. 'Alice at the Palace'] she was doing, or something.  So didn't do it, so she came into the show to replace Charlayne and so she had to learn new and she had to fit in, you know.  It's never, it was never about anybody standing out, it was the fin- five hands, five fingers and it work together.  And so she learned to do that and it was fun, you know, for her and for Alan Weeks, you know.  I don't know if you know him, he was very famous--is still--song and dance man that worked in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] for many years, you know.
Speaker 1: So, when, when you decide to initially--I mean when, when you decide that, that--well you said it broke up there were two companies so to speak?
Speaker 2: Yeah it was two companies and so we stayed and then at the end of their run in London they came back and we met up here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and we did the show here for almost eight--eight, nine months out here at the Aquarius Theater [Earl Carroll Theatre, Los Angeles, California] at that time.
Speaker 1: So this would be about '79 [1979], '80 [1980].
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.  And then we met up--did the show, went to San Francisco [California], San Diego [California] and sat down for a while and we had--we got the business together to go to Paris [France].  But before Paris we did the special for NBC.
Speaker 1: The television spe- version?
Speaker 2: Television special and that was '80 [1980], you know.
Speaker 1: Now you weren't the only one in the company at that point that had been on tel- had, had--well you had movie experience, you did ge- you hadn't had TV experience at this point had you, you had movie exp- film experience?
Speaker 2: I had film experience.  I think that, I can't remember right now, but I did 'The Doctors' [ph.] and a soap ['Santa Barbara'], just guest spots on that, you know.
Speaker 1: So you had some idea?
Speaker 2: S- yeah some idea about that.  Yeah, I had already done a soap and yeah, just a guest spot.
Speaker 1: So, so how well received was, was the television, the television special?
Speaker 2: Oh we won.  We won the Emmy [Primetime Emmy Award] for it.  And we had the best time doing it.  I mean, of course, when we got here, they, you know, everything was just open, you know, the sky was the limit, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause at this point, the play had been going on for how long?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were still going on.
Speaker 1: So, so they--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the road company was in and they was doing it in New York [New York].
Story_ID: 465141
Speaker 1: So those that mattered had seen it--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the powers that be so they were waiting for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, so they were waiting for us.  And we, and we started rehearsal [for 'Ain't Misbehavin',' Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.] and at that time Nell [Nell Carter] was already in her sitcom, so they kind of--
Speaker 1: 'Gimme a Break!'
Speaker 2: Yeah, she wa- had already had been doing that.  And so she had to get back into the swing of it, you know, 'cause it was hard work, you know.  Just because everybody was big, you know, we could run marathons, you know.  And as a matter of fact when we went to Washington, D.C., they, the doctors there thought okay these are big people coming in here, you know, myself, Nell and, and Ken [HistoryMaker Ken Page].  But we were physically fit, physically fit, and so they couldn't read us for any of that, you know.  So, but she hadn't been doing the show and I think a y- six months to a year or something, maybe less.  And so she got back into shape doing it, and, and then we shot it.  And then from there, the--before the fall we went to Paris [France], but it was just Ken and myself, and Andre [HistoryMaker Andre De Shields] going to Paris.
Speaker 1: How were you received in Paris?
Speaker 2: The Parisians loved jazz, you know.  But they didn't call it, the Fats Waller, they called it 'Harlem Swing,' you know.  And so again, the sky was the limit.
Speaker 1: Were you aware of a difference in, in attitude of the--the Parisians when it came to--
Speaker 2: They knew more about Fats Waller hands down, you know.  We had the German audiences that came in.  They knew all about Fats Waller, they knew the songs, you know.  The first night we were there, you know, when we bowed after, you know, and we heard (makes sounds), and we thought they were booing us, so we went oh my god how rude.  But they were applauding us like saying bravo (laughter).  And we were like, what, you know.  And so we had a lot, a lot of tours in Paris seeing the show and it was quite wonderful.
Story_ID: 465142
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you think that your production may have really raised the consciousness of that time of people into jazz music, Fats Waller, and the understanding of what was going on with their own music--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --especially African American people?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Because prior to that (unclear) people just as aware?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know, it--you know, it's very--it's a very interesting thing when we did 'Ain't Misbehavin'' [Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.].  A lot of people came to see it and they liked it, black audiences, and it's hard to say this, white audience- white audiences also were there and they loved it.  The black audiences were not too familiar with it, but they enjoyed it and it reminded them of the times way back in the day.  But they were more excited about 'Dreamgirls.'  They were more excited about current music or the music that they hear on the radio then they were of the music that was in the past.  That's the way I felt about it, you know.
Speaker 1: Why do you think that is?
Speaker 2: Education.  What you're conditioned to, you know.  I wanna say not knowing where you're coming from, you know, and it's a harsh thing to say, but sometimes it is, you know.  This is, this is your heritage, you know, jazz.  This is an American music that we developed here, you know.  And people don't appreciate it, you know, so.  And it's okay to like 'Dreamgirls' and any other musical, you know, 'One Mo' Time' and all that kind of stuff.  It's okay for that, but you also have to know where this came from, and out of this came that.  You know what I'm saying, you know, so.
Story_ID: 465143
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's your opinion of black theater today?
Speaker 2: Black theater today, I think there's some very good black theater and then there's some very bad theater, you know.  And you, you just want people to learn their craft, you know.  And you don't, you, you have to go to a place where you educate your audience, not always bring them back, you know, step up, you know.  It's the same thing with, with some of the, the, the shows that are always religious and I'm gonna get my man and he's gonna come back, and your momma's daddy--.  So they're doing what's going on in the community, but also there's a lot more of material that we have.  We have the, the Tuskegee, you know, the men in, in--flying--airmen [Tuskegee Airmen], you know.  We have the women that created hair products.  It's not Mary Bethune [Mary McLeod Bethune], but there's another one.
Speaker 1: Madame C.J. Walker.
Speaker 2: Yes, Ms. Walker.  You know, there's, there's more information that's out there, you know.  So you don't have to always get stuck being back in--I don't know what--I don't know what you wanna call it now.  But you know, you just want people to step up a little more.  Learn a little more.  Educate your audiences a little more.  Learn your craft some more and don't take the easy way out.  Don't be lazy.  And, and sometimes I, I, I find that not just white and black, but the actors are lazy, you know.  Go for that jugular vein, you know.  Who, you know, who are you talking to?  You can't talk in your sleeve to an audience, you know, you gotta speak up, so that's my--
Story_ID: 465144
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) After 'Ain't Misbehavin'' [Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.], you had a string of--did you kind of switch to television at that point or what did you actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah, I--what--not necessarily switched, I had the opportunities to, to do more of TV work.  I came out here for a little while and I got work on television and, and more film work, you know.  And so thank god, you know, I just kept on pressing right along, you know.  I didn't get them always, but when I got them they were good, you know.  And so I'd just--would just keep going.
Speaker 1: When did you officially move to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: I moved to L.A. in 1986, the end of '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: And you mentioned your father [Robert Brown, Sr.], he came with you, or?
Speaker 2: No my dad didn't come here until--to live until '97 [1997], '97 [1997].  But the whole time that I was working in New York [New York] when I bought a house and, and he lived in the house in--up in Harlem [New York, New York], you know.  And, and my brother [David Brown (ph.)] finished school, you know, my baby brother.  And my other brother [Robert Brown, Jr.] was just working constantly, you know.  And so the family did well, you know, and they were used to me not being there.  You know, and I just, you know, kept busy working, you know.  Singing here and there, at Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York], you know, the Children's Jazz and Blues Saturday [ph.], we had one of those.  And you know, you just keep doing the work and growing.  And so finally when I moved here, for good, the family was looking towards coming here, you know.  And we just would all be together.
Speaker 1: Do you think it was a big difference, of course it was, but moving here established versus just coming to L.A. to find it?
Speaker 2: Well, I came with work, you know.  I came to go to work and so, which was good.  I wasn't looking for work, I had a job when I came here.  Then after that I looked for work (laughter), you know.  But I think though when you're in New York City you work more because there's always something to do.  Here you really do have to wait for the proper role to come through the door.  You know I think theater now is a little better here and there're a lot more independent films now, you know.  But you know, I, I think that you do work more in New York City than you do here.
Story_ID: 465145
Speaker 1: You're in Los Angeles [California] now, you're doing more television, you came here with work to do, television.  Can we just back up a moment and look at the show that you did, the NBC show ['Ain't Misbehavin''] that won the Emmy [Primetime Emmy Award].  Explain--usually that show, those are cast differently sometimes with different people, there're different casting, but this was the original cast--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but a different director.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Could you explain the experience with that please?
Speaker 2: Don Mischer was our director for the musical, NBC, who does a lot of big theatrical productions on television, you know, like the Olympics, and the da-da-da.  And we--when they first told us about it, doing the special for NBC, you know, you kind of say okay now are we all gonna go with this.  You know, are they gonna take us or are they gonna take somebody else.  But they made it clear that we were the ones that were going to do it.  There, there were two producers and Alvin Cooper- Cooperman [Alvin Cooperman], has just passed, he just died not too long ago, and I can't think of the other man's name, Buddy [Buddy Bregman]--.  But anyway, they went to great lengths to make sure that the show stayed tight like it was with the original people and--because we were the ones that could do it and to be honest with you.  It, it, it has the energy, we were the creators of it.  We know that every breath the other person takes, if that's, if that makes any sense to you.  So it works.  When you take another cast, you have to make it work.  You have to fit them in.  Because, you- you know, most shows that they recast them and it doesn't work.  Something's off about it, you know.  And so you weren't there at the birthing of it, you know.  So that's why they took this original cast.  And they were right.  They were right.  It won, you know, hands down, all of its time slots and, and awards and whatnot.  And so it, it--working with Don, Don was very open.  He said, "Do what you do and I'll catch it on camera," and he did.  And if you were doing something and it was an angle that was not good, you would say, "Well I really can't do this because this--this--this is the case," he'd fix it.  "Okay, we're gonna do what you need to be done and I'll tell you what I have to have because of this lighting or because of the way this camera is gonna shoot with the orchestra.  I want the orchestra here and I want you there.  I want them over you."  So you worked together with it, you know.  And he didn't tamper with it at all.  The only number we did not do that was locked in was the "Jitterbug Waltz," and it was because it was long.  And so, you know, though we didn't do tightly because, because it was--I felt it was long, you know, and they did too.  But it, it worked.
Speaker 1: Do you find that directing style to be very liberating for an artist to be able to really get their craft out?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, you know.  Only if you don't know what you're doing.  Then if you don't know what you're doing then you want somebody to tell you, you know.  But if you know what you're doing you can go run with the ball, you know, and they'll tell you how far you can go, you know.  So that's always fun to do, you know.  They can bring you back.  It's harder sometimes to get things out of people, you know.
Speaker 1: So you're saying the talent is already there, the, the director is just one to tell you how far to go with it?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Story_ID: 465146
Speaker 1: So you move to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and, and at this point you're doing various things, working, and you mentioned that you think there's more work in New York [New York].  Is it harder to get the work in L.A. you think because of just--it's just spread out, it's spread out here?
Speaker 2: Yes it is.  It is.  Now it's another story totally about what is going on in the business.  The business has changed as we speak, it's still changing.  But in New York City at--there was a time where you could get up in the morning and come to Manhattan [New York, New York], and you'd meet four or five people and they'd tell you about a job that was coming up or the job that was going on.  Here you're in your cars so you get it over the internet or you get it over, you know, phone.  And you can't just walk into offices here, you know.  You've got to have an appointment to be seen, you know.  And the businesses here you have the casting person, you know, first is the agent or the manager, the casting person, then the casting person's assistant, then the producers, then the director before you can get a job.  There's so many people in this business before you get to the door.  As in New York at one point, there was just the agent and the casting agent, and you had to get through that, you know, hurdle through the casting agent and then you'd see the director.  But now if you get to the director, there's two, three or four or five producers that have to okay you before you get, you know.  So, it's, it's, it's everybody having a job off the actor.  And you wanna say if the actor's not there, you don't have a job.  And it's because so many people have come into the business that everybody is making money off the poor actor, but he's not making any money, you know.
Speaker 1: So how ha- how has this place been--Los Angeles been for you over the past few years that you've been here?
Speaker 2: Well it, it's, it's been good, it's just been--the last year I did three films, low budget, you know, and two musicals we--were short term, you know.  So, that's good and then the year before that I'd work alo- all year.  And the year before that I'd work all year.  The year before that I didn't work at all, you know.  So it goes up and down.  It's not--the work is not as fast as it used to be 'cause it's a different time, you know, and I'm also older, you know.  So that's what I contribute it to is that you go into another age bracket, another grouping and then you know, and who's writing what.  And now with the reality shows, it kind of kicks you right to the curb, you know.  So, it- it's a little different.
Story_ID: 465147
Speaker 1: Your resume is quite extensive for all kinds of different roles you've had over the past few years in various parts and various things.  My question to you now would be what advice do you have for a young lady or young, young man who wants to be an actor, be it Broadway, theater, you know, film, whatever, what advice do you have for that person?
Speaker 2: Study your craft, be prepared.
Speaker 1: Would you elaborate a bit more in what study your craft means, 'cause I'm sure many say they go to school, but what do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: But no a lot of people don't go to school.  That's what I'm finding.  There are a lot of actors out here who do not study.  They go out on raw talent and that's very good, but you've got to learn how to back it up.
Speaker 1: Is school enough?
Speaker 2: You know.  Well, you can, you can take coaching classes and scene study classes, but you also have to work, and that means working in some little dive if you want, you know, store front, fifty-seat house, you know.  Or if you must--like Jackee [HistoryMaker Jackee Harry] said that they go to somebody's house and they read and whatnot and that keeps you up, you know.  And, and so I think you have to do all those things, you know, but learn, learn how to craft.  Because if you are just going on raw talent every day, when you stand up near Al Pacino you're dead in the water on stage.  You know, 'cause he has the backing and the, and the craft, you know, you know.  And, and, and I've seen people who just tear up the scenery with their raw talent and, and then they get on stage and you're like what, you know.  And I'm not being funny, I'm ju- I'm being serious.  You know, they went up against somebody and you wanna say you have to know what you're doing, what are you saying, where are you going.  Because when you do get on stage, you fall apart because of the--so many people and so many people staring at you and your nerves, you know, and the coffee nerves and whatnot.  So if you know where you're going, if you have some backing, you know, behind it, you'll be able to stand up, you know.
Speaker 1: How important is diversity of your craft?
Speaker 2: Very, very.  Just don't go off of one role, you know, one type of role all the time, because then you're labeled that always.
Speaker 1: How about singing, dancing, acting, all the three different dimensions of a--of an artist what do you think, how do you feel about that?
Speaker 2: Well if you can do it, if you can sing, dance and act that's very good, you're a triple threat, you know.  But know at least one of them really good, you know.  If you're a great dancer, know that.  Because--and when you're finished doing that, you can be a choreographer or an advisor.  If you're a good singer, you can always sing, you know.  A good, and a good actor can always act, you can always teach on the side, you know, 'cause you know what you're doing, you know, so.  I think it's important.
Story_ID: 465148
Speaker 1: Could you share your additional feelings, a lot of times now they'll take a celebrity--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and put them into a role, to be in a movie or play, well this person is not necessarily an actor, how do you feel about that and what are they doing for the art form?
Speaker 2: Well it's not helping it.  And we have, we, we see that every day with Broadway, you know.  There's shows that there're people we know can't act hot in the desert, you know what I'm saying, and they put them on stage against people who have been trained and who can do the job.  But because they have the name, or because they're very young, you know, and they're sellable, they get the, the, the job, you know.  And so I think you just have to hang in there, you know.  And I--the one thing I always say is that if you stay to the table long enough, someone will deal you a hand, and that is true, you know.  But the corporations have infiltrated the, the business, so by them taking over, they only see money.  And so people who have--don't have the craft are just put up on stage now and it's bad for the other actors because they have to deal with it, you know.  And you're just like okay fine.  I mean I think, I think at Chicago [Illinois] that it's like a revolving door, you know, they have somebody every six weeks.  So that means the cast that's there, they're rehearsing every six weeks with someone new, you know.  And that's not really fair, but it's making the producers money.  You know what I'm saying?  And it's getting people in and people will use all kind of excuses of why they're doing that, but for some people it's just a, a way of keeping in front of the public's eye, you know no matter what.  And so--it's not fair.  But nobody said this is fair either, you know (laughter).
Story_ID: 465149
Speaker 1: --What are your hopes and aspirations for the African American community as far as just people in general and the arts?
Speaker 2: The arts.  Well, my wishes for them, for us, for everyone is to do good work.  To have more works be uncovered.  To produce more good writers that we need desperately and, and good actors, you know, I want the very best and for this generation, I want the very best for them.  It's hard to see it on--sometimes, you know.  I think Tyler Perry is a wonderful writer, you know.  He's hit a lot of it right on the head, but I think he needs to do some more work, you know, step up with some more work, you know, to elevate because there's still even more humor that's there, but you just have to go in to the next step for it.  And for people not to take the easy way out, you know.  You have a whole influx of Latino writers that are coming and they have very good stories and very strong stories, and they will be able to get their stories to the door.  You have an incredible Asian community, they have stories, you know, and they're writing them and they're producing them.  You have the Indian community, it's called Bollywood in India, and they're coming fast and furious, you know.  So America, America blacks have to say, hey we got great stories, let's not take the easy way out and let's put our stories out there, our good stories, you know.  You know, lots of, of, of good work is what I want everybody to have.
Story_ID: 465150
Speaker 1: And what do you want [HistoryMaker] Aremila McQueen's legacy to be?
Speaker 2: My legacy.  That I was a good actress, a wonderful singer who told us stories in her songs, you know.  I know that I am a good friend, so I will be a good friend, and, and a loving person, a peaceful person, you know.  And, and so, you know, I haven't really thought about that a lot because I'm, I'm not going anywhere (laughter), but--and I still got more to come, you know.  That role for me has not been done yet, it's coming, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Do you have any closing comments that you'd like--any statements you'd like to make for the people?
Speaker 2: For the people.  I just wish you well, and like I said to all of the--again, if you stay at the table they will deal you a hand.  You have to--it's like being like a piece of furniture, not moving, you know, 'cause you will get it, you know.  It might take a long time to get there, but you will get what you're supposed to get, you know.  And have faith in yourself and realize that a lot of this means nothing, you know, it really doesn't in, in the scheme of life, you know.  The important thing is that you be happy and in good health, you know.  This is just a job, something that you wanna do, but love what you do.  And if you love what you do, it makes it easier to, to, to stand, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, I wanna thank you for your time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh thank you.
Speaker 1: --and, and this interview and we just wish you much success in the future and we really thank you for your time today.
Speaker 2: Thank you, thank you for asking.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: You're wonderful (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 465151
Speaker 1: This is my father, Robert Brown [Robert Brown, Sr.].  And I think he is eighty-five on this picture.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, basically when and where the picture was taken?
Speaker 1: This, this is here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The date if you can?
Speaker 1: The date, no I can't tell.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Or year?
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998], 'cause he had just come here. Nineteen ninety-eight [1998].
Speaker 2: This is me at sixteen months old.  And I think this was 1952, '53 [1953].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And where?
Speaker 2: Oh, this is Brooklyn [New York].  That was my photo day and you can see I wasn't happy about it.
Speaker 1: This is myself and my mother from graduation day in junior high [J.H.S. 258 Nathaniel Macon Junior High School; David Ruggles Junior High School, Brooklyn, New York], and I think that was 1963.
Speaker 2: This is my brother, David [David Brown (ph.)].  And I have no idea what date this is (laughter) or what the occasion was.  I can't see anything behind it to tell me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  His last name?
Speaker 1: Brown, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Say his last name also.  David Brown?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  My brother's name is David Brown.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Thank you.
Speaker 1: This is my other brother--oh yeah, this is Robert Brown, Jr. and this looks like a dinner during the holidays that we were together.
Speaker 2: This is my father, Robert Brown and my mother Kathleen Brown [Kathleen McCall Brown] during Christmas, and I have no idea when that was.  We were little at the time though, so it must be around the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: This is me again in 1978.  This was the commercial sh- we were shooting for 'Ain't Misbehavin'' [Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.].
Speaker 2: This is me again, 1985, I was playing the role of Mrs. Yeamons [Mrs. Annie Yeamons], who was a real person in 'Harrigan 'N Hart' on Broadway.
Speaker 1: This is me again, this is when I started in the business later, about ten years after I started really, and I think this was 1970, '71 [1971], I think.
Speaker 2: This is me again and this was '78 [1978], that I know for sure.  And that was my high glamour picture.  I also modeled (laughter) for a couple of nights.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is 'Adventures in Wonderland' for the Disney Channel, I did that for two years.  And this is the cast, and I was the first black Red Queen for Disney Channel, which was a feat by itself.
Speaker 1: This is one of the queen shots in her throne room where she's reading in 1991.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is 1984 in 'Harrigan 'N Hart' before we went to Broadway where I played Gretel as one of my characters was more common.
Speaker 2: This was in the '80s [1980s] where I played Bloody Mary in 'South Pacific' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II].  And that's Jack Jones, the tall man there.  And that was my, I played seven companies, international companies of 'South Pacific.'
Speaker 1: This is 1983 at Radio City [Radio City Music Hall, New York, New York] where I danced with the Rockettes in '5-6-7-8 Dance!'
