Story_ID: 467758
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers; our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Bezelee Martin.  Spelled as B-E-Z-E-L-E-E, Martin, M-A-R-T-I-N.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh, not do I (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Now there's gotta be a story behind Bezelee.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, or, how--what's the story behind your name?
Speaker 2: Well, my auntie, I understand named me from--it's supposed to be in the Bible, Bezelee are, and she gave me that name, so it's a rare one, I have not been able to run across it anywhere else, at any time.
Speaker 1: Okay, but it's in the Bible though?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's supposed to be in the Bible, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, you ever seen it in there?
Speaker 2: Yep, but I don't remember where it was, (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and sir, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Nine, twenty-nine, thirty-two [September 29, 1932], Dumas, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, what?
Speaker 2: Dumas, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Oh, Dumas, D-U-M-A-S?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Dumas, Arkansas, okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, just consider myself as a businessman.
Speaker 1: And, well, to--for those who are watching us, you have a chain of supermarkets in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] area, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Called Lena's Mark--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Lena's Market [Lena's Food Market, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]--
Speaker 1: --Lena's Markets.
Speaker 2: --Yes.  We own that, and I'm also into real estate business as well.  I own quite a bit of real estate.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date, sir?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Okay, December the 1st, 19--I mean--207, [December 1, 2007].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We at Lena's store, in the upstairs office on East Capitol [Drive], in Milwaukee.
Story_ID: 467759
Speaker 1: Now, be- before we go into depth, there are five lightweight kind of warm-up questions we ask, and they only require a short answer.  The first question is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what is it?
Speaker 2: Well, my favorite is--I think, macaroni and cheese, is one of my f- one good ones.  My wife [Lena Martin] does a very good job with that, and I like turkey and dressing, which is another good item that I like.  Corn, I have to say, maybe the most favorite vegetable, corn; I like corn.
Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color? Brown.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I think Bahama [Bahamas] pretty much is about one of my favorite location, I like to go to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the one I would address most is, is, the saying of doing the best you can, or you can do whatever you can--whatever you want to do.  You can do whatever you want to do, or like to do, or something of that na- yeah.
Story_ID: 467760
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Tom Martin] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: It's Ruthie May Martin. R-U-T-H-I-E, M, Martin [Ruthie Hall Martin].
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It's eight--1905--I think it was in Arkansas; I'm not sure about that.
Speaker 1: Okay you thinking she was born in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know the town or just--?
Speaker 2: No, sure don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace 'em, first of all?
Speaker 2: Well, I can go back to my mother and her oldest brothers and sisters, as far as our interaction, and--
Speaker 1: No, what I mean like, can you go back, how far back in time can you go?  Can you go back your great-grandparents, or great-great-grandparents?
Speaker 2: As far as remembering them--
Speaker 1: No, not knowing 'em, but just who they were, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, I think grandparents are about as far as I can go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or grandparents, not great-grandparents--
Speaker 1: --Okay.
Speaker 2: --that I don't know about.
Speaker 1: Okay, and were they from Arkansas, too, as far as you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about 'em and what they were doing in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: My grandparents?
Speaker 1: Yeah, or great-grandparents, either one, here.
Speaker 2: My grandparents, no, I didn't know much about 'em, my knowledge were that they was just a basic farmers, and they did farm work, that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay, they were farmers, okay, are there any stories that are passed down in the family about slavery, or Reconstruction, or any of that?
Speaker 2: Well, as close as I can remember a rough and hard time.  My father, he was aggressive young man to my understanding in that, he owned his own farm early in life, and--
Speaker 1: That's your father right? I was asking about your mother's side of the family, first, and then we were doing (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah, okay.  Well, from my mother's side the--all I can recall related to them--that they did stay on a farm, and that was in--I was very young when we moved to Oklahoma so--and my memory of them is not too broad because, my grandfather, on my mother's side, when he passed, I must have been about four years old, four or five years old, and I stayed with my grandmother for about four or five months--about, maybe about three months after he passed, as company keeper, (laughter), and that's pretty much all I can remember about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what were their names, your grandparents' names?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: And what were your grandparents' names?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was Hall, Hall, uh-huh, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well, did your mother ever talk about what it was like when she was growing up in, in Arkansas (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, she never did dwell on that, that much to us at all, I don't know if it was an unhappy life, or what it were, but she never did talk about that, at all hardly.
Speaker 1: Was she able--did she grow up on a farm I guess or did she--
Speaker 2: Pretty much so, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did she, did she have a chance to finish school in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so, but I don't recall her stating how far she did go, but I know I don't think that she--if she did, she might have just finished high school or something like that, or grade school or something.  She didn't have no degree as far as education, at all, to my knowledge.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was she like?  What was your mother like?
Speaker 2: My mother was a very aggressive mother.  She was demanding of her belief, and her wants, to the degree I feel that she implanted her ways into us through her demands that she made upon us, as far as doing what she want, the way she wanted, or the way it should be.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that's was her.
Story_ID: 467761
Speaker 1: --Kind of aggressive kind of person [Martin's mother, Ruthie Hall Martin], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And wanted you to, do things a certain way?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well did you--well, what way was it (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Basically, I have to say good because we all turned out to be pretty good (laughter).  She had her ways and her demands, was one that were very helpful through life, and made it a little less difficult, for us to do things that we wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, for instance, what was one of the things that she demanded that you do?
Speaker 2: Well, one, to be on time, two to remember what is asked of you to do.  She demand that, you know, she don't tell you the same thing two or three times, you know, tell you once that's supposed to be about it, (laughter), so it wasn't a case that she'd tolerate a continual repeat on something when she tell you to do something.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, one of the--so is there any stories at all from that, her, side of the family about your grandparents or, what life was like for them, you know, when she was growing up?  Was it, or was it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well yeah, it was a tradition of hard times and hard work, and things of that nature that, you know, the routine of getting up early, and stuff of that nature is part of things that I've heard so many times until, it didn't seem to be s- nothing spectaculars or different from the norm of, of expectation, you know, low tolerance zone of something wrong or doing something wrong, or the--I'm just say, from their--from her side of the family, that just about the way things went.  They didn't go out of the ordinary.
Speaker 1: Now were they involved in the church at all?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother, she went to one church, my father [Tom Martin] went to another one. She went to the Meth- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On, on, your mother's side, I'm talking about what was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, on the Methodist church. Well, she was involved, I would always have to go with her to church and I keep her company, 'cause, I would talk to her lots on the way there so, I was almost like a company keeper, and you know, she go to church, she would take me with her, and we would walk and--
Speaker 1: Now, was she a Baptist, or Meth (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Methodist.
Speaker 1: Methodist, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was she an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal]?
Speaker 2: A.M.E.  Uh-huh, she was A.M.E. church, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: A.M.E. church, okay.
Story_ID: 467762
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tom Martin. T-O-M, Martin, M-A-R-T-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born 1898, I think it were.
Speaker 1: And, where, where, was he born?
Speaker 2: In Arkansas too, to my understanding, I think so.
Speaker 1: Were they born in the same place?
Speaker 2: No--not, I'm not for sure about that--that I don't know, I just know that they was--to my understanding, they was born in that, you know, era, but in the same vicinities or not, that I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now, what do you know about your father's side of the family?  H-How far back can you trace that group?
Speaker 2: Well, he was very short traceable, I think he was the only child, by his mother and so--he didn't--I'm going to just use a example--he grew up in of interest of carpentry work, and he did a very little farming, he tried that, do to farming, but his best hand was doing carpentry work.  And he--
Speaker 1: So did he have a chance to go to school much?
Speaker 2: He went, not a whole lot, he had a great ability to execute by memory.  He's a carpenter by--use the word trade, and not by the education, it's by the understanding and just talking to you now, it's almost like someone learned to play a--play the piano and never did go to school to--so he could do it, on a natural basis.  He was very, very good, in carpentry work, he build a house, without, you know, with all this material and everything.
Speaker 1: Now, was he trained anywhere?  Did anybody train him to--
Speaker 2: No, that's what I'm saying, he self-trained he's self--
Speaker 1: So he didn't go to one of those industrial schools or any of that?
Speaker 2: No, he's was self-trained and he did teach carpentry work, although, like I said, he was a self-train.  He taught it at the state training school for boys [State Training School for Incorrigible Negro Boys; John H. Lilley Correctional Center, Boley, Oklahoma], he taught carpentry work to--what, what's, become to be one of his trades, that he was able to teach it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he taught it at the state training school, you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's in--is that in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: No, that was in Oklahoma, Boley, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you know your grandparents on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Just my grandmother and she passed when I was very young.  I must have been about three years old, or four years old when she passed.
Speaker 1: Now, were they farmers too basically?
Speaker 2: Nope.  I really don't know what they was doing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your parents--well your mother [Ruthie Hall Martin] and father didn't really talk a lot about their parents huh?  From what they--
Speaker 2: No, they really didn't, they didn't talk that much about their parents at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your father serve in the war by any chance, or serve at all?
Speaker 2: No he didn't, he escaped all of that, yeah, (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now is (background noise) there a--was your father very strict too, was he like your mother?
Speaker 2: My father was very, very, strict.  He was not one that would bother you that much, and we learnt that early in life, and I think if he corrected me twice, it would be about the size of it.  I don't remember it, but once he correct you on something he didn't have to do it anymore 'cause he would do a good enough job that you remember (laughter). And you didn't do wrong, because you didn't want to have no tangling with him, because he was very strict about his like and the dislike.
Story_ID: 467763
Speaker 1: Now, is--is there a story about how your parents [Ruthie Hall Martin and Tom Martin] met that you, you can tell us?  Did, did, you know how they met?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, they--I don't recall about how they met, at all, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: But they did meet in Ar- Arkansas, though, right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story as to why they moved to Oklahoma?
Speaker 2: Yes, that were--their challenge in life that they run into a problem.  They was--he tried farming, and he almost run into the same problem I had.  He had a bad year and he was buying his own farm, at the time, and they had a couple of bad years, and then they lost all of their equipment, mules and stuff of that nature.  And after they lost that, they tried sharecropping, for one year I think, and he didn't like sharecropping, and then he moved to Oklahoma after trying sharecropping for a year.  He los- he lost, all his equipment and stuff, and he sharecropped for a year, then he moved to Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, do you, do you know if he was in debt when he moved or not, did you, did you have a sense that he was?  When they leave or--
Speaker 2: Well, when he left Arkansas--no he wasn't because they had foreclosed on him the year before, and then we sharecropped for a year, and then he left, so I trust that he didn't leave owing nobody nothing.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now, about what time--what year did he leave Arkansas?
Speaker 2: It had to been '39 [1939], I think, 1939, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was over forty years old when he left Arkansas.  He had been there a good, long time, 1939.  And, do you know why he chose to come to Boley [Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Well, my aunt and her husband lived, lived in Boley, and he would naturally came there because, they knew, know some people there.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, we know in history that Boley is a black town, founded by black people.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And, did that play a part in his decision to move to Boley or his sister's (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Yeah, I'm sure that did because that was a very--at that time Boley was a very lively, and very active, and enjoyable place to live.  It was a nice place to live.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now--now, you were about--you were--now you were born in '30 [1930]--
Speaker 2: Thirty-two [1932] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thirty-two [1932], you were about what, seven years old?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was about six or seven years old, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, do you remember anything about Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Just a little bit, I have a pretty good memories about it (laughter), yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what did you call the town that you lived in?  Was there a--?
Speaker 2: Dumas, Arkansas, yeah.
Speaker 1: Dumas, okay, all right, Dumas, Arkansas, okay, but you're not sure that your parents were born around there or--?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 467764
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' [Ruthie Hall Martin and Tom Martin] personalities, and their talents, and their dispositions, and--who do you think, you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, and why, why?
Speaker 2: She--well, I got traits of both of 'em, but I think more my mother, from the true business feeling, and the business side, and my father from the enduring, strong, enduring, of, of, mastering what I go to do.
Story_ID: 467765
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: A early childhood memory?
Speaker 1: An earliest, do you have a first one, first thing you can remember?
Speaker 2: Oh, there's one that where everybody tells a story about.  I have always been a business person, and as a child I would take and cut a pencil in half and sell to my classmates because, if we had to take a test and you didn't have a pencil, you was in trouble, so I would take, take my pencil, and I would take and--take my pencil, take and cut it, and sell it for a nickel or something like that, and then they would--could take the test.
Story_ID: 467766
Speaker 1: As far as a business move, and then I done a number of little things like selling Blair's [ph.] product.  I sold that in--as I was a child, very young--
Speaker 2: Now, Blair's products, is that like Amway [Amway Corporation; Amway] or something, or, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's--
Speaker 2: --like one of these mail, where you stay away from products--
Speaker 1: It's like Watkins [J.R. Watkins Medical Company; Watkins Incorporated].
Speaker 2: Watkins.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Watkins or Amway or--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, yeah.  It was more a Watkin thing, it's--
Speaker 2: I know they have (Unclear) products now the same way, a similar way.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I would order that and sell it, they had flavor and pie filling, stuff of that nature, because back at that time, you know, sugar was rationed, and I thought I had a miracle, but though the pie filling the--I don't know how I got the feeling that you could--you didn't need any sugar, so I was telling the people, and they--some of them did try it, and you need sugar, (laughter), but they thought they didn't need sugar, but I--they thought or I thought they didn't need sugar--oh, but anyway, that was a joke.
Speaker 2: Oh, you told 'em, they didn't need any sugar, and--when it come to find out--they did need it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, they did need sugar, you know and it was kind of a--as a kid, I would--I don't know where I got it from, but I thought sure you didn't need no sugar.
Speaker 2: So, so you're talking about, this was during World War II [WWII], when the sugar was being rationed (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, correct, right, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Right.  So you were, you were a little older than--I guess you were in your--what about ten, eleven?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Story_ID: 467767
Speaker 1: Tell us what things were like growing up.  You grew up in two places, so give us an idea of what, what your surroundings were like, and what were the sights, sounds, and smells, of growing up?
Speaker 2: Starting in Oklahoma--it's were very exciting because you were surrounded with peers that--of your own, that you admired and respect.  It was a challenge comparable with true values of life as it had to offer there in Boley [Oklahoma], and we all had similar challenge, figuring a way to make it, and how to make it.  I--early I start to cutting lawns, it was one of my entry to making money, to, you know, as a kid, I liked to go to the basketballs games and things like that.  I would cut lawns, 'round the city, and I had kids to help me to cut lawns.  I had one lawnmower and went to the hardware store, they loaned me money and let me have one on credit.  I got me another one, I had two, then I had someone to help me cut lawns, and some of my classmates, they like that, 'cause I could get more business than what I could handle, and with me having a little bit more than I could handle, then I could have them to help me.  So--
Speaker 1: And you would pay them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.  Kids worked for me when I was twelve, thirteen years old and they was--it was fun and then in the summertime also, we had a baseball team that I went--I had the concession stand.  I sold soda pop, as we call it, and at the baseball games, and I owned that, and I used to make real, real good money doing that, as I had that, so we were making money at the baseball game.  So I started out running it for the guy that owned the baseball team, and he liked my aggressiveness and how I was handling business, and one time, he didn't buy enough soda, and so what I did, I put all his bottles to the side, and then I went to town and bought some sodas for myself, and I got all of my bottles and I put them to the side so, when the game was over, and he came out he say, "Oh, we sold a lot of sodas didn't we?"  And I related to him, and I said, "No, these are yours and these are mine."  So anyway it was a real joke to him and he enjoyed it, and he said, "Well, I'm going to give you the stand."  So he gave me the stand, from then on, I owned the stand and I ran the stand.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 467768
Speaker 1: You had the sodas concession at the baseball game, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now how, how, old were you then, when you had the soda concession?
Speaker 2: I had to been 'bout just--I had to been about 15, 14, or 15, 'bout 14 or so.
Speaker 1: Oh, the original question I was asking you, but you went right into business (laughter).  But the original qu- question was, what are some of the sights and sounds and smells, and going on?  I mean, what did Boley [Oklahoma] look like, smell like, and you know, what, what, was it like?
Speaker 2: Boley was a--to me--it was like, a normal city, 'cause I didn't know no other, and it was--
Speaker 1: Well, if you was going describe it to a kid, in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] now, you know, and his frame of reference is Milwaukee in 2007, then what was Boley like?
Speaker 2: It was a place of interest from as they say our own heritage, doing some of everything, of fun and respect. It was a place where our police, they was black, our school superintendent, our post office, all of our peoples we looked up to, they was of our own.  And it was enjoyable to the point that you--I enjoyed just being there.  From that perspective of relaxation and things that you hear about, and things of that nature, you didn't encounter a lot of things that you hear that people were encountering, they brought up in life, we grew up almost like a big, huge, family, in a sense.  You knew everybody; they knew you.  You hear very little problems and trouble, very little.  You go out on Saturday nights, and you have a good time and stuff.  Oh, I was young, but I would stay with my older brothers and sisters and stuff of that nature.  And you just learn to love the people that you was in touch with--so many people that you was in touch with, you learn to care, love them as a friend.  And we was always very much well respected, like my mother [Ruthie Hall Martin] until she passed.  A lot of the school kids, although we lived a pretty good ways from the school, they would come and just--they would visit her, and talk to her, and things of that nature.  So I would say to kids, I wouldn't--I couldn't look for a better situation or environment, to grow up.  Just wish it could've maintain itself, and continue to offer other peoples that experience, to be self-sustaining, to be more of a dependent on yourself, for yourself.
Story_ID: 467769
Speaker 1: Who were some of the black citizens of Boley [Oklahoma]?  Can you name some of the businessmen, and I guess and s- and the leaders in Boley when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well the Lees was--were the big people that maybe you might have in- interview, maybe not, but would be a good one to interview.  They was my classmate--one--one below and one is above me, and they owned the Smokaroma barbeque [Smokaroma, Inc.], and this they sell throughout the world, and it came from Boley.  They manufacture it--the hamburger cooker, they was the one that came out first, so, the first one to come out with a cooker that cooks a hamburger in two to three minutes, they--they was the founder and the producer of that, which very few people would say, may be aware of it.  But they got out now, they came out with it, many, many, years back--
Speaker 1: Kind of like a Foreman [George Foreman] grill or something like that, the way--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, they--
Speaker 1: --cooks one burger at a time?
Speaker 2: --yeah, they cook, but they came out with it many, many, years back.
Speaker 1: These are the Lee brothers, the Lees?
Speaker 2: The Lees, right, uh-huh, Maurice [Maurice Lee], Maurice and Forrest Lee.  They--we was all growing up together, and they were very, very, good at that, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who were some of the other leaders in town?  Who ran the bank and who was the--? The Lees and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that's their father and mother, and their grandfather was the backer of the bank.  Mr. Anderson was their mother's father, they were pretty much that.  The Turners was one of the peoples that--I done forgot, one of their relatives was the one that shot, Pretty Boy Floyd [sic.]. And he was, he owned the hardware store.
Speaker 1: Now, now, when did that story take place? Now, did that take place before you came to Boley?
Speaker 2: Yes, that was before.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I thought.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's the story of famous bank robber, Pretty Boy Floyd.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, that was--
Speaker 1: He came to Boley, to rob the bank, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, my classmate grandfather, I think was his grandfather, or relative, one of his relatives--they saw him, saw him I guess he was on his way out the bank, and that's when they shot him.  They shot him before he could get in the car, coming (laughter), coming out the bank, and that was kind of like the way that went, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's one he didn't rob.  He didn't get chance to finish robbing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, they, even have a segment about that, on The History Channel about that, where they're talking about Pretty Boy Floyd about how the men of Boley came out and stopped him (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right. Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 467770
Speaker 1: What, kind of things did you like to do when you were, when you were a kid growing up in Arkansas and Boley [Oklahoma], did you have a special interest?
Speaker 2: Well, in Boley I think my greatest, most fun, were--kind of two: basketball and baseball.  And the--well, the baseball was actually the one where I had a concession stand at, and I used to go with the other baseball players, and we go to other places to play.  Basketball, I were the--supposed to been their mascot, but I was there just by name, the boys would take care of our little ball, because I was too small (laughter).  And I just traveled with them and I would go with the high school team [from Boley High School, Boley, Oklahoma] to, you know, to play, especially going out of town was always fun, you know, going to Tulsa [Oklahoma], Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], and you get a free game, free ride, and all of that being the mascot.  They--I think I was more comp- again, conversation and company, and you know, I guess, the coach taking a liking to me, and classmate, which were the Turners--that, that's the young man his grandparents was the one that was involved with that.  We was good friends, so we used to travel with the basketball team, and so, that was my most exciting games were basketball and baseball.  I didn't get off into football.
Story_ID: 467771
Speaker 1: What school did you start at?  Did you start in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Yep, I think my first year or two was in Arkansas, in Dumas, and then I left there, we came to Boley [Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: Can you remember the name of your school in Dumas?
Speaker 2: Nope (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, and when you came to, came to Boley, what was the name of that school?
Speaker 2: It called Rust, R-U-S-T.
Speaker 1: Okay, Rust School [Boley, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then we went from there to Boley Grade School [Boley, Oklahoma], and Boley High School [Boley, Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: Okay, now were you a good student?
Speaker 2: Well, I thought I were (laughter).  I managed to--let's say we finished, and I feel was able to accomplish at a level, I think, with compare with the rest--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of accomplishment.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Math, was my fav- favorite subject.
Speaker 1: Okay, and were there any teachers that were special teachers for you?
Speaker 2: No, not sp- yeah, talking about no.  Yeah, my special teacher he was a reverend, he was my pastor, and my Boy Scout master, his name was Reverend Ben H. Hill [Benjamin Harrison Hill].  He was an exceptionally good teacher, and I give him and my parents [Ruthie Hall Martin and Tom Martin] credit for me being, able to accomplish what I've been able to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, now he was your teacher in high school, or--
Speaker 2: Grade school and high school--
Speaker 1: Grade school and high school, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah right, he was a master.
Speaker 1: And all--okay.
Speaker 2: And he was my pastor (laughter), so he was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 467772
Speaker 1: What was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Church.
Speaker 1: Did it have a name other than that, I mean?
Speaker 2: I'm just trying to think.
Speaker 1: Well, just keep thinking about it, it may come you.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: But what--so, I suppose church played a big part in growing up there huh?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, uh-huh, it's--it was part of your, your routine, you're going to church, and I used to sing in the choir as a kid there.  And we all, we just called it the A.M.E. Church.  Now, I don't recall nothing else went with that one, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, wasn't named after Wesley [John Wesley]--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Allen [Richard Allen], or anybody?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, unh-uh
Speaker 1: Okay, A.M.E. Church.  Let me see, so, well--what was I gonna say--well, did you have like special duties in church?
Speaker 2: I'd sing the choir.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.  And when I came to Milwaukee [Wisconsin], I worked on the usher board and the young people's choir, because I was still young when I came here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, I was older than I looked, so they was always taking me to be a kid then, and I was singing in the young people's choir, but you know I was a little bit older than I looked (laughter).
Story_ID: 467773
Speaker 1: Let's see now, in high school [Boley High School, Boley, Oklahoma], now in high school, did you get any special awards or anything?  Any, any--
Speaker 2: No.  I--as I recall, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't get no special awards there--
Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in high school activities, like different clubs and things?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, when you got a little farm life tilling on you, you didn't have much left, not much room left, no (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The only thing I got involved with during that time, was being a Boy Scout, and then I had--that was enough for me after school, sometimes you had to go, you had to go for meetings, 'cause most times, when school was out, you go to work, (laughter).  It wasn't no time for something else, you go to work, that's, that's, what you have to do, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what kinds of things did--now you said that you, you had a lawnmower business going, you had a lawnmower business going, you had a concession stands going, what other kinds of businesses did you have?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Now, I suspect there's more (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, during that time, that's when I moved to Oklahoma, so I've done a number of things, I raised chickens, sold chickens to the restaurants, and things like that.  A particular product--the little farming, I think the biggest thing we did was raise some tomatoes, and I used to sell those throughout the community.  My brother, my oldest brother, he, when he came out of [U.S. military] service, he planted a field of tomatoes--and they planted them, but then they couldn't do nothing with them, but they didn't and I taken upon to pick them, and harvest them, take them to town and I would sell them by the bushel. And that was another little favorite chore I had taken.  They didn't have aught to go talk and sell, so, I taken them, and picked them, harvest them, I take them into town, and I sold it to people and they buy them, and can the tomatoes. So, that's what I did in Boley [Oklahoma]--I think that pretty much--until I came here, and when I came here, and then that's when I start selling nylon hosiery, and stockings, a best set nature, here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin].
Speaker 1: Now when you were, a senior in high school--I mean, how, how, far did you get in high school?  How long did you go?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to--in Oklahoma, to sophomore year, then I moved here, then I went to MATC [Milwaukee Area Technical College, Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  And I--taking business and bookkeeping and accounting.  I went to school to learn how to provide for myself, and take care of myself.  I didn't go for any other purpose, other than that, that's what I told my mother [Ruthie Hall Martin], when I decided to come, that I wanted to learn how to take care of myself and provide for myself, and that I did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, why'd--
Story_ID: 467774
Speaker 1: Now did your whole family move to Milwaukee [Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: No.  They came like, one at a time.  My oldest brother was the first to come, then, my brother, which is just older than me, he came, and then I came next, and then the baby brother came next. That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did your mother [Ruthie Hall Martin] and father [Tom Martin] stay in Milwaukee--I mean stay in Oklahoma?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they stayed in Oklahoma, right.  I come to get an education to learn more about business.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry, how many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I got six and four, yeah it was ten of us alive--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that was raised up.  We had two brothers that passed, you know, as babies, they was young, they passed away, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so you got here, you were a sophomore in high school [Boley High School, Boley, Oklahoma]--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now did you go to school here, in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know you mentioned Milwaukee Area Technical College--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --but did you finish high school here?
Speaker 2: No, I just went (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You went right on to--
Speaker 2: I went right into the trade field, to learn about business, to learn about how to--the bookkeeping part, the accounting, and stuff of that nature, that's what I felt I needed to learn and know.  And I learned about sales, and stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you just bypassed the rest of it (laughter).
Speaker 2: But I didn't, I didn't feel I needed that, all I wanted to do is to know how to provide, and take care of myself, and if I learned that.  I wasn't interested in working for nobody else.  I never had but one job in my life, one full time job, and that was all I had, and that was enough (laughter).
Story_ID: 467775
Speaker 1: So you went on to MATC--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Milwaukee Area Technical College [Milwaukee, Wisconsin].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now were you working at the same time, or--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I worked--that was the one I had a full time and a part time job that I worked simultaneous together.  One were at a tannery, it was my full time job that I worked at, and the part time job I had was selling cars.  I sold cars, and there I was the first licensed black, new car salesman in the City of Milwaukee [Wisconsin], or the state to my knowledge, that's what they told me.
Speaker 1: You were the first black one (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was the first black --
Speaker 1: First black one okay.
Speaker 2: --to sell new cars and I did a pretty good job with that, (laughter), at part timer, I didn't seek it for full time; it was strictly a part time job, and-
Speaker 1: How about what year was that?
Speaker 2: That was 1950, yeah, '50 [1950], '51 [1951].  Yeah, '50 [1950], '51 [1951].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, what, what, kind of cars did you sell?
Speaker 2: Fords [Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan], sold Ford cars.
Speaker 1: All right.  So what happened next, did you do pretty good as a car salesman?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was okay but (shrugs).
Speaker 1: That's the, you gotta work for yourself.
Speaker 2: I, I, mean, it was strictly part time and I always wanted a business of my own.  That was my goals and my objective to own my own business.  I wasn't interested in working for no one.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now, by 1950--were you married by the '50 [1950]?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't marry 'til 1960.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right, so how, how, long did you work selling Fords?
Speaker 2: Oh, I sold that, two or three years, something like that, wasn't no long time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you--you were working other jobs too, at the same time?
Speaker 2: I had one job, I only had one--I mean as full time job, as far as full time job. That was at the tannery. I worked there, and when I got off work at the tannery then I would come and sell cars--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that's the way it worked.
Story_ID: 467776
Speaker 1: How did you--you know, what was the first major business that you got in, on your own, I mean and how, how, did that happen?
Speaker 2: Well, my first venture of my own of essence was selling nylon hosiery.  I had my own brand of hosiery that I sold and I sold that across through from Oklahoma, Kansas, and in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] there.  I don't know--he was one of my customers in Kansas City [Missouri], Blair [ph.]--I don't know he become to be--I forgot he was a very popular guy there in Kansas City.  I don't know if he--what he become to be, but I would sell--he was buying from me, because he had a beauty supply place in Kansas City, and he would buy my hosiery and he would sell them to beauty shops, along with his other goods.
Speaker 1: Now how did you--who supplied the hosiery?
Speaker 2: I bought them from the manufacturer.  They were producing for me, I had my own brand, my own name, on my own hosiery.
Speaker 1: Now, well, just kind of explain that.  How did you find out about the manufacturer, were they close by in town, were they in town?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they was here in the city.  What happened, I naturally--I started out--there was a Jewish guy, he had a place he was selling, so-called wholesaling, and I went and talked to him.  He give me a special price on hosiery, and I buy the hosiery, then I would go and sell it to different peoples, I run into peoples now that I used to sell hosiery to, there's a lot of them still around, they know me and I would sell them the hosiery and I would go buy them and deliver it to them.  And then I did that for a period of time until I got my volume big enough, then I went to the mill manufacturer, that they would produce them and they would put my name right on the--on the nylons, and I have it my own name called Martin Hosiery.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I hit my hose and put them in drugstores, and grocery stores, they would sell my hosiery, and most often drugstores, you know, around the city, and grocery stores around, and beauty shops.  I had the beauty shops, drugstores, and the grocery stores, I would sell my nylons to, and they sell them to the customers, they have them displayed and whatever they sell, I go round and replenish them.  And that was the--kind of like my early business venture of my own developing something.
Speaker 1: Now did people generally know that you were black?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: I mean, when they bought your, your hosiery--
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-hm.
Speaker 1: --did they know that they were buying, they was buying your hosiery?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah a lot, I had people out selling them and everything, I had--kind of aggressive.
Speaker 1: Did you sell them all over the city to everybody or--
Speaker 2: Pretty much in the black area and I did ship them to Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], I think I had drug stores in Tulsa [Oklahoma], Oklahoma City, and the one beauty supply in Kansas City, I would ship to them.  They would order from me and I ship it to them.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is in 19--well, what, year is this in?
Speaker 2: I figure that that would be '57 [1957], somewhere like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957], '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: Okay, so how'd you do, did you do pretty good?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I did pretty good, yeah, managed to make it pretty good (laughter) in most things that I went after.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 467777
Speaker 1: Well, what--what happened next, what did you do next?
Speaker 2: Well, then I went into (background noise)--I went in the trucking business, I owned a trucking company that we would sell--I mean, hauls gravel, sand and gravel.  I had a dump trucking business, I went into that, and my brother, he couldn't find a job, and so he told me he could get a job, if he had a truck, so I went out and bought two trucks and that way he could have a job driving the truck so I was in the dump truck business for a while.  And I went out of the dump trunk, to over the road, and I had a tractor and trailer that people would drive, I would a driver that was driving that over the road, a tractor and trailer.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is in '58 [1958], '59 [1959]?
Speaker 2: Yeah--the tractor and trailer, when I got into that, that must have been at least about fifty--'58 [1958], between '58 [1958], '59 [1959], yeah it was before I got married.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 467778
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about getting married now, now--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --'cau- 'cause your stores are named after your, your--right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My wife [Lena Martin], right, uh-huh, yeah.  There--I met, met her before that, and she and I got together, and from there, we decide to stay with the business [Lena's Food Stores, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], which I had, had going a little bit there with the nylons--well getting to the tail end of that, I was drifting into the grocery business, at the time.  And I was selling candy and cigarettes, and stuff like that to neighborhood grocery stores.  I would buy and selling to them, and I was a wholesaler, and I went from there to ash- I add the paper bags, I was selling and supplying them that and then a little later on I found myself pretty much, in the wholesale food business and I actually was selling to many a neighborhood stores in the city.  And mostly all of them and restaurants and barbecue places, I supplied them with they goods that they need, that's the gallon of barbecue sauce, salad dressing, or cheese, or bags, or whatever they need--napkins that I would sell to them, and we would deliver to 'em so then, that how I went into wholesale, I had a wholesale business that we sold to mostly all the stores around in the area, some of everything.  Like certified, no different, I had a lot of customers.
Speaker 1: Okay now, did you specialize in any one kind of a product?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, just like certified I sold some of everything, all of your major manufacturer, Hills Bros. [Hills Bros. Coffee], Maxwell House [Maxwell House Coffee Company], Colgate [Colgate Palmolive Company], Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company], you name it--General Mills [General Mills Inc.], all of them.  I used to buy direct from them, and sold to the smaller stores.
Speaker 1: Now, was it difficult to get, get money to put up front for these items.  I mean, did you have to get bank loans and things to--
Speaker 2: I was pretty hard worker, and I managed to manage my money and manage my operation, it was many, many years before I start to borrowing any money from a bank.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 467779
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your wholesale business, when you were--?
Speaker 2: Martin Wholesale [ph.].
Speaker 1: Martin Wholesale, and just kind of explain to us how the wholesale grocery business works, and who you were selling to, and how you were able to do it.
Speaker 2: In the Martin Wholesale, we naturally, have to deal with the manufacturer or the national brand company that owns a product such as Hills Bros. Coffee, or Gerber's baby food [Gerber Products Company], or Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company] soaps, Northern [Quilted Northern] tissue, Charmin tissue.  We deal with the actually manufacturer or producer of the product, and then we will turn around and sell it the retail grocer, they would buy it from us, and then they retail it off.  That's the way that would work.
Speaker 1: Okay, the advantage you had, you had trucks right, you, had trucks?
Speaker 2: Well, we had trucks, but not to the extent that it gave us an advantage.  The only thing we did with the trucks was like everybody else, we use it from our accumulation point to the distributed to the retailer (background noise).
Speaker 1: Okay, now, who--now, this is in the early '60s [1960s], right, that you're doing this, right?
Speaker 2: Mid-'60s [1960s], yeah.
Speaker 1: Mid-'60s [1960s], okay.  Now did--well I was asking you before, with the tape ran out before, did you have to go to banks to get, to get money in the beginning (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that I did do later down the road, and it wasn't to take care of my wholesale business, it was to buy another wholesale company out.  When I start mines I started with my own money, and I produced and growed very fast, and very rapidly, that, I got to a point that my competitor, which was ahead of me, got a little tired and his thing I suppose was dropping, and 'cause I was getting a large portion of the business in the city, and he was naturally lo- losing a great deal, so he decided to sell out but he sold to me and I had to borrow money to buy him out, although that was a big mistake, cause he probably would've went out anyway, but I bought him out and by buying him out, I bought a lot of dead merchandise, 'cause I bought another wholesale house out.
Speaker 1: Who was the other wholesaler that you bought?
Speaker 2: It called Central Wholesale [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what year was this that you bought him out?
Speaker 2: That have to been--have to be around '68 [1968], or '69 [1969], something like that, 'bout '68 [1968], I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, how large a territory were you covering then?
Speaker 2: We were covering pretty much the North Side [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and 'bout that time, obviously I went to the south side, so we was covering 60 to 70 percent of the, I'll say, local city business, not suburbs, but pretty much, and this was the north side and the south side of town.
Story_ID: 467780
Speaker 1: How did you get into the retail business?
Speaker 2: Well, the expressway came along and tore down a lot of your smaller groceries 'cause it went right through the city and--
Speaker 1: Okay now, did--we've heard about this before, this is what they call urban renewal, right?
Speaker 2: Correct (background noise).
Speaker 1: And a lot of black communities, suffered when urban renewal was--took place because the redevelopment, or the construction of highways normally would come right through the black business strip, and this happened and--I don't know if you're aware of it happening--it happened in Dayton [Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --it happened in Tulsa, Oklahoma--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --most of the cities where there's black population, the highways would come right through the black business area.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you think this was an accident?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: That, I feel, was a way of dispersing accumulation of peoples in geographical area and with that they have strength, because it was very together and once you burst it up, and they fly all different directions, you lose your strength because as you scatter, you're weaker, and the whiter area that you are in, you are weaker and doesn't have much power, one way or the other, political, or recognition, and without that, they didn't amount to very much.
Speaker 1: Okay, it seemed to have been done in every city.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that, that's the reason that we had our business are stronger, was stronger,  because we was collective together, and being collective together, you, you did more business with each other, and exchange with each other, and you would come to respect each other more so.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, what happened here?  You said urban renewal was coming to Milwaukee [Wisconsin], and how did that present an opportunity for you?
Speaker 2: Well, it not necessarily presented one, it interfered with what I had going, because it dispersed my customers.  It didn't generate anything per se for me.  From a wholesale especially, we were gonna be bursted up.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, you felt a need to go into the retail business after a lot of the retailers cl- closed down?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I then didn't decide to because of the need I was hoping to do a job--a combination of both jobs, but that didn't develop fast enough to do and maintain both, and then I let the wholesale go and just went retail.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was your first store?
Speaker 2: Well, the very first was the one I had on 20th [Street] and Hadley [Street] was a--was the very first store that I had.
Story_ID: 467781
Speaker 1: What were some of the challenges in getting a store started, I mean, do- doing retail (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know maybe I never did look at 'em something of huge, special, other than what it needed to doing, and I was pretty much able to do that, and that were stock it properly, and then try to run it properly, and that we did quite well.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what are the, I guess, the most important factors in running a retail store properly in, in the community?  What would you say?
Speaker 2: The, the most important part of is one, is recognizing things that are good and maintaining that, being able to maintain your customers, and you do that with care and concern.  And they can feel it, and they can act accordingly as you are able to do a job where they see and feel that your concerns are there, and they will stick with you, in many cases, not all, or nothing you can do will get all of the peoples, you just get a percentage of the peoples.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that is what I found (cough). In level to actually--we could hold our customer base, because we gave people an exceptionally good service.  I shared the same wall with Krogers [The Kroger Company].  I opened my store--one of my stores,  one of my first new store, was opening, and we shared the same wall, Krogers and my store, we had the same wall, just walk in this door, or this door.
Speaker 1: You were side by side?
Speaker 2: Uh-hm, yeah, uh-hm.
Speaker 1: And--so, Krogers a retail giant (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know, yeah--
Speaker 1: --a retail giant.
Speaker 2: I was right there until they left.
Speaker 1: So, Kroger left?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Krogers left and A&P [The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company] was a half a block down the street from me.  They were my competitor, and I was there when both of them left, and I then purchased A&P store, and I was a fir- it was, a big, large, supermarket, with base--I think I was one of the first ones--but I was one of the first or not, but I'm the one that survived.
Speaker 1: So you think its customer service that made a difference?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  We loved to be serviced well, and give attention, and give respect, and be loved.
Speaker 1: Are there things that you would do?  Like for instance, what would you do that Krogers wouldn't do necessarily well?  What did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, the first thing, we would learn our customer, we know what they like, and we make sure we have it, and then, we could beat 'em in a lot of places, that they--they art to retail business is recognizing where your strength are at, and do that.  And know your competitor, and know where their weakness are at, and you can survive off their weakness, 'cause most business, all business have some weakness, and you just have to be smart enough to recognize where their weaknesses are at, and where your strength are at, and if you do that you'll survive.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was the strength of your market here, compared to the other two?
Speaker 2: Well, I could--by me understanding the, I say, the awareness of purchasing certain items that they purchased them too, but I recognized the need for the--customer need different than they did, percentage wise.  So I would do a better job merchandising, and pricing and changing prices, where they would--couldn't keep up with me.  They couldn't--lot of people say, you can't keep up with them, but they can't keep up with me because I can change faster than they can. And I would change faster than they can--they would, so in the end results, I could give my customers, a special like that (gesture).  They couldn't do that.  So they got 'em coming and I'd see they got 'em coming, so I create me a sign, (laughter), I go with my sign and the end results they, they couldn't keep up with me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they had, had to go through a longer decision making process?
Speaker 2: Correct, they couldn't do--they couldn't make the changes as fast and as quick as I could, and I did that, I didn't mind doing that.  And I looked for things of that nature, how I could do it, and keep up with it.
Speaker 1: Now, would, would you send shoppers over to the other stores see what they were doing, or did you send some spy over there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, we would do that sometime, but not too much, but yeah, we would do it.  We check them out, they check us out.  They could check us out, but they couldn't do nothing but check us out. We could check them out and do something, so that makes a difference.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 467782
Speaker 1: Now there--are there special products or proportions of products that were more appealing to the black community than others (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's where the whole thing were, and see--and that's another thing, being able to recognize, a lot of times they would take advantage of black peoples and we knew it, 'cause we know what we could buy the wholesale for, and what they could buy.  They could buy it maybe a little cheaper than we could, but they didn't necessarily give it to you because they bought it cheaper, they just made money off of you.  And we recognized these places where they could do that and they did do that, then we would make the change, and we would give 'em a break on the prices.  So that would make it more easier for us, with their lack of interest of selling you something cheap, get what they could, made it open the door for us where we could get (background noise) where we could get for it, and still make money.  Yeah, if they wanted to undersell us, they could do it, but then, they would look very foolish, with the number of places they would have to do it at, and where we were only doing it in one or two places.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you specialize in certain kinds of vegetables and meat that were popular with black people that maybe they were slow to figure out (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah, well they could figure it out, it's a matter sometimes of, did they want to do it?  You know, some people very stubborn in they ways and what they--, "We didn't figure on--we didn't have to do that, we not going do that, he ain't going survive no way, he ain't going be here that long though, so why worry about it?"  That was they thought, but we always fooled 'em.
Speaker 1: So they played you cheap?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now what were like--what are some of the things that black people were buying, I guess at a higher rate, you know--
Speaker 2: Good ones, we used the basic food items such as black-eyed peas, the cornmeal, or sugar, or grits, pig feet, pig tail, things of that nature, apples, oranges, and, you know--everybody buying but, we just--holidays we do more of it, in proportion as far as the shopping as our customer would come and buy a whole case of apples, a lot a times, a half a case, we used to merchant out, half cases of apples.  In the white area, they didn't do much of that. They bought normal little portion, and where we was selling big portion, and we recognized that, and we could take advantage of that, and our people loved that.  'Cause we have a better price than they had, 'cause we didn't have to package all of 'em in one--three, fours, or sixes, a dozen, sell whole half a case, and this way here, naturally, we could do a better price.  And I'd sold hundreds of cases of products, and right next to Krogers [The Kroger Company], it wasn't nothing for us to sell a hundred cases of one size of oranges and stuff like that, because the people would come there, see.
Story_ID: 467783
Speaker 1: Now, I don't under--there are some smaller, black stores in Chicago [Illinois], that sell things like sassafras tea, in a jar, already mixed up and--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --from Mississippi and these--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Some stores, there's a couple stores, that's selling muscadines, and scuppernongs, from Georgia--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh
Speaker 1: --when nobody else had 'em, in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Do you, you, go after those kinds of products, that people--
Speaker 2: We have, but now--how can I put it--I don't--we don't go at it as much as we used to, I used to get ribbon cane and persimmons.  I would get any odd thing, I was a little different than my kids are now.  They don't quite think it's necessary to do all of those things, but I used to be in behind it. This time of year coming up--like I said we'd buy ribbon cane, big, have that in the store for sale, any odd--per- like I said that the persimmons was another one that we would get--these things are--they just a gimmick, memory, conversation piece, and all, they tell the customers, "Well, I got some Irvin [ph.] cane down at Lena's [Lena's Food Stores, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]," I'll go down and get some, or this or that, you know, that kind of a thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay--
Speaker 2: And paper-shell pecans was another one, the big, long, shell, pecans, you could buy those, and they was a lot of fun, you know, just having that.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, have you ever made arrangements with black farmers of the South, or any farmers of the South, for produce that, what you get directly, when you have (unclear)--
Speaker 2: We tried a little bit of that, but that never did work out enough because the lead and timing, where you run into a problem.  You can't be without your basic, and if you give up one for the other one, you'll find yourself short.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So you couldn't mix it some. Oh, we get a farmer and he bring us a whole lot of sweet potatoes, we would buy 'em--we always support our own, we had a great feeling for that.
Speaker 1: Now, do, do the fellows bring the watermelons up from the South in the trucks?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we've had watermelon, truckloads of watermelons, and we bought a number of truckloads of watermelon from the South.  Peanuts, a lot of peanuts from the South, with a good friend of ours from Boley [Oklahoma].  He used to bring us peanuts and pecans, and stuff like that.  All from Oklahoma, you know, he--we tried some of all of it, uh-huh.
Story_ID: 467784
Speaker 1: When did you start e- really expanding your retail stores [Lena's Food Markets, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and, and, acquiring these larger food stores?
Speaker 2: That come along--well the beginning of it, we bought one from Kohl's [Kohl's Food Stores] and we did real, real, well with that.
Speaker 1: Now that's Kohl, that's K-O-H-L (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right, we bought one--
Speaker 1: Now, when did you buy the Kohl's store?
Speaker 2: Oh boy, you ask for these dates, now, I'm not good on all of those, per se--
Speaker 1: Well, ear- early '70s [1970s], or '80s [1980s] what er--
Speaker 2: No the Kohl's--let's see--no, no--it was '80s [1980s]? Let me see--eight--sev- yeah, yeah, '80 [1980]--ten--I think around '87 [1987] or '88 [1988]--'bout '92 [1992], think.  Maybe that must've been around '92 [1992].
Speaker 1: Okay, about '92 [1992], you think?
Speaker 2: I think so, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Anyway, there we bought that and that went over quite well, 'cause we would do more business in, in a day, than they would do in a whole week with that store.  We bought it and a lot--when customer was there, "Oh, we don't want you to take out 'cause, y'all not going do nothing with the store," and they figure we couldn't handle it, cause it was a big store and we bought it and we was very successful with it, like I say, and we found our self doing more in one day than they would do in a week.  Some days especially like a holiday, we could do that much business.  Do way more than twice the business that they were doing.
Speaker 1: Now, how important has your family been to the expansion of your business?
Speaker 2: Well there's no substitute for a family unity and doing anything, or whatever you do you can't find a better situation, unless--if you have problems, which you can have problems, but if your problems are handled correctly as any problem, then it subsides, well, like anything else.  It's just a cure, find the cure to something that comes, as in going contrary to the other one, whatever, so you find the cure.
Speaker 1: Now did your wife [Lena Martin] work with you full time on the stores, or did she--
Speaker 2: Well, she (laughter)--she say she worked all the time.  So yeah, my wife and I, we been partners together, and, from day one almost, when we got married and that was our unique thing that we decided.  We both quit our job after one day.  I worked one day after I got married, that was it.  I quit, and she must've worked two days, (laughter),  three days and she quit hers so, we was from there for ourselves, so we been together as partners all of--all the way through our marriage--we was always one.
Speaker 1: Okay, she's an en- entrepreneurial kind of a person too I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she--what happened--I hope not over-emphasizing who I am, but she has always been a supporter with me in whatever I did, and so we've been through a lot of things together, as far as business and different business and triumphs.
Story_ID: 467785
Speaker 1: Did you meet her [Martin's wife, Lena Martin] here in Mil- in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-hm.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how you met?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, the story, ain't no big story, no flattering story, I just met her at church, and she was quiet and very kind of a low key girl, and when I first met her I tease her now, that I put her on the side and I played with the other girls for a while, then I came back and got her, when I got ready to get married (laughter).  I tease her about that, she say, I thought I was beside myself, because I always had a lot of fun with the girls, and 'cause I had a new car and stuff like that, and the girls are always after me.  So I told her, I saw you, but I just wouldn't let you slide though, (laughter) so it was kind of funny, that.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did, your wife--or does she play a special role, in the store [Lena's Food Stores, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], or does she handle a certain job?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, she have been in all of my business all the way, the money watcher and the money controller.  She, she keep up with the books and things of that nature, help make sure that the books and things are kept up with and until, you know, that was, that was her cup of tea.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She would do whatever had to be done, but the big thing rolled with keeping up with the money in the books.
Story_ID: 467786
Speaker 1: Now, a lot of people I've talked to had children, and after they started a business or something, but the children don't have anything to do with the business, after they go off to college, and whatever, they want to pursue a profession, in some place out- outside of the family business.  Now your, your, sons actually work with you, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: How did you--how did you manage to make sure that they worked with you, or, how, how, did they decide to work with you?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That was part like my mother [Ruthie Hall Martin] and father [Tom Martin], where they pretty much did what I want 'em to do.  So that's just about how they wound up.  There--they respected me, and my, my, whole feeling, do it for yourself.  And I will never forget, I was a little ahead longer, with it, and my wife [Lena Martin] had to kind of yank my chain a little bit.  They was in school, you know, lot of times the kids have to go and get jobs at different business, as part of their grade curriculum.  I just couldn't see that, they got a business of they own, they go to they business to work, so, if we own, worked it out in school, that they could get school credit from coming to the store.  I wasn't involved, one of the other supervisors at the store would be they bo- they boss, and turn they grades in that way.  So once we got 'em into it, they stuck with me.  I didn't o- tried not to overbear; I give them a lot of freedom, where they won't hate the business, or totally dislike the business, with me overbearing on 'em.  And when time come for them to start developing them self as a man, then I gave them more room, and I supported them, and they could go to school, wherever they liked to, or wanted to.  We didn't want to choose what school they went to, and then we just--made it as comfortable as we could, by paying for all of the education, not getting student loans, and stuff like that, but when they come out of school, they got to pay a loan or anything of that nature.  And we let 'em had the luxuries of things that helped make their life enjoyable, such as a car, and stuff like that, and apartments and things when they--while they was off from school--out to school, they could live off campus and have a car too.  I didn't give 'em a car their first year in college, but they could have a new car their second year in college.  So they always had that, and they had they freedom to keep that car as long as they had their grades up.  If they lose they grades, they lose the car, so that was the rule of the house.
Speaker 1: So, did it work pretty good?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all of 'em finished school pretty much on time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it worked very good I didn't tolerate--I would tell 'em if they lose they grade, they lose they car.
Speaker 1: How many children do you have, I mean--?
Speaker 2: Four.
Speaker 1: Four? Four sons (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right--four boys, right, and all four of 'em--
Speaker 1: They didn't all start working with your store [Lena's Food Markets, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] after college, did they?
Speaker 2: No, they--the oldest one, he in the architect field, well they didn't just start right after, they tested some other things.  The oldest one, he didn't come back into the business, he kind of wanted to, and I kind of discourage him, and I don't know if I did the right thing or not, but I did kind of discourage him a little bit 'cause he asked me if I want him, I said, "No, I want you to go ahead and try what you want to do, and if that don't work, then you can, naturally, always come to work and do this."  So he was able to do pretty decent, pretty good in the architect field, and so, he stayed with that.  And the other two, they did well, they did pretty good, but then, they wanted to come back and do this, 'cause one was a investment banker, the youngest one, that's Greg [Gregory Martin], and Derrick [Derrick Martin], he worked in the insurance and he sold BIC's--yeah the BIC's pens and stuff, he worked, he had two jobs, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 467787
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you the same question that I asked you off-camera, so, so, your son the architect, doesn't work with you he's in Chicago [Illinois] now, right?
Speaker 2: Correct, right.
Speaker 1: --and the--but the other three do--
Speaker 2: Correct, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) they work with the business [Lena's Food Markets, Milwaukee, Wisconsin].
Speaker 2: They're here, right.
Speaker 1: And, as we speak now, you've expanded--now--you've acquired some of--some abandoned Jewel food stores [Jewel-Osco]--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: --and as Jewel gets out of the neighborhood, you bring the store back, and you seem to do okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so far we've been able to do pretty good, and we do not have all what we feel that we want, or we need, in a sense, but we do know, we are on the way with accomplishing the goal that we set out to.
Speaker 1: Well, the stores appear to be--we're in a store now and as we came in--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --and looked around, you seem to have a full range of produce, and products--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah we--
Speaker 1: --as much as anybody else here.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: It's full of people too.
Speaker 2: Well, that we pride our self in being good at what we do, and I like to say, in most cases, we gonna beat the average one.  Sometimes we may get a little beat sometimes, but most cases, we will do better than the average one.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any thoughts about, the decline of black, grocery stores and markets, in most of the major cities in the country today?  I mean, when you go to Chicago, Collins brothers had, had, the Food Basket chain [Food Basket, Inc.], it's now defunct, it's finished, the remaining stores, if are stores at all, their run by Arab Americans, that come over from, you know, different parts of the Middle East, Lebanon, Palestine, different places, same is true for a lot of the black gas stations, around the country.  Do you have any--you're 'about the only one I know that's expanding--I don't--is there an association, of black grocers, at all or--
Speaker 2: Um-hm. There are one--there are some--not that I have dealt with 'em, that much.  My son, they do have a connection with a black group across the country, as far as, communicating and talking about what they doing, how they doing, and they're--although I never, got involved with that side of it, so far, but, yeah, there are one, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now have you been approached by Arabs or Koreans about purchasing your stores?
Speaker 2: No.  I haven't, and part of it, maybe, we are very strong, adamant, about our business, and few people get the feeling that that's who you are, and what you are, they don't usually bother you.  If you are giving weak signs or weak lack of interest, then that's a open door.
Story_ID: 467788
Speaker 1: Just give us kind of a capsule of how many stores [Lena's Food Markets, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] you have now.
Speaker 2: Well, we have six stores now that are operating and they are all similar in size, but all don't have the same service, as, as--all the way through.  We have two of them that has a bank and drugstore and liquor store, and we have one--oh, and a deli and bakery--and we have one that have just a bank--not a bakery, bank, and a deli in it, and then the other one, doesn't have a bank--the other two doesn't have a bank, they just have regular grocery store.
Speaker 1: Okay and they're all in the Milwaukee [Wisconsin] area?
Speaker 2: Correct, right, uh-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any stores in the white community here that you run?
Speaker 2: No, but this is the closest one mixed, heavily mixed, quite a few white do shop at this store.  It's very heavily mixed, and the other one, it's not mixed as heavy as this one, this one is--has the most white that shop--will shop here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 467789
Speaker 1: You were telling me, when we first met this afternoon that the biggest challenge in running the stores [Lena's Food Markets, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], was personnel, having enough to cover the stores on any given day.  Sometimes you have, have, to shift them around.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm, uh-hm, there, the problem of personnel, is where you need it, when you need it, it has a lot to do with your business, because when you're short, it has not just effect on that day, but on many other days because, people remember, your shortcomings, more than they will anything else.  What they expect and they get it, it doesn't have a phase or value--cause I'm getting what I was looking for, but that's what I expect anyway--it's when you fail to get them what they want, that's what has memory, when you've fallen short.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's why it's so important.
Story_ID: 467790
Speaker 1: What are your future plans for your stores [Lena's Food Markets, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?  Do, do you--
Speaker 2: Well, my sons would like to complete the six that we have to become as efficient as they need to be, to develop the right foundation, and then they will open others.
Speaker 1: Okay, are you looking about now--there are some urban areas--we were discussing this too.  I raised it.  Detroit [Michigan] has virtually no supermarkets at all, you know, in the inner city?
Speaker 2: Well, we have been approached, relating to Detroit, matter of fact, we had a real nice luncheon, and a get together with the mayor of Detroit, and he identified the same thing, and we would be more than happy to go there, but we don't want to go there unprepared, or not ready, to sustain what may come, that we don't know, so we need to be able to deal with that.
Story_ID: 467791
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the greatest one is, wish--maybe wishful thinking of the past of together and, and, having the variety of things that we need, and getting the proper--let's say service--and respect, that anyone deserve to have, that's spending their money for something.  So our neighborhood, and the jobs for our young people early in life, 'cause that's their developing stages, and when they miss that, they losing so much, because they losing the value of doing something for them self, early in life, that helps sustain them, where they'll develop with that attitude of caring for them self, or taking care of them self.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're saying we're just not, training young pe- people, to be entrepreneurial early enough?
Speaker 2: No, no, we're not training 'em at all--the like me, we're talking about--and those coincidence ones, there's some that being trained to do the wrong thing from an entrepreneurial level versus doing the right thing, and if we could have more of our young peoples to get involved--not that they're gonna do grocery.  It's about their learning.  As I told people, whatever you want to do in life, you can get some training at the grocery store, because you meet some of all people and you deal with some of all people.  And you learn how to handle things relating to many different things, other than grocery, just to--what it take to make it work, and if you learn that, and do that, it help you through life regardless of which road you travel because, I have trained, and people that work for me now, they're doctors, they're lawyers, they're counselors, and they worked for me, and worked with me, when they was young, and they grew up that way.  Some of them, the only job they had was with me, like one now, at University of Wisconsin, only work he did was me and college, and when he finished college, he stayed with University of Wisconsin, so hey, that was me and them, you know, and that's kind of an experience, that I love to see more of our peoples be able to learn to care for them self, and still can do other things.
Story_ID: 467792
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing you'd do differently now, if you could?
Speaker 2: Be--nothing much, it's all depend on what area, that you speaking of and generally, no. If--well, if I had more control over things, I would do them different.  And I were insist on young people spending more time with me, or with my business, to learn more about how to make it, or how to do, I would try to do that.
Story_ID: 467793
Speaker 1: And likewise when you look back at what you've done to this point, what, what, today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: What now?
Speaker 1: I, I, was asking (background noise), what today would you consider to be your legacy, when you look back on everything you've done?
Speaker 2: Well, it's the ability to exceed where many fail.  Many things that other peoples have tried, or tried to do, that I was able to do them, in the sense of running a grocery store business [Lena's Food Markets, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], of this nature.  That is not easy, and everybody haven't been able to do it, or didn't do it, for whatever reason, and I was able to sustain the hardships that play a role in surviving, making it through, and--let's say taking care of my family, as an individual, with the help of others naturally.
Story_ID: 467794
Speaker 1: Do you have a philosophy of business that you've developed over the years?
Speaker 2: Well, how can I put it?  I--maybe my philosophy that, whatever I do--approach to do--should do the best that they can do, and no one can do it any better than you, if you want to do it.  That's where I was raised at.  You can do anything you want to do, there's nothing that you cannot do, if you want to do it hard enough--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) or bad enough, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there anything that I haven't asked you, we need to talk about, before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm just trying to think--it was a couple of things that I was thinking about, but I done forgot now, myself, what they were.
Story_ID: 467795
Speaker 1: Here's one now, I just now thought of this now.  Where do you advertise? Do you advertise mostly to black press, or--?
Speaker 2: Everywhere, we advertise on TV, radio, newspaper, handbills, everywhere.  We advertise through all available aspects, to get what we looking for.
Speaker 1: What's the most effective, advertising that you're doing--
Speaker 2: Radio, I think.  Radio, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, is it local radio station here that you read on the most?
Speaker 2: Um--1290 [WZTI Radio, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], I think that's the one.
Speaker 1: 1290 FM [sic.] or (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm just trying to think, my son takes care of all that--I'd say, Greg [Gregory Martin], he, he, takes care of that, I done forgot which that one he do most with it, but he got it everywhere.
Speaker 1: All right, and when you advertise, do you appeal more to older people or younger people?
Speaker 2: Well, that one, I think he's pretty much in the middle there.  He don't go to the extreme, one way or the other.  He's pretty much in the middle there, he don't go strong--older peoples or extreme young, he pretty much in the middle there.
Speaker 1: Have you ever used a celebrity spokesperson?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh, no.  My son, they claim he's good enough, (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so he does the ads?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, we have a commercial that, we have a lot of fun, and sure enough was fun, when we driving--we drove from the parking lot, we got out of the car, and there's some young ladies and whatnot, and we got out the car, and they started to singing our commercial, "It's Lena's [Lena's Food Markets, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]," you know it's, it's, a little shock, when you be approached that way, somebody see you and recognize it, and then they start singing your commercial on TV, or on the radio--
Speaker 1: Now, how does your theme song go?
Speaker 2: Oh, come on, don't ask me (laughter). I have to get you to get Greg on that one--sing.
Speaker 1: And do you have a slogan? Do you have a slogan, you know--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: "Lena's where quality," or anything like--I don't know--just something like that.
Speaker 2: I'm just trying to, yeah, yeah, that's what I'm trying to get it out the way they do it now--it's, "Lena's is serving you and serving your community the best," or something of that nature the way it goes, but it's kind of unique, you can hear it, it's a little jingle.
Speaker 1: I think, I've heard it a couple of times since I been here.
Speaker 2: You have?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay then, you know what it's a little bit about.
Speaker 1: Okay, well is there anything else before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No.  I think that you did a very good job.  You covered about everything I can think of.
Story_ID: 467796
Speaker 1: Were you a part--when Nixon's [President Richard Milhous Nixon] administration, was doing black capitalism, and all that, were you a part of the small business loan group or anything?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That--doing my business, I didn't do much loan, or borrowing at all, my kids, that's the new generation (laughter). I was the hard rock of doing, I didn't do much borrowing at all, very little borrowing.  I was more the grunt man.  I made it, and kept it, and spend it, so that way it worked out for me.  I didn't do much borrowing at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, well, is there anything else that we haven't talked about (simultaneous)?  Okay.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I think that's about it.
Story_ID: 467797
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy but, a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would just like to be remembered as a good father, and a good businessman, and did things with respect, and always was fair.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Okay, take care.
Speaker 1: Thanks a lot for spending the time, I know you're busy.
