Story_ID: 23887
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Gary Stephen May.  G-A-R-Y S-T-E-P-H-E-N M-A-Y.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 17, 1964, St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: Dean of the College of Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is December 10, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Atlanta, Georgia on the campus of Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology].
Story_ID: 23888
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask and they only require short answers.  They're kinda like a warm-up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite food.
Speaker 2: Ahh, lobster.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: I don't really have one.  Any place that has a beach.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I definitely don't have one of those (laughter).
Story_ID: 23889
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, and then we'll keep 'em straight and then we'll put 'em together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Gloria Hunter May, G-L-O-R-I-A H-U-N-T-E-R M-A-Y.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 11th, 1938.  I think that's right.  Also in St, Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?  Do they--can you trace 'em all the way back to Emancipation [referring to the Emancipation Proclamation that was signed by President Abraham Lincoln in 1863] days or--
Speaker 2: No I can't.  The relatives I know on my mother's side would go only back a couple of generations.  I knew my great-grandmother, her grandmother, very well until she died, and--
Speaker 1: What was her name?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Her name was Lena Butler.  And then--and we have, you know, we have pictures and family memorabilia of people older than her, but I didn't know any of those people.  And then--
Speaker 1: What did you--I'm not asking if actually knew them, but if you knew of them, what stories do you know of?
Speaker 2: I really didn't know much about 'em either.  They'd been in St. Louis for as long as I--her family had been in St. Louis [Missouri] as long as I'm aware of, as long as I can remember.  Don't know much more than that.  I have a little more information on my father's side, but we'll get to that I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you knew your great-grandmother.  She was born and raised in St. Louis too?
Speaker 2: No, but I can't tell you where she was born.  Somewhere in the south.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Do you know what she did for a living?
Speaker 2: Uhh, no (laughter).  By the time I was a kid, she was long retired.  I imagine she was a domestic worker of some kind, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And, okay.  What about your grandparents?
Speaker 2: So, ahhh, my grandmother and grandfather on my mother' side, my grandfather was a hospital worker.  That was his full-time job.  He also had a part-time job at a country club as a, you know, server--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and my grandmother, his wife, was also a domestic worker.  She was a nanny.  She cared for children of wealthier white families when they go on vacation and they'd invite her to come stay with them and care for the children and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well that kinda implies a higher level of education than if you were just doing cleaning or something.  So did you--
Speaker 2: They both were high school educated, yeah.  No college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  During those days though, high school education if you had it--
Speaker 2: That's about as far as you were expected to go, and that's what they did, and they both had pretty good jobs and worked their whole career.  They knew each other--they were married more than sixty years, and I think they dated for several years before they were married so they knew each other almost their whole lives.
Speaker 1: Now what were their names?
Speaker 2: Harrison Hunter, III.  I'm sorry, he was Harrison Hunter, Jr. and she was Alice Hunter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did your mother say about growing up?  Did she grow up in a specific neighborhood in St. Louis?
Speaker 2: She grew up in North St. Louis [Missouri] and went to school--elementary school and high school in the same area, went to public schools, then she went to the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri] for her undergrad--for the degree.  She was one of the class of African-Americans that integrated that university, and got a degree in education.
Speaker 1: Was there any turmoil associated with her integration?
Speaker 2: Some, yeah.  It wasn't as bad as some of the places in the south, but you know they were certainly, you know, heckled and, you know, made fun of and things during her stay there so--
Speaker 1: That would have been in the '50's [1950's]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Did your mother have any stories about growing up that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: Uhh, only that, you know, she had a brother and a sister.  There were three of them, she was the youngest.  They were reasonably well off for African-Americans at that time.  She, you know, tells me about that like my grandfather was the first to have a television on the block and, you know, they were treated very well and cared for very well; a happy, loving family.  Both the immediate family and extended family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well, so she was the first black college gra--I mean was she the first college graduate in her--
Speaker 2: In her family, yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: --yeah, okay.  All right.  Okay.  And did she--was she a teacher a social (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --She went on to become a teacher.  She taught at the St. Louis Public School System for more than forty years.
Story_ID: 23890
Speaker 1: All right.  Let me move to your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Warren May, Jr., W-A-R-R-E-N M-A-Y, Jr.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born November 22, it would have been, I guess '37 [1937] if my mother was born in '38 [1938].
Speaker 1: Okay, and how--
Speaker 2: He was born in Louisiana.  Delhi, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Delhi.  Where is Delhi in relationship to, say New Orleans [Louisiana] or Baton Rouge [Louisiana]--
Speaker 2: I think it's close to Monroe [Louisiana]; I'm not sure exactly where.  I've never visited there, but--
Speaker 1: It's on the gulf but a little bit further--
Speaker 2: Further inland than that.
Speaker 1: --okay.  Okay.  Now what can you tell us about your father's side?
Speaker 2: I have a little more information there.  My great, great-grandfather on my father's side was a man by the name of Theodore Cavendish May.  Actually, it was a white man from London.  And he himself was an indentured servant when he came to the United States.  When he finished his servitude, he married a Caribbean woman, black woman by the name of Minerva.  So those were my great, great-grandparents.  And they had, I have to look at the right number; they had eight or nine sons, and the son that was my great-grandfather was Theodore.  I'm sorry, was Thomas May--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and as I said they all grew up in Louisiana there and Thomas had a son, Warren, Sr., who was my grandfather, and then my father Warren, Jr.  So it was very unusual at that time for a white man to be married to a black woman, as you can imagine.  And so I'm sure they had a lotta good stories there.  And she was a former slave.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And she was the Caribbean?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't know what island she was from.
Speaker 1: All right.  Was he an indentured servant in the Caribbean, or--
Speaker 2: No, here.
Speaker 1: --in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not sure what part of the U.S. or even where they met but--
Speaker 1: Well that takes--let's see.  He would have been, let's see.  This is great great-grandfather so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --we're talking about if your father was born in '37 [1937], say your grandfather is about 1910 maybe, then it takes us back to about 1850 or so?
Speaker 2: Yeah, mid to late 1800's.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So did the family always live in--did his family always live in Delhi until he left?
Speaker 2: As far as I know, or thereabouts, in Louisiana, and then--and my father, when he was a young boy, they moved to St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Did they have land in Delhi [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: I believe so.  I believe the family does still have some land there.
Speaker 1: So did the whole family move, or just--
Speaker 2: Part of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were kind of scattered actually.  So we have Mays all over the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there any story about why they moved other than this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I think it was just, you know, opportunity.  Moving north seemed to be the thing to do and moving up the river on the Mississippi River [Mississippi] , St. Louis was the place they stopped and settled.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So once again now that your father--what did your father say about growing up?
Speaker 2: My father didn't talk too much about his childhood.  His father owned a tavern, a saloon, in St. Louis and my father I guess would do some odd jobs for him occasionally.  He also spent some time on a farm with his grandparents where they had livestock and you know he was--my father loved horses and he himself bought and raised some horses later in his life.  So he spent some time on a farm as well as time in the city.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A farm outside of St. Louis?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  About forty or fifty miles west of St. Louis
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your father have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: My father didn't go to college right outta high school.  He didn't go until later in life.  He finished his degree in the '80's [1980's] so he didn't do any college immediately.  He went to work in the Post Office in St. Louis.  He was a clerk, and he spent his whole career there working for the U.S. Postal Service.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, those days and even now, that's not a bad job in terms of income and security.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was steady work and it was stable, and he made a reasonable living, so between the two of my parents, you know, she was a public school teacher, he was a postal clerk, we--you know, we were middle class black family.  We never wanted for anything, my sister and I, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So just you and your sister?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have one sister.  She's two years younger than me.
Story_ID: 23891
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--I'll ask you more about her in a minute, but is there a story about how your parents met that you can tell?
Speaker 2: They went to the same high school, they dated and I don't think they became serious 'til after my mother [Gloria Hunter May] was already in college, but they knew each other in high school.
Speaker 1: Now what high school was this?
Speaker 2: It was Sumner High School in St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Sumner.  Okay.  All Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We get the names:  Sumner, Vashon and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Yep.  Yeah, my grandfather went to Vashon (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Sumner High School.  Okay.  Now, when you think about your parents' personalities and their dispositions, their likes and dislikes, how they look, how they walk and talk, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I'm a mixture.  My father [Warren May Jr.] was very proud, competitive, wanted to be the best at everything, ambitious.  My mother was much more reserved, but she's the kinda person who really cared about other people as much or more than herself, and she was always trying to make sure everyone else had everything they needed, and still is that way.  And family was very important to her; probably the most important thing to her if I had to name something.  And so the marriage and my sister and I were probably her number one priorities even though she had a job.  My father wanted more responsibility and wanted to be a leader in his profession whereas my mother didn't have those kind of ambitions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did your father like climb the ladder in the Post Office?
Speaker 2: To some degree.  I mean he always wanted to be Post Master of St. Louis.  He didn't make it that far (laughter), but he did get some supervisory responsibility for some of the offices there.  But I think both of them-- it was very important to both of them that my sister and I excelled in--you know, educationally, so I think, you know, my father was very insistent that I got good grades and he would take my report cards to work and things like that and show 'em off and, you know if I--he said if I want certain things, you gotta get good grades to get whatever toy or model, or whatever I wanted to get outta him.  He'd make sure it was a quid pro quo.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now your sister is younger than you, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She's two years younger.
Speaker 1: All right.  So did she become--did she get involved in science too, or--
Speaker 2: She's not in science, no.  She got a degree--well her degree is in gerontology [the study of the social, psychological, and biological aspects of aging], I guess which is a science, but she never has practiced in that field.  She works at Boeing in St. Louis, which was McDonnell Douglas when she started in the contracting office.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But she studied to become a gerontologist (unclear)
Speaker 2: She did study it but she's never worked in the field.
Story_ID: 23892
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right now.  When you look back at growing up, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory is we lived across the street from my mother's parents and I remember there was a two-family flat we lived in, and I remember, you know, having Christmas there, and opening my Christmas presents and running back and forth across the street to see my grandparents and play with my cousins who also lived across the street, and those were pretty fond memories there at that time.
Speaker 1: Now is this on the north side of St. Louis [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: The north St. Louis [Missouri] (unclear) is the name of the street.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So in St. Louis they would just call that the north side?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  North St. Louis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, we always ask this question when--now did you grow up the same place the whole time?
Speaker 2: No.  We lived there 'til I was about two, then we moved to the county to the suburbs--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a little further west of the city, close to the airport.  And my mother's still there in the same--the house I grew up there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right after my sister was born is when we moved.
Story_ID: 23893
Speaker 1: Well can you describe the neighborhood you grew up in and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: It was a suburban neighborhood, middle-class.  We lived in a modest three-bedroom home, lots of children in the neighborhood so I remember playing, you know, baseball and dodge ball and other things on the streets there, and learning--you know, riding my bike and skate boarding and all those sorts of things with my friends on the street.  We went to a Catholic school in the neighborhood, I guess, which was kinda unusual.  We weren't Catholic, we're not Catholic, but it was a good school and, you know, my parents--again, education was important, so they wanted to pick the best school and even though it cost a little bit in terms of tuition, they wanted to make that sacrifice for my sister and I.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, anything else?  Any sights and sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: Ahh, just, you know, playing all day until lights come on, the street lights came on, had to be inside by then, and I just had a lotta good friends and good relationships.  We didn't spend any time in the house like kids do now, you know, staying in playing video games.  We didn't do any of that; we were outside all day running and playing ball and, you know, getting into things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you in organized stuff like Boy Scouts and--
Speaker 2: I was in Boy Scouts, yeah.  I was in Cub Scouts then in Boy Scouts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what about little league and--?
Speaker 2: Played little league baseball--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --played soccer.
Speaker 1: All right, soccer, baseball too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, emm hmm.
Story_ID: 23894
Speaker 1: Now, I hear that you are fond of comic books.  You have a comic book collection?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Comic books.  I essentially taught myself how to read via comic books (laughter) from my early--I still have a collection.  I've got my earliest ones from 1964, which was the same year I was born, but I enjoyed the super hero in science fiction comic books, and now I've probably got twelve or thirteen thousand, kept a lot of 'em, all in my house.  And one day I'm gonna have enough time and patience to see how much the collection is worth, but I imagine it's worth a pretty significant amount of money.
Speaker 1: Sounds like it is.  Did you have a specific, I mean a favorite character?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed all the super heroes.  I mean I, you know, I started off collecting D.C. comics which were Superman, Batman, Green Lantern, etc. in the Justice League, and then I began collecting Marvel comics as well, which is Spiderman, Captain America, the Avengers, those (unclear) folks.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite artist?
Speaker 2: You know, I had several that I liked.  I enjoy the artist who depicted the characters with most realism.  I didn't like the sorta the cartoony blockey-looking artists; I liked the ones, you know, some of the ones I can remember like, you know, that are still active now, John Byrne and Jim Lee, and people like that, who I thought the characters looked more realistic.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you're coming along as a kid in the '70's [1970's], mid-70's [1970's]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so you're--so this is the time for the Star Wars movies and--
Speaker 2: Right.  Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --a lot of the big special effects movies, or Spielberg movies.
Speaker 2: Star Wars was the first movie I saw more than once because I was fascinated by the special effects more than anything else.  The story was okay, but the story was sort of a, you know, tried and true formula, you know, of heroism, but the special effects really were the thing that differentiated Star Wars from any of the previous movies.
Speaker 1: Now were you the kinda kid that would like read about how they made the special effects?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I just kinda enjoyed looking at 'em.  I mean I--from a story standpoint, I enjoyed Star Trek much more than I enjoyed Star Wars the original series because I thought those stories were fascinating and well-written and well-acted, and a lot of people would differ with that a little bit but I thought they were well ahead of their time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And we were talking earlier about Lieutenant Uhura--I mean Nichelle Nichols (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: -- (Simultaneous) Nichelle Nichols, yeah, and being, you know one of, at that time, I think two black women on television, and the other was Diahann Carroll.  So that was one thing that was interesting is she was a black woman in a position of authority.  She wasn't the captain but at the same time she was one of the officers on the bridge who had some real important responsibilities, and that was very unusual at that time on television.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  She wasn't cleaning up the--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) she wasn't cleaning up after people.  She wasn't really--you know, she took orders from the captain like everyone else did, but she also had her own area of expertise.  She was communications expert and, you know, on some of the episodes, she was the hero.  She had the role that made the difference, so--
Speaker 1: So did you read any--were you a science fiction fan too, in terms of reading books?
Speaker 2: --I read a lot of science fiction stories and still do.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite author?
Speaker 2: Ahh, well, I guess I'd say growing up it was--I forget names here--I'll think of some of the names and I'll come back to you but--
Speaker 1: Bradbury or Clark or--
Speaker 2: [Ray] Bradbury was one but that's not the one I was trying to think of.
Speaker 1: Henline?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: There's a Henline, Robert Henline?
Speaker 2: No.  (Hesitation, then recollection) Asimov (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Isaac Asimov
Speaker 2: "Foundation" and those stories, and "I Robot" and those kind of stories.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's the one that came up with the robot rules, right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yep.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.  So, seems like you had a lot of freedom to, you know, explore?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, I was a curious kid, had a lotta time to read and to do puzzles and models and things like that.  Those were the kinda things that interested me.
Speaker 1: Okay, like models of planes and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) model airplanes and other tanks and other things like that; ships.
Speaker 1: You were five when they made the moon landing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you remember watching that on TV?
Speaker 2: I remember hearing about it, you know, mainly through radio.  I don't think I watched it on television live, but learned about it later.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then they kept going back.  They went back several other times.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Were you a fan of the space program?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was.  I followed--I think the most interesting time was Apollo 13 [the seventh manned mission in the American Apollo space program and the third intended to land on the Moon.] when they were having trouble getting back, and I remember every day listening to the news on the radio to see what happened that day, and if they were gonna make it, and if they had enough oxygen and all those sorts of things was pretty suspenseful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How--if 'Nova' was on television in those days--I think it might have been.
Speaker 2: 'Nova?'  I don't remember ever watching (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Public television.
Speaker 2: --Maybe.  I mean I wasn't watching the--I was watching the fiction, not the real science, right? (Laughter)
Story_ID: 23895
Speaker 1: All right.  Was Church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: I did grow up in a church, a Methodist church.
Speaker 1: What was the name of it, if you remember?
Speaker 2: Union Memorial, United Methodist Church.  It's my mother's [Gloria Hunter May] church, and her family, but my parents were married there, I was baptized there, my sister was baptized there.  I actually recently went there to give the anniversary message, just last month.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's in St. Louis [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: In St. Louis, emm hmm.
Speaker 1: So the suburbs you lived in, that was--that's outside of St. Louis, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was an area called Normandy [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Normandy.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about school now.  Where--you started school at the Catholic school right?
Speaker 2: I went to Catholic elementary school.
Speaker 1: Catholic elementary school.
Speaker 2: Ascension [Ascension Catholic School in Chesterfield, Missouri] is the name of the school.
Speaker 1: Ascension.
Speaker 2: I went there from K through eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Math was always my favorite subject.  I enjoyed school in general, but math was the most fun.
Speaker 1: And were there any special teachers there that you remember that--
Speaker 2: Ahhh, so a lotta Nuns there.  I remember well.  Some because I enjoyed them and had a crush on them, and some because they were disciplinarians and they, you know, took care of the spanking and those sorts of things when it was necessary.  I guess my sixth grade teacher was the one that I enjoy--remember the most.  Her name was--her last name was Seimer, and I had a crush--I remember having a crush in sixth grade and wanting to stay after school and do things like that because I, you know, had a crush on her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, let's see.  All right.  Now, did you have a chance to go to any--I mean, did you go to museums when you were growing up and that sorta thing, or--
Speaker 2: Not too much, no.  We didn't do that sorta thing very much.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, or did you spend--you know, a lot of kids moved into the suburbs, it surprises me, to some extent never get into the city, or rarely get into the city for anything.
Speaker 2: Not a lot; you're right.  We would go there occasionally for family activities.  Most of the rest of the family was still in the city, or we'd go to the zoo or go to the [Gateway] Arch or some of the, you know, attractions in the city occasionally, but most of the time we spent out in the suburbs with our friends, and going to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you collected comic books, you got models--
Speaker 2: Emm Hmm.
Speaker 1: --so that's kind of a collection too, right?
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) yeah, I built the models and displayed those in my room and, you know, I had a erector set and Lego, and all those sorts of things were the things I enjoyed doing--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and jigsaw puzzles.
Speaker 1: So I take it with your father driving you, you had good grades.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  He [Warren May] didn't have to push that hard, but he did.  He was very attentive about that, and my mother was too.  I mean she did--she would check the homework we brought home every day, and she--if I was in a play or had a speech to give, she'd go over the lines with me, so both parents were really involved in education.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, you came along, let's see.  When you came along, Dr. King [Martin Luther King Jr.], when he passed, that was probably too early for you to really--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--I was just a little boy.  My mother told me what happened; she said we were in the grocery store.  I was a toddler, and she remembers herself stopping and crying, but I didn't have any sense of what was going on.
Speaker 1: Now was Ascension an integrated school?
Speaker 2: Mostly white, but there were a few other black kids there, and a smattering of, you know, I guess Asian.  But I guess when we started there, most of the time I was there, it was probably 70 or 80 percent white.  Until the very end, it started getting more and more black.  Families started moving into that area.  Composition changed, but it was mostly white.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, you went to Ascension through the eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And anything important about Ascension's graduation before we move to high school?
Speaker 2: No.  I was, you know, a straight A student there and did very well, had a lotta good friends and relationships, and enjoyed my time there very much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 23896
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, we were talking off camera about 'Roots' [Alex Haley]--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --now that came out in 1977--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and you'd have been ahh what, thirteen?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was like ahh eighth grade or so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, thirteen years old?
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: And tell us about your reaction to "Roots."
Speaker 2: I was fascinated by it.  It was probably the most compelling television I had ever seen, and maybe still to this day have seen 'cause, you know, I watched every episode.  My face was glued to the television, riveted by every, every--'cause I had never--had no concept of slavery in the middle passage and what sort of things black people had endured.  I mean we had some of this in school, but you know reading it in a textbook just didn't come alive the same way it did on television there with, you know, the story was so well-done and well-acted, and it was just a significant milestone in my life, seeing that series.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you expressed some surprise that your white classmates weren't watching.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, you know, at school we'd get there in the morning and everyone would say, "What did you do last night?  What did you watch on television?"  And, you know, I was stunned that my white classmates weren't watching it.  I couldn't imagine anybody wouldn't be watching this (laughter), but, you know, and they didn't, and not because they were bad people or anything; it just wasn't part of their experience or interest, and that was also something--a learning experience for me that there was some difference between myself and my, my classmates.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So did your teachers discuss it at school at all?
Speaker 2: We did not discuss it in school very much at all.  It was more of a family--you know my whole family was watching it together and we'd discuss it, you know, during and after.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did you have a sense that your own family history was--part of that was your own family history?
Speaker 2: Well I would ask a lotta questions.  You know, it was the same kinda thing that our family experienced, and I was able to generalize that show to the black experience more broadly, and didn't have specific details on my family like Alex Haley did, but could sort of identify with it.
Story_ID: 23897
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, high school.  Now where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to a high school called Lutheran High School North, which was also very close to my home, so I went from Catholic elementary school to a Lutheran high school, and I'm a Methodist (laughter), so I started getting an appreciation for different points of view on religion.  But it was a matter of just picking the best schools really, for me.  The only choice--other choice that we considered if I was gonna stay in Catholic school was the (unclear) high school was--actually the school that I was encouraged to go to by the folks at Ascension [Catholic School] because it was the best Catholic high school in the city and maybe still is, or one of the best, but it was all boys.  And my father wanted no parts of me going to an all-boys' school, and I kind of agreed with him, so--I wanted to go to a co-ed school and it was a good Lutheran school right up the street, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how big was Lutheran High School?  Was it pretty big?
Speaker 2: Uhhh, small.  Uhh, total enrollment at that time maybe 500 students.  Roughly 120 or so in each, each class.  I know my graduating class was 104 students.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, did you continue to be interested in math?  You know, is your top subject--
Speaker 2: Right.  I was interested in math but, you know, I was good in everything; math and the sciences, and I was also a good writer, and in high school I made all A's as well except for--ironically I got two B's in high school; both were in gym PE classes.  One was gymnastics, I can't remember what the other one was (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you like athletics at all?
Speaker 2: Uhh, you know, I enjoyed--played--I mentioned playing baseball and I Played tennis in high school a little bit and did track one year.  I wasn't the best athlete in the world; I wasn't ahh--you know, a lot of my friends played football.  I wasn't--I was a small kid and not particularly fast, so that didn't make a good formula for football player.  I wasn't very tall, so basketball was out as well.  I knew I had to play basketball in elementary school too.  So I was more of a student.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now were there any particular teachers that were special in high school for you?
Speaker 2: I had a lotta good teachers in high school, particularly in math, again my favorite subject.  I remember my geometry teacher; her name was Barb Klensik.  I really enjoyed geometry, and that was unusual because nobody enjoyed geometry (laughter).  But I sorta was--got a kick outta doing the proofs and that kinda thing, which nobody else could do 'em and I was always helping everybody else with the proofs.  And then after that, took pre-calculus from another--a guy by the name of Carl Holshon; I think he's still there too.  Oh, and I guess I took algebra before, before geometry from--Marting was his name--Mark Marting.  Enjoyed all those math classes I remember; I remember a lotta the high school teachers well.  Also, I remember some of the science and history teachers and all of them.  Had good experience there.
Story_ID: 23898
Speaker 1: Now at a certain point in high school, you participated in a summer program called Developing Engineering Students--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and that's sponsored by McDonnell Douglas [merged with The Boeing Company in 1997], right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, so I wanted to do it after my freshman year, but I was too young.  And the counselor had, you know, told me about it and said "Well, if you continue to like math and science, and you wanna think about engineering, you could do this next summer."  So my sophomore year, that summer was the first summer I did it.
Speaker 1: So you knew about it before your counselor knew about it?
Speaker 2: No, my counselor told me about it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I wanted to do it and wasn't able to do it because it was too soon, so I waited a year.  And McDonnell Douglas also was very close to my house, so it worked out very well.  And a couple of my friends also were in the program.  It was specifically for minority students too, so that was an attraction.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the site actually was over at McDonnell Douglas near your home?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, fifteen minutes from where I lived.
Speaker 1: All right.  What was it like?
Speaker 2: So it was a bunch of students from all over the city, probably twenty-five or thirty of us who were all--who all excelled in math and science, and who had been nominated by someone at their school--a counselor, or principal or somebody, or a teacher.  And it paid, so we got an hourly rate, and we learned about, you know, different engineering principals, and we learned how to solder and we learned how to do drafting, and we learned about the airplanes that were being manufactured there at McDonnell Douglas and got to meet the engineers that worked there and--so it was really a great program.  We made some friends, and some of us stayed with engineering, others didn't but--
Speaker 1: Before you heard about the program, did you know what an engineer was?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I mean I had people telling me, "You know you should consider engineering 'cause you're good at math and good at science," but no engineers in the family, so I had no role models.  I didn't have any concept of what engineers did for a living until I was there in that program and watched 'em day-to-day.
Speaker 1: Can you kinda give us what you came to understand the difference was between a scientist and an engineer?
Speaker 2: Well I knew engineers used science.  I always thought engineers--and still think this, are more practical than scientists, so--scientists, you know, discover the laws of nature, and engineers find uses for those discoveries and develop technology that can be--to improve the quality of life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you know of that distinction in those days, or did you--
Speaker 2: Not early on, but I sort of developed that understanding.  You might--the only concept of sciences that I had were from television as well and usually they were the mad scientists trying to take over the world; that kinda thing, and so it wasn't all positive although, you know, you knew these were smart people, so they could do things, and other things--other people couldn't.  And so that was a good--an attractive part of being a scientist, but you didn't see any scientists do anything really useful or positive.  And then there--I guess the only one maybe was the professor on Gilligan's Island who was kind of a--you know, it was always baffling to me why he couldn't figure out how to get them off the island (laughter).  He could do everything else there and he couldn't fix that radio, so that was--so he had his ups and downs in my mind.  But then there were the people on "Star Trek" and the other shows who were heroic, the engineers and scientists on those shows.
Speaker 1: You raised a good point.  There are a lot--I wonder what the percentage is of scientists and TV and movies that are trying to take over the world you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the most common role for scientists in media even today.  I mean it's--that's one of the problems that we have attracting young people into engineering and science because the portrayal in the media is so negative.
Speaker 1: You're right.  I agree with you.  So, okay, was this program every summer or just this one summer?
Speaker 2: I did it for three summers; through my senior year and then off to college.
Story_ID: 23899
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're still making--are you still making straight A's?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  I was making straight A's all through that period and then into college as well.  You know, I made B's in college, but the first year or so was all A's.
Speaker 1: Well I'm trying to--high school.  So in high school, you were still making straight A's?
Speaker 2: In high school, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: This is straight A's.  Okay
Speaker 2: --all through high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you hold a class office or anything?
Speaker 2: So I was the--so there was one guy--I have to mention I made two B's.  There was one guy who made all A's and he was the Valedictorian of the high school.  I was the Salutatorian and gave the speech at graduation for that role and I didn't--I was not a--in student government, I was on the National Honor Society and those sorts of things.
Speaker 1: Now what kind of a teenager were you?  Were you shy, or were you outgoing?
Speaker 2: Not particularly shy.  I wasn't the most savvy or knowledgeable person in the world.  I remember going to my--the first party and I, you know, I had dressed up in a suit to go to this party in somebody's basement, and everybody else was, you know, casually dressed and I felt kinda outta place and it took me a while to sorta get the social graces down and understand that sort of thing.  But I had friends and, you know, I wasn't, you know, isolated or nervous or shy or--I wasn't the prototypical nerd at all.  I had friends and had girlfriends, and enjoyed my social life.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now did you have a favorite music in those days?  Now this was the mid-'70's [mid-1970's], right?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed the classic R&B and funk that, you know, other black students liked, you know.
Speaker 1: And even the funk in that era had a sci-fi--
Speaker 2: A little bit.  Parliament Funkadelic.  That was one of my favorites; still is, but I also enjoyed, you know, Marvin Gaye, and the O'Jays, and all the R&B groups.  But I also had a pretty eclectic taste.  I had a lotta white friends, so I had some rock that I enjoyed as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what artists did you like?
Speaker 2: Oh wow, you're gonna make me try to remember--like Chicago and uhh--who else was back then?  Uhh, the Rolling Stones and those type of people, right, were back in those days.  They're still active, I guess.
Story_ID: 23900
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right, so, at graduation you were the Salutatorian, and I've heard that someone--I guess at--I read anyway, that someone at McDonnell Douglas, recommended Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: That's right.  So as we were trying to think about what colleges to attend and, you know, the folks there at McDonnell Douglas had a list of schools that they hired engineers from, and said Georgia Tech was the best, it was this guy's understanding.  And they also had a co-op program which I was interested in which would allow you to work and go to school, and give me a chance to come back home every other quarter.  And so Georgia Tech was one of the schools that McDonnell Douglas hired co-ops from, and I also had a couple of friends from my high school who were ahead of me who went to Georgia Tech, and I also had--several of my female cousins went to Spellman, and so Atlanta was kind of an attraction for those reasons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So did you work at McDonnell Douglas the summer before you went to Georgia Tech too?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So at that point, did you-was there any particular phase of engineering that you knew you wanted to be involved in?
Speaker 2: Not really; I kinda liked everything, so it was hard to pin it down, and ultimately, I was deciding between electrical and chemical, and I guess I decided on electrical because I had done some (unclear) radio, you know, I built radios when I was a--as part of my erector set, Lego phenomenon, so I picked electrical over chemical.
Speaker 1: Now did you fix stuff around the house that was broken?  And did you like to do that?
Speaker 2: I was more known for taking things apart (laughter) (unclear) putting them back together; but occasionally, yeah.  I did woodworking in high school and did shop and, you know, auto-mechanics and all those sort of things, so--enjoyed doing those kinda things.
Speaker 1: Did your dad do a lotta that kind of work at home?
Speaker 2: Not really.  My dad [Warren May Jr.] was ahh--he was pretty bright.  I mean he was very good at math; in fact, I remember not being able to do some problems and asking him, and he would, he would do 'em for me even though he had never--he hadn't been to college at that point.  So he was kinda naturally gifted in math; yeah, but he didn't do much handy man kinda work.  I mean, he took care of the yard and those kinda things, but--and painted, but not much what I would call engineering kinda work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you graduated from college in '82 [1982]? Is that it?
Speaker 2: '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: '85 [1985], okay.  High school, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) high school '81 [1981].
Speaker 1: --'81 [1981] okay.  High school graduation is '81 [1981].
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Story_ID: 23901
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So the fall of '81 [1981], you started Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: All right.  So what was Georg--had you been to the campus before?
Speaker 2: No.  I'd been to Atlanta [Georgia] before, but my first experience on the campus was when my parents dropped me off.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So what was it like?  Was it what you expected?
Speaker 2: Pretty much.  I thought the campus was very nice, you know.  I wasn't in the most luxurious dorm in the world, but I--you know, there was a lotta green space on campus, fairly modern buildings and architecture and pretty reasonable size; it wasn't too big, it wasn't too small, so we had--I enjoyed the campus life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So did you get involved in any of the fraternities or any of that type of thing?
Speaker 2: I was never in a fraternity, I had really no desire.  I thought about it for a little bit.  Some of my friends were gonna pledge and got involved, but I had no desire to let anyone tell me what to do for any length of time (laughter), so--and I also had observed the negative impact it had on some people's grades and I didn't wanna be part of that.
Speaker 1: Now did they have a black student organization when you came--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: We did; we had a couple.  We had a National Society of Black Engineers, which I became very involved with over time, and we also had an African-American--what's now called the African-American Student Union here, but at that time it was called the Georgia Tech African-American Association.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, yeah, the National Society of Black Engineers; did you get involved with that immediately?
Speaker 2: I did, right away; I became a member.  As an engineering student, I became a member right away, went to the meetings where we learned about, you know, writing a resume, interviewing and preparing for an engineering career, and how to get a job.  As time went on, I became an officer and eventually president of the organization as an undergraduate and eventually national chair of the organization as a graduate student.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right.  So you decided to focus on electrical engineering--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --but was there some sort of a senior paper or--that you worked on--
Speaker 2: In--
Speaker 1: --while an undergraduate at Georgia tech?
Speaker 2: You do have to do a senior project, yeah.  So mine was in the area of microelectronics.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Microelectronics.  Now we're talking about the early '80's [1980's], and this is before there are personal computers.  I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah, personal computers were just starting to become available sort of as I was graduating but not a lot--they weren't prevalent but they were--they existed.
Speaker 1: What was different?  Just kinda--just tell us what was different I guess between now--today, 2012 and when you were in--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: There was no Internet; that was a big one.  I mean there was no--I mean when we did computer assignments, we had to go to the computer science building and we used punch cards initially, and then later we would submit our programs, not on punch cards, but using a batch processing environment and we'd have to wait for the printout to see if the results were right and, you know, no one had their own computer; all the computing was done centrally in one place on campus.  So that part was very different; no one had cell phones, no one had any of the things we kinda take for granted here today, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now were there any special teachers at Georgia Tech?
Speaker 2: Ahh, well, so I did the senior project with a professor by the name of Kevin Brennan who, we worked on design and fabrication of a device called an Avalanche Photo Dio, and that was--he was my instructor in my first courses in semi-conductors in micro-electronics.  He has since passed away, but he was, you know, a good mentor for me, and probably the person that got me interested enough in that field to go to graduate school.  But there were also other mentors that were not electrical engineering professors.  We had one black professor on campus in engineering who was an African gentleman by the name of Augustine Esogbue.  He was an industrial engineer--
Speaker 1: Can you spell his last name for us?
Speaker 2: E-S-O-G-B-U-E.  (Unclear) our first African-American professor at engineering at Georgia Tech and he was--he only just retired a couple of years ago--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and so he was a big influence on me as a role model mentor, but--although I never had a class with him 'cause I wasn't in that field.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now I take it you had a really good experience here at Georgia Tech as an undergraduate.
Speaker 2: Yeah, generally speaking.  It was a good place to go to school.  I enjoyed--I had good friends, we, we had a lotta fun, we got into a lotta mischief, you know, I played intramural sports, you know, maintained my grades, was active in these organizations, had a leadership role on campus so I was well-known to the administration and the faculty.  It was a very positive experience all the way around.
Speaker 1: Now were you tempted to stay here to work on your Master's degree?
Speaker 2: I was.  I thought about that a lot actually, but the person I mentioned, Dr. Esogbue, actually told me it would be better for me to go somewhere else and if I wanted to come back at some point, that I could--that was open to me, but he said it was better not to get all your degrees from the same place.  And so he was--one factor in me decided to go away to graduate school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So you graduated from college in 1985, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And--now did you have a--now you graduated as--ahh Magna Cum Laude, right?
Speaker 2: I did.  Highest honors, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's--with the highest honors, so I guess there's nowhere to go (laughter).  Can't get any higher, so--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) yeah.  Had a 3.9 Grade Point Average.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you know Dr. Paula Hammond?
Speaker 2: I did not know Paula until--I know her now, but I didn't know her then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, I have a note here that she was here then.  Are there any other black students that were here with you that we would--
Speaker 2: Oh, quite a few, yeah.  We had a pretty good--in fact, my class--we had quite a few people who really did well academically.  There's another--Johnnie Parker is a professor at Kentucky now.  She was in my class; one of my good friends, Steve Isabel.  Both of these people got PhD's.  He got his PhD at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Massachusetts]; he now works in Boston at Bowes.  Several of us did very well; I remember our class was--raised a lot of eyebrows because we were all doing really well, and we were all, you know, socially normal, right? (Laughter).  So that was something that was new for Georgia Tech; to have African-American students--so any numbers, doing as well as we were doing.
Speaker 1: You know I think for the first time--just looking at the issues of black collegian in those days, they really pushed engineering--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right--
Speaker 1: --as a career of the future.
Speaker 2: --right.  "Black Collegian" was actually the same publisher as the first "National Society of Black Engineers" magazine, yeah.  So I remember working with those people.
Story_ID: 23902
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So you chose to go to--well, grad school at University California at Berkeley, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But before you went, you spent like some time at Bell Labs?
Speaker 2: So I was a Co-op, so I worked at McDonnell Douglas [St. Louis, Missouri] first for five quarters.  In the Co-op Program, you go to school for a quarter, work for a quarter, and you alternate.  It's a five-year program instead of a four-year undergraduate program.  But my last quarter--right before that, I had gotten a fellowship from AT&T, (unclear) AT&T Cooperative Research Fellowship Program--CRP, which was very famous at that time for helping black students and other minority students get PhD's, and the only requirement was that you worked for Bell Labs for one summer.  And so my final Co-op quarter I spent at Bell Labs in New Jersey, and I worked for a guy by the name of Larry Nagel, and Larry was a Berkeley alumnus who was very famous for writing a piece of software called SPICE [Simulation Program with Integrated Circuit Emphasis] which, you know, we can get to that if you want to, but it was a well-known piece of software in our field of micro-electronics.  And Larry encouraged me to consider Berkeley [University of California] and I did.
Speaker 1: Now what is SPICE?  I have to ask now (laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm gonna forget the acronym.  Basically, it was a program that simulated integrated circuit performance.  So it was a, you know, computerated design--piece of software that could simulate the performance of circuits.
Speaker 1: With integrated circuits?
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: What is an integrated circuit?
Speaker 2: Most people know them as computer chips; that's the laymen's term.  So integrated circuits are pieces of silicon that are designed and fabricated to perform certain functions in electronics that allow computers to do what they do.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So this is--what did you think of Bell Laboratories?
Speaker 2: Bell Labs was another fascinating experience because at that time, you know, it was known for being one of the most intellectually stimulating places--companies in the world and they had averaged more than one patent per day since their inception and, you know, I remember meeting Nobel laureates there and just walking the halls.  I actually worked in the organization of a gentleman by the name of Arno Pinzias, who won the Nobel Prize for physics in the late '70's [1970's]; I don't remember which year, and Dr. Pinzias was known for--his discovery was the average ambient temperature of the universe, which kinda led--lent credence to the big bang theory.  So we're working with these people, talking to 'em day-to-day, and all these great physicists and chemists and engineers and other scientists, so Bell Labs was just a really great experience, and they had a lot of minority programs.  So I was in the CRP program, but they had other programs for undergraduate students who would come there and spend the summer.  They had other graduate programs for women and other underrepresented groups, so it's really an exceptional collection of young people and the older well-established scientists, so I spent two summers there.  It was a great experience.
Story_ID: 23903
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So at UC [University of California] Berkeley--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --now it's 1980 uhh?
Speaker 2: Started there in January of '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: '86 [1986], January of '86 [1986].  Okay.  All right.  And you decided to focus on electrical engineering?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Electrical engineering, computer science was my major--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --there--the one department there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now you worked as a research assistant there?
Speaker 2: Eventually.  I started off sort of just taking classes and decided on what field I wanted to specialize in, which was--the first choice was in semi-connector devices.  And I became a research assistant for a professor by the name of Ping Ko; K-O is his last name.
Speaker 1: K-O?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The first name is what?
Speaker 2: Ping, P-I-N-G.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And I worked with him for two or three years, and then I--he was my research advisor, then I changed groups and worked for an advisor I eventually graduated under, doing something slightly different, which was semi-conducted manufacturing, so it's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --less device-oriented, more assistance oriented.
Speaker 1: Now were there any other African-Americans there in school or as instructors?
Speaker 2: Not instructors, none on the faculty, but we had a group of students that was--we had a--called the Black Graduate Student Association--BGSA, and--no, I'm sorry; that's here (laughter).  There, it was called the Black Graduate Engineering and Science Student Association--BGESS, which we started there in my class, so we had, you know, several of us who have since become faculty members.  And you mentioned Kevin Horrigay, he was in my class at Berkeley.  Valerie Taylor, who's the Chair of Computer Science at Texas A&M [College Station, Texas], was in my class at Berkeley (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) (unclear)
Speaker 2: --several others have gone on to industry.
Speaker 1: We've interviewed Valerie Taylor too.
Speaker 2: Have you?
Speaker 1: Right.  Texas A&M?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we graduated in the same ceremony.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, most of the people we interview, when they go off to graduate school, they don't really notice the MS, they just keep going (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--yeah, the MS [master in science] in kind of--you get that along the way, and it's not really a big deal.  I remember my mother being mad at me 'cause I didn't go to my Master's graduation ceremony and didn't tell her about it 'cause that wasn't my goals.  She found out about it later and was not happy that I didn't tell her about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  For those of us who are not in science (unclear), that seems like that would be a big--
Speaker 2: Well, it's so--you know, the Master's is--the goal was doctorates; the Master's you picked up along the way because you did the course work anyway, so it was, you know, part of the process, but it wasn't the end of the process.  So it wasn't viewed as--with a lot of excitement.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you want on to earn your PhD in 1991, I mean you--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --got it.  All Right now, can you tell us what your Dissertation was about?  And how--when do you actually start working on your Dissertation?  Is that like as you work on your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's a continuous process (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Master's as the same work (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --as soon as you become--well for some people it is.  For me actually, as my Master's, I changed advisors and started working on something different.  But it's not unusual for it to be a continuous process from the very beginning of your graduate program to the end.  But the two fields I worked in were very closely related, so it wasn't like a big jump.  The Thesis, the Dissertation was on Automated Malfunction Diagnosis of Semi-Conductor Manufacturing Equipment.  So what I did was design essentially an expert system that would collect data from various sources and draw conclusions about the health of the processing equipment that was making the innovative circuits.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was (unclear) of the program to monitor the--an automated process.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It would both monitor the manufacturing process and predict failure modes for the equipment so that the engineers could--in real time, or even sometimes in a predictive manner, determine what needed to be adjusted or fixed before it went down.
Story_ID: 23904
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, Automated Malfunction Diagnosis of IC Manufacturing Equipment?
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: So this is your Doctoral Dissertation?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So is actually, from what I've--is a theme in a lot of what you've done in engineering since, you know, design--
Speaker 2: I've continued in that same field, the general field of semi-conductor manufacturing.  I've done modeling, monitoring diagnostic sensors, design for manufacturability, modeling of yield of the process; all of those things relating to the improving, enhancing, and making more efficient, the process of making integrated circuits.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what you do once again is you're applying an engineering solution to an engineering problem?
Speaker 2: Right.  And using various tools and statistics and artificial intelligence in other fields to help improve those processes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  I was thinking when I was reading this, in some ways it's like it's related to, you know, creating--I guess--artificial intelligence on a robot or something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So we actually use artificial intelligence, neural networks, venser shaper theory, genetic algorithms, as tools in our toolbox to improve--to help us analyze data that we collect and make predictions and build models, and do control--process control for these manufacturing processes.
Story_ID: 23905
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, now after you earned your PhD, you went directly back to Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, Georgia] (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I did (laughter); I came right back here.  I actually several places; both universities and in industry.  I had a few offers.  The other offers I had at academia were at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Carnegie Mellon [University] I can recall.  And I had offers at Intel and Texas Instruments industry and I decided--I picked Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology] for a variety of reasons.  One, I had some experience here; two, you know, at the time, there was a large effort--two large efforts.  One, they had just built a manufacturing research center, and they also just built a microelectronics research center.  And those two fields were those two connectors where my work was focused. And so it seemed like a serendipitous, you know, set of circumstances.  I remember the folks at MIT were shocked that I turned them down (laughter), and still to this day whenever I run into the particular professor who made the offer--his name is Paul Penfield, he's retired now, he tells me that I made a mistake (laughter), even though I am now the dean of industry at Georgia Tech, he says I never should have passed up that opportunity to work at MIT and, you know, who knows if he's right or wrong, but I think it's turned out okay for me.
Story_ID: 23906
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So you became professor of engineering and computer engineering?
Speaker 2: Electrical and Computer Engineering--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that's the way we were organized here, but I still do electrical engineering myself, but we also had computer engineering degree and we're in the same department.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  It's interesting here and like almost the second year you're here, in '92 [1992], you founded and became director of the Summer Undergraduate Research and Engineering Science program, SURE--
Speaker 2: Right.  The SURE program.
Speaker 1: --the SURE program.
Speaker 2: So, you know, my other real passion, in addition to my research, was in attracting other minorities to engineering and science and helping grow the field and replicate myself, if you will.  I never could understand why there were so few of us.  You know, if you believe, as I do, that the types of talents that make for good engineers are distributed uniformly across populations, there should be--you know, we should be a parity in engineering--black people, but we're not.  So that's been a real passion of mine to contract more people to engineering, more African-American people to engineering.  So at this program, the SURE program that you mentioned was an offshoot of something we did in graduate school where we brought students from other universities to campus at [University of California] Berkeley for the summer to recruit them to graduate school there.
Speaker 1: Now was that the Superb program?
Speaker 2: Superb.  So my colleagues and I, when we were still graduate students, started the Superb program at Berkeley.  And so the SURE program--the first name actually was called GT Supreme and forget what--it was another long acronym, but the same general model where the idea was to bring students from all over the U.S., black students who were at that time just electrical engineers, to Georgia Tech to (1) get them interested in graduate school, and (2) to hopefully recruit them to Georgia Tech for their graduate education.  And I did that--that's probably, as I think about it, that was actually the first proposal I ever got funded as a faculty member, was for the SURE program.  And starting that, as you said, right after I came in 1992, and it's been going strong every year since then so--the program is twenty-two years old now.
Speaker 1: Now did you get this program funded for $2.3 million back in '92 [1992]?
Speaker 2: No, no.  The very first grant I got was for about $50,000, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, so this is the accumulation of all years, I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--yeah, that's (unclear).  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'cause I was gonna say "Wow, it's astonishing."
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  That would be great if that was my first grant, no.  That first--it was just for one summer, a 50,000 grant--$50,000 grant for one summer, for '92 [1992], that would fund about ten students.  And then after that, I wrote a, you know, renewal proposal and have been renewing it ever since then, typically every three years.  The cumulative amount of funding there has been more than two million dollars.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's funded by the National Science Foundation [NSF].
Speaker 2: Primarily.  There have been a few other foundations, but that's been the bulk of the amount.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well--and that's for approximately how many students?
Speaker 2: So we started out with just ten students that summer, but now we have about thirty-five or forty students every summer.  Cumulatively, we've had over 400 students since the program started.  No students themselves have gone on; some of them have started similar programs and gone to graduate school and are professors at other universities, and it's been quite a success story.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, let's see.  What were you working on?  Was your time at Georgia Tech split between research and teaching?
Speaker 2: It was.  At any research university, the responsibilities of the faculty member include both the research mission of the university as well as your teaching--your educational mission of the university.  And there's some service and professional things that you do as well, but you have to be good at all those things to be successful, to get tenure and get promoted.  And I was doing what I was supposed to doing.
Speaker 1: What kind of research were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (unclear)--work.  I was continuing that.  I had students working on, you know, various sensors and modeling and process control systems, and all again designed to improve the efficiency and productivity of integrated circuit manufacturing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So it says here that in 1997, you're thirty-three years old, you take on a leadership role at the National Science Foundation.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was working as a--on a committee for NSF [National Science Foundation], and I think what I was doing then, if I remember that particular role, that was the--that's probably--it could be one of two things.  It was a Committee on Equal Opportunity and Science Engineering.  Is that the one you're talking about?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So I was on that committee for a while and I eventually became Chair of that committee.  I guess I was Chair in 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Coughing).  And in 1998, you founded the Facilities Academic Careers in Engineering and Sciences (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--So that's a FACES program.  Facilitating Academic Careers in Engineering and Science.  That was another grant from NSF that we got through a program that was originally called Minority Graduate Education, but now it's called The Alliances for Graduate Education (unclear).  And the idea there was (1) to increase the number of underrepresented minorities getting PhD's in STEM fields, and more importantly than to get those folks with the PhD's into academic careers.  And that was--we were one of the first cohort of universities that got one those grants and I was the principal investigator of the grant.
Story_ID: 23907
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I don't wanna skip past this, but you went through a period when there were no personal computers or that sorta thing, or Internet, through the period we just talked about.  I guess all this is up and runnin' now--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right.  Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --through the early 90's [1990's], beginning of the early '90's [1990's].
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: How did that change what you were doing?
Speaker 2: I just made it easier, more efficient.  I mean I think I got my first PC when I was in graduate school, actually it was part of the AT&T Fellowship Program.  They gave us a PC and, you know, became proficient at using and programming the PC and it became a tool of the trade.  Everyone had one or had access to one, and was using those to build models and do other things that were associated with my research.  And not it's just, you know, kinda taken for granted, it's an everyday part of life.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Did you have a particular one that you gravitated towards in those days in the kind you used?
Speaker 2: I used whatever I had and could get my hands on (laughter).  The one that they gave us was an AT&T model PC.  It wasn't all that great actually (unclear) but, you know, it served its purpose.  And then we had computers on campus that we had access to as well, and eventually, you know, over time acquired my own PC's and laptops and other various tools.
Speaker 1: Did you prefer any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I really don't.  I'd been using one of those machines for a long time.  My wife likes iPhones and--I mean likes Apple machines; I've used both and don't have a strong preference either way.  Whatever's available.
Story_ID: 23908
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right.  Now we talked about the FACES program--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --and so that's ongoing; that's still going on today, right?
Speaker 2: It is.  Right.  It's ongoing.
Speaker 1: Is SURES still going on?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--SURES  [Summer Undergraduate Research and Engineering Science] is still going on as well.  Both of those programs are ongoing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you said you founded these and they're still doing things.  It says here in 2000, you were elected to the National Academy of Science and Engineering to participate in Frontiers of Engineering.  Now the Frontiers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Frontiers of Engineering.
Speaker 1: --yeah, for Engineering Conference, right.  Which as--not just anybody, but as one of the nation's top 100 engineers between thirty and forty-five.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's how they advertised the program.  I'm not sure who makes that determination but you have to be nominated to be invited to this annual conference.  It may be annual, it may be bi-annual; I don't know if it's every year or every two years.  And this was a big deal; it's put on by the National Academy of Engineering, and so the participants that are invited are sorta the cream of the crop, and have to be below--I guess forty is the limit--the age limit.  So it's quite an honor to be invited to that program.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now in 2001, you were a consultant for the National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is the National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering [NACME]?
Speaker 2: So, that is an organization that was founded in the '70's [1970's] by a group of corporations who recognized the dearth of African-American and Hispanic engineers--engineering talent in their companies, and could foresee how the demographic changes were happening and that the future need was gonna be there, and it's still active now.  I've done, over the years, I actually got a scholarship from that organization when I was an undergraduate.  Over the years I've done various activities, including some consulting, for them and, you know, writing research reports and that sort of thing.  And even right now I'm on what's called their RPAC Research Policy Advisory Council.  And I just a (laughter) conference call today with them, in fact.  So that organization is one of the ones I participated in that's sort of related to this passion I have of increasing participation of minorities in STEM fields and it's just one of many that I have been active with.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Another one is the GEM program, right?
Speaker 2: The GEM program as well.  The GEM program is another that started right around that same time, in the '70's [1970's], to provide graduate fellowship funding for minority students in engineering and science.  And actually, the GEM program is pretty important from another standpoint for me because the former executive director of that program is a gentleman by the name of Howard Adams, and Howard used to go barnstorming across the country recruiting students into GEM and getting students interested in going to graduate school and I saw one of his presentations as an undergraduate.  That's one of the big reasons I went to graduate school; he was so compelling in salesmanship, if you will.  He was so enthralling in telling us what the benefits of going to graduate school were and why, you know, if you had the talent and you had the money, you should go to graduate school because you're gonna be--it's gonna give you options and give you--expand your possibilities for success in your career.  So, as I said, Howard was the executive director of the GEM program, and I've done things for Jim off and on.  I'm currently the Executive Vice President of the GEM Board, and the executive director of the GEM program is a good friend of mine and who I've known for many years now-twenty-five years or so, actually--Michele Lezama--and so I'm still active with that group as well.  But the group I've been most active with is the National Society of Black Engineers though.  I've been--we talked about my undergraduate days as an officer on campus, but I became the National Chair of that organization in the mid-80's [mid-1980's] when I was in graduate school, and have been on the National Advisory Board for most of the time since then.  And that organization--I met my wife through that organization, who is also--she's also an engineer, and it's probably been one of the most influential organizations in my life thus far, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did you meet your wife before you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) No, after I graduated.  After I got my PhD--
Speaker 1: --okay.
Speaker 2: --my wife and I met here in Atlanta [Georgia].  I was running a math tutoring program at Douglas High School on Saturdays, and a mutual friend of ours (unclear) invited her to come tutor one Saturday and she introduced us.
Story_ID: 23909
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right, now in 2001 you were promoted to the Motorola Foundation Professor.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Now what is the Motorola Foundation Professor?
Speaker 2: So in academia, it's an honor for a professor to receive what's called an endowed position--an endowed professorship or endowed share, and the Motorola Foundation had given Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, Georgia] a sum of money to endow a professorship in electrical engineering and I was selected to be that Motorola Foundation professor there.  And so that was quite a big honor for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And also you were Associate Chair of Faculty Development, right?
Speaker 2: So I--yeah, I was promoted to a full professor a couple years before that in 2000, and after I got promoted to full professor, I had inquired with my boss at the time, the Chair of the department, about opportunities for leadership in the department, and so it happened in 2002, the person who was in that role was--had retired, and so Associate Chair for Faculty Development was a role that allowed me to supervise the tenure promotion process for the school.  So it was a pretty important role, and I was part of the leadership team of electrical computer engineering as an Associate Chair.  It was not a full-time role, but it was sort of my first major experience with a leadership title in academia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, in 2002, you were appointed Executive Assistant to President Wayne--G. Wayne Clough, right?  Here in Georgia Tech?
Speaker 2: That's right.  So Wayne was our tenth president here at Georgia Tech and he had a leadership model which he had an executive assistant which was essentially the Chief of Staff of campus.  But, you know, more descriptively, it was sort of a way to be an apprentice to him and learn what presidents do and how their day-to-day interactions and activities go, and at the same time, you know, continue to be a, you know, researcher and continue to teach your classes, but it was a full-time experience as executive assistant there, and it was probably one of my most fulfilling professional experiences up until that time.  I did that for three years; he was a great president at Georgia Tech--a great mentor for me personally.  He is currently the Secretary of the Smithsonian [Museum], so he's been very successful his whole career so that's certainly a good role model to learn from.  He also went to Berkeley [University of California], also was a Georgia Tech undergraduate, so we had similar career paths--a lot in common, and he remains to this day a great friend and mentor, and I'm very grateful to him for that experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now you worked as a consultant for Boomershine Enterprises in 2003?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a small thing.  That was kinda just a project.  One of the--Boomershine automotive family had an idea for a new gadget they wanted to try out and they needed somebody to help them design it and test a prototype, and I did that.  So that wasn't a real significant activity for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: (Inaudible response) (laughter).
Speaker 1: In 2004, it says that you received the Georgia Tech's Outstanding Undergraduate Research Mentor Award.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is as well as the Outstanding Minority Engineer Award from the American Society of Engineering and Education.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So the first one, from Georgia Tech, was related to my work with the SURE [Summer Undergraduate Research and Engineering Science] program.  Georgia Tech decided to give an award on campus for the person who had done the most for undergraduate research, and the SURE program was the undergraduate research program, so--so I think that was the first year they gave that award.  I think either I got it myself or I shared it with someone else as the first recipient.  And that same year, ASEE, the American Society of Engineering Education, gives a Minorities in Engineering award nationally for someone who is an outstanding mentor, so I got that award as well for my work with the SURE and the FACES [Facilities Academic Careers in Engineering and Sciences] programs, and NSBE [National Society of Black Engineers] and the other activities that I had become involved with nationally.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now I don't wanna skip over anything.  If I skip over something, let me know--
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember as you talk (laughter) because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --because I'm trying to--I'm following a chronological outline, but that doesn't mean I'm gonna--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --hit everything.
Speaker 2: Okay.  If I think of something, I'll--
Speaker 1: So one thing--one question is like what kind of research were you conducting during this period of time I guess?
Speaker 2: Same type of research all through (unclear) semi-conductor manufacturing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --and modeling, and process control, and all those sorts of things.  Graduating PhD students in that field.  I had nineteen PhD students and many of them have gone on to their own successful careers, and a lot of those were African-American students and I'm proud of that as well.
Story_ID: 23910
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  In 2005, you were appointed as the Steve W. Chaddick School Chair of Electrical and Computer Engineering--
Speaker 2: That's right--
Speaker 1: --here at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology]?
Speaker 2: --yeah.  So I've been--I became the first African-American Chair of an engineering school here at Georgia Tech in its history, so I was chairing my home school, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering where I had been hired a few years before succeeding the person who hired me, Roger Webb, as Chair of that school.  At that time, and still is, the largest department in the country--about 110 faculty, about 20--at that time, about 2,500 students.  It was the biggest department--biggest school on campus at the time.  Now it not anymore, but its' still the biggest electrical and computer engineering school in the U.S. and ahh, so it was quite a responsibility for me to be leading that program.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So I have here some goals that you listed at the time.  What were some of the issues, you know, and goals that you set?
Speaker 2: Well we wanted to be the best so, at the time when I took over, we were ranked probably eighth or so in the country and we had a goal to get in the top five.  I thought that was a reasonable goal for short-term, and by the time I finished my leadership role there, we had made it into the top five, according to the 'U.S. News and World Report.'  We also had goals related to, you know, raising funds and building facilities and starting new degree programs and a variety of activities relating to making our program strong.  We hired approximately twenty-five faculty during that time frame and a lot of those faculty have become very successful.  We raised close to $130 million in philanthropy under my leadership.  Many many awards for individuals as well as for the school during that period of time, so I'd like to think that we were quite successful.  And it's, you know, some pressure on me, you know, being relatively young and being the only and the first African-American to have such a role and have a certain amount of stress and pressure associated with making sure you do it right so that others can follow.  So I think we were able to do that in a way that led to me becoming dean now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Another item of concern was a female student enrolling, right?
Speaker 2: That continues to be the challenge in the traditional fields of engineering.  We, you know, we hovered around, you know, a ten percent female enrollment in electrical engineering.  We'd like--it used to be higher than that before fields like biomedical engineering and others--environmental engineering, newer fields, started attracting female students away from the traditional fields of electrical, mechanical and civil engineering.  So we struggled with how to get more female engineering students, so we formed a group called Women in Electrical and Computer Engineering, and did some other things to try to recruit more students and had some success.  I think by the time we finished, that percentage was up to about twelve to fifteen percent, and there's a long way to go, but we're still making--made some progress and that's a challenge in engineering in general now, with--in my role as Dean, we have about twenty-four, twenty-five percent female enrollment in the college.  The national average is about eighteen percent, so we're a leader in the production of women engineers as well as production of minority engineers at Georgia Tech.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  In 2006, you received the American Association for the Advancement of Sciences Mentor Award.
Speaker 2: So I have a National Mentoring Award, this one from the scientists as opposed to the other one from engineering education.  So, you know, it's a prestigious award that's given at their annual meeting which I went to receive in San Francisco [California] that year.  It was a monetary award, and there's some publicity that's generated behind this.  I was very honored to receive that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think it was like $5,000?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That sounds right.
Speaker 1: And you get a plaque?
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) (unclear) chunk a change (laughter).
Story_ID: 23911
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So now 2011, you're now--this is like--the note I have like going from 2006 to 2011, but you're still serving as the Chair of Computer and Engineering--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) Electrical (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and then the Dean's Office--the Dean's position became available because the previous Dean here had retired--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so I was able to become a candidate for this role and through a search process, international search process, was eventually selected to become--became the first African-American Dean of Engineering in what is the largest program in the country, the largest and most diverse college of engineering in the country, and the number four ranked program in the country, so--so the pressure continues to be on (laughter) to do well.
Speaker 1: So they did an international search?
Speaker 2: We did.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't just in the bag, they didn't tell you, "Well come on" (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I wish it had been that way.  It would have been a lot less stressful, but they did a full, you know, six to eight month--maybe it was a year--search process, and we had candidates who applied from all over the world, and we got down to a set of four finalists and I was eventually selected.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So you've been the chair ever since--the dean ever since?
Speaker 2: For the last year and a-half, I've been the Dean.
Speaker 1: When we were trying to find this building on campus and we asked some students at the bus stop, he said "The whole campus is electrical engineering, what do you--"
Speaker 2: Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology] is sixty-five percent engineering.  We are the biggest program in the country, so there's not an engineering building (laughter).  There's fifty engineering buildings (laughter) on our campus, but this is the headquarters to the Administration Building.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And what are some of your goals as Dean?
Speaker 2: Well, I set--I'm pretty ambitious.  I've mentioned we are the number four ranked program.  One of my campaign slogans, if you will, when I was seeking the job, was to get to the medal stand and become one of the top three programs, which I think is a reasonable goal.  I don't wanna sound like I'm obsessed with rankings but rankings are important; that's how people view you and your success and your quality.
Speaker 1: Ahead of you are MIT--
Speaker 2: MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] is number one, Stanford [University] is number two, and Berkeley [University of California] is number three--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --graduate level.
Speaker 1: So you gotta bump one of those three?
Speaker 2: We'll have to bump one of those three off, and then there's a bunch of people behind us who are not sitting still either so it's not like we just have to worry about those four--those three ahead of us; we have to worry about some very exceptional programs who are just very close--closely behind us that are also trying to get better.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would it be Caltech [California Technical Institute], maybe?
Speaker 2: Caltech's in that group, Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign], Cornell [University], Purdue [University], [the University of] Michigan; they're all--I don't remember the order but all those good programs are in that group--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: --Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--well continue; you were talking about some of the--you wanna get 'em on the stand with the rest of the--
Speaker 2: So I mean there's a lot of things associated with becoming one of the best programs from an educational standpoint.  I'm a big advocate of more active learning approaches as opposed to traditional, you know, chalk and talk or, you know, lecture-oriented learning.  I'm a big advocate of students getting their hands dirty and getting actively involved in (unclear) problem-based learning, as it's called, where students were given open-ended problems to work on in more of an apprentice-like mode with the professor, as opposed to lecture mode, where they're doing--their professor is more of a guide, as opposed to the source of all the knowledge.  You don't need--the students today don't need you to have all the knowledge transferred from you to them because they have all the knowledge in the world at the tip of their fingers in their cell phone, right?  So the usefulness of you being able to provide factual knowledge is limited.  They really need you to tell them how to use that, how to add value is--how to use that knowledge to, you know, build devices or to design processes or to create solutions to the grand challenges that are facing society in a variety of ways in human health or energy or infra-structure or security, all the things that are important to human beings that have technical solutions and engineers can provide.  So we wanna develop new ways to teach students how to do those things in the classroom.  At the same time, from a research standpoint, our goal is to be relevant in those grand challenges, to create those solutions that are facing--to those grand challenges that are facing society, and be the place where inter-disciplinary solutions are developed where the best minds in the world want to come and be part of, you know, how it's compared to modern day from Alexandria to Ten Buck Two, where people will wanna come and be the center of all knowledge in engineering where these solutions are being found.  And then from a practical standpoint, to put those solutions out via, you know, commercialization of our research via, you know, start-up and other activities, entrepreneurship, innovation, public service-oriented activities.  And those are all sorta the goals that we have in mind for the college as we move forward.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 23912
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I just wanted to finish like talking about the goals--your goals as Dean maybe before we ask another question.
Speaker 2: Ahh, so the other goal I mentioned is to undertake all these activities with a global thought process in mind.  In other words, what we're doing today, you know, the world is flat, as [Thomas] Friedman has said; so we're not doing our work in isolation; it has impact around the world, and so we want our students to be good global citizens and to have an appreciation for other cultures and to be able to go work in other parts of the world, as well as to be able to attract people from other parts of the world to our campus to do their work.  And so those were very important aspects to our overall goals in the college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Today, engineering--I mean science and engineering are like universal languages in a lotta ways, right?
Speaker 2: In many ways; you know, many people have always said math was the universal language, but I think science and engineering are that way.  Scientists and engineers understand each other in a way that other--people from other professions don't across cultures, which is, you know, pretty inspiring; I mean I think, you know, you can go to a conference where you have people from China or India or from Europe or from Africa or from wherever--whatever part of the world they're from, and they still have this base line understanding of each other and what we're trying to accomplish which may or may not be true in other fields, right, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what's the proportion I guess of foreign students here at Georgia Tech?
Speaker 2: So it depends on level.  At the undergraduate level, it's less than ten percent.  I mean we're a state institution and we, you know, have an obligation to educate the students in the State of Georgia that wanna be engineers, and we also have, you know, students from other states in the United--in the U.S. that come here to study, so probably less than ten percent of our undergraduate students are from foreign countries.  It flips at the graduate level; I would estimate that at the graduate level, we probably are sixty percent for our nationals, and most of those, the leading origin--places of origin for those students--are India, China, South Korea, Europe not as much, but there's quite a few European students too.  But those three Asian countries are probably the main source of our foreign students.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And in terms of the African-American students, what percentage do you have there?
Speaker 2: Ahh, African-American students are, for the most part, domestic.  And this kinda mirrors what I said that the undergraduate level--most of the domestic students--there are some African--more African students at the graduate level.  There are African students at the undergraduate level too.  I don't wanna imply that there are none, but there are--at the undergraduate level, it's domestic students, Caribbean students, and a few African--students of African descent--direct African descent.  And then at the graduate level, there's probably maybe more of a contribution from those students.  I don't have a specific number; it's off the top of my head.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I know you made steps to--just looking at the literature, you made steps to grow the faculty in terms of African-American presence.
Speaker 2: We want the faculty to look like America, right?  So that means that we have to spend a lot of our energy and attention on recruiting underrepresented--one of-currently underrepresented populations to our faculty and to our student body.  So we think it's a worthwhile thing to do, we think--we want our students to be used to seeing people of all different backgrounds as either a professor, supervisor or colleague, or customer, you know.  So if we're gonna be successful at that, we have to have a campus that looks like America.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Does Georgia Tech have a particular research focus that makes it unique in terms of--
Speaker 2: Well, we're so large at Georgia Tech.  We can--we have critical mass across the spectrum of engineering interests and knowledge.  We have--we offer eleven undergraduate degrees, we have eight schools of engineering within the college; they are aerospace, biomedical, civil environmental, chemical and bi-molecular, electrical and computer, industrial and systems engineering, material science engineering, and mechanical engineering for our eight schools; among those eight schools, they offer--we offer eleven undergraduate degrees.  Every single one of those eleven degrees is ranked in the top ten in the United States.  We have more top ten programs than any other university--any other college of engineering in the country, and we're quite proud of that.  And so it's a very high-quality program in addition to being the largest program and the most diverse program.
Story_ID: 23913
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Let's see.  I had a question--I was gonna ask you about the monitoring of automated devices in terms of the job loss situation.
Speaker 2: So automation--people worry about automation costing people jobs, especially lower-tiered workers--low-level workers.  There's a couple of answers to that.  One, the automation process itself requires workers and people to develop these systems, and that means a certain amount of re-training is gonna have to occur for some populations of workers.  But there are opportunities in engineering and science and technology for people that are building such systems.  The other answer to that is, and this is probably more far-fetched and maybe Pollyanna-ish, but the idea is to make--improve quality of life for everyone.  So it's not so much the goal to take someone's job, but to let--make someone's less onerous and less physically taxing.  So, you know, I kinda disagree with it, I--you know, the businessman might say, "Well now I can reduce my labor force because I've got this machine that can do this job."  I would prefer the approach be taken that I can find other things for my work force to do that require less, you know, that are less onerous and require less physical labor, and that can give--use other skills that my work force might have.  And I know, as I said, that's probably not what ends up happening in reality because there are, you know, people who believe that, you know, profit and loss is the bottom line so if I can make more money by laying off people than having an automated teller or an automated cashier or automated gate agent at the parking and parking deck, that's an unfortunate side effect on what's been happening but what can you do?
Story_ID: 23914
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now if you had to cut back on the research--I suppose you've had to cut back on the re--your own research--
Speaker 2: I have.
Speaker 1: --as you've, you know, progressed in administration.
Speaker 2: That's right.  I--you know, I used to have a group of PhD students that, you know, hovered around ten to twelve typically.  And over the years as I've progressed up the leadership ladder in administrative leadership, I now only have two PhD students left.  And that's probably about the right number since I have such a large set of responsibilities.  I spend so much time traveling and raising money as a Dean and representing the profession, and the various activities, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  And with the resources that Georgia Tech has, which I'm sure are mightier than say what AAU [?] and some of the other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) Historical black college?
Speaker 1: --yeah, historical black colleges have.  Is there like a collaboration and interaction with them in terms of students coming over?
Speaker 2: Oh we have, yeah, we have many partnerships with such places.  Probably the most well-known is our dual degree engineering program which has existed for about thirty years now.  It's not as big as what it used to be, but for many--in the 70's and '80's [1970's and 1980's], and even into the 90's [1990's], it was our--one of our primary sources of African-American students in engineering.  So the idea is the students--it's a three two program; the students spend three years at the HBCU whether it's Morehouse [College] or Spellman [University] or (unclear), and then they come over to Georgia Tech for their engineering degree and they get two degrees in the five years.  That's why the dual degree name was used.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard about that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--very big source of recruitment for us for many years.  And it actually has really helped us establish a reputation of being a place that's supportive--has a supportive environment for black students, and has helped us recruit students who were not involved in that program at all because they know that we're graduating students successfully, students are getting jobs and having successful careers and can point to Georgia Tech as being the place where they--they got started.  So now we have many other partners where we recruit students from and then there are many students who just wanna come to Georgia Tech directly as a freshman like I did myself, yeah, because the reputation is so strong.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So if you could go back go back to research, would you stay in the same field?
Speaker 2: Ahh, I probably would be in a related field.  I think, you know, most researchers are--our attention spans are not very long in terms of different--we like to get involved in very different projects over time.  So as our careers evolve, so do our interests.  So people may migrate to different types of projects over time and I'd probably be no exception.  But I would stay in the general field of microelectronics and semiconductor devices, I'm sure.  And you know, you never know; I might one day be ready to go back to just a faculty job at some point.  I shouldn't say just a faculty job, that's really the pinnacle, right?  Being the educator is the most important job on our campuses, but at some point in my administrative leadership career, I might end up--might go--return to the faculty.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did it cause you--did you hesitate before you took these administrative jobs?
Speaker 2: A little bit.  I think I--initially what you wanna do is kinda feel it out, see what it's like.  You know, I had people telling me, "You'd be good at it, you should think about it."  I had quite a bit of encouragement from people who were in--who were already in leadership roles as well as from peers, and so that naturally makes you wanna try it out because people think you'd be good at it.  So I got a chance to try it out in these roles we mentioned; there's associate chair, and then as executive assistant to the president here, and that sort of, you know, I got the--my itch scratched and became interested in proceeding with finding leadership roles, and now I think I'm gonna continue on that mode for the foreseeable future and hopefully have an opportunity that makes some--to have some impact in the profession in the university leadership role.
Story_ID: 23915
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in terms of semiconductors and electrical engineering, what's the cutting edge now in terms of that research?
Speaker 2: Oh, so, you know, what's called the minimum feature size of devices now is measured in nanometers which are billionths of a meter.  To give you some perspective, the human hair is probably 100 micrometers, for millionths of a meter thick.  African-American hair may be a little thicker than others, right (laughter)?  So that's a hundred micrometers.  I'm talking about tens of nanometers, so we're talking about, you know, dividing the width of a human hair by a factor of 10,000 or 100,000 right?  And these are the sizes of the devices--the transistors that are in the innovative circuits.  And so a chipped microprocessor would have, you know, billions of these devices on one small piece of silicon that's, you know, approximately a square centimeter of silicon.  It really is mind-boggling, the technology that's needed to make that happen, and the expense of the factories and the intricacies--sophistication of the equipment that's needed to make that happen.  It's really mind-boggling.
Story_ID: 23916
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point in your career, what today--well, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: Ahh, nothing major career-wise.  I, you know, I think I've had a successful career, and I've done what I've enjoyed.  I guess the one, you know, thing I wish was different is that you have to sort of make a decision on a specific narrow field very early, and I've always been more of a generalist and would like to study a lotta different things.  I liked--I mentioned an interest in chemical engineering early on and, you know, I've made some things happen--happening or interested in bio--very exciting in biomedical engineering right now, and if there were sufficient time and, you know, some opportunity to do something in a more disciplinary way, that's probably what I would do if I had to go back and do it again.  But I have no regrets about the way that my career has gone, I've been able to do some interesting things, may have some success, been able to pursue my passions that were sorta transitionally related to my research career in education--educational program, so--and then I've been lucky enough to have leadership roles at this point and been very blessed and very happy about that.
Speaker 1: Do you have a message for young, you know, students that are coming behind you?
Speaker 2: I tell students this--maybe this is the same which you asked me about before that I couldn't think of.  I tell students all the time, you find what you enjoy doing, and this is not original from me; other people have said this; if you like what you do, you never work a day in your life, right?  So you find something you really enjoy and are passionate about and that's what you pursue.  And then you work hard as you can, but you also play as hard as you can and then you pray as hard as you can.  I tell students all the time work hard, play hard and pray hard, and you'll have a successful life and career.
Story_ID: 23917
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what are some of you hopes and concerns for the African-American community today?
Speaker 2: Well I continue to be concerned about our under-representation in scientific fields; I think--it's hard to accept and explain why, you know, we've been at this--trying to fix this for decades and still have made only modest progress where there's so many opportunities available to us in this--in these fields.  I think that's a real way out for our folks in terms of success in careers and professional life.  I think engineering and science careers are a good foundation to do almost anything, including, you know, medicine or law or business or even politics; whatever you're interested in doing.  It's such a good foundation for you.  And that's one of the things I also do; I try to tell students when I'm recruiting them is that, you know, even if you don't see yourself long-term as an engineer working in a big company or even in your own company, the training that you get as a scientist and as an engineer is invaluable for many many different career paths and can open many doors for you, so--we have students who are interested in being entrepreneurs, students that are interested in going--admitted into medicine, into law, in business and, you know, I think those are perfectly acceptable things to do with an engineering degree and I encourage people to think broadly about, you know, what you're passionate about, using engineering as a foundation for that.
Story_ID: 23918
Speaker 1: Okay.  We always ask this question too.  When you look back again on your career and life at this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Ahh, you know, my grandmother used to say her favorite gospel song was "If I could Help Somebody" and so I'd like to think that, you know, when people meet me--have a chance to interact with me in some substantive way, I'd like to think I've helped them in some way.  That's my goal, is to always leave somebody's life a little better than it was before they met me, and if I can pick a legacy, that would be it.  For people to be able to say about me that knowing Gary May either helped me to accomplish something or made me a better person in some way, so--
Story_ID: 23919
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us a little bit about your family now.  Do you have children?
Speaker 2: I have two teenage girls.  They are seventeen and fifteen.  My oldest is a senior in high school.  Her--she just found out she got accepted at Purdue [University], so we're excited about that; this happened Friday (laughter).  So she'll be off on her own next year.  She wants to be a computer scientist--this week--so, you never know, it might change (laughter).  My youngest is a freshman in high school.  I'm not sure where she's gonna career-wise yet but she's got some time to decide.
Speaker 1: And you--your wife's involved in science too, right?
Speaker 2: My wife was--has an engineering degree--has two engineering degrees.  She got a Bachelor's at Boston University [Massachusetts] in electrical engineering, and her Master's from Georgia Tech as well in industrial engineering in the Operations Research area.  But she works at CNN as a Software Developer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Ahh, no, not that I can think of.
Story_ID: 23920
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Ahh.  So I'd like to--you know I think it is related to the legacy.  I'd like to be remembered as someone who got the most out of the talent he was given, so not only someone who had a certain amount of talent at birth, but really worked very hard and tried to make other people's lives better, tried to make the world a better place in a small way.  I mean I don't have any kinda grandiose solutions about what I do but I think it's important for you to leave every place and every person that you've contacted a little bit better off, and that's--that's where I'd like to be remembered, as someone who, who made other people's lives better.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
