Story_ID: 192645
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns, ma'am could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Amyre Makupson.  M-A-K-U-P-S-O-N, I'm sorry, Amyre, A-M-Y-R-E, and the last name is M-A-K-U-P-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And, now is this your, what was your maiden name?
Speaker 2: Porter.
Speaker 1: Porter, okay.
Speaker 2: Porter, P-O-R-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind Amyre?
Speaker 2: Actually there is.  My mother [Amyre Porche Porter] was Creole from Saint John [the Baptist]'s Parish [Louisiana] New Orleans [Louisiana], right outside of New Orleans and it was a family name and I, you kinda joke and say you can stand on any street corner and say Amyre and fifty people will say what?  But it's a, it's an old family name, A-M-Y-R-E, and we have recycled it very, very well.  My mother before she passed away was living with us so she wo--lived here and I lived here and my daughter [Amyre Makupson] lived here, we had three Amyres in one house, but I've got several cousins and aunts with Amyre, it's just an old recycled family name of some French background.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Nine, thirty, forty-seven [September 30, 1947], River Rouge, Michigan, which is right outside of Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, right now I do special projects for UPN [United Paramount Network] and CBS in Detroit.  I am a writer, a recently published author, I'm busy with the promotion and marketing of that book, I do a lot of acting at Detroit Repertory Theater, I still do a lot of public speaking and MCing type events.  I get a lot of that as wh--when I was full time at the stations, but I continued to do that kind of thing, also, very active on several boards, profit and nonprofit.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is April the 5th, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at this present time?  You don't have to give your address but?
Speaker 2: At my home in Southfield, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 192646
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Now before we go into depth there are five People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That are short, they only require a short answer, they're like warm-up questions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: First one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Pizza, I love it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 1: Navy blue.
Speaker 2: All right, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 1: I like spring.
Speaker 2: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 1: Caribbean.
Speaker 2: And the last one, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 1: I don't think so but people tell me I say, "Aww man," all the time, it's just kind of a reflex so I, I guess it's that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 192647
Speaker 1: All right.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Amyre, A-M-Y-R-E, Ann, A-N-N, Porche, P-O-R-C-H-E, and her married name, Porter, P-O-R-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Seven twenty-seven, eleven [July 27, 1911], St. John [the Baptist] Parish, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what do you know about your ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace that, that line?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately not far enough.  Y--you know I know my grandparents names, my mother had four siblings, there were five of them, they were from Saint John's Parrish, moved to New Orleans [Louisiana], they were Creole, which wh--a mixture of, of the Spanish, French and African American, they later moved to Chicago [Illinois], and then most of them seemed to wind up in Detroit [Michigan], almost all of them wound up in Detroit, not all of them stayed, but they came here.  The only one living now is her youngest brother who lives here, his name is Bernard Porche, and he is, he will be ninety this year.
Speaker 1: Okay, now are there any stories passed down through the family of what life was like in Saint John's Parish, Louisiana?
Speaker 2: Not a lot of stories, my, my grandfather was a barrel maker, my grandmother died young, I think my mother was like barely a teenager when she died.  I did know her siblings very well, and they all lived here but, t--th--they did--I, I think that even though they grew up in New Orleans, they spent most of their lives in Chicago, young life and young adult life but moved to Detroit probably pretty young in their twenties I would think.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there aren't any--a lot of stories passed down from--
Speaker 2: I don't know a lot of stories--
Speaker 1: --Louisiana?
Speaker 2: No.  No, no.
Story_ID: 192648
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Amyre Porche Porter] talk about growing up?
Speaker 2: She did and I always had the feeling that life was a little difficult for them because they didn't have a mother, 'cause their mother died young.  Their father was kind of a stern taskmaster, as I recall, he worked a lot and he was the man of the house, you don't ask too many questions, you just do kinda do what I say and I don't really know a lot of stories, my, my aunt, Isore [ph.], married and moved to Detroit [Michigan] and my mother just kind of followed her, she said she just showed up on the doorstep one day and said, "I'm living with you, I'm kinda tired of living with Papa."  And so she moved here then, then there were three boys, they eventually moved here and the father eventually moved here and lived with my aunt who is the oldest and, and so they made their life here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Although she had many, many relatives in New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Now.  Okay, now did your mother have a chance to go to high school in Detroit or did she--
Speaker 2: No, my mother went to high school in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now I really cannot tell you the name of the high school.  I think I used to know that, but I've forgotten it, she did not go to college.
Speaker 1: Probably [Wendell] Phillips [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] or DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois], one of the two?
Speaker 2: I couldn't say with any degree of certainty and she came to Detroit, probably very shortly after that, I mean maybe she worked a year or so, but she was a--came to Detroit very young, probably early twenties.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did she do for a living there?
Speaker 2: Well, you know what?  My mother never worked.  She was a housewife, and she worked all right, she had five kids, but I just remember, one story I remember about her was when my father [Rudolph Porter] was in the [U.S.] Army and they were in Fort Huachuca [Arizona], and she was with him and she had a job once at American Aircraft [ph.] and she used to talk about it, how she said, the women were much better workers than the men, because the women would start to work on the aircraft and they would, they'd go, "My husband could be in there or my son could be in there" and they--and she used to talk about it, laying down backwards and, and screwing nails and screws all up into the nose of the plane and that kind of thing and it was during World War II [WWII] time.  But, aside from that, I don't, I don't know of any job that she held.
Story_ID: 192649
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Rudolph, R-U-D-O-L-P-H, Hannibal, H-A-N-N-I-B-A-L, Porter, P-O-R-T--E-R, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story behind the Hannibal?  You know, that you know of?
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of but he was quite a character, he should have been named Hannibal (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Eleven twelve fifteen [November 12, 1915], I believe, Austin, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace those ancestors?
Speaker 2: Not a lot further unfortunately.  I knew his grand--his parents, my grandparents and he had two sisters, one is still living and I still have a lot of contact with her and that's really about it.  Of course, he had a lot of family in Austin, Texas, but beyond his parents, I really don't know very much.
Speaker 1: So they really don't have any stories they passed down (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, no.  His stories he created his own and embellished them and passed them on (laughter).
Speaker 1: What kind of stories did he create and embellish?
Speaker 2: He was quite a raconteur.  He was a physician, went to Meharry Medical School [sic. Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], he was the first of his family to go to college, much less professional school.  His father was a railway clerk and his mother was a cook in the Austin County Jail, I don't remember the name of the county, but he was flamboyant, he--to this day he's the youngest person ever to have graduated from Meharry Medical College in Nashville, Tennessee and--
Speaker 1: Wh--what year did he grad--I mean how old was he when he graduated?
Speaker 2: Twenty-three maybe, or something like that.  I don't know the exact age, a good friend of mine, and you may have interviewed him, Wendell Coxx, who was at WCHB Radio.  They were there at the same time, Wendell was in the dental program, my father was in the medical program and he, and he told me that, he said every time he goes down there he hasn't lately, but he says he, he always checks it out and, and that record still stands.
Speaker 1: So that'd be in about 1938 'cause he was twenty-three--
Speaker 2: I'm guessing, but I would think so.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I would think late '30s [1930s], certainly early '40s [1940s], but.
Story_ID: 192650
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Amyre Porche Porter and Rudolph Porter] met?
Speaker 2: My father moved to Detroit [Michigan] for a job, he was at that time, almost all black physicians went to Homer G. Phillips Hospital in St. Louis [Missouri], for internships 'cause it was the only one, pretty much would take them.  After he did that, he came to Detroit, so he was here trying to establish a career.  My mother [Amyre Porche Porter] had recently moved to Detroit to live with my aunt and uncle, her sister and my--
Speaker 1: Hold it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, you have speed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were we talking about?  Oh, how they met, how your parents met.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  So my mother was here living with her sister and brother-in-law and my father was here trying to establish a career, so my father went to a party once at Joe Louis Farms.  It was--Joe Louis was getting real popular than in the championships and all that, and he saw her at a party and he didn't know her, but he was with a few friends and said, I've gotta--and she left, and I have to find out who she was and, and I really wanted to meet her, anybody ever sees her call me right away.  And he says that he was home one day and somebody calls says, hey that girl you were looking for, she's at so-and-so, where ever it was and so he jumped up and got dressed and went down there and met her and, as they say, the rest is history (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay well that's something he really knew what he wanted--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --What he wanted?
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Story_ID: 192651
Speaker 1: Now did your father [Rudolph Porter] have any stories about medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: You know?  It--he, I remember him, he, he loved his school, Meharry Medical College, it was very difficult, it was very expensive and I th--if I remember this correctly, I think the tuition for medical school was less than $400 a year, I mean but that was a whole lot of money to them.  And I remember them talking about his parents really working in overtime and trying to save enough money so that he could go to medicin--medical school, but that it was just, I mean it was really a privilege and a honor back then because people simply did not have the money.  But it, it--they worked hard and they made good friends and many of the people that he knew throughout his life were friends that he went to medical school with and of course there were a lot who were not, but they, they had a bond and they, they loved their school and they went back and thought highly of it and they thought that there were no other doctors in the world regardless of where they went who were better prepared mentally and socially and academically than those who came out of Meharry Medical College.
Speaker 1: Okay, very proud of where he came from--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --yeah, I just wanna, and so, does he have any, any stories about practicing medicine in those days, I mean he was--
Speaker 2: Well, I remember myself, when we used to go on calls with him at night, you know, when doctors made house calls?  And he told us people used to pay him in pieces of cake and chickens and stuff like that because they didn't have the money.  He--my, my brother-in-law, not my brother, his brother-in-law, Doctor Samuel Milton, di--di--who he eventually went into practice with, he built a hospital in River Rouge, Michigan, which is a stone's throw from Detroit.  That at one time was the largest black hospital in the country and they had everything, I mean they had the maternity, they had surgery, they did everything, it was one on Visger Road, I think it was 234 Visaka Road, in River Rouge and he spent his entire career at Sumby, Sidney A. Sumby, S-U-M-B-I [sic.] Hospital in River Rouge.  So they would have, and of course it was a--a black neighborhood; it was a poorer neighborhood in many respects, but they took care of everybody and they just, they loved what they were doing and they dedicated their lives to it, they eventually took so other doctors in, it's only been recently, within the past couple of years, certainly since 2000, that the actual hospital itself was torn down and is now something else.  But they spent their lives there, they, they did a lot of things for a lot of people and were very, very proud of it.
Story_ID: 192652
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory, my ear--this sounds so weird, but my earliest childhood memory is we lived on Bassett Street, which is in River Rouge [Michigan], which was right near the hospital [Sidney A. Sumby Memorial Hospital, River Rouge, Michigan] and I used to have a Hop-Along-Cassidy bike with little streamers that came out of the handlebars and I remember riding that bike up and down Bassett Street all the time.  I remember our house, I could walk through it today, and tell you exactly what was in it, and I used to love it, I just thought it was the most beautiful house and I remember once my mother [Amyre Porche Porter] wasn't home, my father [Rudolph Porter]--we--we were home and my father let a bird flew in the kitchen and I thought that was a terrible, horrifying thing.  But I guess my earliest is, is the, is the Hop-Along-Cassidy bike.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 192653
Speaker 1: Who did your household consist of?  Your mother [Amyre Porche Porter] and father [Rudolph Porter], you, and you have sisters right?
Speaker 2: My mother and my father and I have three sisters and a brother, he's deceased now, but so it was always the seven of us, five kids and two parents.  We always had, many times we had live in help, so there were maybe eight of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Wh--tell me what were some of the, can you describe your neighborhood to us and wh--what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, until I was five years old I lived on Bassett [Street, River Rouge, Michigan], from five until about thirty-five, I lived in Detroit [Michigan] on West Boston Boulevard.  But in the early years I just, I remember and to tell you the truth, I don't know if I remember it or if I remember stories or if I remember seeing pictures and have, have, have built the stories around the pictures.  But I rem--we had a backyard and it was fenced in and there was a lady who lived with us named Rose and I remember her very, very much, my brother and I, mostly, we were, well my sister and then my brother and I, I just remember playing in that backyard, I remember that my father had built an extra bedroom on the back and we all kinda all the kids slept in, almost like a dormer kind of a situation.  I remember some of our neighbors, Janie Scaggs [ph.], from next door, I remember running up and down the neighborhood, my mother was a fabulous cook, I remember her cooking all the time, I remember we had a television and that was a big deal, I remember somebody telling me, I think we were the only family who had a television at that time.  But I remember Thursday night fights, because my father used to like those fights.  I just, I remember being there and being happy and having a great time.
Story_ID: 192654
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little girl?
Speaker 2: Well, I was really nosey, I think.  I used to talk a lot, I intended to hear and be heard, I like to be in on the action, I used to always like to be in plays, I liked, I always liked to command the attention and seem to find a way to do that.  Life was great, I mean, everything was funny and a lot of people around and we were always eating a lot, and, and I just, I remember happy times.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was music a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Mu--it depends, I mean, in my younger years my father [Rudolph Porter] loved jazz and music like that, which I, I never was too much of a fan, but growing up in Detroit [Michigan] in the '60s [1960s], I was a Motown fanatic.  I thought that--I to this day, I think one of the greatest man ever to grace the earth is [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy, I just, I think that is a phenomenon that just probably could never happen again.  I was, I listened to Motown music twenty-five hours a day, I still do.  I think it's terrific.  So, th--when you say music, there's Motown and then there's other things, to me that's all that matters.
Speaker 1: Now who--who's your favorite, or who are some of your favorites in Motown?
Speaker 2: You know I--it would have to be the typical, I think that Diana Ross is one of the greatest entertainers every born, I think [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson is outstanding.  I've always loved the Four Tops, I love Martha and the Vandellas, I just, you know, th--Heat Wave and Dancing in the Streets was just somethin' else.  Mary Wells, I thought was just fabulous, I--I love all of 'em, I love all of 'em, they're terrific.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's pretty much all of 'em.  (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Yeah, well that's a lot of 'em, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: In fact there are only a few people, you know, they--they're a couple of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] types, I think Patti LaBelle is outstanding, she should have been with Motown, Aretha Franklin really never was Motown, she's from Detroit, but she was not with that company, but I think they're the greatest, I think they, I think they did the world a favor and, I, I jus--I mean I still listen to them.  When I listen to music that's what I'm listening to today.
Speaker 1: Now did you know any of them (unclear) growing up?
Speaker 2: Not growing up, I'm friendly with [HistoryMaker] Martha Reeves now, of Martha and the Vandellas, I'm very friendly with Esther Edwards, in fact, I'm very proud to be emceeing an extravaganza for her coming up pretty soon, she's a lovely person, but no, I didn't know any of them.  I would have sold my soul to meet Diana Ross, I just thought she was the greatest thing ever born.  Never met her, I saw her once with--I mean I've seen her several times, every time she comes to Detroit for a concert, Fox Theatre [Detroit, Michigan], Chene Park [Amphitheatre, Detroit, Michigan] or whatever, I always go to the concert but I, I never met her and once she walked by me and by the time I realized it was her and I turned around and looked and she was gone at that point, I almost fainted, I just th--I thought that much of her.  But I, I never really met anybody and don't really know anybody other than Martha Reeves.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and I know, Four Top, [Abdel] "Duke" Fakir.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's in Detroit.
Story_ID: 192655
Speaker 1: Now, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: I went to ca--I'm Catholic, went to Catholic school from first grade through twelfth so yes, it was because it had to be, you know, Catholics you have to go to church on Sunday or you're gonna burn in hell forever.  So I went because I had to, the interesting thing Larry [Crowe] is that, I don't go that much now, but I think I'm a better person and I think I'm a better Christian and I think I have a stronger faith now because I approach it differently.  I, I do what I feel in my heart and soul as opposed to what I'm told I have to do or else.
Story_ID: 192656
Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to school, at grade school?
Speaker 2: I went to school at Visitation [Catholic School] which is in Detroit [Michigan] on the corner of 12th [Street] and Webb [Avenue] and all of us went there and that's when Catholic schools were communities, they were lives, they were churches and schools and, and convents and gyms and rectories.  I went there from first grade through tenth grade although most of the rest of my family went there first through twelfth, I left in the eleventh grade and went to Saint Mary Academy in Monroe, Michigan, which is only about thirty-five miles from your boarding school, but I went to eleventh and twelfth grade there.  So, I had a good dozen years of, of Catholic education.
Speaker 1: Okay, now were there any teachers in grade school that made an impression on you or who were instrumental in your development?
Speaker 2: You know what?  Not really in grade school.  There was one I remember because she was so tough and I think everybody was afraid of her, Sister Frances Winifred [Schnell] of the Adrian Dominican nuns, and I just have thought about it all my life and recently within the past couple of years, I became friendly with a couple of nuns of that order and I was talking about her and they were able to find her and so I called her up with another friend who I'd gone to grade school with and we asked if we could take her out to lunch and she said yes.  And so we went out and we were talking and we started talking about old times and I said, remember this, remember that?  And she looked at me, I couldn't believe it and she says, I don't have a clue who you are.  (Laughter)  And I said, then why did you go out to lunch with us?  I said we could be mass murderers or something, she said, I don't know, I just decided to.  And so I saw her again many years later, I don't know, over fifty years later and I can't believe she didn't even remember who we were.  The girl who was with us was Sharon Hannigan [ph.] whose father was the history teacher at Visitation, but she said she didn't remember us and for some reason I don't know that I even really believed her.  But she said she didn't and she says you know?  I've had thousands of second graders and when I stopped and thought about it from her perspective, I thought well, you know, maybe, maybe that's right.  But my brother and I, Rudy [Rudolph Porter, III] were the first two black kids in to go to Visitation and it--it was a confrontation sometimes and just some things that happened that I just thought she would have remembered but she said she didn't and so that's the way it is.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did you have a favorite subject in grade school?
Speaker 2: Did I have a favorite--I must not have because it's taken me a while to think of it.  I used to li--this is such a stupid answer and you hear kids say this all the time, but I loved gym because I loved to swim and one of my primary goals in life was to be an Olympic swimmer and I actually swam on the swimming team from second grade to college.  So I used to love being in the gym swimming all the time, but academically, you know, I preferred English and writing and that kind of thing better than math or sciences.
Speaker 1: Now did--did you have a--you said you liked plays and that sort of thing--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Did you, did you have a chance to, you know, perform, you know, do oral presentations and that sort of thing in (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I used to be in speaking festivals in grade school all the time.  We had plays every year I was in every single play from grade school through college, in fact my bachelors is in drama a--and I used to love to get before the class, I used to love to command attention, I used to love to read to people, I used to love to be in plays, all that dramatic performance type stuff, I did a lot of it and enjoyed it and I still do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you remember any of your roles in grade school?
Speaker 2: You know we used to do Christmas plays a lot and I remember being the "T" in the Christmas tree, (laughter).  Other than that they're just little silly plays and I remember being a lobster once.  No, they're just little silly children's plays that, they were just fun.
Story_ID: 192657
Speaker 1: So you went to Visitation [Catholic School, Detroit, Michigan] through the tenth grade?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: St. Mary's Academy [St. Mary Academy, Monroe, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Were you--were you in any, you know, did you have more memorable roles in the, or something you can really remember from high school?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't really, not so much from high school, by that time they had--they were having, you know, just kind of non-descript kinda little plays.  I was more into in high school, I was more into these, in Catholic schools they had these things called Genesian speaking festivals and you would get some kind of a speech or character and read and all of the Catholic schools in the area would participate in that.  I never actually won one but I, I used to participate in them all the time a--and you'd go before this panel of judges and you would kind of act out your speech or, or whatever your presentation was.  So, I did a lot of that, but I didn't really get back into plays per se until I went to college.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So were you involved in high school activities, you know, the various (unclear) clubs and things or did you run for class officer?
Speaker 2: No, not so much in high school.  I did--I was always on the swimming team, I was always on the debating team and always in these reading clubs.  So, that pretty much took up a lot of my time.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there anything about high school that stands out that, that you can tell us?
Speaker 2: I liked high school.  We, my, my eleventh and twelfth grade years at St. Mary Academy, I was at boarding school and I came home every weekend.
Speaker 1: So w--where was it?
Speaker 2: Monroe, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Monroe?
Speaker 2: It was only about thirty-five miles.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: My cousin was going there and I really admired my cousin and I thought that was so cool and so I wanted to go there too, so I did.  But, so I was home on weekends but, you know, we just, we went to parties, Detroit is a house town and we'd go to parties all the time and they'd always have Motown music and that's really what we did.  We'd go to the basketball games and the football games from school and we'd go to parties all the time on weekends and we'd just play our music and just dance and have a good time, that simple little harmless fun that, that kids don't do anymore and I used to love it.  I had great friends and we just, we thought we could just sing and dance and have a good time and that's what we did, that's what we did and drive cars and hang out.
Story_ID: 192658
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [St. Mary Academy, Monroe, Michigan] were you paying very much attention to the Civil Rights Movement?  Did people in your family talk about what was going on?
Speaker 2: Yes they talked about it, I remember talk about freedom fighters, I remember all kinds of talk about [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and Ralph Abernathy, [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis in her era was pretty big at the time, I remember NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Freedom Fund dinners, which a lot of people in Detroit [Michigan] were involved in.
Speaker 1: Now that's a big deal in Detroit.
Speaker 2: Oh, very big deal.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: If I'm not mistaken--
Speaker 1: I think it's the biggest--
Speaker 2: --It started here--
Speaker 1: --dinner in the country.
Speaker 2: Well, it's actually a sit down dinner for, I think its ten thousand people.
Speaker 1: I think it's the largest dinner in the country.
Speaker 2: I, I believe it is.
Speaker 1: So I've heard.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Three venues of oc--or two or three venues where they're the podium.
Speaker 2: Oh, they were like four--
Speaker 1: And a huge--
Speaker 2: --Dais--
Speaker 1: Right--
Speaker 2: --Things and, and, and later in my career I would sometimes have the honor of introducing the dais a--and they would may--four of them maybe, I don't know, maybe twenty people at each.  But everybody from the President of the United States on, was at those dinners and still are very supportive of those dinners.  So yes, there was a lot of action in, in our house and I would imagine that because of that and my father [Rudolph Porter] tended Wiley College in Marshall, Texas, all of us went to black schools, colleges and universities, so wh--we were pretty involved.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, now w--your schools, St. Mary Academy and Visitation [Catholic School, Detroit, Michigan], were those all-girl schools?  Both--
Speaker 2: No, St. Mary Academy was.
Speaker 1: St. Mary, okay.
Speaker 2: Visitation was not.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay so, th--are there any outstanding stories from Saint Mary's Academy or any--anything happen there that you remember?
Speaker 2: No, I went there two years, I was in a big play, Cyrano de Berge--Bergerac ['Cyrano de Bergerac'], I played Ligniere, the town drunk, (laughter) we had a huge theater.
Speaker 1: So did all, all girls play the parts?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  That was a terrific school.  Nothing really stood out, I really, I, I don't know why I wanted to go there other than my cousin was there and I used to kinda like to do the things that she did 'cause I thought she was so cool.  But, we were one of maybe, I don't know, maybe four black girls at the school and, you know, I was just kinda into my thing and into my friends and having a good time and, and, am, am still friendly with a couple girls that went there, I still am friendly with them, but no, nothing particularly stood out, I was just happy and I liked it and I did well in school and we had plays, and I played on the basketball team and I was on the debating team and, and it was a good time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, when you were, were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was maybe a little better than average, you know, I didn't stand out at all academically, but I, I did fine, I, You know, I was a C+, B student.
Story_ID: 192659
Speaker 1: When it was time for you to graduate [from St. Mary Academy, Monroe, Michigan], did you have a career path chosen?  Did you have any idea what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: You know what?  I had a few ideas I think the day I was born and what I wanted to do.  I wanted to be an actress, I wanted to be a pediatrician, I wanted to be a psychiatrist, I wanted to be an Olympic swimmer and I wanted to be a news anchor.  I knew I was gonna be one of those five things, and I used to try to, to kinda guide my life and my classes in those directions and I was able to eliminate some.  I was always good enough to make the swimming team, but I was never good enough to win, when I found out that there was a lot of math and science involved in, in psychiatry and pediatrics and, and you have to be an M.D. [medical doctor], to be the, to be a psychiatrist, I kinda knew that wasn't gonna go that way, I seriously wanted to be an actress but I honestly didn't think I looked the part and I, I had this image of what an actress was and, and I didn't think I'd fit in.  I went out to California once with my mother [Amyre Porche Porter] just too kinda lo--look at things and meet some people and, and it just scared me to death because it was so big and so different from, from Detroit, at least in my mind.  And, I used to wanna be a news anchor and so I started kinda focusing everything in that direction and was fortunate enough to have realized that and, and did it for twenty-five years.
Speaker 1: Okay now, where did you go to college?
Speaker 2: Well actually, I, I started out at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and I stayed at Howard University for about an hour, an hour Lord--
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: --For a year and a half, for a year and a half, I then went to Wiley College in Marshall, Texas, my father had gone there and my brother [Rudolph Bulter, III] was there at the time.  I went to Wiley, boy was that ever different, Howard and Wiley was as different as night and day.  My brother died that summer, he was in an automobile accident and died and there's no way in the world I would have gone back there at that point.  Just so happened, my sister was graduating from high school and she was about to attend Fisk University in Nashville, Tennessee, and so I decided, well she's going there, I'll go there and it was one of the best decisions I ever made in my life, I just loved it.  I wound up staying there three years graduating, then went back to Washington [D.C.] to grad school, American University.
Speaker 1: Okay now at Fisk University, now you got there in what '40 [1940], I'm sorry '50 [1950]--
Speaker 2: No, I--
Speaker 1: '60 [1960], '66 [1966]?
Speaker 2: --Seven.
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven, '67 [1967]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-seven, '67 [1967], September of '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I graduated in June of '70 [1970].
Story_ID: 192660
Speaker 1: Now what was going--now a lot of, you had like a black student movement going on in a lot of the colleges and I think Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] was involved in some things.  Did you, did you, were you, were you involved in any of that kind of activity?
Speaker 2: You know what?  That was a different kind of time in my life, like I said my brother [Rudolph Porter, III] died that summer and I was just kind of emotionally absent.  I had a few very good friends there who were from Detroit [Michigan], a lot of kids from Detroit were there and it wh--and I had a, you'd asked earlier about a teacher who stood out, I had a teacher, I got very, very friendly with and because of some of the friends I had and this relationship with this teacher, I really think helped to pull me out and let me move on and become the person I became because I was so distraught and depressed about my brother's death, I really didn't get into a lot of activities but I--
Speaker 1: He was killed in an accident?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In a?
Speaker 2: In a motorcycle accident.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So it was a very difficult time, but I think because of where I was, my parents knew a lot of people down there because my father [Rudolph Porter] went to Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], it was literally, is right across the street from Fisk and friends that they knew.  So I had like another family there, so I really just kinda got into some different kinds of things, became a little more serious of a student and, and it became a very good time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, what did you do at Fisk, I mean did you, I mean what did you do?
Speaker 2: I did a lot of acting, I had a lot of friends and we just hung out a lot and we just kinda talked a lot, just kind of enjoyed the city, I did a lot of horseback riding, you know we were young and daring and, and there were still some places that you were not welcome in Nashville [Tennessee], and we'd go and see who'd be the first one to get thrown out, I mean silly kid things that you do.  I just l--a lot of simple things that I really enjoyed, going to movies, going to drive in theaters, loading kids up in the trunk and then one or two people drive in so you don't have to pay for the rest of them and wonder how they didn't notice that the car was dragging on the ground (laughter) in the back as you went through.  They had great restaurants, great soul food restaurants, Mary's Pit Barbeque [ph.] and Sweat's Soul Food [ph.] and White's Fish [ph.] and, and there were just a lot of people there and everybody was kind of young and carefree and, and reading a book occasionally but enjoying the city and the Grand Ole Opry, which I, I learned that, that Nashville was music city, I said there is no mu--Detroit [Michigan] is music city, I've never he--I was not, so not into country music, I didn't even know what it was.  I did an internship at a television station there at WSUM Television and they called the dorm one night and said could a few of us come on down to help because they, Johnny Cash was coming to town and they needed some things done.  I didn't have a clue who Johnny Cash was, I didn't even know who he was, of course as soon as I got there I realized this is somebody really big because of how everybody was acting and reacting.  But, just to have the chance to, to just kinda relax and enjoy life and enjoy your friends and do okay in school and, and really get into this city and, and meet people and have an internship and, and have also, and, and a new additional type family, it wound up being a very, very, very good time.
Story_ID: 192661
Speaker 1: Okay, were there any teachers that were like mentors or, or role models at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: I had a teacher and her name is Dr. Gladys Ford, from Houston, Texas, she was the head of the speech and drama department which I--was my major.  I am to this very day, thirty-five years later, I'm still very friendly with Dr. Ford, she still lives in Houston, Texas, I visit her often, well not often but I do visit her and she has come up to visit us and she was my drama teacher, she's the first person I sent a copy of my book to for her to review because I, I knew she would tell me the truth about what she thought about it.  And, and the way we got friendly was kind of interesting because I used to debate a lot and of course she was involved in that but I just, it, it--shortly after I got there, one day I just was horribly depressed and just thinking about my brother [Rudolph Porter, III] who had died maybe, I don't know, two months earlier or three months earlier and I was kinda walking down the hall of one of these buildings where she was teaching and she says wh--what's, what's the matter?  Come on in here.  And I started talking to her and just, you know, you never know what kind of reaction and action she's going to have and the fact that she saw me, the fact that she asked me to come in her office, the fact that she sat there and listened as I cried and talked, just, I mean it was like somebody had given me fifteen winning lottery tickets, it just meant so much to me and that's when I definitely, 'cause I hadn't even declared a major.  That's when I decided right then I was gonna be in her department 'cause I so admired her and wanted to be around her and, we've been friends for life and I just think she's a terrific person, it's one of those human things that I don't think could happen at one of these huge [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan] type schools and I think it's one of the advantages of a, of a place like Fisk University.  And she, she made it for me, she just, and I just, there's nothing I wouldn't do for her today, nothing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 192662
Speaker 1: So you graduated from Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] in '70 [1970]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And, and where did you go from?
Speaker 2: Then I went to the American University in Washington, D.C. and I got a master's degree in speech arts, communication theory and was able to kind of continue to do the same kinds of things.  I, I gave a lot of speeches and they'd record them on video tape and we'd look at them and, and see how good we were or were not and I just used to love to do it.  So, I did kind of the same thing, so wrapped that up about '72 [1972], and then came on back home to Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Did you get involved in any theater in D.C.?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I worked so hard in grad school I didn't have a chance to do that, in fact, I think, I, you know, having had a different mentality at the time, I probably worked harder in my two years of grad school than I did in my five years of undergrad, but no, I didn't have time.
Speaker 1: Okay what, did you do any television work there?
Speaker 2: I didn't do any television work, it was really a speaking kind of a situation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Other than having the advantage of having it taped and looking back at it, that was really my practice type experience.  I had no television experience whatsoever.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To tell you the truth, I had applied into the radio, television department at American and I was not accepted because I did not have any background in radio and television.  They did accept me in the speech arts communication theory, I didn't even really know what that was at the time, but I thought, I'll do it.  So, I, I did go there and, and, and finish that program.
Story_ID: 192663
Speaker 1: So what did you do afterwards [after earning her M.A. degree from American University, Washington, D.C.], I mean, what--?
Speaker 2: You know what?  I am one of the luckiest people alive on the face of the earth.  I came back home [Detroit, Michigan] after grad [graduate] school and right about that time, they were about to launch WGPR TV in Detroit, that was, was the first black television station in the country.  I knew some people over there, my father knew a couple people over there, I went over there and told them what I wanted to do and they hired me to be the anchor for Big City News, it was called, it debuted September 29, 1975, 'Big City News' with Amyre Porter and Pal D'Que.  I had never anchored a newscast in my life, I had pretty much, other than an internship, never been in a television station in my life, to be able to start on that level in a top ten market in the city I grew up in, you, you can get struck by lightning first, I'm sure and win fifteen lottery tickets first as well.  But that's the way it happened and that's how it started, I stayed there and I, I did 'Big City News,' I did a talk show every day called 'Porterhouse,' I didn't have a clue how to do a talk show, I would, c--in a hour a day, I would find people on the street and say, you know one thing I can do is talk, I can talk to anybody for an hour about anything, including a tree and I really believe that.  I'd pull people off the streets, I'd call restaurants and ask for the owner, I called Detroit City Council and had them come in, just anybody I could think of who I knew who had something to say, I'd call 'em and invite 'em on 'Porterhouse' and we would sit there and talk and talk and talk and that's really how it all began.  Now I had been there, it's a really interesting story and I used to tell this to kids in, in my speeches all the time, I had been there, oh geez, they canceled the news shortly after I started because they didn't have the money to keep it on, I decided that I was gonna stay anyway because I wanted the experience.  After about a year, here I've got my big bad master's degree, I'm making zero, absolutely zero.  First of all, I'd left a job, I was making 22 thousand dollars at Michigan Health Maintenance Organization, left that job to go to GPR for twelve five [twelve thousand five hundred], 30 days later they stopped paying me because they couldn't afford to keep that news on, but I stayed to do the Porter House and some other things.  I'd gotten pretty discouraged and was able to get my old job back at Michigan Health Maintenance Organization at my old pay, well, just then, channel 50 called and asked me if I was interested in coming over there and I really was not, I was kinda discouraged because of what had happened and I decided, well, I'll give it one more shot.  I went over there and that was in September of '77 [1977], and what I did was produce and host a live thirty minute talk show Monday through Friday and was also public affairs manager of the station, we started news in '86 [1986], and I've anchored that and, and in some form had a talk show ever since.  But I, I, I walked away from a, from another job, it wound up being the best decision that I'd ever made and then I stayed there for, I stayed at 50 or WKBD for twenty-five years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Wow, that is--this story is, is really remarkable, you know?
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: It just seems like it just--
Speaker 2: It absolutely is, I was never a reporter, I never had to do the street thing, I never had to go to the cities that you've never heard of before to get experience.  I never led the gypsy lifestyle, I never left there, I stayed there and never left and I'm still doing special projects for the station (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now--
Story_ID: 192664
Speaker 1: --What did you have to do to make sure that you could actually perform as an anchor?
Speaker 2: I just knew I could.  I knew I could, I would look at anchors on television and I said I can do that, I can, I'm just as good or better than you are and I really believed it.  The trick was getting somebody else to believe it or giving you an opportunity.  And I was lucky, the son and the moon were in the right place in the sky, the GPR was starting here, I had a connection or two, I went over there, they said fine, and that's how it all started.  I don't know that that could ever happen again if it wasn't--in Detroit [Michigan], in Chicago [Illinois], in a top ten market?  I mean, it just was supposed to be, that's all I can think of and, and I, and I worked hard.  I would spend more time at work, I loved it and I wanted to be the best and I thought I was the best and, and it wound up being one of the best experiences of my life.
Speaker 1: Now did you pattern yourself after anyone on air at that time?  I know that, in my hometown in Dayton [Ohio], there's a one of t--the CBS anchor, on the local CBS pattern himself after Walter Cronkite was so apparently--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Like, "This is Don Wayne with the news."
Speaker 2: ((Laughter)
Speaker 1: He sounded just like Walter Cronkite, but did you pattern yourself after anyone?
Speaker 2: Not particularly, there were some anchor woman, women who I really admired and I would watch them all the time and I figured, they were comfortable and they were relaxed and I thought they were beautiful women and they talked and, and I said I--I'm, I can do that, I can do that and I tried to develop my own style.  I never tried to read anything to anybody, I tried to talk it, I tried to make it a conversation, I tried to make you think this was one on one.  And that's just something that came from inside or subliminally from somebody else that I didn't even realize, but I tried to make it a one-on-one personal relationship and it worked for me very well.
Story_ID: 192665
Speaker 1: WKBD [Detroit, Michigan], you--is that, that's where you won the Emmy Award right?
Speaker 2: Six of them yes.
Speaker 1: Six of them?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And WKBD is, as long as I was there was under five separate ownerships, we went from KBD stands for Kaiser Broadcasting Detroit [Michigan], it was a Kaiser Permanente, the health people out in California, we were bought by Cox Communications out in Atlanta [Georgia], we became Fox, we became Paramount, we became UPN [United Paramount Network], CBS, I mean, television went through a revolution as you know.
Speaker 1: How did you survive all those changes?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know, you know, I prefer to think that I was that good and they didn't wanna let me go, but it is unusual, I went through five ownerships, five or six ownerships and the reason I'm not there now is because they went out of the news business.  I absolutely am one of the most lucky people on the face of the earth because of how I started and because of how I was able to maintain.  I don't know if that could happen again.
Speaker 1: Now, from what I've read, you never was an anchor on the, the big Detroit stations, you know, the, the biggest station?
Speaker 2: Except for the very end, because my company bought CBS, so now I'm anchoring on UPN and on CBS.  The irony of it is, the station that they bought, they wound up being CBS was WGPR TV which was the first black television in 1975, in Detroit.  So, in a sense I just kinda ended right where I started.
Speaker 1: Right, only--
Speaker 2: It's owned by the Masons then.
Speaker 1: --On CBS instead of (unclear) (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, right, but CBS in the later years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but even at that though you, you've won so many awards, I mean, you seem, a lot of people consider you one of the best if not the best I hear.
Speaker 2: I appreciate that.
Speaker 1: I mean when you were on, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: But, I was able to win anchor and Emmy for best anchor and for best talk show host and for them for best commentary.  I've been lucky, I me--and I, I do a lot of community work, I evolved in all kinds of organizations and always speaking in schools and that kind of thing, so I really was able to meet a ton of people, just a ton of people, different activities and then of course I had a talk show, I just invite people to come on and so I was in a position where I could meet a lot of people and, and I used to enjoy doing that so I never stopped it.  I still am asked probably as much as any current anchor, to speak and emcee different events and I still do it because I enjoy it and, and it's my way of giving back so, I enjoy doing it and, and I think I get, my pay is the appreciation and the nice things that people say that I definitely appreciate.
Story_ID: 192666
Speaker 1: Now do, do you have a favorite interview of all the interviews you've done?
Speaker 2: I have done so many interviews it's unbelievable.  Do I have a favorite?  I used to do also a lot of telethons and I would meet a lot of kids and their families and these are kids, you know, most of the hel--telethons are associated with health issues, March of Dimes and that kind of thing, Children's Miracle Network, I used to meet a lot of the families and do special stories on them and interview them.  And I always was touched by these families because they have extreme circumstances and they seem to really rise to the occasion and accept that as their normal as opposed to feeling sorry for themselves and kinda kicking the world around them.  So, whenever I would talk to kids in the families who were up in spite of the circumstances that they had, I would come home at night and kiss my kids and realize how fortunate and blessed I was and am.  So I enjoy doing that because I thought I was able to give something to them, I don't think they ever realized how much they gave to me by sharing what their life was really like.
Story_ID: 192667
Speaker 1: Now did people ever, the way you look, you, you could be anyone--
Speaker 2: Anything--
Speaker 1: --at a glance, any, any you know, any racial group that, that you could think of at a glance, and was that a, are there some interesting stories about that?
Speaker 2: Probably about a zillion them.  But most people, if they didn't know me would thought I was Arabic because, you know, the largest Arabic community outside of the Middle East is Dearborn, Michigan which is a stone's throw from Detroit [Michigan].  Amir that's spelled A-M-I-R is a very common Arabic name, it's like John in America.  So a lot of people would just assume that I was Arabic.  Now, nobody's gonna look at me and say, "Oh there's a black girl walking down the street," nobody.  But I was always very upfront about it and I always tried when I could to make it known and so it wasn't necessarily a problem, I always wished I was more identifiable, but I'm not and so, I just have to deal with that within my own context and although it sometimes does become a problem or has been a problem, you know, it--everything as you know is the way y--you look at it, the way you approach it and the way you shake it down.  If this is a negative, and it's the worst negative I have to deal with, is that such a bad thing?  Would I trade it for cancer?  Would I trade it for heart disease?  Absolutely not, back in the day, you know, corporations just had to put on paper, I have this minority and that minority and that minority and so I'm sure that that was, was one of the things that I filled, it worked for them, it worked for me, I don't care why you hired me, once I get in there I'm gonna show you that I was the best choice regardless, but probably now what people specifically want, Black and Asian or whatever, I probably, they'd never tell me, but I may not necessarily qualify because they want people to know it.  I don't think they cared back then, you know, a lot of the circumstance that exist, the time swing that exist in your time, works for you and some works against you.  So, that just, it kinda happened that way, but, now everything on my resume indicated it, Howard University [Washington, D.C.], Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], GPR-TV, Detroit Boston Boulevard, there were many indicators but, no I, I can be, have been and am still mistaken many, many times.
Story_ID: 192668
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what, what's the most, maybe dramatic news story you've ever had to report?
Speaker 2: There have been so many news stories, the one I think that probably stands out in my mind more than any.  There was a guy who lived down river in Wyandotte, Michigan, his name was Lawrence DeLisle, and I just will never forget this story.  He, one day was driving his car and he drive it almost right up to where the river, there was the river and this embankment and then you would go over it, he was like kinda practicing, drive and stop, drive and stop.  The next day, 'cause people talked about this later, but the next day, he and his wife got in the car with their four kids and in the middle of the night drove off that embankment, he and his wife got out and they left those kids down there to drown.  We were there when they were pulling those kids out of the water, it was the most traumatic thing I'd ever seen in my life.  Of course, he goes to jail and the wife defends him and he's still in jail and, and, they were able to free themselves into the black water in the middle of the night and left those four kids down there, it was the most amazing thing I'd ever, I, I absolutely couldn't believe it.  That has just followed me forever.  When, when Pope John Paul II was shot, we did a live coverage, that was amazing to me, I didn't know that anyone had ever tried to assassinate a pope before.  And of course, once you learn the history and they start talking about it, you know, that there were many attempts on pope's lives before.  But I wasn't aware of them, so I thought that was fascinating.  I was able to interview, I was an absolute 'Dynasty' fanatic, that night time series, 'Dynasty'?  And I was able to interview John Forsythe once and I thought this has got to be the greatest thing in the world.  But I was a strong admirer of Coleman Young, the first black mayor of the city of Detroit and he'd come on the program every now and then and I just loved to talk with him, so there's some really good stories and they're some really sad and negative stories, but they o--over the years they run the gamut, let me tell you.
Speaker 1: Now were you, you reporting I guess when, when Nelson Mandela came to Detroit [Michigan]; do you remember that?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Now, but the thing about that is we didn't, our, our evening news, which is the ten o'clock news an hour, Monday through Friday, had not started at that point so we didn't really have coverage for it, we were involved but we, in the sense that I'm sure that you're asking me and the context that you're asking me, we weren't really involved because we didn't ha--our news wasn't set up at that point.  Only the morning which was live where people had to come in, which I did, but they had to come into the studio.
Story_ID: 192669
Speaker 1: How have things changed for women in the media?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think things have changed tremendously.  I think that women probably make more money than we ever have, I think we have more prominence than we've ever had in terms of different programs and positioning and news, I think that the powers that be pay much more attention to the ideas and vision and focus of women in the newsroom.  There are more women in, really in decision-making situations such as a news director or, or producers or writers or, or directors even, I think women have a say now that we never had or certainly not on this level.  I think it's still a long way from being as it should be.  We still on the whole, make less money, and on the whole have less decision-making and prominent type positions but I think that we have come leaps and bounds, even though I think that there's a lot more to go.
Story_ID: 192670
Speaker 1: Okay this is my daughter's [Amyre Makupson] graduation party from Howard University [Washington, D.C.], she's on the left, my son Rudy [Rudolph Makupson] is in the middle and that's me on the right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  All right, next.  All right, go ahead.
Speaker 1: My husband Walter Makupson on the left and I'm on the right.
Speaker 2: And (unclear) on top of the other one.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Fun family picture, my husband Walter is at the top, Rudy, my son is in my lap, that's me and then my daughter, Amyre is on the right.
Story_ID: 192671
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know one big part of what you do in Detroit [Michigan] that I've read about it, you know and, and looking you up on the Internet or in a newspaper, whatever.  People talk about all the charities that you're involved with, and, y--you, you, we, you alluded to some of them a moment ago but you, you've raised money for the, Alzheimer's Foundation and, or this, wh--what's the specific group here the--
Speaker 2: It's Alzheimer's Association.
Speaker 1: Association, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I'm very involved with them I'm on their board and I chair their largest and most successful fundraiser, have been for the past eighteen years, last year we raised over a million on this one day event.  My mother [Amyre Porche Porter] had Alzheimer's and, and died and I have always, y--you know, I'm not kidding when I tell you, I've always realized how fortunate I am, how blessed I am that my career and t--the way things have gone, and I always felt it was my obligation and responsibility to try to give back to people and I would tap into certain organizations and really try to help them, Alzheimer's is one and I did have a, and did, and do have a personal reason for doing that, but I was able to meet people for example the executive director of Covenant House Michigan, I had him on a show one day, I didn't even know what Covenant House was really and I got real involved in what he was saying and he bought a couple of the kids there, these are homeless kids.  A lot of us are pompous enough to think that they, they're everybody lives like I live, these kids don't not have homes they are kids here who have nobody and nowhere to go and they can go to Covenant House, they can get jobs, they can get housing and food, they can get an education, they can get a start, they can get their lives back.  So, I'm on, on that board as well, I really do enjoy that, I used to do the March of Dimes telethon and I joined their board, I'm still a member of their board.  These are kids who are born with horrible problems who no fault of their own, Spinal bifida, big gaping holes in their back, I mean it's an awful situation, I look at my kids and think, look at how blessed I am, I feel for those kids and for those families and so I would try to get involved and bring attention and money to their cause because they all need attention and money.  Sickle cell disease, I've been on that board for many, many years, a good friend of mine whose a retired judge in the City of Detroit asked me if I'd join years ago and I'm still involved, these are black kids who, and their lives are disrupted by these diseases that we, you just get it, or, or, you, you carry and you don't realize.  A lot of times if you could have someone who could champion your cause, our bring attention to your cause, get people educated about the cause, you can make a difference, it's all about education, it's all about money.  So, I continue to remain involved in a lot of these, the Providence Hospital Foundation of Michigan, it takes a lot of time, th--they don't pay you, you wind up paying them half the time by contributing and getting involved in different programs.  But, I think it's a good thing to do, I think it is my obligation and responsibility to do and I just plain enjoy doing it because I believe it comes to some kind of a good conclusion for some people, so, it's, I, I'm still as involved as ever.
Story_ID: 192672
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there any real I guess highlight to your career as a, as a anchor, as it, you know, you know people see you every night doing, you know, the anchoring the news and so forth, is there, there anything that's happened that you consider like a highlight of it or, or the most, maybe the most exciting day you've spent as an anchor or most--
Speaker 2: I can give you--
Speaker 1: --trying day, or--?
Speaker 2: --a lot of those and, m--let me see, there's one, Karmanos Cancer Institute [Detroit, Michigan] just honored me, which I was quite honored and we had a roast and we had it at the Roostertail, which is a big place in Detroit [Michigan], they had more people at that event then they have ever had at any of their roast and a lot of the television people were there who kind of roasted me, we had such a great time and I felt so good about myself and everything that I had done or whatever my career involved and I was just so touched that so many people came out and got involved and it was just, it, it was just, it was such icing on the cake.  I felt really, really special and I just felt really blessed and, and thrilled that people would come out and, and take a part of that, because they had to buy tickets and it was a very expensive event and it raised money for the Cancer Institute, but it was also fun, so, that was a very, very special day.  Another one, a friend of mine Gail Parker, who's a psychologist, they called and asked her if she would come and be on the Oprah Show?  So, she called me, asked me if I wanted to go with her, it on like a Thursday, and I said, I can't do that, my kids are young, and all this stuff and, I thought about, and I though no, I can do that.  So, my husband agree to get the kids to school, I, I meet my girlfriend at the airport, we go to Chicago and we're on the Oprah Show and I was kinda sitting right next to her, because she was answering questions of a lot of people who were on the stage, so they were shooting into the audience (unclear) and I'm sitting right their next to her and everybody in Detroit, what's Amyre doing on the Oprah Show?  But it was such an exciting thing because we got up and we left and we spent all day, I had to get back to Detroit that night because at the Fox Theater, and we were Fox 50 at the time, they had the whole cast from 'The Jeffersons' was doing an episode live at the Fox and we ran 'The Jeffersons' in syndication on 50, so I had to come back and MC the show that was at the Fox and they had on the big marque, Amyre Makupson, Fox 50, and the Jeffersons and I thought that was so exciting and coming off of Oprah, and just running in and out of Chicago like a real jetsetter, emcee the show, ran on back to the station, anchored the news that night, I mean it was one of the most exciting days of my life and it's all because of, of what I did, you know, provided these kinds of opportunities that, that other things don't which is truly exciting.
Story_ID: 192673
Speaker 1: Now you, you anchored until just recently right?  You, you were--
Speaker 2: Well, they [WKBD, Detroit, Michigan], they stopped doing news in December of 2002, so after, yeah, after twenty-five years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So do you think they'll ever bring the news back or?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think they will, I'm sure they will.
Speaker 1: This is on CBS 62, right?
Speaker 2: CBS 62 and UPN [United Paramount Network] 50.  I think probably they will, I think it'll take a few more years, they had stopped once before for a few years, actually a couple times, but I think they'll bring it back and, and be a few, three, four, five years.
Speaker 1: Now with your popularity around here, have, have you been offered another anchor position by (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: No but I've been very busy ever since.  I got involved in acting at Detroit Repertory Theatre, I really, I wanted to finish a book that I started four years ago, I was able to do that, I'm extremely busy with the promotion and marketing of that right now--
Story_ID: 192674
Speaker 1: Now what's the name of the book that's--
Speaker 2: The name of the book is 'So What's Next,' and it is a compilation of many people's thoughts about what you think happens after you die.  Not that you have, wh--whatever influences you, be it religion or dreams or presences real or perceived or whatever experience, everybody has a thought on what they think happens.  They don't talk about it because they don't want people to think they're crazy but once you give somebody a venue and they trust you, well what do you think?  And then I would tell them something and they see that they can trust me, they start talking Larry [Crowe] and they never stop.  And the most fascinating thing to me is almost everyone, maybe with the exception of two or three people, I'm talking men, women and children cried like babies while they were talking and, a lot of them it surprised them.  They didn't know that they were gonna do that because they began to talk about people who they truly loved and lost and most of them began, believe in some kind of an afterlife and they began to express the sincere desire to reconnect with people they've loved so and lost, that they'd talk about it and start crying.  And they, some of them have fascinating stories, some of them really have kind of non-descript, non-stories, but everybody believed so intensely in what they that it just brings about this kind of emotion.  It's the most fascinating thing I've ever done.
Speaker 1: Now what, what, what prompted you to pursue what people think about, I mean what, what people think the afterlife is about?  I mean it's
Speaker 2: Here's the thing--
Speaker 1: It's an interesting subject but, but why did you--?
Speaker 2: Because when I was nineteen years old and my brother [Rudolph Porter, III] died, I just thought that was the most unbelievable, unacceptable, amazing thing in the world.  I never could accept that and to me death meant you can't move anymore and I just thought, what is he doing?  And how is he doing?  And what's going on?  And I became borderline obsessed with it.  Now add that to the fact that because of what I did for a living, I was always asked to speak at a funeral, never in my wildest imagination that I ever thought I would speak at a funeral, of course I wind up speaking twenty-five, thirty of them and I'm looking at these bodies and thinking what are these people doing?  And where are they?  And just because they can't move, does that mean that nothing is going on?  I just became borderline obsessed with it and I would think about it all the time and I started just kinda writing some thoughts down, I don't even think I really started out to write a book, but I talked to people and they'd say, oh, I've got a story and, or I'd mention it and somebody'd come to me with a story, before I knew it I had several interviews, so then when I really focused on, it started to take shape and, and I just, that's how it happened.  And of all the things that happened in my life sense then, I mean births and deaths and career, even murder.  To this day, the event of my life is the death of my brother, it just mean that much to me, so that's where it came from.
Speaker 1: And when someone--it's hard, except when someone is here and all of a sudden they're not here, there's no preparation--
Speaker 2: And your first experience, you know?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's like--
Speaker 1: There's no preparation for it--
Speaker 2: Exactly, none.--
Speaker 1: --They we're--
Speaker 2: --None, young, healthy--
Speaker 1: --He, he wasn't ill--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: He was, yeah.
Speaker 2: It's like, you know what?  People really do die, I guess they're telling truth, it just, I, it was shocking to me.
Speaker 1: Are, do you find that most of the people in the book who tell you they're, what they're, they're prognostication is of life after death?  Are th--are they informed primarily by religion or, or?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say religion is a part of it, the dreams are also a part of it, presences, some people swear they've seen this or done this or whatever and then just other experiences, whatever it is, it gives them the thought and that's, that's what they base it on, some people think nothing happens, you die, you rot, that's it.  Other people think this is simply a springboard, we go on to other time and space, we just cannot understand it because this is all we know right now.  But th--but that this is only the beginning, if I learned one thing from this book, is that I am not afraid to die because of things I have experienced, because of things I have heard of other people, I know, can I prove it?  No.  But do I know it?  Yes.  There's something else and I think it's something good and something positive and something better than the best of what we know right now.
Story_ID: 192675
Speaker 1: When we look at, you know, Detroit [Michigan] as a city it's, it's been going through quite a few changes--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --politically, you know, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community in Detroit today?
Speaker 2: You know, I've lived in Detroit all my life except as a student.  My parents [Amyre Porche Porter and Rudolph Porter] used to talk about what a fabulous city this was, they would go places and do things and it's a backyard town and everybody was friends and everybody looked out for each other, things were happening, you know, it's, I would like to see Detroit go back to the glory that I think it had and the glory that it deserves.  I don't know what happened here.  Everybody has problems, everybody's got problems, we don't, I don't know that we've handled our properly or, w--where's our downtown?  And why isn't our riverfront developed?  Why do we have so many abandoned houses?  What's wrong with education?  Or what about the cri--you know?  Everybody has problems but there are thriving parts of Chicago [Illinois] that are just, just fabulous and glorious and, and alluring, same thing with Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], same thing with New York [New York], with Atlanta [Georgia].  Detroit, w--we don't have a downtown, we seem to be disjointed, people don't live in the city, every, in Chicago, everybody lives in Chicago, Detroit everybody lives in the suburbs, I don't know what happened here or how we missed a beat or how we kinda got caught in some kind of a time warp.  Where's the excitement?  Where's the business?  We don't have any of the traditional chains here that other cities have in terms of restaurants and that kind of thing they're just, I don't know what happened but, somebody fell asleep and we missed, we got lost somewhere.  We should be much more vibrant, we should thrive better, we should have more exciting things to do, places to go, we just, Detroit is, you can't see Detroit and Chicago in the same breath or Atlanta or Philadelphia or Mia--a lot of cities.  I don't know what it is, I honestly don't know, but I wish we could find out because I think we have been cheating ourselves for a long time and will continue to do it until we can kinda pull it back together.  I think you gotta bring people in the city, that's, I think that's our biggest problem.
Story_ID: 192676
Speaker 1: When you look back over everything you've done up to this point, is there any major thing that, that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: So a major thing I would do differently?  No, I don't think so, I always try to stay as involved as I could, I always try to be a decent fair person, I always wanted to work hard, I always wanted to have a family, I think my greatest accomplishment is my family and I think they are, and I'm blessed to have 'em.  I don't think there's anything I would do differently, I can't think of anything at this point.  I wish I could stay younger longer, but other than that, anything that's in my control, I don't think so.
Story_ID: 192677
Speaker 1: Now, now you've had a chance to really act on stage recently with Detroit Repertory Theatre [Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How's that been?
Speaker 2: Yea--here's my summation, I've never worked harder, I've never been more dedicated, I've never made less money, and I've never had more fun.  It's the most exciting thing I've ever done in my life, I absolutely loved Detroit Repertory Theatre.  I was asked to audition for some other parts for this year, but I couldn't commit, it's a major time commitment and because I'm so busy with the promotion of this book, I didn't have time to do it.  But, it's absolutely terrific and just to throw in a line about how life imitates art or vice versa, however that expression goes, I had the lead in a play and I was a widow who had a lot of trouble dealing with the death of her husband, so through friends and through humor, you let go and move on, and it has a, it has a very happy ending.  But, I, it's all while I'm writing on this, this book about what happens after death.  I mean, everything was just kind of falling in line, but it's, it's, acting is just, it is the most beautiful thing in the world.  My fellow journalist sometimes would get angry with me 'cause I'd say, this is acting, you're acting, I've gotta find a way to make you like me because you can watch a thousand other people, you know, so I've gotta stand out some kind of a way.  They'd--"Aw you shouldn't say that, this acting this journalism, you have to this, you have to that," well you know it's all in the presentation.  And, so I, I just have carried that through to my life, every summer I was in California trying to be an actor, my daughter's working on, in school, but her goal is broadcast career, I think acting is terrific, I love it.  I think we all act every day, we just don't realize it.
Speaker 1: Okay, I tend to think you're right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Story_ID: 192678
Speaker 1: Now, likewise when you look back over your career to this point, of all the things you've done and all the charity work you've done and everything, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: That I really cared about some people and some organizations and some situations and that I really tried to use whatever influence or position I had to bring attention to organizations and people who desperately needed it and couldn't seem to do it on their own.
Story_ID: 192679
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family.  You, you just, you alluded to 'em a few minutes ago.
Speaker 2: Well, my husband [Walter Makupson], we've been married, God, I can't believe it'll be thirty years this year.  He is attorney for General Motors, my--we have two kids a son [Rudolph Makupson] and a daughter [Amyre Makupson], my son did his first two years at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], his last two in Michigan, he's in California trying to be an actor, it's a tough business, it's going slow but he's got a plan in place so he's gonna give it a few years, see what happens, my daughter, I have to brag, graduated from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] magna cum laude, she's now at Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan] in a master's program, she is very much interested in the television industry and, and would like to do more magazine type things, she's gonna internship at BET [Black Entertainment Television] this summer.  They're great kids and, and they're smart kids and I just, with a little bit of luck, will stay on track and, and do well, I, I wish the best for them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there anything we have not asked you that you think you want to address before we ask our last question?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, well.
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  You know I, I, I've had a lot of ups in my life, I had a lot of downs in my life, and I think after all is said and done, at the end of the day, as they say, it's, it's been a good life and I wouldn't, even the bad things I don't think I would trade much of anything.  I think I'm fortunate in many, many ways.
Story_ID: 192680
Speaker 1: Our last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as someone who knew the difference in things that are important and things that are not important, someone who tried to use her influence and position in a way to bring attention to things that really matter.  I'd like to be remembered as someone who, with her heart and soul adored her family and her friends and tried to always enjoy the moment, realizing that it's fleeting and it's not going to be here forever, that I took what I could, enjoyed what I could, gave back what I could.
Story_ID: 192681
Speaker 1: You were telling us about Isiah Thomas and I was asking you about being an anchor and you said you had an Isiah Thomas story.
Speaker 2: Well, I used to do a lot of projects with people in town [Detroit, Michigan] about different kinds of things and we were doing a Black History essay contest.  So we were talking about different things and shooting this PSA [public service announcement] at the Palace [of Auburn Hills, Auburn Hills, Michigan], so he had to say his part about stay in school, and this kind of thing and it took him twenty-five times to finally get it right, so he says, "My God, I finally got it right."  I do my part, I do it in one take, and he looks at me and he says, "God, I wish I could do that," and I looked at him and I said, "God, I wish I could dunk a basketball" (laughter) and he says, "I never thought about it like that."  So everybody's kinda got their own thing, but, I just, I thought that was just kinda funny, you know, he's, he's looking at my thing and I'm looking at his.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, we did, I did a ton of projects with people in just, you know, awareness raising education kinds of things and we'd use a lot of local celebrity types, get out and vote, any kind of campaign like that, that was always exciting and fun, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 192682
Speaker 1: Okay this was a billboard that was all around town when we first, when we, for, for ten o'clock news on channel 50.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  (Unclear) no don't take it down.
Speaker 1: About what year is this?
Speaker 2: Probably 1990.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You've got two things going together (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Yeah, okay next.
Speaker 1: That is me on the right and my sister Vicky on the left, we were living in River Rouge, that picture has got to be fifty years old, I'm thinking I'm like five maybe six.
Speaker 2: Making a noise, I better get back in here before it started screaming at me (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Let's change it, okay go ahead please.
Speaker 2: That picture is probably about 1973, I was at some function that's my father's [Rudolph Porter] best friend who I was with, [James] "Sonny" [Arthur] Stinson.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay next.
Speaker 2: Go to my youngest sister.  That is pitiful, that's at Visitation [Catholic School, Detroit, Michigan], that's my major awkward stage, it's probably about seventh grade, I can't even believe I let you see that.
Speaker 1: Do you know if (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My daughter [Amyre Makupson] put it in there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Next.
Speaker 2: That is me living in River Rouge, Michigan, I was probably about three years old or something, that's gotta be very early '50s [1950s], standing behind my father station wagon.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This would be the (unclear), let's just try this one.
Speaker 1: That picture I was in the dormitory of St. Mary Academy [Monroe, Michigan], I was in high school, April of, how about?  1965, my daughter said I looked like I was in an insane asylum.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Hold on please.
Speaker 2: I can't believe she put that thing in there either.
Speaker 1: That's a journey to enlightenment.
Speaker 2: Geez.  This picture was at WGPR TV, first black station in the country, and it was probably in September of '75 [1975], and I'm sitting there, I was interviewing Billy Eckstein, the other guy is George White, who was the program manager at the time.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Hold on please, we're not done.
Speaker 2: This picture is my baby sister and me, Denise, I'm holding Denise, I'm probably about six years old and that's my mother [Amyre Porche Porter] standing behind us.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay next.
Speaker 2: That is a recent picture of me taken in probably in 2004, and it's a picture I had taken for book promotion.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Next.
Speaker 2: This picture I think was probably the last publicity shot I had taken at the station 62 and 50 publicity shot.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, got it.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken at the old Gotham Hotel in Detroit [Michigan], which had to be the most prominent black hotel in the country.  I'm on the right, my cousin Giselle Beady is in the middle and my sister Vicky is on the left.  I look like I had a drink there.
Speaker 1: That--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  A little bit to your right, there it is just a half inch or so, a little more, a little more, okay, can you push the bottom back against the back of the easel?
Speaker 1: That's (unclear) about there?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  That's what stands up, (unclear) yeah, right, thank you.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: All right that's me on the left and my younger sister Denise on the right.  It was on an Easter Sunday, we were all getting ready to go to church.
Speaker 2: This is about what year?
Speaker 1: That's probably about 1958 or something, late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture that was taken at the NMA, National Medical Convention I think in Houston, Texas and I think that would have to be probably mid '60s [1960s], I'm on the left, I don't know who that is in the middle, my sister Vicky's on the right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay next.
Speaker 1: This was Easter Sunday, I'm on the left, my brother Rudy [Rudolph Porter, III] is next to me, my youngest sister Denise is next and then Vicky is on the far right.  We're all getting ready to go to church, Easter Sunday, probably late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Move that to your right just a little there, oh I'm sorry, to your left, (unclear) good, perfect, great, okay.
Speaker 1: I remember that dress was purple and yellow, (laughter)
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That was on one of my earlier talk shows, the name of that show was Detroit today, it was probably in the late '70s [1970s], '78 [1978], '79 [1979], I was interviewing John Forsythe, my hero at the time, I loved 'Dynasty.'
Speaker 1: Blake Carrington.
Speaker 2: Blake Carrington, that's exactly who it is.  (Unclear) today, oops.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  It's okay to start now.
Speaker 2: Okay that's also on the set of 'Detroit Today,' probably late '70s [1970s], I'm on the right and my assistant, Tina Yen [ph.] is on the left.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Next please.
Speaker 2: This is a great one here (unclear).
Speaker 1: That's a family shot, we had just moved into our house on Boston Boulevard in Detroit, so that had to be '53 [1953], or '54 [1954], and the latest '55 [1955], but geez, I don't know who that little boy is on the ri--on the very bottom but, if you go up one aisle, and I'm on the right, my sister Vicky's on the left, go up on more aisle, my first cousin Candy, and then my Aunt Helen who is my father's sister, that's my grandmother, my paternal grandmother, my brother Rudy's in the middle, that's my father's aunt Nina [ph.], next her my first cousin Roy Harris [ph.], next to her, my father's other sister Ghendi Harris [ph.], who's still living, living in Austin, Texas, she's next and then the last row starting with the left, my oldest sister Carolyn, my mother, my first cousin Suann (Ph.), my aunt Izora, (Ph.) my uncle Roy Harris, my cousin Anita, I don't know who that next lady is, and there's my father and then my uncle Joe Tandy on the right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay next.
Speaker 1: That was taken in Las Vegas, that's me in the forefront, and my mother sitting next to me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Year?  Or as best you recall it?
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, probably, 19, I'd say, '82 [1982].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Yeah, okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: About 1955, my mother's in the middle, I'm on the right, my younger sister beneath, Denise, Vicky's on the left, my brother Rudy on top.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Yes, 1950-ish my brother Rudy and I, visiting Santa Claus.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, go ahead please.
Speaker 2: All right that's me riding a horse,--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Lean your head to your right a little bit to clear out of the shot.  Okay thank you, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Me riding a horse that's probably 1951 or so.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  --and go ahead.
Speaker 2: These are my three sisters, I'm on the left, my sister Vicky is next to me, then Denise, then Carolyn.  This was taken about 1992.
