Story_ID: 136954
Speaker 1: Good afternoon.
Speaker 2: Good afternoon.
Speaker 1: My name is Reginnia Williams and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer today is Scott Stearns.  And, I'd just like to begin our discussion by asking if you would please state your name and spell your first name, middle name if you have one, and also your last name.
Speaker 2: Well, I am Steven, S-T-E-V-E-N, A, Alan, A-L-A-N, Minter, M-I-N-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: And, would you please state your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, at the present time, I'm an executive in residence and a fellow at the Cleveland State University [Maxine Goodman] Levin College of Urban Affairs [Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 1: And, would you give the location of today's interview?
Speaker 2: Yes, the interview is taking place at the Levin College at Cleveland State University in Cleveland, Ohio.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Mr. Minter, would you please state the street address for the Levin College?
Speaker 1: Yes.  It's 1717 Euclid Avenue.
Speaker 2: And, today's date, for the record?
Speaker 1: I think (laughter) today is the 11th.  No.  Is that right?  The 11th of January, 2005.
Story_ID: 136955
Speaker 1: We also have, as part of the, the set of opening questions, the group that we call People magazine-ish type questions.  And, I wanted to start by asking if you have a favorite color that you could tell us about?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Blue.  And, how about a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: The fall.  I've always loved the autumn.
Speaker 1: And, do you have a favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: And, how about--
Speaker 2: Although I have to say why it's the favorite.  We do a lot of traveling and I could list many, many places that we've enjoyed greatly.
Speaker 1: And, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: No, great.  How about a favorite motto or slogan?
Speaker 2: Take the long-term view.
Story_ID: 136956
Speaker 1: We'd like to begin the interview by discussing your early life.  And, so, would like to know where you were born and when.
Speaker 2: Well, I was born not too far from here [Cleveland, Ohio] in Akron, Ohio, October 23, 1938.
Speaker 1: And, your parents' names?
Speaker 2: And, my parents are Lawrence, generally called by most of his friends, Larry Minter, who'd been born in Buena Vista, Georgia, about 1916, and moved to Barberton, Ohio when he was four or five years old as I, as I recall.  And, from Barberton lived in Akron and has been principally been a residence of Ohio and northeast Ohio up until he retired.  And, about twenty-three years ago, he and my mother moved to San Antonio, Texas.  My mother insisted on finding better weather.  And, my mother is Dorothy Minter who was born in New Orleans, Louisiana.  And, not too long after she was born, was asked by her mother--her mother asked an aunt to raise her who really in effect became her mother.  And, they moved to Kent, and so she grew up in Kent, Ohio.  And, likewise, has been a resident of Northeast Ohio until she moved to San Antonio.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you remember your grandparents on either side of the family?
Speaker 2: Yes, quite well.  My grandparents during most of the living years that I had association with them, lived in Akron, Ohio, on Otto Street.  So, Akron, although we did not live there very long, was sort of the, you know, the family home and magnet.  My grandfather came here from the South to Barberton and worked in various jobs but spent most of his years working for the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company where he retired from.  My grandmother came from Talbotton, Georgia with him.  He was somewhat older, I think.  She was eighteen. He was thirty, when they got married.  And, she was really a homemaker all of her career, and never worked outside of the home.  And, saw them frequently and certainly they--they were pretty great influence upon-- upon me.  And, I think my grandfather particularly since he was a great, great story teller who, who loves to spin a yarn.  And, I think, it played off on, rubbed off on my father, and probably on me to some extent.
Speaker 1: Now, did you state their names?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My father's name is Lawrence Minter, and--oh, my grandparents?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Samuel David Minter, and Mozell Thomas Minter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, then, my grandparents, as I said, in effect they were my grandparents, although not birth grandparents, were Margaret Washington Henderson Knox (laughter) and, my grandfather I had, I guess, really two.  The one that I remember the most was name Slade Henderson before he died.  And, my grandmother had a really very significant influence on me.  Particularly during my junior high school years when I was sort of beginning to become of age.  And, I just learned a great deal from her.
Story_ID: 136957
Speaker 1: Did your grandparents--and both you said, your grandmother, maternal grandmother [Margaret Washington Henderson Knox], very influential in your life.  And, you had your paternal grandfather [Samuel David Minter] who loved to tell stories.  Did they share any special stories with you that you can recall today?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, (laughter) I can go on for hours in terms of that.  I mean, I think, my grandfather Samuel was just a great storyteller.  And, much of what we know about sort of the South and the characters and so forth, are really stories from his time.  And, I--we--he used to tell these stories, and of course, we all knew that these were incredible exaggerations.  You know what I mean?  They couldn't possibly be true and so forth.  But, I had an amazing experience as an adult.  In about 1972, or '73 [1973], when my daughter Michelle [Minter] was about nine years old--my grandfather before he died went back south to Buena Vista [Georgia] and Manchester, Georgia, and so forth, generally every year.  And, as did my grandmother, perhaps at different times.  So, as I became a young adult and a parent that was something I wanted to do.  And, I would say to my grandmother, you should call me sometime, I'd like to come.  And, finally, we were in Mass--living in Massachusetts, and one Wednesday or so, my grandmother called me and said, "Well, she was gonna stay in Manchester for a period longer."  My great-grandmother was alive--was in her nineties at that point.  And, she said, "Perhaps you'd wanna come."  And, so, I decided absolutely we were gonna fly down to Atlanta [Georgia] and rent a car and go to Manchester.  And, I take Michelle.  And, I called my dad [Lawrence Minter], who had not been back since he had left the South, at four or five years of age, and he decided, well, maybe this was a great time.  Since, his mother was there, his grandmother was there, this would have--and then I would be there, and Michelle would be there.  There would be five generations.  And, so, we went back.  And, I mean, I was just dazzled to see the various places and hear some of the stories.  But, to get to the one of the example.  My grandfather had told a story about clearing a field that then they turned into corn and, about fighting with an alligator or crocodile--all of these kinds of things which, you know, would take a half hour.  But at any rate, here we are in Buena Vista, Georgia sitting on the front porch with several older men who were by that time, in their eighties, early nineties.  And, my father's there, and we were all there.  And, these men said about my dad, "Well, first of all, your name wasn't Larry. You--your name down here, it was Buster," okay.  And, so, they went on about this and they said, "And, you know, you're not half the man your daddy was.  Now, let me tell you a story about your daddy."  And, they then proceeded to tell the story about my brother--Samuel and his brother Roy [Minter], got home from school early and decided they were gonna go fishing and, so, they were racing across this broad field and to the Kitchi Gummi [ph.] Creek and you--how you ran, they were taking off their clothes and so forth.  The dive up, out over the bank and down into the water.  And, talked about how, you know, he went down and he twisted and turned.  He looked down and they got about ten feet from the water, they looked down there and they saw their, saw their father, Clem.  And, they said, "Oh Lord, you know, if we disturb the water, there's gonna be problems." So, he talked about how they turned around in the air and came back and hit the bank and started running to pick up their clothes.  And, sat down on this log and put on his one shoe and then he couldn't find the other shoe.  And, looked again, and realized that the crocodile had his shoe.  So, he wasn't giving up his good shoes down there.  So, he talks about how he flipped and fought with that crocodile or alligator--I don't remember which one it was--all the rest of the afternoon.  And, he finally got his shoe back.  And, then walked across the road and his uncle said to him, "Boy, what you been doing?"  And, he said, "I've been, you know, saving my shoe."  And, he said, "I wondered."  He said, "I looked out over there, that field has been plowed so, you go get the bushel of corn and go out there and plant the corn," okay.  Now, this is a great tale.  But, here were three men sitting on the porch telling this story.  And, I realized, they believed it.  They had all told these stories so many times that they could've passed a lie detector test, okay.
Story_ID: 136958
Speaker 1: He, you know, of course, my grandfather [Samuel Minter] was the greatest ballplayer--he and his brother, Roy [Minter].  And, he would tell the story of on Sunday after church, they would have a picnic and a baseball game and all the people came around.  And, it was three or four miles from the center of Buena Vista [Georgia].  But, when he would start warming up, people coming out of church in Buena Vista downtown would hear these sounds, (making sounds).  And, they say, "What's that?  Oh, that's Sam Minter warming up, okay."  So, he would talk about that.  He was the great pitcher and his brother, Roy, batted third and he batted fourth.  And, when Roy went up to bat and Sam got on the on deck circle, they would get the boy and put him on the mule and start him out for the next county.  Because, Sam would hit the ball so far, and they only had one ball, that they had--they'd have to call timeout, and they'd have the picnic while the boy went to go get the ball and bring it back.  Well, these were fantastic stories, and of course, he'd take a half hour to tell it.  And, then when we were in Massachusetts, we went to see the movie, 'Sounder.'  And, if you recall, in the movie, there is this scene of the baseball game, after church, and hitting the ball so far, they had to stop for--have a picnic, so forth and so on.  So, I mean, these were the kinds of things that my, that my grand, the kind of stories my grandfather would tell, who had an enormous work ethic, which he passed on to my father [Lawrence Minter], who had--has, has a great work ethic.  So, it's that kind of thing that had a lot of influence.
Story_ID: 136959
Speaker 1: Okay, and you said your maternal grandmother [Margaret Washington Henderson Knox] was also, very influential (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In your life.
Speaker 2: As I said, she brought my mother [Dorothy Minter] to Kent [Ohio] when she was a very little girl, an infant.  And, my grandmother was a person who worked as a domestic and as a cook and worked in a lot of different person's houses in Kent and Akron [Ohio] and so forth and, had done that in the South in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And, she was a person who had standards.  There were people who she wasn't about to work for.  I mean, you either were up to her standard or she wasn't, you know, gonna work for them.  And, she also, because of that, had a sense of what was good behavior, what was proper etiquette, how you handled yourself and all of those kinds of things.  And, during the time from sort of fifth grade to ninth grade, most of that time she was a widow and lived oh, a half a mile from where we lived.  And, my sister [Rosalyn Minter] and I would go during school nights and stay with her overnight and then catch the school bus from there.  And, she never would sort of sit down and say, "Now you should do this, and this is the way you should handle yourself."  She kind of led by example.  And, the thing that really probably rubbed off on me more than anything is once a week, it seemed like, when I was there, she used that as her time for sort of counting her money, sorting out her cash, deciding what was gonna be paid through postal money order, and what she was gonna put in her savings account, and so forth and so on.  And it didn't really occur to me until many years later that this was an object lesson about--her attitude was, for every ten dollars you got, you saved two dollars.  You put money away.  You were careful about it.  Never wanted to be dependent upon somebody, so forth and so on.  And, that notion really rubbed off on me.  But, I, but it wasn't that she preached.  Or, that she sort of said, you know, you should do this, and so forth.  But, obviously, she said it often enough and it became part of the ritual that I recognized how much it really rubbed off on me.
Story_ID: 136960
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned that you had a sister who would ride the school bus with you.  Was it just the two of you--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: In your family?
Speaker 2: No, I'm the oldest of eight children.  My sister Rosalyn [Minter] is about two and a half years younger than I am.  And, then there's--there were seven of us in little over nine years.  So, we were stair-stepped together.  So, actually, we're--seven children in sort of a little over nine years.  And, then practically nine years later, Christopher [Minter] came along, who's my youngest brother.  So--
Speaker 1: Can you tell me all of their names--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In birth order?
Speaker 2: Right, Rosalyn is my sister who's the closest to me in age and, currently lives in Chicago [Illinois]--had lived here in Cleveland [Ohio] and Shaker Heights [Ohio] for a long time--is in real estate, particularly in sales--works for one of the large condominium companies in Chicago and has a daughter whose name is Laurie.  Then, I have a brother, Michael [Minter], who currently lives in San Antonio, Texas--was a career man--retired as a Master Sergeant in the [U.S.] Air Force oh, probably seventeen years ago.  And, then went to work as a postal worker in San Antonio and that's about how my parents got there and he has one son--is married.  And, then there's Richard [Minter] who lives in Windham, Ohio, which is about forty miles from here, east in Portage County [Ohio].  And, is married and had two daughters, one whom died in a tragic automobile accident but one daughter, Audra, who lives in Columbus [Ohio].  And, then there is Larry [Minter], who lives in Shaker Heights near where--where we live.  And, Larry is a retired systems analyst having worked a number of years for the East Ohio Gas Company [later Dominion Resources, Inc.] here in Cleveland.  And, he and his wife have two children and several grandchildren.  And, then there's Rosemary [Minter] who lives in Shaker Heights here in the Cleveland area and is a retired accountant with the Sight Center of Cleveland [Cleveland Sight Center, Cleveland, Ohio].  And, she and her husband have a daughter who lives in Shaker who--and they have one gran--grandson.  And, then I have a brother, Tony [Minter], who is deceased who was a state highway patrolman in California--a chippie [CHP, California State Highway Patrol].  And, he and his wife have two, had two adult children, one who's deceased and the other who recently got married and is doing quite well.  And, then after Tony is Christopher who's the youngest in the family.  And he is a captain in the Ohio State Highway Patrol responsible for the Southeastern Region for the State of Ohio.  And, he and his wife have three lovely daughters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So.
Speaker 1: Full house.
Speaker 2: Yeah, full house.  That's right.
Story_ID: 136961
Speaker 1: So, the family, all of the children you just mentioned grew up in Akron, Ohio?
Speaker 2: Grew up in Northeast (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) for the most--
Speaker 2: Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My, interesting thing, my parents [Dorothy Minter and Lawrence Minter] made a decision when and I think I was about four or five years of age, that they thought that they could best raise us outside of intercity Akron.  And, therefore, ended up sort of living in a number of different places in Northeast Ohio.  That's one explanation.  The second explanation is, my father was a very determined--I think, probably he'd admit today, pretty strong-willed person who didn't particularly like bosses.  I mean, he liked to do things his own way.  And, he did them extremely well, but that, that didn't fit--go down too well in some places.  Let me give you an example.  I mean, he was probably, from what he thinks and others, the first Negro coal delivery driver in the city of Akron.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, it's a great story about all of that.  But, having done that, he had a boss who said, "Well, you ought to deliver the route and do it this way."  And, he sort of said, "Well, that makes no sense.  I mean, I'm doing it well.  Everybody's pleased.  This is the best way to do it."  And, boss said, "You know, but, I want you to do it this way."  And, my father at that point was the kind of person who'd say, "Well, I tell you what, take your job and shove it," okay.  And, and so, we moved around--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A good bit.  So, I can tell you in--we lived in Copley [Ohio] and Kent, Ohio, in Windham, Ohio, and Braceville, Ohio, and Warren Township [Ohio] and Sewickley, Pennsylvania.  And, ultimately ended up in Kinsman, Ohio where I went to high school in Kinsman sophomore through senior year.  Where we were the only black family in the township.  And, and as it turned out, I'm the only black person to ever graduate from the Kinsman schools because they ended up being consolidated later in the '60s [1960s].  And, my family moved from Kinsman to Windham, Ohio, which really sort of became the family home.  And, my sister Rosalyn [Minter] graduated there from high school and all the rest of my brothers and sisters.  So, Windham is sort of the Minter family home town. Only for me, Kinsman is the family home town because of, you know, high school experiences and impact of teachers and principal and church and so forth.  So, we've lived in a number of places in Summit [County, Ohio], Portage [County, Ohio], and Trumbull [County, Ohio] Counties.  Some places where there were a mixture of African American families.  Some where there were none.  And, some where there were a few.  And, so, it made for a whole different kind of experience.
Story_ID: 136962
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned that your father [Lawrence Minter] delivered coal sometimes.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did he do other kinds of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Jobs as well?
Speaker 2: He was a very skilled, semi-skilled person.  He worked for the Paul Feed & Supply Company in Garrettsville [Ohio].  He worked on the railroad.  He worked in the steel mills at Republic [Steel] and Copperweld [later Fushi Copperweld, Inc.], worked for a period for the American Bridge Company in Ambridge, Pennsylvania.  And, then in the late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s] got very interested in being an over-the-road steel hauler.  And, was one of the very early African Americans to drive a steel truck, which he loved.  It didn't work too well having a large family and being away from home.  But, I think for those of us, as children, it does stand out in our minds as--as something he loved doing.  And, it--did a number of different jobs.  Ultimately, ended up working for the State of Ohio as a heavy equipment operator for the State Department of Transportation [Ohio Department of Transportation, ODOT] and advanced to be supervisor for bridges and culverts.  And, ultimately was the superintendent of highways for Portage County before he retired.  So, did a number of different things.  When he retired, because he's four years older than my mother, after spending a year looking after grandchildren and so forth, got bored.  And, my mother said, "Well, what do you wanna do until I retire?"  And, he said, "You know, what I'd like to do is go back and buy a truck.  Go back on the road," as a sixty-some year old steel hauler, which he did and he loved.  Didn't have to make the money at that point so, he didn't, you know, have to go every place.  But, he did that until my mother retired and sold the rig and they moved to San Antonio [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell us a little about your mother's work?
Speaker 2: My mother for the early part of her career, if you will, was a person who was at home looking after--after all of us.  And, being a super parent who--we like to say as I remember it, that my father was very oriented on the report cards towards deportment, citizenship, all of those things.  We used to say to the teachers, "Please if you're not, if you don't intend to communicate something different than we did--as well as we did the prior six week grade period, put the checkmark in exactly the same place.  If you move it to the left or right, my dad would try to interpret that."  So, even when he was out on the road, somehow he knew when those six weeks grade cards were coming home.  And, we could look up from the school bus coming around the curve and the truck was in the driveway.  And, he was there to collect those report cards and look at that side.  And, my mother looked at the grades.  So, and she was the one who was sort of--"Okay, what are we reading, I'm gonna read,  I'm gonna tutor,  I'm gonna--" she was the one who was down at the school being the school parent and the homeroom mother and so forth and so on.  Occasionally, working doing day work.  And, then after the family moved to Windham [Ohio]--I was in high school by that time--she began as sort of the custodian cleaner at the Windham Bank.  She was a post lady working for the U.S. post office [United States Postal Service].  She did work for the Portage County Library System.  Went back to school at Bohecker's Business College [now Fortis College, Ravenna, Ohio] and took some courses and ended up at the Samuel Moore Company [Samuel Moore & Company], which later became a division of Eaton [Corporation] in Aurora [Ohio] and did that until she retired.  So, and, along the way was always sort of the superintendent of the Sunday school, a pillar in the Methodist Church in Windham and in other churches.  And, when they moved to San Antonio, continued to do the same kind of thing in the Methodist Church they belong to there.  And, she was president three times of the oldest AARP [Inc., formerly the American Association of Retired Persons] chapter in San Antonio.  So, always somebody who was every engaged in the community, I should say, until very recently because of her frail health.
Story_ID: 136963
Speaker 1: Mr. Minter, at the end of our last segment, you were describing your early childhood in various communities in Ohio.  And, I wanted to stay with that subject for just a few more minutes at least.  And, wondered if you would share with us information about some of your earliest memories of growing up in Ohio.
Speaker 2: Well, I think there a couple of things that stand out in my mind.  One of them is living in Kent [Ohio] and the experience when I was either--kindergarten, first grade, I don't remember exactly--of being in the summer library reading program where, you know, you read a number of books and I ended up being, you know, one of those who got selected because I was either second or third in terms of the most books read over the summer.  And, the experience and the act--you know, the wonderful experience of getting your photographed and be in the newspaper and have your picture appear and the pride of my parents [Dorothy Minter and Lawrence Minter] and people who lived around us.  And, also, I got a certificate, a gift certificate from the A & P Supermarket [Atlantic & Pacific Company], which was not too far from where we lived.  And, I could do anything and buy anything with this.  And, I had been going up to the store and noticed these things called lobsters.  And, so, since this was my money to spend, I went to the store and asked them about the lobsters.  And, so, whether we got two or three or how many--I don't remember that so much--but, and, had to have the butter and all the things to go with them.  And, to come back and, so our family had lobster, which was a very big deal.  And, and of course, the affirmation of the neighbors and so forth.  So, that's one of the things that stands out in my mind.  And, I think the other, interesting enough, is not real early experiences but, is when we--when we moved to Warren Township [Ohio] which we called Leavittsburg [Ohio] Liberty Steel from Ambridge, Pennsylvania, it was the end of the first six weeks of the fifth grade for me.  And, it's interesting that I don't remember, I--the teachers.  I can't tell you a teacher that I had up until that time.  I can remember the schools and I can remember a few things about it, but, nothing that stood out in my mind.  And, on this first day, when my brothers and sisters, and I went to school, they were giving the exams for the fifth grade, end of the six weeks.  And, the first class, homeroom was math, Miss Nelson said, "Well, there's no point in having you take the test, you're new here.  You know, do the stuff in the book and, you know, tomorrow you'll get started."  And, the second class was history, and the teacher, Miss Thompson said, "Well, why don't you take the test anyway.  I mean, we'll find out what you know."  And, I completed the test obviously a lot sooner than many of the other students.  So, she took it, and graded it, and walked out of the class.  And, what happened was, I got a hundred.  And, suddenly, make a long story short, I was identified as being a smart little colored boy.  And, therefore, I ended up taking the test in each of the classes after that.  And, did, I guess, reasonably well.  I don't whether I got a hundred--I don't recall getting a hundred on any of the others.  But, but, the following morning, I mean, and not only that, the affirmation I got at home and how good it made me feel.  But, the following morning when I came back to the homeroom, in math class, I got moved from sort of the back seat, up near the front.  Now, part of this was the stereotype about "the colored kids" who were in the class.  But, also, part of it was, well this is a smart little boy and, you know, we need to watch him and so forth and so on.  And, it's interesting that that really stood out in my mind.  And, I can name every teacher I had in the fifth grade from there on.  And, as years have gone by, I've used that many times to illustrate what a powerful difference expectations, as well as affirmation can make.  And, I went on there in that school, another girl and I were the first ones in the history of the Warren Township schools to play in the band and the orchestra.  And, to go through a different set of experiences.  But those are the things--
Speaker 1: You mean, the first African Americans?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  The first African Americans to play in the school band and orchestra and there--thereby go on the band trip to Columbus [Ohio], and some of the experiences of what that meant.  But, those were very shaping experiences.  And, of course, then to go on to high school [Kinsman High School, Kinsman, Ohio] where I was in a graduating class of sixteen and we were the only African American family in the history of the schools.
Story_ID: 136964
Speaker 1: Well, can be backtrack a little bit?  You said, you had some interesting experiences traveling with the band.  Were these overnight activities?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and--
Speaker 1: Problems with accommodations or?
Speaker 2: --Problems with accommodations at the Neil House in Columbus, Ohio, where, where we went.  And, it was both the band, the orchestra, and the chorus.  And, it was 1952.  The Republican, well, the Republican-Democratic Race for President of the United States, and we were staying in the Neil House, two of us.  I think, and I was an eighth grader, I think.  And, some veterans took exception to it and they asked us to--went to the band director, without our knowing it, and said, "Well, we'd appreciate it--we've made arrangements for you to go to another hotel with those ki--those children."  The band director said, "Not a chance.  We all move."  And, we all ended up moving on Saturday night out of the Neil House and being scattered in various hotels all over the place.  And, then none of us knew exactly what had happened, okay.  The adults knew obviously.  And, one of the things that happened, typically, the band orchestra did well.  On Sunday, you stopped for brunch at the Ohio Hotel in Wooster, Ohio.  We were there and (laughter) I was back in the back someplace and by the time they discovered that I was there a substantial number of the students and persons had eaten, and they said, "You know, we don't--sorry, we don't feed colored people here."  And, we ended up walking out without paying.  And, this was something that had to be told to the parents when we all arrived back in Leavittsburg [Ohio] and our parents were there to meet us on Sunday.  So, that, that kind of experience.  The other thing that I think has--had an impression on me from those years is that because my parents [Dorothy Minter and Lawrence Minter] were very focused on us getting a high school education, family name, those kinds of things, respectability, reputation, being important but, we did a lot of reading and we had to speak proper English.  And, because we were reasonably good students, I had began to encounter the experience from African American kids who were my peers who would say, "You know, you're kind of funny.  You talk funny.  You talk like them."  And, from white students who would say, "You know, it's kind of funny. You're really more like us."  And, it's--you know, that goes all the way back to--in the 1940s, late 1940s, early 1950s.  But, how that has continued to play out over the years.  And, I think, kind of tragically so, that even today, one of the great struggles is for a number of children in African American families that if you're striving and academically oriented, you can have a tough time in terms of peer pressure.  And, so, I recall that and it's something that I've tried to be cognizant of in work in terms of my concerns about education.
Story_ID: 136965
Speaker 1: Well, can you tell me how you dealt with that as a teenager?  Did you sort of select special friends who accepted you for who you were?  Or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) well, of course--
Speaker 1: Did you have to adjust?
Speaker 2: When I went to high school [Kinsman High School, Kinsman, Ohio], here I was in an environment where I was the only black and, therefore, I had a mix of experiences.  But, but most of them were pretty, were very positive experiences because there wasn't much for people to really be prejudiced about.  And, so, therefore, it really did not present much of a problem to me in high school.  I mean, I didn't date in high school.  And, you know, I--there were things I was gonna be careful about doing.  I wasn't unaware of race but, actually had a very--pretty good experience.  In the Methodist Church in Kinsman [Ohio] clearly the reason why I'm a college graduate.  The only one with a four year degree or more in my family, among my siblings, is because of the influence of the teacher in high school, the principal who also was my Sunday school--I should say, the superintendent of schools who was also my Sunday school teacher.  And, the influence of a woman who I still am very close to who inspired me greatly.  And, they were the persons kind of responsible for moving me along to, yes, you're gonna think about going to college and sort of helping me get to Baldwin-Wallace College [later Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio] where I got my degree.  So, and, it was there that I realized in full ways that going into an environment where there were, I would say, six or seven African Americans in my freshman class--four of us who were in the same room, coincidentally.  And, with my other three roommates who were from the Rochest--two of them from the Rochester area in New York, and the other from East Orange, New Jersey, who were very talented, very capable persons--two of who were transferred at the end of the freshman year.  And, what was the difference?  I mean, the difference was for them, it was moving into a predominately white environment for the first time and having to make that transition and some of that difficulty.  And, for me who'd come out of an overwhelmingly white environment in school at being comfortable with being able to make--to do that navigation, I didn't have to deal with that as a freshman starting in.  I mean, I had to deal with other things about school, but didn't have to deal with that.  And, so, the issues of race in society and so forth in culture, I think are very important.  And, I happened to get the blessed side of that when I got to college.
Story_ID: 136966
Speaker 1: Well, coming of age as you did in the, in the era of Brown [Brown vs. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas, 1954], in the beginning of the modern Civil Rights Movement in Ohio, where there was never any slavery. So, I used to be surprised when I read description--when I read descriptions of incidents of racism, especially institutionalized racism or the black codes in Ohio but, in the 20th century, in the middle of the 20th century in the 1950s, did your parents [Dorothy Minter and Lawrence Minter] really take any special care to prepare all eight of the children for anything that they might encounter outside of that home environment?
Speaker 2: You know, the answer to that is, is kind of both yes and no.  I mean, I--I don't recall there were things that were done that was special.  I think my parents felt very strongly about performance and what we did and they were very engaged in our lives and they were there to back us up.  It isn't that they didn't have some experiences.  I mean, my family when I was probably second grade or thereabouts was forced to move from Braceville, Ohio to Windham, Ohio because the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] said, "You can't live in this house that you're renting," on sort of the main road running through Braceville.  And, my brothers had some difficulties in high school when a situation where there were other African American families who lived there but, and they'd even had outstanding athletes who'd been voted the athletes of the year who were African American, or black.  But, the year three of my brothers showed up at the high school along with two or three others, that was too many, you know.  We--you can play one of those boys in basketball, but you know, we're not gonna have all these, we're not gonna have these kids taken over, you know, football and basketball are spectator sports.  And, my father really helped my brothers and their friends, peers, deal with that from a perspective of experiences he'd had as a young man, young boy becoming an athlete in the Barberton [Ohio] schools.  So, I think, it was always a question of how we handled ourselves, what we did--be aware of your circumstances and surroundings.  But, you don't back down.  You're just as good as anybody else.  And, that was really the attitude of my parents.  And, and, and don't make any assumptions.  In other words, don't do something because you think somebody might not like it.  And, I think all of--the big influence on me as it is related to race is, I'm well aware of racism.  I've--but, I don't start out making an assumption.  I'm--I start with assumption, I belong here, I should be here, I can operate in this environment and I'm gonna move as long as somebody doesn't stop me and I don't have to de--you know, but then I'll have to deal with it.  And, I think that has worked, not only for me but I can say for my brothers and sisters as well.  And, as a clear rub off of the pattern that my parents set.
Story_ID: 136967
Speaker 1: You know, I'm curious about the, the sports teams experiences that you, you alluded to.  Did your father [Lawrence Minter] encourage your brothers to go out for those teams, in spite of the fact that there was some resistance to having that strong an African American presence?
Speaker 2: Well, we were all athletes and played sports.  And, I don't think it occurred to anybody.  When my brothers, when they moved to Windham [Ohio] and they went out for the football team and, three of them were on the football team and they started the first game of the season.  But, the boosters said, "Now, wait a minute, hold it.  We're not gonna have all those boys out there taking up spots," okay.  So, my father then helped deal with that based on experiences that he had had when he had gone to Barberton High School [Barberton, Ohio] many, many years before.  And, when I went to Kinsman [High School, Kinsman, Ohio], and of course, I was the one who was in high school, Kinsman was too small to play football so we played baseball in the fall, okay.  And, the first day, the guy said, "Well, what positon do you play?  You're coming out for baseball."  Well, I didn't know there was baseball practice.  So, I show up the second day and they said, "Well, what position do you play?"  And, play in the outfield.  "Well, go to centerfield."  And, I played centerfield.  Well, why did I play centerfield?  Because that was 1953, and that's where Larry Doby [Lawrence Eugene Doby] played.  And, you know, colored guys and Negros were fast, and had rifle arms, and I was the beneficiary for a while, of all those stereotypes, right.  I mean, they didn't say, "Well, let's go out here and test your arm, and can you really run, and can you really hit?"  I mean, it was assumed.  "Well, hey, you know, he's black.  He must be like, you know, those players of that era.  I mean, he's Willie Mays, and Larry Doby [Lawrence Eugene Doby], and [Luscious] "Luke" Easter, and all them put together."  So, I went through things where I was the only one, okay.  And, it didn't take very long before people became aware of who were in--insiders in school.  I was aware of, you know, people are watching so forth and so on.  It had some disadvantages.  It had some advantages.  But, I wasn't gonna be traumatized by it.  And, I think that's what my dad did with, my parents both did with both--with both of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, and for the viewers who don't know as much about sports history in Ohio as you, who's Larry Doby and what's his relationship to Cleveland [Ohio] history?
Speaker 2: Well, Larry Doby was the first African American to play baseball in the major leagues in the American League--followed soon after Jackie Robinson.  And, went on to be a great centerfielder for the Cleveland Indians and is in the [National Baseball] Hall of Fame [Cooperstown, New York].
Story_ID: 136968
Speaker 1: I'd like to, to ask again about life at home.  And, and wonder if you could share with us information on some of the sights and sounds and smells that remind you of home growing up in Ohio?
Speaker 2: Well, most of the time we lived in very modest circumstances.  And, in--in mostly rural to semi-rural areas.  So, therefore, country and farmland, and I--during my high school years--I worked on farms.  I made hay, baled hay, cut corn, did all--many of--all the kinds of things one did on a farm without being a farmer.  And, I was a small town boy.  I remember we often lived in places where we had to walk a good distance.  We lived four and a quarter miles from town and didn't always have access to a car.  And, yet we were all involved in many activities so we walked and did those things.  And, music, my mother [Dorothy Minter], mother and dad [Lawrence Minter] came home from the Warren [Ohio] music store and said, "Here's a violin.  You, you shall play the violin--take violin lessons."  And, that--I wasn't so enamored with the violin.  I also later played the saxophone.  But, it was an introduction to a different world.  And, I'm a great classic music person.  And, and what also stands out in my mind is--is on Saturdays in cleaning and so forth, listening to The Metropolitan Opera [New York, New York] and the Texaco [Star Theater] radio hour.  And, I'm a great fan of opera, and we go to the opera and the theatre and plays and so forth all of the time.  And, so, that stands out in my mind and I think also we had to be a fairly self-sufficient family so, we played baseball.  Well, who did we play baseball with?  Mostly with my brothers and sisters.  And, and I think those were some pretty great times in terms of bonding.  But, I guess, the thing of the sights and the sounds and the smells, what really does stand out in my mind is the number of things that we did together, in terms of trying to be fairly self-sufficient.  And, we had chickens and ducks and all those kind of things.  So, I, I have a rural background and also a background of having worked pretty hard.  As is true, I think, of everybody in my family.  In high school [Kinsman High School, Kinsman, Ohio], I was the custodian at the U.S. post office in Kinsman, Ohio, during all my high school years and played sports and cleaned doctors' and dentists' offices and did the dry cleaners and participated fully in the community life.
Story_ID: 136969
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned that the church was also an important institution in the family's life.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what holidays were like?  Were they mostly religious celebrations or was there a special meal usually at holiday times in the Minter household?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, the holidays were big things and, and my grandparents often came which would--which made it very special.  Probably the holidays that stand out the most in my mind are really Thanksgiving, which was a big family holiday with grandparents coming, and, Christmas because our family celebrated Christmas on Christmas Eve.  And, the thing that stands out in my mind is because we didn't have a lot of money, my parents [Dorothy Minter and Lawrence Minter] would take us and say, "Okay, this is--you've got, let's say five dollars, and you got five, each," we each--the money got parceled out and we got to go with them and buy our own Christmas presents (Laughter).  Which then got wrapped up--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: For opening on Christmas Eve.  And, we continued that tradition basically until my parents really moved to San Antonio [Texas].  And, then by that time, you know, when you're married and you've got your own children and different families that--that has gradually faded away.  But, this year on the Saturday night before Christmas, those of us who are here as adult children essentially got together and did that with our chil--our adult children as well as our grandchildren.  But, the holidays were always special.  My mother was always somebody who was thinking about celebrating things.  And, since we were very active in the church, so Easter and Palm Sunday and Christmas and so forth.
Speaker 1: Now, in the Methodist Church, do you have the, the pageants?  It's something I recall from my Baptist years (laughter) we had to have the, the recitations and all of that.  Or, what was that like?
Speaker 2: Well, we did have some of that.  I mean, I--when you mentioned that the thing that stands out in my mind is--is when I was--when we lived in Warren Township [Ohio], we attended a very small Baptist Church.  And, I remember being--participating in what, I guess, they called the Tom Thumb weddings.  And, usually, I was the preacher because the people would say, "Oh, that boy he, he reads so well.  He speaks so well."  But, and probably no more than thirty, forty people attended these churches.  But, it was a, it was a very important thing for, as I said, more so my mother than my father [Lawrence Minter].  But, that we participate, and that she participated and every time we moved--I went to like seven elementary schools in that, by the end of the first six weeks in the fifth grade.  And, so, when we moved from one community to another, I mean, my mother would pretty quickly find a church, get herself introduced to the school, volunteer to be a--you know--a school homeroom parent, or whatever was the case.  Which in it of itself was fairly extraordinary for a black parent to be so bold as to come in and suggest that I can help and I wanna participate.  And, again, she just assumed that, "Well, you're gonna welcome the help and here I am."  And, so, it's up to somebody else to decide whether they wanted that or how they felt about it.  And, that had a lot of influence on me.
Story_ID: 136970
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you mentioned Kinsman High School [Kinsman, Ohio] and the teachers and others who made a difference in--in making it possible for you to--to do well in high school.  And, then to make that transition to college.  Do you remember the names of any of the special teachers who were influential?
Speaker 2: Oh, I probably can name every one of them (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Mr. [Robert] Titus was the superintendent and he also taught the math courses.  I had him for algebra.  And, I worked in the office on Wednesdays during my, probably junior and senior years, 'cause they didn't have an office secretary.  And, Mr. Banning [ph.] was the social studies, social sciences teacher and the principal of the high school.  Miss Fitz [ph.] was the French teacher.  Miss Brown [ph.], well I could go on.  Mr. Welch [ph.] was our class advisor.  And the person who had the greatest amount of influence on me was Jean Garlock who taught the general business courses and also was a pillar in the Methodist Church and continues to be and someone who I remain very close to over all these years is still--we correspond with Christmas cards.  And, when I was sworn in as the Unit--as the first secretary of the United States Department of Education, she was there at the White House for the--for the swearing in.  And, I go back to Kinsman [Ohio], oh, at least every other year to be sure to see her, my wife Dolly [Dolores "Dolly" Minter] and I do.  So, it--it was a, was really a very influential place for me.
Story_ID: 134337
Speaker 1: Mr. Minter, we were talking at the end of the last segment about your high school years.  And, I wanted to ask, for your senior year--at the beginning of that year--were you certain that you wanted to go on to college after high school [Kinsman High School, Kinsman, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: I wasn't at all--it's funny because I was a sports fan, I knew all about colleges and universities and listened to football games, and so forth and so on.  And, in some ways, you know, I projected myself playing sports but high school was not something--I mean, college was not something that was on my radar screen really.  And, my parents [Dorothy Minter and Lawrence Minter] had not graduated from high school.  Therefore, they felt very strongly about a high school education.  I hadn't really thought about it to be honest.  And, suddenly there came a day, because I'd mentioned to you that I worked in the office of the superintendent, when Mr. [Robert] Titus came out and suddenly something occurred to him and he said, "Well, tell me what are you doing about plans to go to college," and so forth and so on.  And, I said, "Well, no, I haven't thought about it."  I--and, he called Mrs. [Jean] Garlock and the two of 'em sort of sat me down and said, "You're gonna go to college.  And, you go up to the library and you get some catalogs and you start looking.  And, we're gonna check on you every week or so to see what progress you're making."  And so I did, you know, and because I had gone to--was going to Kinsman where I'm in a class of sixteen, I thought about going to small schools.  And, I got a collection of catalogs and started to look at them and so forth.  And, as I mentioned, I worked at the U.S. Post Office so I--it was easy to send the cards in the mail and to get them.  And, one day in late October, early November, my father who was at that time a steel hauler, came home and said, "You know, I was in this truck stop in Conneaut [Ohio] and happened to run in--pick of a copy of the '[The] Plain Dealer.'  And there was a story in the sports section about a man named [William] Harrison Dillard, who was a great Olympian in 1948 and again in '52 [1952], and it was story about him training still and his relationship with Baldwin-Wallace College [later Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio] where he had been a graduate."  And, my dad mentioned, "I don't know quite where the school is, but it's up there around the Cleveland Airport [Cleveland Hopkins International Airport, Cleveland, Ohio]."  Well, on Sunday morning, I'm in my Sunday school class and--I don't remember now it was before or after class--Mr. Titus said, "I didn't check with you.  What are you doing?"  So, I told him about, you know, some of the catalogs I had gotten, I was looking at.  And, I mentioned this Baldwin-Wallace.  And, that afternoon, the Methodist minister, Reverend Tony Stoneburner came out to our house and said, "Mr. Titus and Mrs. Garlock told me, I'm to pick you and your mother up at 8:30 tomorrow morning.  We're going to visit Baldwin-Wallace College."  And, we, the three of us drove up and it was a beautiful November fall day, and student council elections were going on and so forth and got a tour of the campus.  And, went to the admissions office and they had rolling admissions, meaning they admitted you whenever they had all the paper, you didn't have to wait 'til a certain date.  They gave me the material to fill out and sent me to the placement office and I said, "I don't have any money" to Mrs. Twitchel [ph.] and she said, "Well, Mr. Minter, you would not be the first person who wanted to go to college who didn't have any money.  I think we can get you a job in the dining hall, and since you're Methodist, and probably a little scholarship with loans and so forth.  If you wanna do it, you can do it."  And, so, I went home and filled out the application and applied and shortly thereafter was admitted.  And, it turned out that BW [Baldwin-Wallace College, later Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio] was inaugurating a new president in December.  His name was A.B. Bonds, Dr. A.B. Bonds [Dr. Alfred Bryan Bonds].  And, because I was an incoming freshman, I guess, we got this wonderful invitation in the mail with the seal and the whole thing, inviting us to come to (laughter) his inauguration.  And, what did we know.  I mean, you know, my parents and I went. And, not only were we, you know, among a very small number of persons of color there but, we got to meet the new president.  Here I'm a freshman who's gonna come in the next September, and so, that was my introduction to Baldwin-Wallace and why I went to school.
Story_ID: 134338
Speaker 1: And, then as I approached the end of my freshman year [at Baldwin-Wallace College, later Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio], the question was, well, you know, where am I gonna get money.  Where I'd worked in the summer, my dad [Lawrence Minter] informed me that Mr. [Harvey] Haynman, who had a small manufacturing plant, Target Stamped Products, in Kinsman [Ohio], had a job for me.  "Tell Steve to come here, he's got a job."  And, that summer after about three or four weeks--I had gotten a couple pays--I realized that my money was going back into the family.  Because it was important.  And, I also realized that if I was going to make it, I had to really hang on to those dollars and I probably couldn't come home again.  And, so, I lived on campus year round after that at BW [Baldwin-Wallace College, later Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio].  I mean, I saw a lot of my family and all of that 'cause we are very close, but, I sort of had to is--isolate myself in a way because they were not in a position to be able to provide financial support.  So, I essentially worked my way through, through Baldwin-Wallace.  I was a member in a fraternity, one of the first interracial fraternities in the United States, men's fraternities.  It was called Beta Sigma Tau.  I went in as a freshman.  It was a small fraternity but its founders had been Harrison Dillard, James Lawson of civil rights fame, [HM] Stanley Tolliver who's a very distinguished criminal defense lawyer here in Cleveland [Ohio].  And, during the--during my freshman year, their senior years, I had as big brothers, [HM] George Forbes who later went on to be, of course, a very distinguished city council president in Cleveland, [C.] Lyonel Jones who is the head of the Legal Aid Society [ of Cleveland, Cleveland, Ohio] and has been with the Legal Aid Society for years, Jim Walker [ph.] who was with the Cleveland schools and so forth.  So, here were, for the first time, I had some African American role models who were some strong personalities and who would determine that the work ethic and so forth.  So, it was a--it was a tremendous thing for me.  And, here we were, interracial fraternity at Baldwin-Wallace, and that experience was great.  I served as the treasurer of that fraternity and president for several years of the fraternity and national president of the fraternity.  And, I was very involved in campus life in pretty significant ways.  And, I worked in the dining hall for four years as a dishwasher, in Lang Dining Hall, and the dietician and the head cook, who were really very strong influential persons, were African Americans.  So, Mrs. Johnson and Mr. Washington were persons who I related to and so forth.  And, my good fortune was it turned out that after my freshman year, my sophomore year, my wife, future wife, Dolly [Dolores "Dolly" Minter] arrived at Baldwin-Wallace from having grown up in Lakewood [Ohio], where there were no blacks.  White and we became good friends 'cause she worked in the dining hall and had a romance on campus.  It was pretty normal.  We had the--you know--the lavalier and the fraternity pin and the sing.  And, we were married in the college chapel.  So, BW is a very important part of both of our lives.  And, I've been very involved there and honored there, as has my wife, who is a trustee and has been a trustee for nearly twenty years.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, is that your wife's given name, Dolly.
Speaker 1: Dolores--
Speaker 2: Dolores.
Speaker 1: Kreicher but, other than having to be on the birth certificate and the income tax form, it is Dolly.
Speaker 2: That's quite a group of HistoryMakers (laughter) all there on the campus of Baldwin Wallace--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: At the same time.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 134339
Speaker 1: And, and I'm wondering too about your relationship with your wife [Dolores "Dolly" Minter].  And, and you, you know, that you're one of the first couples of Cleveland [Ohio].  So, everyone has seen the pictures of Steve and Dolly Minter.  And, because you're an interracial couple.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I know that has been a subject of a number of the stories that I read, even background information in preparation for today.  Were there any special obstacles that you had to overcome to keep the marriage together?  Keep the marriage going this long?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: You know, it's interesting. We, we lived on East 149th Street, close to Van Aken [Ohio], Cleveland, Shaker [Heights, Ohio], and then moved into Shaker in 1963.  And, I, I can honestly say when we talk about these things, we've never really had any kind of experience that one would've said well, negative or so forth.  Well, that's not to say that I didn't get a letter now and then as I was moving up the ranks in prominent public service, somebody who didn't like, you know, wrote one of those letters and so forth.  But, in terms of the experience of living in Cleveland, living in Shaker Heights, moving and going and doing things that we wanted to do and we were fairly open.  We attended a predominantly black church in Glenville [neighborhood, Cleveland, Ohio], the Glenville United Presbyterian Church [Cleveland, Ohio]. We're Presbyterians.  It wanted to be an interracial experience although it was obviously predominantly black. We, we've really not encountered problems.  And, I know people are kind of surprised by that and say, "Oh, really." It doesn't mean that you're not aware of things and so forth but, but I, I can't give you a litany of bad experiences.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you said you lived in both Mount Pleasant [Ohio]--East 149th. That's technically Mount Pleasant, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Mount Pleasant.
Speaker 1: In Cleveland?  And Shaker Heights--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Certainly and both integrated communities--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At the time that you moved into Shaker in the early '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Right, I first lived at the corner of--when we, when I first graduated in Aug--in September of 1960, lived at the corner of East 75th [Street] and Chester [Avenue], in the Hough area [Cleveland, Ohio].  And, lived there for about eight months or so, before moving to Mount Pleasant, East 149th Street.  And, we've basicall--the Shaker experience has been one which we felt tremendous about and made some very conscious decisions because we said, "We're gonna have a family, and we're gonna have children."  We want those children to have the benefit of the best public school education we thought we could afford.  And, that's why we lived on, depending upon one's point of view, the first or last street in Shaker Heights.  There's 154th Street and the next street is Menlo Road and that's where our first house was.  And, where our daughter Michele [Minter] started to school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now were you married before you graduated?
Speaker 2: No. My--I graduated in 1960 in August, and Dolly actually graduated in June of 1961 although she finished all her classwork in March of 1961, and we were married in April of '61 [1961].  Interesting story in this regard is, of course--and she started teaching in the Cleveland [Ohio] schools in March, early April, before we were married.  And, she taught at Sowinski Elementary School [Cleveland, Ohio].  And, which was a mi--at that point, was about 50/50 ethnic, white and black area.  And so, when she went to meet with the principal, and the principal was impressed with her and you know, wanted to know well, where are you gonna live.  And when Dolly told her where she was gonna live, the principal said,--well, Ms. Shragel [ph.]-"Well, I'm, I'm kind of concerned.  Maybe I'll go by there and check this out, you know.  Where is this now at 75th [Street] and Chester [Avenue]."  And, finally Dolly said, "Oh, well, maybe I should tell you, you know, my fiancee, the man I'm marrying is a Negro."  And, Ms. Shragel [ph.] said, "Oh, thank God" (laughter).  So, so that would be all right, you know, if you're gonna be there, then there's better (unclear) and she had a great time teaching.  And, she did in the schools, Cleveland schools until Michele was born and she went back for a short period of time as substituting and then when Caroline [Minter Hoxby], our second daughter was born, it was come home and take care of the children.
Story_ID: 134340
Speaker 1: Now, were you [Steven A. Minter and wife, Dolores "Dolly" Minter] both education majors at Baldwin-Wallace [College, later Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yes, as a matter of fact.  She majored in elementary education, and I majored in physical education.  I had a history minor, thought I was going to be a coach and social studies teacher but, it didn't turn out that way.
Speaker 1: All right.  Can you tell me about that decision to start a family?  How soon after the wedding did you decide that we should definitely have children?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say--well, we were married in April of 1961 and Michele [Minter] was born in October of 1963.  So, that, therefore it wasn't something we wanted to think about early on.  The emphasis when we first got married was-- by that time I was working at the Cuyahoga County Welfare Department [Cleveland, Ohio].  I started there as a caseworker, hired sort of over the resistance of the personnel director who--it's a whole long story about discrimination there but--not by the [Cuyahoga County] Welfare Department--but by the Cleveland [Ohio] schools [Cleveland Metropolitan School District] interestingly enough.
Speaker 1: I'd like to hear it.
Speaker 2: I'll come back then in a moment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, started as a caseworker in the County Welfare Department.  Well, the story probably is worth--I'll try and capsulize without going in to all the details.  When I began interviewing for a position in early 1960 to be a teacher, I was interviewed by the Cleveland schools, by two people.  And, was pretty much offered a job to get a contract.  They knew something that I didn't know.  And, that was that probably if the supervisor of physical education for the [Cleveland Metropolitan School] District knew that there was a vacancy to which I was gonna be hired in, he would not hire me.  Because, he-the few positions that were available at that time for blacks--he preferred to hire products, his kids who came out of the Cleveland Public Schools and who'd gone on to college and done well.  And, that's kind of understandable, okay.  I didn't, I didn't come out of that background and so forth.  But, they thought enough of me that they were gonna slip me by and get me signed to a contract and then would be pretty difficult to do anything and they thought everything would work out.  Regretfully or unfortunately, or maybe thanks, you know, the Lord works in mysterious ways.  I failed to take a required American history course, even though I was a history minor, almost a major.  And, so, in early May, I got the--the good news was that they [Baldwin-Wallace College] taught the course in summer school.  And, the bad news was, I couldn't graduate.  I could walk across the stage and get a blank diploma, which I did.  In the first Monday in August, which would've been the first or the third, or something like that, I was then to go sign my contract.  And, living in Berea [Ohio], got on the bus to go, of course, left early because you wanted to, you know, be there early.  The person who was supposed to meet me was ill.  And, didn't think about that until I was already gone.  And, those were days when they didn't have security guards and so forth.  And, it's August, I walked in.  I go up to the floor where the Physical Education Department is and I'm waiting and in comes the person who's the supervisor who says, "Well, why are you here?"  Well, I'm waiting on so and so--I'm, you know.  And, you know, after a while, he comes back out, "Well, why are you--what are you here for?"  "I'm here to sign my contract.  I'm gonna be a new teacher."  And, he was very blunt.  "Well, I don't know anything about it.  I'm the boss."  And, "Hey, I'm gonna be straight with you.  If I got a job, it's not going to you.  It's gonna go to," okay, "one of my boys and girls."  So, it's now second, third of August, and I had thirty, approximately thirty interviews during the rest of the month of August because, that was a time when there was still lots of jobs openings.  I mean, in elementary and secondary education.  And, I had, then, for the first time, really the experience of, you know, going to Tallmadge [Ohio] where, you know, the superintendent would say, "Gee, I knew there was something wrong when I got these papers.  I couldn't figure out why you hadn't already been snapped up but, I'm sorry, where this is--we're just not ready to deal with the, you know, the issue of having a black or Negro teacher" and so forth.  And, because most of the major city jobs that I knew about--that were referred or Baldwin Wallace was aware of--that their placement office was getting.  So, I was going places where there were vacancies, and actually went to southern Ohio a couple times.  No job.
Story_ID: 134341
Speaker 1: Walking across the campus [Baldwin-Wallace College, later Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio], I met people who I knew, the president's [Alfred Bryan Bonds] secretary, Ms. Raegler [ph.] and the college historian, Ms. [Bertha L.] Stiefel.  And, Ms. Raegler says, "Gee, this is terrible.  Well, you know, maybe you'd like to be a social worker.  There--the County Welfare Department needs good people," so on and so on.  "I'll arrange it."  And, a few days later, I had an appointment.  Then, the personnel director said, "Well, yeah, you, I mean, you're qualified.  We actually have some jobs.  But, I think you wanna be a teacher, one.  And, two, I don't like people from Baldwin Wallace."  (Laughter) So, that was that.  On September 5th, I'm walking across the camp--I ran the, the food service programs during the summer.  And, you know, now I've gotta get out of the fraternity house.  So, I'm walking across the campus and the--to my truck and I was gonna run by the fraternity house and I run into the same two women who wanna know, "Steve, what's going on?  How's it going?"  So, I told them.  When I got out of the--my food service truck at the fraternity house and walked in the telephone was ringing and on the phone was the secretary to the personnel director and said, "Report to work on Monday morning."  Now, what happens and we now know that all of this is true.  Ms. Raegler called her sister, who was Ms. Raegler, who was the secretary to the director of Cuyahoga County Welfare Department [Cleveland, Ohio].  And, obviously Ms. Raegler said, "What's this all about?"  And, I think Mr. Stralik [ph.] said, "Okay, hire him."  So, Friday at 1:30 or 2:00, I was told to report to work on Monday morning.  On the Monday that I reported to work, on the fifth floor of the building at 24th [Street, Cleveland, Ohio] and Payne [Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio], there was a celebration that went on all day because under the State of Ohio's new educational leave program for professional social workers, a group of, I think, five or six were going off to graduate school social work, being paid for by the state. In return they would have a commitment to come back and work.  And, they were being celebrated as being, these are the leaders of this department for years to come.  I mean, it was tears and cake and joy and so forth.  So, before I knew even what my job was--and I happened to be in the corner where all the administrators were--I knew that this is something significant.  Well, how do you go to graduate school?  Well, you have to pass the Civil Service Exam, you have to get accepted to graduate school in social work, you apply to the state and you can go.  I was in the second class.  I went the following September.  And, therefore, you know, I look back on it and I think, the Lord works in mysterious ways.  And, it was the '60s [1960s], and the era of civil rights and it was the New Frontier and the Great Society programs, and the War on Poverty.  And, there were lots of persons who were retiring who had been around from the [Great] Depression on.  And, so, the whole social services thing expanded greatly and I was in that cohort of young persons who was able to take advantage of that.  And, I went to graduate school social work in September of 1961, and came back during the summer and then graduated in June of '63 [1963] and I was a special services case worker.  Make a long story short, I went, I went through every seat that you could go through in the department.  I believe was a special services case worker, supervisor, chief administrative director in Title V, the largest work experience and training program--had as sort of my mentor, the guy who was moving ahead of me, who was extremely talented, labor organizer, a man by the name of Eugene Burns.  And, in six years, I went from the case worker position to the director of the department in the end of the '60s [1960s] in 19--January of 1969, I became the director of the department.
Story_ID: 134342
Speaker 1: So, I, I had all the experiences of going through the riots in Hough [Cleveland, Ohio], the riots in Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio], establishment of the food stamp program, the War on Poverty, all of those kinds of things.  And, moved up the ranks.  And, it was an incredible time in Cleveland's [Ohio] history and I feel, you know, very privileged to have the opportunity to do that.  And, then in the spring of 1970, I received a telephone call from Dr. David Austin who was a professor at Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts], the Foreign Teller School [sic, Heller School for Social Policy and Management], who said, "The governor [Governor Francis Williams Sargent] had just let go the Commissioner of Public Welfare.  They were looking for somebody.  Probably, you know, might not be interested but,"--he'd like permission to submit my resume.  He wanted to try and illustrate to them that there were persons like me out there.  I said I really wasn't interested.  I'd only been--I'd only been the director thirteen, fifteen months.  But, I'd had the experience with working with the [National] Welfare Rights Organization [NWRO] in Ohio.  I was on the National Council of Local-State Public Welfare Administrators.  I'd gone on to the Board of the American Public Welfare Association [APWA], and they asked me if I'd come on to do some consulting for them in Massachusetts, which was a progressive state and one of the worst administered welfare systems in the country at the time.  And, I made some suggestions around things, and then finally one day they called and said, "Well, the governor has made up his mind, he wants you to come in November."  He was running for election on his own, Frank Sargent--come in November.  So, you know, meanwhile we're gonna go ahead and appoint an interim commissioner.  And, I said, I'll never forget this, "Well, I'll tell you what. I would never take that job. I--it--the department is so messed up, I wouldn't wanna come in behind somebody who was the interim."  He said, "Well, what are you saying?"  I said, "Well, the only way I'd consider it would be, if I came now."  They said, "Well, you know, we don't known that he's gonna win.  He's running against Kevin White and Michael Dukakis.  It's pretty risky."  But, you know, what about it.  So, I got a call, come, come meet the governor.  And, I was told that he'd already committed the job to somebody else and so forth.  But, he wanted to meet me.  And, he and I--what was supposed to be a half hour together, ended up for an hour and a half.  And, he said, "Steve, I've, you know, I've given my word.  I promised this job, but I wanna think about it and I'll get back to you."  That was on a Friday.  I think it was on a Monday, and on Friday, they called me and said, "The governor has made up his mind.  He wants you to come.  If you can come now--you have to be here in thirty days and that's a condition.  And, you can't tell anybody because we haven't yet told the person who thinks he's got the job, but we haven't reached him yet."  And, I said, "Well, okay, I'll be there in thirty days but you're crazy. I have to go tell the commissioners."  I mean, well, by the time I went and told the commissioners and got back to my office, it was already out.  I mean it was all over the national media and so forth.  So, I went to Massachusetts where I was the first African American to ever serve in the governor's cabinet in the Commonwealth's [Commonwealth of Massachusetts] history.  And, served as Commissioner of Public Welfare and had a lot of interesting experiences there when you think about race and history and so forth.  One of them--one of my favorite stories is, obviously there were a lot of people who were concerned about well, who's, well who's this guy gonna be bringing in and you know, the deputy commissioners and assistant commissioners, who's he--who's gonna be replaced and, you know, all of these kinds of things.  And, early on, I had some fairly prominent black persons come and visit me to say gee, we're glad you're here.  It's really great--so forth.  So, I'm very cognizant of the fact that that's what they're concerns were but, not too long afterwards I get a call from the Somerville Catholic Charities and the Monsignor [Francis G. O'Sullivan] comes in to visit me--Monsignor O'Sullivan, terrific person, and he says to me, "Well, Steve have you been to Lake Street [Brighton, Massachusetts], yet?"  And, I said, "No.  What's Lake Street?"  He says, "Oh, my goodness."  He says, "Well, you haven't met the Cardinal [Richard James Cushing], His Eminence."  "No, I haven't met the Cardinal."  "Well, you know, I'm gonna make arrangements.  We've got to go and have you meet Cardinal Cushing."
Story_ID: 134446
Speaker 1: Mr. Minter at the end of the last segment, you started to tell us about your relocating to Massachusetts and moving your family there and, about a meeting with His Eminence [Cardinal Richard James Cushing].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, will you tell us a little more about that meeting (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, Monsignor [Francis G.] O'Sullivan asked me had I, had, had I been to Lake Street [Brighton, Massachusetts]?  And, I said, "No."  I didn't know what Lake Street was.  And, that was the Cardinal's [Richard James Cushing] residence.  And, he thought I should go and see the Cardinal.  And, up to that point, I had been largely concerned about how the department [Department of Public Welfare, now Department of Transitional Assistance] leadership was reacting to me as an African American coming into the department.  So, now, we go to visit the Cardinal.  Actually, it was about a week, within two weeks of the time he died.  So, I was probably one of those who had one of the last audiences with him.  And, I was absolutely amazed because he came in. He started talking to me.  He told me all about myself.  And, how he, that he had always had a voice in the selection of the Commissioner of Public Welfare because prior to 1968 it had been primarily the child welfare division of the state and the Catholic Church had great interest in what happened with the child welfare programs.  And, so, that Governor [Francis Williams] Sargent had not checked with him about my appointment.  And, then he proceeded to tell me about all the check outs he had done with Bishop Hickey [James Aloysius Cardinal Hickey] and with the Catholic hierarchy here in Cleveland [Ohio].  And, they had said I was a good person.  And, then it came out that the significance of my appointment, while I was interested that I'm the first African American, it turned out I was the first Protestant, okay.  A great object lesson in terms of making assumptions and acting on assumptions and not having all the information, right.  Because, therefore, it suddenly hit me that some of the people around me who were concerned about what was gonna happen were more concerned about that I was a Protestant than I was an African American, okay.  And, a great lesson which I've told many times, in terms of sometimes do your due diligence and don't always act on assumptions, you need to know.  So, that was one story.  The other was, so, here I am the new commissioner [Commissioner of Public Welfare, Commonwealth of Massachusetts] and obviously there is a desire at different times to consider patronage or to help somebody out, or so forth.  And, the two important committees in my life were the House Ways and Means Committee and the Senate Ways and Means Committee of the Massachusetts Legislature.  What turned out in the House, the powerful person in the House was the Vice Chairman of the Ways and Means Committee.  His name was Joe Early, Joseph Early from Worcester, Massachusetts.  And, interestingly enough the--the Senate Ways and Means Committee chairman was also from Worcester [Massachusetts], Joe Kelly [James A. Kelly, Jr.].   And, so, Joe Early would call me and I'd go up there and he'd say, "Look, I really need this favor, could you do this?  Could you find a job for this person?"  So forth and so on.  And, "You know, you got another chit."  And, I would always get this business of, "Aww, man, you're collecting the chits.  You're gonna have so many chits you're gonna turn in someday.  You're gonna be wealthy," and all that kind of stuff.  Well, in '73 [1973], '74 [1974], we got to the point that we, we needed about a million, nine hundred thousand dollars for a data processing systems to put together.  And, we had worked on it for a long time and finally got it into the bill, into the appropriations bill but, it had to be signed off by the Senate Ways and Means Committee and the House Ways and Means Committee.  So, of course, I'm happy because now I can go turn in my chits.  And, I went first to the Senate and Senator Kelly said, "Oh, Steve, its fine," you know, "Get Joe to sign it and send it over here and it'd be done."  So, now I go to Joe Early and say, "Here, here's I'm--you know, I'm here today and I'm turning in all my chits," you know, and so forth and so on.  And, it's really pretty simple, you don't have to do--all you gotta do is sign this thing and I got it done.  And, he sat there and just looked at me, and he said, "I don't know whether I can do that."  "Oh, what's the problem, Mr. Chairman?"  "Well, I've never owed anything to a Negro.  I mean, I, I've never had, you know, I didn't, it didn't occur to me that you were gonna come in and make a demand of me."  And, I said, "Well, gee, you know, what can I do?  I mean, this is, you know, this is not an outrageous request?"  And, he said, "Well, I just don't know whether I can do--I've gotta think about it.  I'll call you in the morning and tell you my decision."  And, the following morning he called me and he said, "You know, I paced the floor all night.  I didn't sleep, and you know, but, I guess what's right is right.  So, I signed it and sent it over."  I mean, this was a big thing.  Now, as it turns out, he goes on to run for Congress of the United States and goes to Congress and becomes a close, personal friend and colleague of [HM Louis] Lou Stokes and a champion for a number of different kinds of things but, but he'd never had the experience of a black person sort of being his equal or his peer.  Or, hey listen, I've done you these favors, now I need this favor from you.  And, you know, over the years, there've been a number of different times where you, you run into things like that, that you're dealing with where people are--it's a different experience.  So, one of my Massachusetts stories.
Story_ID: 134447
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'd like to, to talk also about the whole act of relocating.  You spent so much of your life in Ohio, different communities in Ohio but still all of your education, everything taking place in Ohio.  I believe the graduate work also.
Speaker 2: Yes, at Case--
Speaker 1: Completed--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In Ohio?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: At what university was that?
Speaker 2: At Case Western Reserve University [Cleveland, Ohio].  The Mandel, what we call the Mandel School today, of Applied Social Sciences [Jack, Joseph and Morton Mandel School of Applied Social Sciences].
Speaker 1: Okay, so all of that happening in Ohio--meeting your future wife, your undergraduate years, Baldwin-Wallace [College, Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio], marrying, working in Cuyahoga County here in Ohio and then everything's changing in 1970 and everyone is going to Massachusetts.  Who's going with you?  I know your wife [Dolores "Dolly" Minter] is there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my wife and three small daughters, Michele [Minter], Caroline [Minter Hoxby], and Robyn [Minter Smyers].  And, you know, this offer came through and for me it had to do with expanded opportunities.  And, I--there was a question in my mind, you know.  I thought I was pretty good.  I felt I could really do a terrific job.  And, I'd had the wonderful luxury of growing up, if you will, and moving up through one system where I knew everybody, and so forth and so on.  And, so, when the opportunity to be in the governor's [Governor Francis Williams Sargent] cabinet and so forth came along, I thought, well, here's where I find out, am I as good as I think I am?  And that had a lot to do with, you know, my decision to go and to move there, which was big decision for us.  And, one of the issues then was, well, being a biracial family, interracial family, where would we live?  So, I said to the governor's office, "Well, what's important from our vantage point are good schools and a community where there's an interracial presence.  We ended up in Needham, Massachusetts which had good schools, no question about it.  And, of course, what I found out is interracial diverse environment was like one and a half percent African Americans, you know, as opposed to Boston [Massachusetts] had more and Newton [Massachusetts] had more but most of the suburbs didn't.  But, it was a great experience and I think a wonderful time for us to be in the East.  And, there were the sort of the Massachusetts great society years.  And, I had the experience of understanding what it meant on the eastern corridor from Boston to New York [New York] to Washington, D.C.  And, I was very involved in the American Public Welfare Association [APWA] and the National Council of State Public Welfare Administrators and worked on legislation and with the governor's conference.  And, it's there that I met Jimmy Carter who--I later worked in the Carter Administration.  And, it's there I met a person whose really the foremost preeminent child advocate in the United States, [HM] Marian Wright Edelman.  She and her husband, Peter [Edelman], were in Massachusetts during those years.  And, Peter [C.] Goldmark [Jr.] who became [Massachusetts] Secretary of Human Services and ran the New York New Jersey Port Authority [Port Authority of New York and New Jersey] and was budget director for New York and ultimately the president of the Rockefeller Foundation [New York, New York].  So, developed a whole kind of national network which I was able to put to good use when--
Story_ID: 134448
Speaker 1: I'd kind of made up my mind in fifteen years in the public welfare post was enough, from starting in Cuyahoga County [Ohio] in Massachusetts.  And, would have gone on and done something else probably with Governor [Francis Williams] Sargent but he was defeated by Mike [Michael] Dukakis.  And, Governor Dukakis offered me the opportunity to stay on as Commissioner of Public Welfare, but I, I wanted to move into something else.  And, so, there came a day in December when I had to sort of decide what I--was I going to California to be with [Governor Edmund Gerald] Jerry Brown [Jr.] and his cabinet or New York would be [Governor] Hugh Carey and his cabinet or the Social Security Administration to be deputy commissioner.  And, my wife [Dolores "Dolly" Minter] said, "Steve, you didn't really ask me about going to Massachusetts, and we went and it was a good thing. It was a great thing.  And, I'm not, I don't care where you go after Massachusetts but I'd like you to really seriously consider staying in one place for twelve years for the continuity of our children," which we said was important.  Well, you don't go to Sacramento [California] and Albany [New York] particularly and think you're gonna be in a high profile job and stay in that job for twelve years.  You could do it in Washington [D.C.] or Baltimore [Maryland].  But, I decided to put some other cities back on the board.  And, therefore, I put Cleveland [Ohio] back on the board because we had lived here, we had family here, I knew this community backwards and forwards.  And, I made some telephone calls and within a very short period of time--make a long story short--I was offered a position as a program officer at the--at The Cleveland Foundation [Cleveland, Ohio] in social services.  And, one great president of the foundation, Homer Wadsworth who was an icon in the field of philanthropy said, "Hey, we want you to continue to play the national role in things that you've done."  And, it's from The Cleveland Foundation I was able to be the president of the American Public Welfare Association [APWA].  President [James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] asked me to join his administration as soon as he was elected.  We had just come back and I said, "No, I really don't wanna do that."  But, I did serve on the National Commission for the International Year of the Child and I did do some other things with the Carter administration.  And, towards the end of the administration, the United States Department of Education was created as a new department.  And, so--he selected a wonderful federal judge, Shirley Hufstedler who had President Carter been reelected probably would have been the first woman appointed to the [United States] Supreme Court.  Selected her, she was a federal judge, to be the Secretary [of Education] and they were then looking for, you know, some balance, and somebody who had some big systems experience.  And, through Marian Wright Edelman and Vernon Jordan and a number of other persons, my name was suggested.  And, I'd been at the foundation for a few years and it seemed like a nice time to take a sabbatical and I said, "Okay, if I can have a leave of absence, I'll go up and get the department [United States Department of Education] established and stay through the first and second budgets but, then I'm coming back to Cleveland."  And, I actually commuted that year and lived in the home with Marian Wright Edelman and Peter [Edelman] and their three terrific sons.  So, it was a great experience for me to be the first Under Secretary of Education.  And, it helped fill out those experiences because, you know, education as far as I am concerned is probably the most important influence outside the family that makes a difference for most of us in terms of what our life opportunities and chances are gonna be.  And, so, I served until January 20 [1981] when Mr. Reagan [President Ronald Reagan] was sworn in and the hostages came home from--from Iran on that day.  And, I returned to The Cleveland Foundation and where I was associate director and program officer then later became the president for almost twenty years.
Story_ID: 134449
Speaker 1: Okay, I know, we don't wanna gloss over that chapter of the history (laughter) because that's the one that I think that folks in northeast Ohio are gonna be most familiar with all of the Massachusetts and other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) right.
Speaker 1: That sort of background--
Speaker 2: Prelude.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) yes--background information for us--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, I do want to ask also for the record, the birth dates of your daughters.  Because they're gonna be growing up--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: During The Cleveland Foundation [Cleveland, Ohio] years and I just wanna be able to come back to that.
Speaker 2: Yes, well, Michele [Minter] our oldest daughter was born in 1963 in October.  And, started school in the Shaker [Heights, Ohio] schools and then we moved to Needham [Massachusetts] and she came--when we moved back here, she was in the sixth grade and then went all the rest of the way through the Shaker schools and following graduation was an outstanding student--went to Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut] where she got her bachelor's degree in English and kind of majored in performing arts and did internships with Great Lakes Theatre Festival here in Cleveland [Ohio] and at Cain Park [Cleveland Heights, Ohio], and the Mid-Atlantic stage [Mid-Atlantic Center for the Arts and Humanities] in Cape May, New Jersey, got her master's degree at Brooklyn College [of the City University of New York, Brooklyn, New York, New York] in Performing Arts Management, worked for Columbia Artists Management International [CAMI], managing the careers of classical music artists and ensembles, met her husband, Jeff [Jeffrey Yuan], who graduated the same year from Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut].  They didn't know each other as undergraduates but all of their best--they had all the best friends. They just didn't know each other.  But, Michele's roommate got her Ph.D. in Microbio--Molecular Biology at The Rockefeller University [New York, New York].  Jeff was her bench mate, got his Ph.D. there.  And, after they got married, they went--moved to Princeton [New Jersey] where he did post-doc work and now he's a research scientist at Merck.  And, Michele moving to Princeton worked for Westminster Choir College [Rider University, Princeton, New Jersey], director of special projects.  And, then went over to join the Princeton administration and today she is director of development at Princeton University.  Our second daughter, Caroline, was born in 1966--was also quite an outstanding student--went--got her Bachelor's degree at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--was on the--won a letter at Harvard on--for being the cox on the men's lightweight crew.  She graduated summa cum laude Phi Beta Kappa, was a Rhodes Scholar.  Likewise, her husband's a Rhodes Scholar and got her Master's degree at Oxford [University, Oxford, England], her Ph.D. at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and went on to the Harvard faculty and she's tenured.  And, is one of the nation's leading labor economists on competition in schools and all of those kinds of things.  Her husband is a faculty member in English at Yale as a [John] Milton scholar.  And, then our youngest daughter, Robyn was born in 1969.  Likewise, outstanding student in high school--went to Harvard undergraduate and following her graduation was a Trustman [Fellowship] traveling fellow and went to South Africa and worked in the office of Archbishop [Desmond] Tutu and with members of the ANC [African National Congress]--was there the year Nelson Mandela came out of prison and is continued that association, which is another whole story--came back and worked for the Corporation for Supportive Housing in New York City [New York]--met her husband four, three or four weeks into the freshman year and they were pretty much an item from that point on.  She got her law degree at Yale and worked at a major in New York City law firm before they decided to come here and start a family.  And, she's a lawyer at Thompson Hine [Cleveland, Ohio] and he's an evaluation specialist consultant with PricewaterhouseCoopers [PWC].  And, we have three grandchildren.  We say of the--the oldest two grandchildren, they're the true blend of America.  They've got in their background, Polish American, Polish Hungarian, African American, Native American, white, and Chinese.
Story_ID: 134450
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Thank you for including their names in your story.  But, I wanna go back to that chapter of your history that deals with the history of The Cleveland Foundation [Cleveland, Ohio].  Now, Cleveland Foundation has quite a reputation nationally, and it's my understanding that is the oldest community--
Speaker 2: Yes, it's the oldest-
Speaker 1: Foundation.
Speaker 2: Community foundation.  Established here [Cleveland, Ohio] in 1914, so it's over ninety years old.  And, it's the second largest community foundation in the United States with about a billion and a half in assets.  And, it has as its mission to improve the--help improve the quality of life in Greater Cleveland.  It's done that in--wid--by working in a wide variety of areas by trying to address key community needs.  It's a great institution.  Today making grants of seventy-five to eighty million dollars a year in economic development in neighborhoods and housing and arts and social services and health and it was my privilege to be associated with the Foundation from 1975 essentially through 2003 although, I still continue to be a little bit of a consultant at times.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, with the name Cleveland Foundation, does that mean that most of the giving goes to organizations in Northeast Ohio or is it throughout the State of Ohio?
Speaker 2: I would say that probably ninety-five percent of the grantmaking occurs in Northeast Ohio and principally in Cuyahoga Lake and Geauga counties.  We do, do some statewide, or maybe I should say, we did do some statewide grant making on issues of significant importance to this area.  And, it is possible today for donors of federally revised funds to make recommendations and we'll make grants anyplace in the United States that the donor wants to, provided these are eligible organizations.  But, but primarily we really focus on geography--Northeast Ohio.  In its beginning, it was the city of Cleveland and gradually it became Cleveland and its interring suburbs and gradually--the definition of Northeast Ohio has expanded rather greatly.  Because, we're all contiguous in it's--we're really a region and we're very interrelated.
Speaker 1: Now, what about the program support?  Have those areas of interest changed over time with the growth of the area that you contribute to?
Speaker 2: Well, in point of fact, it--the answer to that is, yes.  And, at the same time, I'd like to say that it is also, no.  And, let me explain why.  One of the things I discovered when I came to The Cleveland Foundation about its great history was that when it was established in 1914 and it didn't have any money, and it wanted to model itself and do--be a force in community life, they borrowed from something that had happened in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] just a year before, the Pittsburgh Civic Survey [The Pittsburgh Survey, 1907-1908].  And, and they said to the community, "What are the, what are the major issues we ought to address?"  And, so, between 1914 and 1922, The Cleveland Foundation, without much money, having passed the hat, did these surveys and made reports to the community and recommendations as to what should happen.  And, it's very interesting when you, when you look at those--what those were--education, how to improve the Cleveland Public Schools, the private welfare system and how to bring them together, parks and recreation--looking at how to, what I call American eyes, the Eastern European immigrants, who were coming here, okay--criminal justice, prosecution, police, courts, so forth.  In other words, as they got labeled, these are the enduring issues or the enduring problems.  And, I would suggest that if we go down through the decades and look at what are the issues that an American urban area is going to find itself dealing with--why they have different names.  It's criminal justice, its schools, its parks and recreation.  Now, it wasn't economic development to any significant degree because we were the manufacturing capital, the capital of the foundry.  Today, economic development has come to the forefront as a very important issue.  But, it's been children and arts and so forth and so on.  So the, so, the Foundation really through, what is today, it's fifteen member board and about a fifty-five member staff focuses on what need--what do we need to do to have the kind of quality of life that we oughta have in Northeast Ohio.  And, we're very fortunate in Cleveland to have a very rich philanthropic history. You know, this is a community that has the oldest African American regional theater in the country [Karamu House, Cleveland, Ohio], the oldest regional theatre in the country in Cleveland Play House, the first Jewish community federation [Jewish Federation of Cleveland] in the country, the first or second United Way in the country, the first community foundation in the country. The National Charitable Information Bureau was established here.  There is this great wealth of philanthropy and today it is the--this sector which together with the business and the public sector have to drive the public-private partnership and address the issues of diversity and race in neighborhoods.  And, I was pretty fortunate to start out in this community in, you know, 1960 and from 1960 basically through now, forty-five years, to understand some of the currents and the ebb and flow and to be present to try and work on some of these issues.
Story_ID: 134451
Speaker 1: Mr. Minter, can you help me understand how The Cleveland Foundation [Cleveland, Ohio] gets its money?
Speaker 2: Yes, we get our money largely for most of the early years through bequests.  That is, Frederick Harris Goff, the founder of the foundation said, "Put your money in my bank," (laughter), "entrust it to us.  Our trust officers will handle it.  Think about what you want to leave behind.  You made some of your money in this community, maybe you made all of it in the community.  Leave something behind. Look after your family and so forth and we'll help you but leave something for the community."  And, so, through wills and trusts.  Then we primarily spend the interest, the income, okay, so interest and dividends over many years and reinvest the rest to keep growing it.  And, we get new gifts every year.  Some of it wills, some of it new funds established, so forth and so on.  Now, The Cleveland Foundation does not conduct an annual fund like the United Way or the health groups or so forth.  Ours is really more through planned giving.  And, so, the Foundation has continued to grow through good investments and gifts of which approximate somewhere between thirty-five to forty million dollars a year on average.  And, that's why it is now able to be as large as it is.  And, it has been for a long, long time, the second largest of the community foundations.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when I think about some of the studies of the history of philanthropy in America, the philanthropists aren't always celebrated.  Sometimes they're presented as robber barons. We have the Andrew Carnegies and the John D. Rockefellers and they're not necessarily heroes in the eyes of working men and women.  Do we still have these captains of industry giving away the millions of dollar through noblesse oblige or whatever they wanna call it or where--are they're little people who contribute to The Cleveland Foundation funds as well?
Speaker 2: Well, in the case of The Cleveland Foundation, the idea really was suppose the community didn't have John D. Rockefeller or Andrew Carnegie or persons of that type.  Then maybe, Frederick [Harris] Goff reasoned--he had been John D. Rockefeller, John D. Rockefeller's lawyer or one of his lawyers, perhaps through the union of many gifts, large and small, you could build a great foundation to serve the city.  And, that's exactly what did happen.  Now, if you look at the roster of the Cleveland Foundation's thousands of donors, there are many of the great names of philanthropists and industrialists and capitalists from the beginning of this century down through all of the 20th Century but, there're also hundreds of names that no one would ever recognize or know who these persons were.  And, there're some really remarkable stories.  And, for me, one of the things that was very important--I've often said is to try and address some of the questions that might not be asked but were on person's minds.  And, if the beneficiaries of a lot of the grants and the foundations are persons of color, then the question is, were there donors who were persons of color?  And, for a long time that was not the case.  And, one of the things I worked on during the period I was the president of The Cleveland Foundation was to change that.  And, so, today there are African Americans and Asian Americans and Hispanic Americans as well as all other types of persons.  And, we can truly say, this is the community's foundation.  And, you don't have to answer the question. You can say, [HM] Judge Lillian Burke established this fund, Dr. [L.] Morris [Jones] and Dr. Adrienne Jones have this fund, Steven and Dolly Minter have this fund.  And, so, it's clear that when you go to a donor event persons come up and say, "You know, this is wonderful.  This is such a great group of people.  It's so diverse."  It says something about our community.
Story_ID: 134452
Speaker 1: Mr. Minter, we had started to talk about the role of blacks in the history of philanthropy.  And, you suggested in some of your comments that there are some, some ordinary folks, not necessarily the robber barons that I alluded to earlier who have also played an important role in shaping The Cleveland Foundation's [Cleveland, Ohio] history.  Can you tell me a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, I mean, I think what--the first African American to serve on the distribution committee of The Cleveland Foundation and really sort of call attention to the importance of this organization was Doctor Kenneth Clement who a lot of persons will remember not only as being a very distinguished physician but an important advisor to Carl B. Stokes and his running for mayor of the City of Cleveland [Ohio], a successful bid to be mayor of the City of Cleveland.  And, a fund was established early on to honor his, his parents.  And, I can give you several more examples but I'll use one story to illustrate.  When [HM] Judge Lillian Burke who was the first African American to serve as a judge in the State of Ohio, state judge, was retiring and friends wanted to raise a purse of money.  And, what she wanna do with it.  And, she was concerned about where she could put it that was responsible and be good stewardship and so forth.  And, her friend Tommie [P.] Patty, retired executive director of the Phillis Wheatley Association [Cleveland, Ohio] suggested The Cleveland Foundation.  They came to see me and I told her, you know, ten--it took ten thousand dollars to establish a fund.  She wrote a check for ten thousand dollars and then challenged her friends at her retirement affair to match it and put it into this fund, which she did.  And, she said, "What I want the income for the fund to be used for is to support two organizations." One, to provide scholarships for children associated with the music school settlement.  Particularly the Harv--the Harvard-East Branch of the [Cleveland] Music School Settlement [Cleveland, Ohio].  And, to work with [HM] June [Sallee] Antoine. She was out there.  And, the second to provide a scholarship for African American student at the Cleveland-Marshall School of Law [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio].  And, that exists to this day.  And, so, it was an important thing for her to do.  But, as a great importance, she was willing to go out and talk about what she had done, and in terms that other people might've been reticent.  She explained how much money, exactly what she did, so that she could break it down.  And, I'll never forget two wonderful luncheons that she had at her home inviting woman friends of hers to come in who she wanted them to understand this is what you should do.  This is how you should go about doing it.  This is what you should think about.  Not only that, but her high school graduating class in Pennsylvania--I forgot the exact town--she encouraged her friends who she played bridge with all the time, to establish a fund with the Pittsburgh Foundation [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  She encouraged her church to establish an endowment fund.  And, she's been recognized as really, you know, one of our great donors, recipient of the [Frederick Harris] Goff [Philanthropic Service] Award for her philanthropy.  But, made it, made the foundation and philanthropy and said, hey, look, this can be accessible to a lot of different persons.  So, she's a real heroine in my mind.
Story_ID: 134453
Speaker 1: You know what, when I talk about some of the histories that have been written about philanthropy in America, especially when you deal with the Rockefellers and the Carnegies, again, the revisionist histories don't necessarily celebrate the work that people like Andrew Carnegie were engaged in.  Because he believed again, that it was a way of social control, means of social control to use that money to, to manipulate, if you will, some of the other folks in the society who were perhaps not as fortunate as him, financially.  What do you think of that kind of revisionist history?  You think the philanthropists have gotten a raw deal, or is it a fair assessment?
Speaker 2: Well, it's very interesting, I--I've spent a lot of time reading some of these things.  I mean, let's just take John D. Rockefeller, I mean, there's no question that he was strong-willed, ruthless, all of those kinds of things in terms of building a major empire.  On the other hand, it is also clear that at the beginning of the 20th century, he was already largely out of the business, right, and made as his business from then on, being a philanthropist, as did his son [John D. Rockefeller, Jr.].  And, then his son's generation of the five brothers and sister.  So, it is certain that it is not all a nice neat package but I think if you look at the record, there, there're a lot of people who see the light or feel that they have accumulated something and they wanna do something different.  And, I see that in many respects.  I mean, it's not unusual to have persons who worked in the business sector in major important jobs, who at the end of their career say, "You know, I really like to go work in a nonprofit sector and do something that's a little different that would give me, you know a different kind of feeling.  Today, who's--who's the Rockefeller?  It's [Bill] Gates, right?  What company has been in more brawls around, you know, and trust things than Microsoft.  Yet, I think, if you look at what the Gates Foundation is doing, and what Bill and Melinda Gates are doing with their money, it's a tremendous thing for our society.  On the other hand, you look at Walmart, you know, the question is still open in my mind as so whether that [Walton] family and their fortune will at some point use some of those dollars to really try and make a really significant difference.  But, I think, it will always be a kind of a mix around what we expect of people and what they do with their funds and so forth.  And, I think, it will always be a mixed story.  But, there are some incredible examples of what philanthropy has done.  A--a very important thing that is going on in Cleveland [Ohio] where there will be a dedication in the next couple of months or so, is the East Cleveland Public Library [East Cleveland, Ohio], where an impoverished, really poor city, one of the poorest small cities in the United States, the one thing that's a beacon that's gone on is they've been able to raise the money to add on a very important addition to the East Cleveland Public Library.  Why is that so important?  That library was donated by Andrew Carnegie.  And, Andrew Carnegie helped established libraries all across this country.  And, helped spawn the notation of the free library system and then public support for libraries.  And, there are lots of examples like that.  So, it's always gonna I think be mixed.  But, what distinguishes this country from countries all over the world is that we have a third sector, a nonprofit sector and very generous persons in terms of charitable giving, whether it's foundations, corporations, and largely individuals.  I mean, at the present moment in time, we're all reading about the tsunami [2004 Indian Ocean tsunami] that, thousands of people who died.  Yes, governments have poured in a lot of money.  But, look at the hundreds of millions of dollars that have already been pledged by individuals to say, "We wanna help, we wanna try and make a difference."  And, a large portion of that comes from the United States.  I've had the privilege of helping establish community foundations and work with community foundations around the world.  And, what you find is that this civil society, the giving of society is now occurring in lots of other places because there's recognition that government cannot do it alone.  And, a great deal of what we refer to as the social capital that makes a difference in the United States is the result of people volunteering, giving of their time, giving of their money, trying to make a difference.  We know, for example, between now and 2040 or thereabouts, the transfer of wealth from one generation to another is gonna be enormous.  And, it's projected that perhaps as much as forty trillion dollars will move to--from individuals to charitable--to nonprofit organizations, colleges, universities, hospitals, foundations, Ronald McDonald House, Heart Society [American Heart Association], orchestras.  That's the glue that I think really makes this a great country.
Story_ID: 134454
Speaker 1: Mr. Minter, you mentioned two things in earlier segments that I wanted to go back to.  One was that you officially retired from your work with The Cleveland Foundation [Cleveland, Ohio] in 2003.  And, the other was that there was a fund, it's established or has been established at The Cleveland Foundation in the name of Steven and [Dolores] Dolly Minter.  So, it sounds like you're still involved with philanthropic giving.  Can you tell us a little bit about that fund?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, maybe first it would be well to say that upon shortly after retirement, President Michael Schwartz at Cleveland State University [Cleveland, Ohio], and Dean [Mark] Rosentraub at the [Maxine Goodman] Levin College of Urban Affairs [Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio], offered me the opportunity to--to come to the university and continue to work on some of the major civic issues I'd been engaged in before.  And, to learn a lot about the University and provide some advice now and then and to work with the Center for Nonprofit Policy and Practice here at the Levin School.  And, to begin moving towards doing some teaching and sharing of my experiences and I'm, I'm really very grateful for that.  And, The Cleveland Foundation was very nice to honor me in two ways.  One, to name the conference center at the Foundation which is available at no cost to all nonprofit organizations including public agencies in Cleveland [Ohio], so that it's available and it's named after me.  And, Dolly and I established a fund at the Foundation--I mean, we should be givers too--and a number of persons at the time of retirement and before added to--added to that fund.  So, we're donors and--and have been the recipients of persons adding things to the fund, which we turn around and use that to give away in Cleveland.  But, this has, this has been a great community.  I've been very fortunate to have been at the intersection of an awful lot of things that have happened.  And, it's still time for us to continue to give back.
Speaker 1: Okay, you talk about giving back.  It seems tha--you seem to feel at least, that we have a responsibility to the future generations.  So, that--we had a model at my high school, Hawken Upper School [Gates Mills, Ohio], that each generation--it's been more than a quarter of a century but I think I still remember this--that each generation should introduce its successor to a higher plane of life.  Does that figure into The Cleveland Foundation's mission, or do we just wanna maintain?
Speaker 2: No, I think the Foundation's mission statement, although I'm a little rusty now, says as its purpose is to help to improve the quality of life for all the residents of Greater Cleveland now and for generations to come by addressing community needs and by good grantmaking and by providing leadership in--on important community issues.  That's, that's the philosophy of the Foundation.  It is, yes, we wanna be concerned about the current generation but we're also concerned about the future.  And, is this gonna be a better place to live?  And, one's pretty fortunate when I've been able to spend most of my career dealing with those kinds of opportunities.
Story_ID: 134455
Speaker 1: Mr. Minter, what do you think is--was your greatest accomplishment in working with The Cleveland Foundation [Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Well, I think being there as the foundation was growing and being able to work with a very outstanding board and staff to focus on what we saw as being the important strategic priorities in this community.  And, so, I look upon the things that we did with a good deal of pride and sometimes regret.  For example, in 1987, we went through a process and said that there were three or four strategic priorities, initiatives that we wanted to carry out in Cleveland [Ohio].  One had to do with neighborhoods and housing.  And, the fact that Mayor Jane Campbell could proudly and rightly say that last year fifteen, more than fifteen hundred new units came on line is clearly the direct result of foundations and its partners in this community putting that infrastructure in place way back in the early eight--late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s] to lead to that.  So, neighborhoods and housing.  And, I think we have, without much argument probably the finest infrastructure for neighborhood development in the country.  The development of Cleveland's lakefront is something which The Cleveland Foundation really tried to get the people to focus on and I think we were clearly the catalyst in that regard.  I think the expansion of the development of the arts and cultural infrastructure that took place in the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s] and today are pretty mature is something which I look at with some pride.  And, I guess I'd say--it's been very mixed results because it's very, very hard work--to try and keep our attention focused on the Cleveland Municipal School District.  You know, we still have a situation where less than forty percent of our young people are graduating from high school.  And, we now that, that in order for Cleveland to be a competitive place in the years ahead, it's got to be--its got to be knowledge jobs, knowledge workers.  We struggled hard to make some real progress and begin to turn this system around.  It's threatened greatly right now because of financial problems but keeping our eye on that prize as being the thing that's gonna make the difference in the long run.  And, so, while it's been very mixed, I feel that the twenty-eight years I've been engaged at the Foundation and I came to the Foundation just as the lawsuit or just shortly after the lawsuit was filed by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] against the Cleveland schools.  And, as you know, they were found guilty and had to adhere to a remedial order and we had to go through state takeover the schools.  And, I personally was involved in co-chairing the commission that made recommendations about local control and having a school board appointed by the mayor and so forth.  So, as I said, it's mixed.  But, I think it's the right issue and it's probably, along with economic development, the most important issue we face as a community.  We just need every single child to be successful.  And, we just cannot back away from that and I think that's what The Cleveland Foundation and others has tried to do, is to stay at the table and work with whoever is the CEO or the superintendent and now the mayors to--to try and be able to point to and say, look, these are kids who deserve to go to college and they need to get in school and they need to get through school.  And, these are the workforce that we've gotta depend upon.
Story_ID: 134456
Speaker 1: Mr. Minter, with Cleveland [Ohio] being a majority minority city and most of the students in the Cleveland Public Schools also are from minority groups-- most of those children who are at risk because of the funding shortages in the State of Ohio are primarily African American within the City of Cleveland and to a lesser extent Hispanic students.  What can we do?  What if anything can the government do in partnership with entities like The Cleveland Foundation [Cleveland, Ohio] to turn that funding situation around so we don't have the great disparities between communities like Beachwood [Ohio], a suburb of Cleveland, and the funding that's available for the central city schools?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, I think, we're gonna have to find ways to be affectively militant about the financing of the schools in the state of Ohio.  I mean, you just cannot expect a community where so many persons are just struggling to, you know, keep the door open and pay the utility bills to have to have pass double digit bond issues.  And, we've--we've really got to align the urban--the urban--expand the notion of the central city in the urban districts.  And, in Cleveland I think, we're starting to make some progress in that regard.  In mean, I think as Shaker Heights [Ohio] and as Cleveland Heights [Ohio] and as Garfield [Ohio] and as South Euclid [Ohio] and others and as Lakewood [Ohio] begin to realize they're in the same boat as the City of Cleveland except they don't have quite the proportion of their population, which is at the poverty level now but, that's changing.  And, and we've got to be much more aggressive in terms of trying to get it across to our state legislature and the leaders that tax reform in the state of Ohio is critical.  And, then we've got to make a much more effective, as well as more dollar investment, in the public school system.  Ohio is losing out to other states.  And, it's, it really does not bode well for our future in terms of where we are.  So, I mean, it's more than just ringing alarm bells, we've got to begin to really push for year proposals and maybe we're gonna have to do ballot initiatives, and we're gonna have to do any number of things.  There other states that have done it.  And, I believe that's where we are.  And, we're at a very critical time right now, in the state of Ohio in that regard.  That's true, by the way, not only in elementary and secondary education but it's true in higher education that the investment that is being made in higher education it--we've slipped, we've slipped considerably.  And, this is a state which historically had lots of persons who said, "Why go to college?  I can get a great job.  I can make twenty dollars an hour.  I can make thirty dollars an hour."  Well, that day is gone.  And, I think it's probably something somebody else will do a lot more (laughter) work on than myself.  But, it's something I've been dedicated to-
