Story_ID: 10736
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, and I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you give us your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Richard I. McKinney.  The I is for Ishmael, I-S-H-M-A-E-L, M-C-capital K-I-N-N-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on August the 20th, 1906.
Story_ID: 10737
Speaker 1: Could you tell us your place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Live Oak, Florida.  That's a city in Northwest Florida, about 3,000 or less people.  At that, and in that time that I was born and before, that part of Florida had the center of the population of the state.  But eventually, when a man named [Henry] Flagler built a railroad down the east coast of Florida, it made the southern part of Florida accessible, and the population center moved from North Florida to South Florida as Miami is one of the major cities in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is our occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired professor of philosophy at Morgan State University.
Speaker 1: And you are past president of--?
Speaker 2: Of Storer College, S-T-O-R-E-R in Harpers Ferry, West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Storer was founded in 1867 by Free Will Baptists to take care of a large number of freed people in that area.  And, and the college for a long time was a predominantly, predominantly a high school.  And later it became a junior college and a senior college just before World War II.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June the, the 5th, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at my home at 248 Overland Avenue in Baltimore, Maryland.
Story_ID: 10738
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food?  That's--all foods are my favorites.  But as I recall, what is my favorite food?  It's very difficult to say.  I like most meats.  I guess my favorite food of all would be, would be some specie of fish.  Let's see, what is the--different kinds of trout.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll accept that.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No favorite color.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, I like the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I do not recall a favorite saying that I--I like to say that we must use our minds.  I, that's my thesis in talking to kids.  But it's not in a aphorism form.  It's only emphasis upon the mind.
Story_ID: 10739
Speaker 1: Let me ask you some questions about your--what you know about your family history.  How far back can you trace your family?
Speaker 2: When we were children, my father used to tell us that we were Ashanti.  His grandfather was from the Gold Coast [Ghana].  And he knew him or--as a child, I'm sure he knew him.  But we had a sense of identity with the motherland from our childhood, as I doubt that my father knew his, his grandfather because my father was born in 1863.  And I'm sure that his, his grandfather must have died long before that.  But his father was born in 1827.  And he knew about his, his father, my grandfather knew about his father.  So we were always aware of that part of Africa of which we came.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories that were passed down through the family about Africa or about that, that experience?
Speaker 2: I have no, no, no stories about it.
Speaker 1: Any names or--?
Speaker 2: No, no names.  I've been to that part of Africa, Kumasi part of Ghana, but we were told if we could tell the year that my great-grand--my great-grandfather left there, they could tell where, where he lived, where he was, where his family was.  But we have no names.  Now, so much for my great grandfather.  My grandfather was a, a minister, although he didn't have the opportunity to practice it.  But I guess he was among the group known as exhorters.  They were not ordained people, but they could talk about the scripture as they knew it.
Speaker 1: Is this in Florida?
Speaker 2: In Florida.  And my father, as I indicated, born in 1863, this meant that de facto, he was a slave because, although the [Emancipation] Proclamation had been delivered in 1863 in January, he was born in August of 1863, but didn't become actually free until 1865.  But he was influenced by a northern missionary as a child and eventually, the blacks in that part of Florida wanted to establish a school.  And they chose Live Oak [Florida] as the site for that school.  They needed some help in organizing the school, of course.  So they appealed to the Newton Theological Seminary in Newton Center, Massachusetts, which was the Baptist seminary.  And one of their graduates and his wife came down to Live Oak and helped to set up the school that was called Florida Institute in 1879.  And my father and my mother were students there in the early days.  And they both graduated from that school.  Eventually, my father had been primed to go to a theological seminary, but circumstances intervened at the school and in his own personal life.  He was asked to go to, to stay on at school, instead of going off to graduate school.  And he stayed off two or three years, and then he and my mother got married, and then we came along.  And that had to have changed his plans for further education.  But he became, in education himself, he became president of that school and also the president of the Florida State Baptist Convention.
Speaker 1: Now, can you give us your father's full name?
Speaker 2: George Patterson McKinney.
Speaker 1: And can you spell it for us, his--for us?
Speaker 2: P-A-T-T-E-R-S-O-N, M-C-K-I-N-N-E-Y.  George Patterson McKinney, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay, he was born in 1863?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In Live Oak?
Speaker 2: I believe he was born in Madison, Florida, which is about twenty-five miles from Live Oak.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And he, he grew up in that neighborhood,--?
Speaker 2: In that neighborhood, yes.
Speaker 1: --went to Florida Institute.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Eventually became the principal--.
Speaker 2: President, yes, sir, he did.
Speaker 1: --president of the--.
Speaker 2: Yes, they called it president, but it was actually principal.
Speaker 1: I see, all right.  Now, what was your father like?  What kind of person was he?
Speaker 2: He was a person who was very much interested in education.  He had a whole lot of books in his library which he read considerably.  And he was even tempered.  I've never seen him get real angry or angry at all.  He maintained his, con--the control of his emotions.  I was the youngest of eight children, and he provided well for the family and was a good role model for all of us.  Now, he was a, a very strict man in terms of, of, of morals, personal behavior.  And we were always en-encouraged to keep that part of our lives straight.  And I think that he was, he was successful at that point.
Story_ID: 10740
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I had four brothers and three sisters, all of whom have gone--have passed now.
Speaker 1: And you're the youngest?
Speaker 2: I, I was, I was the youngest of the eight children who survived.  There were, there were nine pregnancies, and two after I was born, died in, in infancy.  So we, we were five boys and three girls who grew to maturity.
Story_ID: 10741
Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother.  What was her full name, and--?
Speaker 2: Her full name was Sally Richard McKinney.  Sally Richard Ellis McKinney.  Her maiden name was Ellis.  Her father's name was Richard Ellis.  So when she was born, they put Richard in her name.  So she was Mrs. S. R. McKinney, Sally Richard--Sally Richard Ellis McKinney.  She was the typical homemaker.  She loved her, her role as, as a wife and mother.  And she was a hard worker too because in those days, you didn't have a knob that you could turn on and get instant heat to cook.  We had to chop wood and build a fire in the stove and let the stove get hot and the room get hot.  I sometimes wonder how in the world she did it all those years, but she did it.  That was her life.
Speaker 1: Now, when was she born and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in 1869 in a place called Marianna, Florida, in West Florida, Jackson County, West Florida.  Her father was a minister also.  So I'm the grandson of, of two ministers.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now what denomination was her father?
Speaker 2: It was Baptist.
Speaker 1: So all were Baptist, sir?
Speaker 2: That's right.  All were Baptist.
Story_ID: 10742
Speaker 1: Can you tell us what it was like growing up?  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, in a small community such as Live Oak [Florida] was, the sights were horses and buggies and wagons, a train that went not too far from where we lived, the sounds of whistles, especially when my dad [George McKinney, Sr.] was on one coming home.  The smells were that of a small community where there were fields, open fields.  And that's about it.  Occasionally, the circus would come to town.  And then I guess the main activity for most citizens in that community was, was going to church on Sundays and visiting friends on Sunday afternoon.  No TV, no radios, a very few automobiles.  So you walked to visit neighbors and that was it.
Story_ID: 10743
Speaker 1: What's the first radio that you remember hearing?
Speaker 2: Crystal radio when I was in college.  And you had earphones, and you dialed in these crystals, and you got sounds, WB--what's that station in Chicago, WB, something.  I always remembered that.
Speaker 1: WGBH or?
Speaker 2: WBBA or something like that.
Speaker 1: BBM--GBM?
Speaker 2: WGN?
Speaker 1: WGN probably.
Speaker 2: Yes, but I, I remember that station because that's the first one I heard on, on the radio.  My oldest brother [George McKinney, Jr.] had one of those, and it was fascinating.  And eventually we were able to get a larger model of the radio, sometimes a big cabinet.  But always it was important to listen to major events.  We always listened to Joe Louis fights and events of that kind.  But it was the, the extent of our contact with the outside world, beyond Live Oak and where we lived.
Speaker 1: Did anybody have a radio in the community when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Not as, not as a child.  The first radio I, I saw was one when I was in college, and my brother and I had one, his crystal.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you get newspapers?  Did you--?
Speaker 2: Yes, we had the news--yeah, we had a daily newspaper, published in Jacksonville, Florida, called the 'Florida Times Union'.  It was a daily paper.  And it came regularly, and it had a section, small section devoted to news of black people.  And that's how we were able to keep up with world events, things in the state.
Speaker 1: Did you get the 'Pittsburgh Courier'?
Speaker 2: Eventually.
Speaker 1: --or 'Afro American'?
Speaker 2: Eventually, we got the 'Pittsburgh Courier' and 'Chicago Defender'.  Because of its lurid headlines, my brother used to call it the Chicago Offender.  But it was a major source of newspaper--of news for us.  And those were two.  And there was another paper that, that I came across later in my life called the 'Norfolk Journal and Guide'.  It's people who are--their readers were primarily in Virginia and Maryland, North Carolina.  It was a good newspaper, had a good editor.
Story_ID: 10744
Speaker 1: What kind of little boy were you growing up?  What did you like to do and what were you interested in?
Speaker 2: Well, as a child, my father [George McKinney, Sr.] being the pastor of the church and the head of the school, I became interested in what he was doing, as an educator and as a preacher.  And every year, there was an opportunity for people at the school to become members of the church.  And they called it a, a, a student revival.  I was six, I didn't need to be revived, but I--when they, that week was held, and I--of course, my first year in school, I was six, six years old, when they asked for people to come and join, I went up too.  I told my mother [Sally Ellis McKinney] about it.  She was not too happy.  She didn't think that I knew what I was doing.  I thought I knew what I was doing.  My dad, of course, was very adamant.  He, he said, he's knows what he's doing.  And so I was baptized into the church at, at the age of six.  And since my dad was my ideal, my role model, I said I was gonna be a preacher.  And that was my intension until I got into my third year of college.  At that time, I discovered philosophy.  And I decided that I would maintain my determination to go into the ministry, to take a theological degree at a seminary, work in a church for five years and withdraw and go back to the university and get a Ph.D in philosophy.  That was my scenario.  I did the first part of it.  I did go to the seminary.  I did get a church in Providence, Rhode Island, and after I'd been there for less than a year, I was invited to teach at Virginia Union [University] for one semester to substitute for a man who was unable to be there on account of illness.  It was easy for me to get a, a replacement for me at my church in Providence, Rhode Island for that semester.  But after I got down there, I got the bug of wanting to teach.  So I stayed there, after they gave me the job.  The man for whom I was substituting had a terminal illness, and so I, I took the job, and I've been an academe ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a long ways from boyhood.
Speaker 1: Right, but I want to go back to boyhood, but that's, yeah, that's, we'll get to all that.
Speaker 2: But in boyhood, I, I had, as a young man, I did have a job working at somebody's house as a--to clean up the yard, helped clean out the garden and things that a ten, twelve-year old boy might be able to do.  I later on had a job helping out the, the owner of that house who had a photography shop.  And I helped clean up the photography shop and so.  So those were the kinds of occupations I could get for about fifty cents or less a day.  And it was part of my becoming aware of the world of work.  Later on, when I was in, in, in college--first of all, before I was able to get to college, as the youngest of eight children, all of the others had to go out of town for their, their education.  And they went to Morehouse College and Spelman College.  And by the time I finished the seventh grade at this school in Live Oak [Florida], there was no money for me to go to college or to continue my education.  I stayed out two years after the seventh grade.  And eventually, my father found a school that I could get a scholarship in Georgia, Americus Institute in Americus, Georgia to which I went.
Story_ID: 10745
Speaker 1: What school did you attend first?
Speaker 2: Florida Institute.
Speaker 1: Oh, Florida Institute.
Speaker 2: That was, that was the very--I finished seven grades there.  And then I was out of school for two years.  During that year, I helped my mother [Sally Ellis McKinney] around the house and--.
Speaker 1: Now, was your father [George McKinney, Sr.] the principal there, I'm sorry, of Florida Institute.
Speaker 2: By that time, no, he had taken another position.  He was over--he was over at this, he was pastor of this other, other Baptist church there, First Baptist Church in Live Oak [Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay,--.
Speaker 2: And he was, he was also what we may call a missionary, helping to establish and strengthen churches in the state--.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he--.
Speaker 2: --under the auspices of the, of the American Baptist Home Mission Society.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was like a circuit minister.
Speaker 2: That's right--no, he wasn't so much of a circuit minister, but helping to strengthen churches.  And so, very--whatever he made had to go into the tuition, room and board for these seven children.  And he didn't make much, but I don't know how in the world he did it.  So I did get this opportunity to go back to school after the seventh grade.  But that was not an advancement for me because they gave me a--they didn't have a transcript for me.  So they gave me an oral examination in, in arithmetic.  And at that time, they followed the principle that we call transfer of training: if you can be skillful in solving problems mentally in arithmetic, that would be transferred to other areas where you can solve problems.  That, that theory has been abandoned now (chuckle).  But I was a victim of it, and they gave me a mental, some test in mental arithmetic, which I promptly flunked.  So they put me in the sixth grade.  It didn't matter to me what grade I was in, just so I was in school.
Speaker 1: So you were two years older than--.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --you would be if you were in eighth grade.
Speaker 2: Three years, three years as a matter of fact by the time I got out.
Speaker 1: And then you got put back a grade--.
Speaker 2: Put back a grade.
Speaker 1: --that you already took.  So you're like four grades behind, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes, so, so and what happened, I had to stay out of school another year after that.  So I was out of school three years.  And I decided that I could do the work at Morehouse Academy.  Morehouse College had an academy at the time.  And I waited until it was too late for them--and I wrote for admission, but I waited too late, until it was too late for them to get an answer to me.  And so I went on up there.  The man in charge, the dean said to me, "Well, we did get your transcript from Americus Institute, and it indicates you just finished the sixth grade.  And our work is based on those who finish the eighth grade.  And, but you've had some brothers here, and they've done well.  I'll give you a chance.  And if you cannot do the work, you'll have to leave after the first semester."  It so happened that our dining room table was a kind of classroom.  So I learned a lot from my mother and father and siblings, just sitting around the table and some fugitive knowledge I had.  We were in the first year English class at Morehouse Academy, and the teacher had mispronounced the name of that river that runs through, through London [England].  It's spelled T-H-A-M-E-S.  And she called it the Thames and I raised my hand, and said, "Ms. Hall, I thought that was pronounced "Tems".  She looked curious.  She said, "Well, we'll look it up."  I forgot about it until the next day the class the met, she started off with saying that I was, had called our attention to the pronunciation, and she was--and I was correct.  So they skipped me from the first, from the second semester of high school English to the second semester of high school English--second year of high school, the first year of high school.  And it was just second semester, of second high school English.  So I skipped, skipped two semesters, a whole year of, of English.  And so that gave me an idea.  I took a lot of extra subjects.  So by the time I had been in high school three and a half years, I had enough credits to be, classified as, as a freshman.  So I finished the eight years in seven by taking extra courses.  They would not give me my degree after seven years because I had not been in college the whole four years.  But to come back to my childhood, we, we played a card game called authors, which is composed of cards with the names and pictures and dates of famous writers.  And they color coded, and so on.  The idea was to get some many matched.  And that was a part of my education.  I didn't realize it.  But it was an educational game.  So that prepared me for courses in literature that I had in high school and, and in, and in college.  In college, there's not too much money to deal with, but I was able, by taking odd jobs and getting some scholarship aid and winning some contests in essays and speaking, that I was able to get through.  So my education was, was I guess inspired by my father and his ideals.  And as far as he--when I got to, when I finished high school, he told me he couldn't do anything to help me financially 'cause he has he's, he's at his, at the, at the limit of what he could do.  I decided that I'd, I'd try it just the same.  There was no idea of my not continuing college so I was able to finish all right.
Story_ID: 10746
Speaker 1: You finished high school and college at Morehouse [College]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  And I was one of the last, in one of the last classes--one of the last high school classes Morehouse had.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went--you finished high school and college at Morehouse.
Speaker 2: And, and college at Morehouse.
Speaker 1: And what were some of the activities you participated in?
Speaker 2: My main activity was in the, in the college glee club and orchestra.  I played the bass viol in the orchestra, which I learned after I got to Atlanta.  I played, I sang bass on the quartet, starting even in high school with my--during high school, and I became bass on the college quartet.  That's where I was for six years.
Speaker 1: Can you still hit a bass note?
Speaker 2: Ah, somewhat, not as bass as I used to be.  But the, the music director, when we were on trips, when introducing the guys, because I sang bass and played the bass viol, he'd say this awful pun and introduce me, and say I was both and base and vile.  But I enjoyed that part of my academic career because it gave me an opportunity to travel to places I would not have had the opportunity otherwise; gave me the opportunity to appear before the public and be at home in, before an audience and to meet people in different places, which broadened my understanding of people and of places.
Story_ID: 10747
Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers or people in Atlanta [at Morehouse College] that inspired you or tried to motivate you or served as mentor to you?
Speaker 2: The father of the man who just called me this morning, who had more influence on me than anybody else.  He taught manual training.  All the boys in high school had to take two years of working with hands.  And I came to love working with, with tools and making things, making cabinets.  So he was my, my major inspiration, inspiration in high school.  And he also had a, an organization of the young fellows called the Comrade Club, that went beyond the manual training and teaching us values and so on.  So I owe a lot to, to him.  I was working on a rocker that I was making for my, a chair I was making for my dad in the shop, and the, the chisel got dull, and it wasn't sharpened and--(pause) does that worry you?
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were talking about your mentor.
Speaker 2: Yes, his name was Clinton E. Warner, W-A-R-N-E-R.  He--I forget what his title was, but he was a, a great inspiration to us in helping us get adjusted to life.  Then I had a--a biology teacher in high school who introduced me to the realm of science, understanding the world of which we are a part.  That was very informative and enlightening to me because of its conflict with some of the information I had as a child about the world.  And I got introduced to the idea of evolution and the way in which the universe was formed.  And that conflicts with some of the things I had been taught in the scriptures.  So I had to make that kind of adjustment, but I had good teachers who helped me to make the adjustment positively.
Speaker 1: Was there a lot of discussion about evolution when you were coming up?  I know the Scopes Trial in Dayton, Tennessee in 1920, and you were just about fourteen then.
Speaker 2: Yes, that, that came up when I was in school at Morehouse.  And I was college at that time.  It was around 1923 or '24 [1924], I believe, something like that.  At any rate--no I was not.  I was still in high school.  We had discussions about that, had a lot of discussions, and it was quite a, quite an event in newspapers and magazines.  People would read about it.  So that was a part of my, my development of knowledge about the world, how people looked at the world.
Speaker 1: Did you--how did you balance them?  You know, did you--?
Speaker 2: I had no, I had no problem with it.  We had some good teachers who were able to reinterpret the relationship of science to religion and science to the world in general.  So we were convinced that one of the ways in which to understand the world was to go to science.  If we wanted to understand something about man's relationship to God, we'd go to religion, that would have the historical background.  But to understand how the world came to be, you don't go to Genesis.  You go to the paleontologist and all the rest of those who have studied earth sciences.  And that part of my education was a very important part because it released me from certain kinds of doctrines that would affect my independent thinking.  Now I, as I had a (unclear) biology, I did have some people in religion, but those were primarily my, I met those in my college years, who were very influential and helpful.  My major mentor in college was a man named Howard Thurman, who was an alumnus of Morehouse, but a person who embodied in himself a combination of intelligence, dignity, understanding and personal charm.  He was a very important part of my experience because he could introduce us to ideas, complex ideas and help us to see the relationship between ideas, which helped to broaden our understanding of life and of the world, broaden our understanding religion.  So he was my major mentor in college.
Speaker 1: And he seems to be--I mean he's a revered figure in most circles, not only in the theological circles, but among students that encounter him at Howard [University], and--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, he, he was at Howard.  He left Morehouse, I think and went to Howard, after--no.  I, I think, I guess he was.  He'd already left Morehouse College, basic education and came back to Atlanta and taught at Howard--at Morehouse and Spelman [College].  And then he went to Howard to dean of the chapel.  And eventually, he was asked to be co-pastor of a church that was just starting in San Francisco, Church for the Fellowship of All People.  There he was for over ten years and then became chaplain at Boston University and so on.
Speaker 1: He's the author of many, many books.
Speaker 2: Many, many books, and the inspirer of countless numbers of people.
Speaker 1: Now, at Howard, they say that the students would come to his house--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Yes, he had a, a corps of kids, about eight of them, who were ushers in the Howard Rankin Chapel.  And they were the, the nuclear of a group of kids who were his debutees, and he was a tremendous influence upon all the students there.  And, of course, Howard was primarily supported by taxes.  Rankin Chapel was endowed and did not use tax funds.  Some of kinds of meetings could be held at, at Rankin Chapel that could not be held on the campus, the other part of the campus.  And Howard Thurman was able to monitor or be an advisor for groups that came to talk about certain issues.  And he was quite an institution there, and, and he was always in demand all across the country for speaking.  And this opportunity to go to San Francisco for this church, came to him, and he thought it was an idea that he should perform because religion, as he understood it, should be for all people, not just being one race.  I visited the church at one time, and it was interesting to see the choir before it went in.  It's an international group, Caucasians, Asians, blacks and the rest of them all harmonizing in music as well as in their, in their social life.
Speaker 2: Now, what do you think is the greatest thing you learned from Howard Thurman for the major things.
Speaker 1: To be very honest in my thinking and to be profound in my thinking, not try to skip over things with platitudes, but to get at the basis of what they're saying.  I made a report once for something he had assigned, and some aspects of my report he didn't like.  His criticism was a general statement, do your best thinking even if it's about nothing but a pinhead, do your best thinking about that pinhead.  And that stuck with me.  If I wanted to be cute, I could say that pin stuck with me.  But I've always felt that one should do his or her best thinking in any situation.  And I've told my students, the world belongs to those who think.  The other ones who do the planning ahead and even at the present to determine how society goes.  So that was what I would learn from Howard Thurman, do my best thinking.
Speaker 2: Okay, any other teachers that you remember in--?
Speaker 1: Yes, I had a, a math teacher.  He taught geometry.  His name was B. B.--his name was Dansby, I forgot his initials.  But he was, he was a gifted teaches of, of both mathematics and geometry.  He made the subject matter live--'cause not just apply approach to the principles of math or geometry.  But he made it live, and went into his class with enthusiasm to learn.  And that was a very important part of my being interested in mathematics and then geometry and how to use geometrical figures and measures and that sort of thing.  And then we had a man--I didn't get him in, in high school [Morehouse Academy], but in college by the name of C. D.  He would, he was a member of a large--of a well-known family of educators, people with brains.  He was huge in size.  We called him Colossal Charlie.  That's what we called him on the outside, but in classroom he could sit and talk about the subject matter and relate it to all aspects of our experiences.  And we would leave the class enlightened in a way that we would ordinarily leave a class if we're just filling out an assignment.  It was more than meeting an assignment.  It was finding out something about life.  I remember when we, our quartet to some small community in Georgia where the people of color had the use of the courthouse for mass meetings on Saturdays.  And he was invited to speak, and we went along with him.  And as he was speaking, one or two of the people in the audience took it as a religious service and began (unclear) moans, saying amen and these usual things.  And he stopped, and said, just a minute.  I want you to hear what I'm saying and not respond in some, some kind of feeling and emotion.  I want you to hear what I'm saying.  They were a little disappointed because they couldn't be entertained and express their emotions as they always did in their churches.  But C. D. who--was a person who tried to be an agent of change in the thinking of people, and he was.  Eventually, he became acting president at Morehouse College.  But he was one of the, the great influences.  There was Howard Thurman, Dansby and C. D. Hubert, they were the main persons.
Story_ID: 10748
Speaker 1: You did fairly well academically, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did very well academically.  I guess I had a good B-plus average.  I made only three C's in college, and two of them were in math.  The other one was due to the way in which a teacher tried to punish me for not signing a petition that she be maintained.  She was a person who had no business teaching college kids, but--and so the president had given her a, a semester's notice.  And she asked some of my classmates to sign a petition that she be maintained.  I refused to sign it.  So when the second semester came, she gave A's to all those kids who signed the petition and who copied off my papers, and gave me a C.  That's one of the three C's I made in college.
Speaker 1: That probably proved that she didn't belong in the classroom.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, it did.  That was her last year, but the petition didn't matter.  The president knew that she didn't--I, I agreed with the president.  So I wouldn't sign the petition.
Speaker 1: Who was president of Morehouse [College] when you went.
Speaker 2: More--John Hope, the president of the entire situation.  And he--
Speaker 1: John Hope is the man that John Hope Franklin is named after.
Speaker 2: That's right.  His--John Hope's father met John Hope and named his, that particular--this particular son after him.  So John Hope was a great influence.  He was very smooth, well educated, well-disciplined, educated.  And he educated--his teachings--sometimes he'd teach a course in philosophy, but we had a, a chapel service every day, five days a week.  And he, on Tuesdays would speak at the chapel service, telling us something about what was happening in the world, and our relationship to it.  And always he'd take out a nice clean hankie from his--here, and unfold it, and wipe his eye glasses and put it back.  That was probably a way of telling us we should always carry two handkerchiefs.  And we learned that just by seeing him, but that was one of the ways, his ways of telling us about neatness and so on.  Speaking of neatness, I was unable during the Christmas holidays to go home, for financial reasons.  In Atlanta, I, I was--oh, quite a long distance, was 600 or so miles from my home.  So several of us who were in that same situation had to stay on campus during the holidays.  And on Christmas day, we would get together and go singing carols to certain people whom we knew, famous people.  So we started with the president, John Hope.  At 5:00 or 5:30 in the morning.  Well, after we started singing, he'd eventually come downstairs fully dressed.  And I asked him why did he come down fully dressed at this hour of the morning.  He said, "My philosophy is always meet the door looking decent."  That was John Hope.  He had a, had a very high standard for us.  And we--he was not a man that we loved, but a man that we highly respected.  The man that we liked, we really loved was the, was the dean.  His name was Samuel Howard Archer, tall, blustery kind of individual, who was a stickler for guys doing what they should do.  And he was a disciplinarian, but the kind of disciplinarian, who, when he administered discipline, the guys who were disciplined did not feel offended or angry.  They knew they deserved it.  And he was that kind of--we called him Big Boy.  But he was a very inspiring man, and when Mordecai Johnson, who was president of Howard [University] at the time, and he was a Morehouse alumnus, reacted to Archer's death, he sent a message to his widow indicating that Samuel Archer was one of the greatest influences of his life.  And he named one of his sons after him, Archer--and I don't think his name was Samuel.  His name was Archer Johnson, named after Samuel Howard Archer.  So Archer was a great influence.  I had no classes with him, but he was always there at chapel.  There was a rule against playing cards at Morehouse College.  No one's supposed to play cards.  And an offense of it would get you sent home.  As a matter of fact, when Mordecai Johnson was a student there, they caught him playing cards.  They suspended him.  He had to leave the school.  And one afternoon when I was a student, some of us who were leaders in the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], on a Saturday afternoon--that was most convenient means of--of recreation.  We had no money to go downtown and spend it.  We sat in the room and, and played whist, no money involved, just a competition.  And so this afternoon, we were busily enjoying ourselves playing whist.  And a knock came on the door and as some of the guys used to facetiously say, "blow your nose and slide under".  It turned out to be Samuel Archer.  So there we were playing cards, against the rules on a Saturday afternoon.  So we put the cards away and, of course, had to open the door when he identified himself.  And he asked for somebody and went away.  So we said, what are we gonna do?  He knew we were playing cards.  Should we admit it and take the consequences?  So we sent one of the fellows there to acknowledge to him that we were breaking the rules by playing cards.  He said, "I knew you were playing cards all the time, but you go ahead and, and do your work".  And that ended it.  He knew it was, at that time, it was ridiculous to send people away for harmless recreation like that.  And we loved him for his understanding, his forthright manner, his forthright way of thinking.  Who else was there?  Those--well, yes, I have to mention a man who taught music.  His name was Kemper Harreld, H-A-R-R-E-L-D.  He was one of the great influences of my life because I was involved in music at Morehouse.  My brother, one of my brothers had learned to play bass viol and played in the Morehouse orchestra.  And one day he came by my house in Live Oak [Florida].  The orchestra was giving a concert in Jacksonville [Florida], and he got permission to come by Live Oak to visit us, his home.  And he brought the bow of the bass viol, I had never seen a bass viol, nor had I seen a bow.  I asked him what it was, and he told me what it was.  So I said, when I get to Morehouse, I'm going to play the bass viol.  So when I did I asked the director could I learn the bass viol.  It was Kemper Harreld.  And he taught me how to play the bass viol.  And by that time, the guy who was playing the bass viol was leaving college, and I took his place.  So I started playing in the orchestra when I was a sophomore in high school and did that for the rest of my years at Morehouse.  But working with Kemper Harreld in rehearsals and trips and that sort of thing was a big part of my--of the influences of my life and a positive influence.  As I indicated earlier, the travel which the orchestra provided was valuable for me who grew up in a little Florida town with not much opportunity to travel.  Those are the great influences as far as teachers are concerned.
Story_ID: 10749
Speaker 1: When you were getting ready to leave Morehouse [College] you were, you were already bound for Andover Newton [Theological School] or?
Speaker 2: No, there was a question of what I could do when I graduated.  Because I had finished the eight-year course in seven years, the registrar refused to let me become a graduate.  I had all the credits, all of the points, but I'd had an argument with him earlier in the year.  And he didn't take kindly to me.  So he said, no, you cannot graduate even though you have these credits.  In the meantime, I had entered an essay contest, sponsored by the New York Yearly Meeting of Society of Friends.  The title of the essay was 'The Quaker Influence on American Democracy'.  So I liked to write and I entered the contest, wrote around to some Quaker colleges for materials, and I, fortunately, won the, the prize for that year.  I was in my last year at Morehouse--really, my junior year, officially, my junior year, but I'd (unclear) all the credits.  That broadened my understanding of this particular group of religious people.  It also brought me to the attention of Howard Thurman in connection with what the Quakers were about to do.  They were about to establish a school for graduate study in Wallingford, PA [Pennsylvania], a short distance from Philadelphia.  And there was to be a center for the study of revision in social problems.  It was called Pendle Hill [Center for Study and Contemplation], named after a place in England where one of the early Quakers had his movement, Pendle Hill in Wallingford.  They were beginning a new program there in 1930.  So Thurman recommended me to be a student in this first year.  I think part of it was due to the fact that I had entered this contest and had, had been successful in it.  So I was a natural, knowing something about Quakers to go to this Quaker center.  The problem was I was officially an undergraduate, but they released my transcript, which showed that I had all the credits and so, and I, I was pleased to be able to get an opportunity to go to school because they, they--the Philadelphia Society of Friends provided a fellowship for me that paid all of my expenses at Pendle Hill for that year.  Part of the fellowship was--the conditions for the fellowship was that I would go to a, a Quaker school on Fridays of every week to talk about race relations, and some of my experiences.  The idea that the Quakers had was that these school kids had no opportunity to meet blacks at the college level, and this was an idea to give them some, to broaden their understanding.  And so I would go to a Quaker school every Friday, and I also went to a Quaker meeting house for religious service every, every Sunday, in different places.  And that was the way I was able to fulfill the conditions of the fellowship that I had and also broaden my understanding of, of white people because I never had occasion to associate with people like that.  And I learned a lot about, about life in that--that set of experiences.  So my last year in college was characterized by my winning this, this, this prize and one or--one or two speaking prizes.  And as a matter of fact, as it turned out, the prize for the essay paid for my first semester of my senior year at Morehouse.  Then I had to try to make up money to pay for my second semester of that last year.  I didn't quite do it.
Story_ID: 10750
Speaker 1: You're still with the Society of Friends, I mean--.
Speaker 2: I was, I was working in their direction, yeah, while a student.
Speaker 1: Yeah, all right.  And even before you go to Andover Newton [Theological School], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I spent one year at Pendle Hill [Center for Study and Contemplation], and I still wanted to go to, I still wanted to go to--like a seminary.  My problem was getting money to go to seminary.  I lived in Southern Florida, a place called Arcadia.  The seminary to which I wanted to go was in Boston--outside of Boston, Newton Center, Mass. [Massachusetts].  Part of earning, my work experience in Florida was at an orange grove.  The man who operated a jewelry store had a big orange grove about five miles from town.  But every year, the ditch around the grove had to be dug out, get the grass out so water could flow.  So I did that for two summers, working with--by myself, five miles uptown on this orange grove, throwing dirt out of it over my head, killing snakes that were there, some of 'em poisonous.  But I realized that was one way of getting, getting through college.  Every time I'd tend to complain, my dad [George McKinney, Sr.] said, you don't, you will not be doing this all the time.  It's part of your preparation for life.  Then I had a job loading orange crates at a big orange grove.  The grove was in a sandy area, too sandy for trucks to come in.  So they used mules and a wagon to load up the crates, that would take them from this sandy place to the, to the paved road about a mile away.  And my job was to load up the crates of oranges on this, on this wagon.  After I'd get a load, I would have to drive the mules to the nearest pavement, unload and then come back, get another load.  So that was a difficult thing, but I did first manage to make a little money.
Story_ID: 10751
Speaker 1: How could I get to Andover Newton [Theological School] in Boston?  I had a sister who was able to, to help me, but I wrote to Andover Newton telling them of my desire to, to study theology there.  I had my transcript sent there, and I told them I didn't have any money.  Could they give me a full scholarship?  I got a letter from a man who was substituting for the president.  The president was out of the country.  He said we have your letter and your transcript, but I'll take chance, so I'm telling you to come.  So my sister, my oldest sister, helped me to raise the forty dollars for bus fare from Southern Florida to Boston.  It took me two and a half days or more of going straight through.  In those days, you didn't have the super highways, and for half the trip, I had to ride in the back of the bus, and I felt that for two weeks after I got to Andover Newton.  When I got Andover Newton to--I had to--my last leg was a train, the seven miles from Boston to Newton Center [Massachusetts].  And I got a cab to the president's house.  It was around seven o'clock at night; identified myself.  He said, "Oh, you, we've been expecting you.  I'll show you to your room."  And he went and got a hat or something and reached down--I reached down to get my bag.  He beat me to it and picked up the bag, and we walked across the quadrangle to the dormitory, up on the fourth floor where my room was.  He said, "This is your room."  He said, "Your roommates is West Indian, said, he's, has a personality.  Nobody can get along with him, but you can."  And he said, "How much money do you have?"  I said, "I have five dollars."  He laughed, as he often did when something surprisingly happened.  He said, "If you do well, you will not have to worry about money," which is all I wanted to hear.  Two weeks after school opened, he asked, "Do you drive a car?"  I said, "Yes, I drive a car."  I'd been driving for three weeks before I got there.  He said, "My wife has to go across town.  Her brother, her foster brother has disappeared, and they don't know what happened to him.  And she has to go to comfort his widow--or his wife and his children.  I want you to take her over there."  It was about fourteen miles from where we were.  So I drive her there two or three times a week.  I became then, his chauffeur.  And whenever any visitors would be coming to speak, I'd have to meet 'em at the station in Boston, drive 'em out to the school at Andover Newton, at that Newton Center.  The president insisted that I sit at the table with him when these people were having meals.  He didn't want to treat me like just a, just a house boy or something.  I was, I was a student.  Well, the background to this is that for a long time, that particular theological seminary refused to admit black people, for over a twenty-five year period.  And I was the second black that they had admitted.  After they got--this new president came on, came on, he took the attitude that all people who are qualified, whatever their race or backgrounds should be offered the--offered the opportunity for a theological education there.  And he explained to me the history of it.  His predecessor had been a man who felt that he wanted to cultivate the constituency among southerners because he couldn't do that if he allowed blacks to be in the same institution on an equal basis.  So during his administration he denied entrance to Howard Thurman, to Mordecai Johnson, to Benjamin [Elijah] Mays, all of whom wanted to go to that school, but who couldn't get in because of their, their race.  They went, went elsewhere and did very well.  So when Dr. Harrick, this new president came in, he said, I will change the policy.  So I was the second black admitted to that school.  And--.
Speaker 2: I take it there were--there weren't any other black students on the campus at the time?
Speaker 1: No, just one, one other black student.
Speaker 2: And just one other thing.  I just want to get some dates straight.  Now, you graduated from Morehouse [College] in what year?
Speaker 1: Nineteen--I left in 1930.  My, my diploma is dated, dated in '31 [1931] because they wouldn't give a degree until after I spent another year in education.
Speaker 2: Okay, and you started, you were at--?
Speaker 1: I started high school in 1923.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  And you were at Pendle Hill [Center for Study and Contemplation] in 1930?
Speaker 1: 1930, '31 [1931].
Speaker 2: Okay, '30 [1930], '31 [1931], and then--.
Speaker 1: I went to, I entered Andover Newton in the fall of '31 [1931] and graduated in 1934.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you were at Andover Newton in the fall of '31 [1931].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, well, continue.  So you're the only black student on campus, and--.
Speaker 1: There, there were two of us, just my roommate and myself.
Speaker 2: The West Indian student, right.
Speaker 1: That's right, on campus.  It was a good experience for me.
Speaker 2: Was he hard to get along with?
Speaker 1: He was, he was.  But that was no problem for me.  I was glad to be in school.  So I could endure his personality.  I don't think he went into the ministry.  I think he went into YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] work.  But he came, I guess because he wanted to get an education in this country.  And I don't think he was committed to, to the ministry as many people are.  It was an opportunity for him to get an education at limited expense.  And at Andover Newton I was able to, to fulfill my commitment to the president.  I was elected president of my class in my senior year, which meant that I was president for the, for the, for life--the man whose president of the senior class is president for life.  And he has the responsibility of organizing class reunions and so on, and which I did for a good many years.  It was along with the class secretary who was secretary for life.
Speaker 2: Okay, who were some of your teachers at Andover Newton that stand out?
Speaker 1: I suppose one of my teachers was a man named Berkley.  I don't remember his first name.  But he taught religious education.  And I learned more, and a lot about religion, not just about religious education, but about religion in general through this man.  He had a wide range of knowledge.  I was interested in what he had to say, and also interested in what his background was.  And then there was a, a man by the name of Anderson who taught New Testament.  He was a graduate of Andover Newton.  His father was too.  But he was quite a scholar, very rigid, rigid in his requirements.  He wanted to save time in class by having a bowl at the entrance to the classroom, and instead of calling the roll, we had to write our name on a piece of paper.  And we entered the class, put your name in the bowl, he said, now hand me the bowl.  So that's the way he took the class roll and concentrated for those sixty, fifty minutes on the subject at hand; learned about scholarship from him, about documenting what you say, the footnotes.  He said, the scholarship is in the footnotes, and it represented, if you were honest, what you had really read and which stimulated your own thoughts and from which made quote or indirect quotations.  So that was a good part of my education.  He was a very exact man as far as, as dates and information was concerned.  It was a very good experience for me because I got, got to meet a lot of people as chauffeur for the president, broadened my horizon knowledge.  And I made some good lifelong friends there, individuals who had not been accustomed to, to interracial contacts, as I was not.  And we became good friends through the years.  And I went from there to a church in Providence, Rhode Island.
Speaker 2: Now, this is a Baptist church?
Speaker 1: A Baptist church, called the P-O-N-D, Pond Street Baptist Church.  And I was there for a while.  Meanwhile, I had begun studying for a master's degree at Andover Newton.  And at the church, I had planned to go to, in Providence, I had planned to go to Brown University to do Ph.D work in philosophy.  But that plan fell through when I took the job in Richmond, Virginia.
Story_ID: 10752
Speaker 1: Tell me about your interest in philosophy.  You said earlier that you were sure you wanted to be a minister until you were introduced to philosophy.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, what happened?  Who introduced you to philosophy?  How did you encounter it, and why did that--?
Speaker 2: Well, we had--I took it as an elective, and the man, and the man's name was Lewis.  I don't remember his first name, but he taught philosophy.  And I got to read the works of the Greek philosophers, Socrates.  Here's a man who, as Howard Thurman had done, forced people to think, what is the basis of your conclusions?  And I admired the way he, he challenged the young people of his, of Athens to think through what they were saying.  And in making that approach, the Athens, the, the young Athenians took him seriously and made the power structure, people in power think through what they were saying.  And when that happened, those people lost their success of security with these youngsters coming up challenging them.  And so who's teaching them?  That man Socrates.  And so they trumped up charges against Socrates, put him on trial and, of course, made him drink the hemlock.  But Socrates' devotion to truth and to analyzing the basis of your thinking, the basis of all of your conclusions, that impressed me.  And I read his apology and his defense that he made in court for what he was doing.  And then I read the works of Socrates to Plato, who tried to understand the relation of philosophy to government.  He wrote a book called 'The Republic'.  It's in dialogue form, in which he set forth his theory of an ideal society.  Of course, we wouldn't follow that theory now, but it was a theory.  It seemed logical.  He said that an ideal society would be an example of what justice is.  See, the book rolls out of a question that had been raised by some of, some young people on the matter, what is justice?  So the writer says, I will, I will show you what justice is.  So he sets forth is idea of an ideal society where adverse people were given tests to determine what their aptitudes were  So people had aptitudes for nothing but regular work.  There were one level.  Another had aptitudes, they were aggressive in their attitudes.  They would be warriors and the policemen.  And there was a another smaller group who were interested in thinking, in rational, rational thought.  They were the philosophers.  So there was a three-tiered triangle for society, the masses of those who were just laborers, producing the food and goods that people need.  A smaller group, the warriors, who were the peacekeepers, and a, the smallest group of all who were the thinkers, the philosophers.  Of course, we could not have that kind of society in these days, but it was an idea of thinking how you can arrive at justice.  And there were other aspects of Plato's philosophy that appealed to me and eventually led to the study of Plato's pupil named Aristotle who built on his predecessors.  Aristotle who also was interested in the best ideals on which a state should be built.  So he wrote a book called 'Politics'.  His thesis was a state exists for the benefit of its citizens.  And he set forth some standards that he felt a state should, should follow in its organizational structure.  He also thought about standards of, of music.  How do you determine what is or is not beautiful?  So we wrote a book dealing with that topic.  We called it 'Aesthetics'.  If it turns out to be a matter of feeling because what may be beautiful in one society would not be beautiful in another society.  What may be good music in one society, may not be good music in the other society.  So, a lot depends upon how one feels.  But then there was a basic question.  Is there or are there some permanence that grew from one level of society to another society--another level or it's from one age to another age.  What are those things that remain after the ages come and go?  It's very difficult to answer that question.  But I suppose it can be best answered in some statement a person makes about a classic.  A classic is some product which appeals to every generation.  So we have some paintings that are classics, some, some works of literature that are classics.  You may read them and reread them, and you get something every time you, you read something that appeals to.  So that can be transferred, I suppose, to art, something that can appeal to generation after generation, not that everybody in generation will be responsive, but there's something that remains.  For example, take music the classical musicians, Beethoven, Brahms and all the rest, wrote great works of music centuries ago--not many centuries ago for these people, but a long time ago.  But we play those in concert halls in Europe and America.  People flock to hear them, but how many people will flock to hear the music of the popular musicians of 2003 fifty years from now, a hundred years?  Will that music be played?  Probably not.  Maybe some part of it will become classic that will appeal to every generation, but this is one of the kinds of things that it is said Socrates had to deal with in talking about, in talking about art.  And he--not Socrates, but Aristotle--talking about art.  So these ways of looking at life, making and understanding life, that we, that we do come to understand life, all appeal to me.  And they were ways that were not dependent upon any one document, such the Bible itself.  It's ways that looked beyond the standard measures of judgment to what represents a basic standard of judgment. And that's independent of, of any kind of doctrine that you feel is standard.  Everybody must believe in it. It makes me appreciate, incidentally, what the founding fathers of this country did in putting as the heart of this government, a separation between church and state.  If you have a theocratic society, liberties are restrained and you have to abide by one particular teaching.  I under that in some Arab, some Arab countries, they don't teach history.  They don't teach science.  All they teach is their religious doctrine, and everybody is supposed to go by that.  So those people are limited in their world outlook.  And that's why I think philosophy is, is, is important.  It--the, the, the etymological definition, of course, is a love of wisdom.  Wisdom goes beyond book writing.  A person can, can have a whole lot of book learning, be--can be unwise.  I have said sometimes that some of the fools--biggest fools I've known have had Ph.D degrees.  They had book learning, but they were not wise.  And some of the wisest men I've known have limited academic education, but they could see issues clearly and make good judgments.  Take some of these people like Harriet Tubman, Sojourner Truth; no formal education.  But they were wise.  Frederick Douglass didn't have a college degree.  But he was wise and able to see the distinction between the true and the false, the good and the not-so-good.  And that is the essence of wisdom, I think.  And that's one of the things in philosophy that appealed to me, trying to see the implications of knowledge, not just knowledge itself.  Well, what does it mean?
Story_ID: 10753
Speaker 1: Did this, like put you in, in opposition to some of the teaching in the black church?  Some of the black churches can be very doctrinaire--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what you're describing, in terms of philosophy, it was a dynamic process.  And, which is different from, you know, following a doctrine with--for people who need change and want change, you know, how does, you know, does like following a doctrine sort of tie their hands?
Speaker 2: Well, the answer was, my career has not been in the black church.  So that's the answer, and if I had been in some churches, I would have been a pariah, in some churches.  But this does not apply to the great preachers in American lore.  It does not apply to Howard Thurman and Mordecai Johnson, Benjamin [Elijah] Mays.  A man, whose name escapes me for the moment, Vernon Johns.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and Gardner Taylor.
Speaker 2: Gardner Taylor, all of these people had formal educations. But they were able to translate, the essence of religion in ways that were creative and understandable and appreciated by, by large groups of people.  I--of course, that varies in some ways with my own father [George McKinney, Sr.] in terms of theology.  He was much more literalist in his interpretation than I would ever be, 'cause he never knew my theological development.  If he had known it, he would have been disappointed.  But there were people who in those days, whose names I cannot recall, who were able to capture the imagination of people, their thinking, by their own personality and by the ways in which they expressed their own truths.  I wonder whether, in these days, a Howard Thurman would be able to get a crowd because a lot of religion in these times has become a matter of entertainment, rather than worship.  And sometimes it's difficult to separate what is entertainment and what is religion.  Much of religious practice in our churches has become jazz, and in many of our churches, they've adopted drums and what have you to spice up the, the, the syncopation.
Speaker 1: Yes, and going back to the old exhorter type of--.
Speaker 2: That's right, of, that, but I think it's something more sinister than that.  They go to church to have a good time.  In the old days, they went to worship.  They also went for socializing because that was the center of life for people in those towns.  I went to my hometown church a couple of years ago in Live Oak, Florida, church that my father served for twenty-five years.  We had dignified services in those days.  The first thing I saw when I got in the church was a bunch of drums.
Story_ID: 10754
Speaker 1: We were talking about Joseph Jackson and the National Baptist Convention.  And we were talking about the mega-churches.  Those are two topics that we were--.
Speaker 2: Well, with regard to Dr. Jackson, I met him when I was a young man at a National Baptist Convention.  He was very, very excellent as a speaker, had a lot of charisma.  So when the vacancy occurred as, for the president of the National Baptist Convention, he campaigned for it.  His major platform was limited tenure.  Up until that time, when a man is elected president, he served for life.  And he said that that shouldn't be.  We should have a tenure of maybe two terms.  He was elected, but when--after he was, after he was selected, he realized the emoluments of the office, and said, we ought to go back to the old system.  And so he had that aspect repealed, and, of course, he was continuously re-elected every year.  And finally a young man from Louisiana by the name of [David V.] Jemison was able to get enough votes to overturn his--Jackson's tenure.
Speaker 1: Now, the one vote in 1961, were you present in '61 [1961] in Kansas City when they had the fight?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, and somebody died.  There was a struggle and some man fell off the platform.  That was sad.  I, I--you know a lot about history.  I see you know all these nuances of--.
Speaker 1: I've interviewed a lot of people.  That's why (laughter), a lot of people like you.
Speaker 2: But Gardner Taylor of course, was a part of that movement, developing the progressive convention as a, as an alternative for the more enlightened preachers.  And it was a good movement.  So that's about, that's--we've, we've--I've invited him out here--GardnerTaylor--to our church a couple of times.
Speaker 1: And I think the crux of that argument, was it not, that Joseph Jackson was saying that black Baptists need not be involved with social change--.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: --it just concerns your soul, in opposition to what Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and Gardner Taylor and others were saying.
Speaker 2: That's right.  And I'm wondering whether or not there was some jealousy there.  Here was King, idolized by another generation, getting the Nobel Peace Prize, all of these things, and Jackson was supposed to be the leader.  But here comes another youngster upstart getting all the praise and so on.  And I think this is one reason why he wanted to change the address of his church.  Of course, that would be, he didn't want to be associated with King, unfortunately.
Speaker 1: Now, oh, also, were you familiar when you were in, when you were in Andover Newton [Theological School], were they discussing the philosophies--I think that's Reinhold Niebuhr, I think it was an influence on Dr. King, his writings were an influence on Dr. King in terms of social--the church having to have a social mission.
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm, I'm generally familiar with that.  I don't know the details, but I'm familiar with Reinhold Niebuhr and his approach to religion and social, social change.  He was very much interested in the relationship of religion to social change.  And he was a great influence upon a generation, two or three generations of preachers, to give you that outlook about what religion can and ought to be doing.
Story_ID: 10755
Speaker 1: We mentioned also the mega-churches, and how do you feel about those mega-churches?
Speaker 2: I feel that, the--I have mixed feelings regarding 'em.  In many instances, I think that they are money-raising events, opportunities for development of egos.  Some of them seem to be purely funny--not funny, but not serious in terms of what the church ought to be.  And it always come down to the commercials at the end, we need these ministries.  Send us money, send us money, send us money.  That's the, that's the commercial.  And when I get to that point, I say, oh, here we go again. There's one of those mega churches by me, run by a man named T. D. Jakes.  His message is much more constructive than the message of any of the others I have ever listened to.  He has something constructive for changing the lives of people in a very practical way.  He started with women, getting to think more of themselves than some aspects of society would want them to think.  And, and I had to turning--turned my TV one night, and he was talking to a large group of prisoners, there were about 2,000 of them.  And at the same time, there was a hookup to some prisoners in Florida and some in California.  He was telling these guys about how to get control of their lives.  And he was wearing a prison suit so that he could feel closer--they could feel closer to him.  They were eating it up.  That part of his message, I thought was, was very useful.  He also has a feeling, however, that the black church should, in the future, should be like his, a mega-church, in the midst of a shopping area, and a whole lot of other things around the church, an institution controlled by the church, and may or may not be the right thing to do.  I, I would not be in favor of that being the mission of the church.  Maybe that's because I was born in 1906.
Speaker 1: Do you think that's too impersonal, having that huge church in--?
Speaker 2: Of course, it is.  Of course, it is.  In the regular churches, you do have access to a minister.  In a big church, some minister who is his assistant, if you don't have access to the senior minister.  But how can you have access if you're part of a congregation of several thousand people, fifteen or twenty thousand people.  Jakes, I think, has 26,000.  Of course, they cannot have access to him.  They can see him on TV, see him in a big auditorium, but that's it.  They can read his writings.  He does do a lot of writings.  So, one of these things are part of the, of the problems that my churches face.  So I instituted a forum at our church here, the Union Baptist Church [Baltimore, Maryland] on--as part of the celebration of a hundred and fifty year existence, a symposium on the black church.  That was the topic.  We invited a number of outstanding people here, the pastor of Riverside Church in New York took the forums.  Bishop Richard Adams of the AME [African Methodist Episcopal] church, Gardner Taylor and some other people who had something to say, not just up there to entertain us, not to entertain us at all, but to have something to say.  It was very productive.  People never seen that concentration of thinking at a high level before.  Our minister, of course, is very well trained, and he provides a model, but to see a number of different people coming in, talking about religion and its potential, its larger dimension, was good.  I planned to protect the, the tapes of those lectures and put them in print form and publish a little brochure about them, showing the implications of what these thinkers and activists in the Christian church have to say and, and do.  That takes time.  You have to take the tapes and roll 'em and, and have somebody record them and have a secretary transcribe them.  And I haven't had time to do that.  But I plan to do it because I think it represents a contribution in these days; not that everybody is gonna follow them because I think we are in a, are in an age where people like to be entertained, the boob tube has made people sit back--sit down and be entertained.  And sometimes that attitude goes into the classroom.  Students expect students--the teacher to entertain them.  In some instances, they just want to be entertained.  And if you're not--if they're, if they're not being entertained, they're not interested.  That's in some schools, some, some, some kinds of schools in some locations.  So the church has been a victim of that attitude, the black church, many black--not all of the black churches.  So they, as I said, earlier, they have drums and have--like I said, when I went to my father's church in Live Oak [Florida], first thing I saw was these drums and a piano, a keyboard on top of the regular organ, which provided much more jazz than the regular organ would provide.  So I said to myself, my dad [George McKinney, Sr.] would be horrified to see this, but why is it here?  Here's a town about 33,000 people at most.  They have no regular sources of entertainment.  They don't have big dances or societies where people can relax; no big athletic contests.  So they come to church.  They leave their homes--they do have radios at home, TV's, but there's a group that come to church, and they, they can let go of their emotions and listen to the, to the man on the keyboard and feel very good about themselves and about what's happening.  And I don't know that that, a church like that could ever go back to the old system where you sit down and listen a well-prepared sermon which challenges the individual to a higher level of life and thinking.  And I think the pendulum will eventually swing back from pure entertainment that is characteristic of some congregations.  But I think that a lot of people who like to be head of a mega-church because it builds up their, their ego, and that's about it.
Story_ID: 10756
Speaker 1: When you left Andover Newton [Theological School], you took a post at Virginia Union [University].
Speaker 2: That's right.  I went to Virginia Union to begin with--as I said earlier, to substitute a man who had been appointed, but who could not take the position because of illness.  He had learned after I got there, he was terminally ill with tuberculosis.  They did not have the wonder drug for TB then.  And he passed away.  But after his, after I got there, he became worse, and they offered me the position.  I learned then that that's what I was supposed to be doing because I found a great satisfaction in dealing with young people.  I could see a young man come to college, very green and fresh.  And I could watch his development from a green freshman to a more mature individual, being able to think and plan for himself, prepare for a career and so on, and graduate, knowing that he has conquered a hundred and twenty semester hours and so many quantitative--and had prepared himself for further education or for the world of work.  I could see that in a four-year span.  I could see some development in a two-year span.  And I could not see this in a church cause where I was, I was--I was young enough to be the--most of the older people were old enough to be my dad [George McKinney, Sr.].  And, of course, they didn't take me too seriously because they knew all the answers, and I was just a youngster out of school.  I learned a lot, however, from that experience, but I learned a lot that has helped me in my later years, from that short while I was at that church.  But at Virginia Union, I, I learned that this is what I needed to do.  After I'd been there a few years, I decided to go back to what I had originally planned, to get a Ph.D.  I was able to get a leave of absence to study at, at Yale [University] for my terminal degree.  And by--I went to Virginia Union in 1935.  I went to Yale in 1939.
Speaker 1: Now, you were--your Ph.D. that you were pursuing was in what--?
Speaker 2: My Ph.D was really in religion and higher education, which involved philosophy at that--I took that degree for one--for two reasons.  One reason I was doing that--at Virginia I was chairman, I was head of the department of written philosophy, and I had charge of religious activities.  The second reason was if I wanted to do graduate study, I had to do it when I could get aid.  The university had a program of religion higher education, and I was able to get a fellowship [clanging noises like dishes in background] in that discipline.  It--the beauty of that was, while at Yale, I could take work in philosophy, which I did.  And so I could say that my major interest was in philosophy of--philosophy of religion
Story_ID: 10757
Speaker 1: Who were some of the professors at Yale [University] that influenced you?
Speaker 2: There were several.  There's one named Clarence [Shedd] who was my major professor and advisor.  He was--and another name, Hugh Hartshorne, who was one of my, also one of my advisors.  There was another one named Liston Pope, L-I-S-T-O-N, P-O-P-E, who was from North Carolina.  And he was interested in social ethics, and there's one named [H.] Richard Niebuhr, who was also interested in social ethics.  They were the most influential people in my study at Yale.  There's one who, whom I did not study, but he was a professor preacher named Halford E. Luccock.  I'd meet him in the hallway and he'll always have something constructive to say, encouraging to say to me.
Speaker 1: What was his name again?
Speaker 2: L-U-C-C-O-C-K, Luccock, Hal, H-A-L-F-O-R-D, Halford E. Luccock.  He was a very dramatic teacher and a very entertaining teacher, by the way, but a very stimulating teacher.  And then the dean of the school, named Luther Weigle, W-I-E-G-L-E [sic], or W-I-E-G-L-E [sic], or W-E-I, Weigle, there's emphasis on the second syllable, Weigle, Luther Weigle.  I had no--I did have a class under him, very inspirational.  But I liked his whole philosophy of, of theological education, creating people who were prepared to think through the issues and to bring the results of their scholarship to their congregations.  And there's another teacher by the name of Robert Calhoun, who taught the history of Christian theology, or Christian doctrine; brilliant man.  He could never, never needed to use a note, but he could go to the blackboard and write lines in Greek and Hebrew, and make the subject of theology live.  History of Christian doctrine live.  And the kids, the students were very delighted with the opportunity to study under him.  And he also taught philosophy.  And I did a lot of my philosophy with him.  So those were the main characters who influenced me, I mean teachers, influenced me at Yale.
Story_ID: 10758
Speaker 1: When you graduated from Yale [University] you continued--you came back as the dean of the School of Religion again?
Speaker 2: Yes, I came back to Virginia Union [University].  And Virginia Union up until that time had a curriculum in the college with emphasis upon religion and upon graduation, instead of getting an A.B., you got--or some other, I forget the name of the degree.  But it was not an adequate preparation for religious work.  And many schools discontinued that, who had had it as part of college.  So Virginia Union discontinued it too.  And the president asked me to set up a religious study program on the graduate level.  And I reorganized the whole study of religion at Virginia Union and made it into a, a graduate program, following the standards of the American Theological Association and so on, or American Association of Theological Schools.  And that was in the early 1940s.  And I became dean of that school and served there for about two years as dean.  And then I changed schools and went to a college in West Virginia, Storer College.
Speaker 1: Now, what--tell us about Storer College.  Who founded it and who, you know, what was the nature of Storer?
Speaker 2: After the Civil War, there were a lot of freedpeople living in that area, Harpers Ferry.  Prior to the Civil War, there had been a factory in Harpers Ferry, manufacturing ammunition and arms.  It was run by the government, and that is the reason why John Brown decided to go to Harpers Ferry because there were good guns there.  And he felt that if he could capture that armory and the guns, the slaves would have the weapons with which to fight for their own freedom.  That was his, his, his logic in going to Harpers Ferry, to get something where he could fight.  And after the war was over--of course, the army did not operate, and there were all these people.  And as was happening in other denominations, the Free-Will Baptist in New Hampshire sent a man down to that area to minister to these people, educationally.  His, his name was--is [Nathan] Brackett, B-R-A-C-K-E-T-T.  I can't recall his first name at the moment, but he started classes of these freed people, and he was allowed to use one of the buildings that the government used for his operation of the, of the, the armory.  And, well, people in that denomination, living in New England, sent money down there for the school.  And they were talking it up because the Free-Will Baptist wanted to be, as the denominations were, established with Morehouse College and a number of other institutions, Fisk [University] and others.  So they wanted to establish their particular school.  And they were able to get a very wealthy industrialist in Maine, by the name of John Storer.  And John Storer wanted to do something for the education of the freedmen.  But he challenged the Free-Will Baptists to work themselves for the basic needs to operate this school.  He said to them, if you will raise ten thousand dollars, I will give you ten thousand dollars.  That was a lot of money in 1867.  But they went at it, and they finally at last were able to raise this money to meet the deadline.  And they were able to get the commitment of John Storer and named the school for him.  And it became a center for the education of, of blacks, first starting at an elementary level and as I said earlier, moving up to the high school.  And many of the middle-class blacks sent their children to high school at Harpers Ferry and Storer College.  They got them out of the city and its temptations.  And it was a very good school, had good teachers.
Speaker 1: Now, you became president in what year?
Speaker 2: 1944.
Speaker 1: 1944. And you were president until '54 [1954]?
Speaker 2: 1950.  I was there six years.
Speaker 1: Six years, okay, now, there's a--now, what were the major challenges at Storer College for you?
Speaker 2: The major challenge was raising money and also increasing the student body.  The problem was twofold.  Many of the colleges that had been, had been founded around that time, 1867, had been able to develop a constituency from which students and, and finances could be raised.  Storer College, located as it was in a village, did not have that base or students.  We had to forage around for students to come there.  The second challenge was money.  I knew that before I took the job.  But I said, maybe we could be able to get the money.  Tied into the challenge of money was the challenge of accreditation by the regional accrediting agency.  Because it was accredited by the State of West Virginia, but not by the North Central Association of College and Secondary Schools, as accredited by the State of West Virginia, our graduates go out into the community and do teaching, social work or similar occupations, go into the ministry.  But they could not get into a medical school because the facilities did not measure up to North Central Association standards.  So my challenge was to get the school accredited and I went there and said if I could get it accredited in four years, I will stay.  If not, I will leave.  I was able to raise the income, but not enough to meet the demands of the North Central Association for our science department.  We couldn't meet the demands because we didn't have money.  We couldn't get into some fundraising programs because we didn't have all the programs that we needed.  So we were in a vicious cycle.  We couldn't get accredited because we didn't have money--we didn't have the money, we couldn't get accredited.  So after five years, I told the trustees I was leaving.  And they had persuaded me to stay.  I did stay another year, but I didn't feel that that was the place I should spend the best years of my life.  So I did resign, and in my first year, I went to Virginia State [University] for a year.  Mean while, the job at Morgan State [University] had been promised to me for the following year.  So while I was at Virginia State, I was doing the work of a friend of mine who was on leave, directing religious activities and then getting prepared to come to Morgan, which I did in 1951.  I came here as a full professor of philosophy, head of, head of department, and stayed as their head for over twenty-five years.  So that's my, my career.
Speaker 1: That's like, it's almost--that is, like fifty years ago, you know, that's--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, it's fifty--yes, when I go to, to the meeting of the alumni association, I meet these people whom I knew when they were eighteen, nineteen, twenty years old.  One year, I went to alumni reunion--the alumni still has reunions although the school is closed.  And they had on the program there was to be an award given to me, and I was sitting on the, on the podium--on the platform, trying to see if I could see this person.  I didn't see the person, I thought.  Time came for that part of the program, this person came up.  And I didn't recognize her from what she looked like fifty years earlier.  But it's fascinating.  The school closed here some years after I left.  I left in 1951.  And they closed in 1955.  Up until that time, the State of West Virginia--
Speaker 1: Keep talking, finish.
Speaker 2: --the State of West Virginia had given Storer a stipend every year because that part of West Virginia was in the eastern panhandle.
Speaker 1: And that year, that, '55 [1955], they didn't give it?
Speaker 2: No, up until '55 [1955], yes.  As I said, they gave the money because there was a law against the co-education of races in Virginia.  There was a school seven miles away from Storer, Shepherd College [now Shepherd University].  Black kids in that panhandle could not go there for a college education.
Story_ID: 10759
Speaker 1: You were talking about how Storer [College] closed, and you said that another school opened up although (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes, what, yes, what happened was that there was a law in West, in West Virginia prohibiting the co-education of the races.  But the nearest college to Storer--I mean to that part of the state was 300 miles away, Charleston Institute, West Virginia State and Bluefield State [College].  This, the legislators felt that they had a moral obligation to these kids who lived so far from a college education and could not go to one nearby, to give Storer some money.  So they gave them, when I got there, it was ten thousand dollars.  We were able to raise it until it came eventually to twenty thousand a year.  But that was not enough to do the kind of thing that was needed.  We had a very limited endowment.  To do a good collegiate program, you have to have money coming in from an endowment and gifts and grants because the students don't pay enough money for it, of course.  And we were not able, during my tenure, to get the kind of money that was necessary to become accredited.  And the State of West Virginia--I had to go to the legislature every year to lobby for this money that they did give us.  1954 came 'Brown v. Board of Education' and the state legislature said, now, we do not need to give that school any money because they can go to Shepherd College [now Shepherd University].  So the school lasted one year later.  And they had to close because they lost the stipend from West Virginia, which was, at the time, the difference between being open and being closed.  I was at Morgan [State University] at the time, but--.
Speaker 1: Now, you've been academia a long time--.
Speaker 2: Since 1935.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did--I don't know if people today have any sense of the number of black colleges that have probably closed down.  Have there been a lot of--there been a number of black colleges that have closed since then?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, through the years.
Speaker 1: Through the years?
Speaker 2: And in those early years, before 1900, there were colleges established.  But they could not survive.  And since then, there have been, from time to time, a college has had to close.  One notable example is Bishop College in, in Texas, that had a good background and reputation, but not sufficient funds to keep it operating on a first-class level.  So they closed.  Most recently, of course--you may know about Morris Brown [College], not enough money to keep it operating at a respectable level, academically respectable level.  And so they had to close.  So we have had a, a process of, of institutions not being able to survive.  Knoxville College lost its accreditation, but it still operates and negotiates with graduate schools for certain of their students who want to go to graduate schools.
Story_ID: 10760
Speaker 1: One of the highlights, I guess, of your presidency [of Storer College] I guess had to be the appearance of W. E. B. DuBois though it wasn't the satisfying--but--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: But I had known about DuBois for quite some time, even as a graduate student.  I used to hear him come to Boston to speak.  He would, he would speak at this--they had a program in Boston called--I forget the name, but some kind of forum.  They met on Sunday mornings.  I used to go there when he was speaking.  And I've heard him at another, in other venues speaking.  He had come to Pennsylvania to speak to speak to a group of with Quakers.  And I happened to be there, and he was telling the Quakers about the, their attitudes toward slavery, how, when the founders came and talked to them about the sin of holding human beings in bondage, and he sarcastically said, "Well after that, the Quakers sold their slaves and got their money back."  So he's, he's that kind of person.  While I was doing a study of religion in black colleges when I was at Yale [University], I visited a number of schools, had correspondence with a number of others; had correspondence with educators, and I chose to talk with DuBois, who was at Atlanta University at the time.  I went to his office and after the usual small talk, I told him why I was there to interview him.  My question, "Dr. DuBois, what place do you think religion has in black colleges?"  "None at all", he said.  I had read his commencement speech at Wilberforce [College] the, a few months earlier.  I said, "Dr. DuBois, I did read your commencement speech at Wilberforce when you ended on a religious note."  When I said that, he stood up and ended the interview.  I had challenged him on, on his own saying.  But I, that's part of my findings.  I wasn't offended by that, but here's a man who is very outstanding, great intellect, who had this particular attitude towards religion in higher education.
Speaker 1: That's seems strange.  Now, he, in his credo, he talks about man being brothers in Christ.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --and even if they can't be brothers in law.
Speaker 2: That's--.
Speaker 1: --and yet, he's not a religious man.
Speaker 2: Not a religious man, but so much of his poetry has a religious temper.  And after his death, there came out a book of prayers that he had written.  My wife [Lena Martin McKinney] is a member of a club that was named for him, back, an organization of 1906, the DuBois Circle, they call it.  And they have a book of his prayers.  And when they open their meeting, sometimes they read from DuBois' prayers.  The general public doesn't know about--know about these prayers.  And there's no association with, with DuBois because DuBois was not a, not known to be a saint.
Speaker 1: He--well, could you tell us any more about that.  I mean he, he wasn't known to be a saint.
Speaker 2: Well, my wife was studying, my wife's mother studied under him at AU [Atlanta University], and she talked about how he used to try to get girls interested in him socially.  I was in Paris [France], as a student at the Sorbonne and one of my friends there was an American journalist, who said that whenever DuBois came to Paris, he had a ball.  And the, Dave's autobiography--or biography of, of DuBois, two-volume study--.
Speaker 1: By, yeah, David Levering [Lewis].
Speaker 2: David Levering, details that part of his life.  It so happens that one of his secretaries was also a major in sociology.  And she was very much in love with, with DuBois and there was some mutual interest.  And she was his secretary at AU, Atlanta University.  And Louis Dale (ph.) tells about how he used to take this young lady on trips with him.  And that particular person became a professor of sociology here at Morgan.  I had a student secretary, a very nice kid, and one day--she had a class with this teacher, she came to the office very concerned.  And said, "Dr. Diggs told us, she told us that she was Dr. DuBois' mistress," and she was horrified that the teacher would make that acknowledgement to the class.  But I learned later that she used to brag on that.  And DuBois tells about that story.  Well, I suppose you cannot expect all perfections to be there at one time.  He was a, he was a intellectual giant.  But in terms of that part of his life he, I guess, succumbed to some of his feelings.  And--.
Speaker 1: But the inconsistency in philosophy seems to bother, I think me, more.  I've read--just listening to, you know, his--he writes a book of prayers.  And then he says religious has no place in the school.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  One story I heard about DuBois was that when he--and his first teaching job was at Wilberforce, where they had a practice of the faculty participating in the, in the chapel service.  And that particular day, so when they got there, they had chapel service.  He was on the platform, and the president said, "After the reading of the scripture, Professor DuBois will lead us in prayer".  DuBois said, no, he won't (laughter).  So, his tenure at Wilberforce was not an extended one.  But my demand for his intellectual social consciousness, his dedication to civil rights and justice, he made a great contribution at that point.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he surprised--you had him as a commencement speaker at Storer, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I did that because I read in one of his biographies--I think I mentioned it earlier, of his trip to the place where John Brown was captured, and--.
Speaker 1: Harpers Ferry is the place where Storer College was.
Speaker 2: Harpers--and so when, when John Brown's--he was in a fire engine house in Harpers Ferry where he was captured, he and some of his other people.  He was shot, but not killed.  And he was able to write, do a lot of writing before he was hanged.  And that stimulated a lot of thought about slavery.  And because he had made this ultimate sacrifice for freedom, people revered John Brown.  "His body lies mouldering in the grave, but his soul goes marching on", you've heard that tune.  So often Harper's Ferry, because it has accommodations, sleeping, eating, black organizations in this area would meet there.  DuBois was interested in the--what was eventually called the Niagara Movement.  They had a movement, had a meeting in, on the campus of Storer in 1906.  We have a photograph of that at Harpers--.
Speaker 1: That's the year you were born?
Speaker 2: What's that?
Speaker 1: That's the year you were born.
Speaker 2: Year I was born.  And there's a photograph of that group displayed at Harpers Ferry.  And they celebrate it every, every year.  They--that's a big, important part of black history.  So I read in his autobiography that when they visited that house, which had been relocated where John Brown was captured, they said, this is holy ground.  We'll take off our shoes.  This is holy ground.  Harpers Ferry, located in West Virginia, the citizenry reflected some of the attitudes of the deep South.  And the reason for that is rather complicated.  The whites in West Virginia--in Virginia, before it was divided, couldn't find much employment in the eastern section.  The slaves were doing the work.  So they gradually migrated toward the western part of the state and eventually formed a kind of culture of their own, hoping that all, and all of their civic activities, the, the state would support them.  The state did not support them as they wanted to be supported.  So the idea of separation, secession from the rest of the state arose.  The B&O Railroad had a little, had a right-of-way through those counties that were in dispute.  And they set guards up at the polling booths to make sure that, that the vote went right.  B&O did not want to go through slave--slaveholding states.  So the vote was in favor of those counties going into West Virginia.  Politically, they did.  Ideologically, they didn't.  And there's a lot of race, racial animosity in that area.  One day I went out in front, and opened my door, there was a cross that had been burned in my yard.  They didn't like the idea of our being there.  And we bought a house farther away from our location because we were expanding, and needed room.  They raised a lot of contention about our expanding.  They didn't want us to go beyond where we were.  And because we bought it, it took the house off the, house off the tax rolls and it made that intention a contention.  So those were some of the attitudes that we faced.  So I said, in my last commencement, that I would like to have a good commencement, a good speaker, someone who knows the area, and who will come and give a, a talk on racial justice and so on.  The only man to do that is W. E. B. DuBois because he has said that this was holy ground, and had been there for, on a number of occasions.  So he accepted the invitation right away.  And it so happened that one of the trustees, the richest man on our board, met me in the bank in Charlestown, not far away, prior to that commencement, and said, "I understand that we have this man, DuBois, that is our commencement speaker."  I said, "Yes."  This man said, "Well, as I--the literature that I get-"-he was a businessman, "indicates that he's a communist."  I said, "Mr. Funkhauser, if he is a communist, it's a--it's a misunderstanding of what we have done.  Suppose a man could come in and in a twenty-minute address, undo, undo all that we have done in four years.  We haven't done our jobs well, have we?"  He said, "You're right."  And so that, that's far as it went.  So DuBois came, and I introduced him, told about his background, his association with Harpers Ferry and civil rights and all that.  And he started his speech, opened the manuscript, I want to talk to you today about Nippon, Japan.  In 1873, Admiral Perry set out from the West Coast of the United States (laughter), went over to Japan, and oh, talked about for twenty minutes about the opening of Japan to Western trade, and sat down.  Nobody in the--in the audience was interested in that.  But, of course, he was under scrutiny by the House Un-American Activities Committee, and he did not want to say anything public that would increase the tension under which he was going.  But I was glad to have him as our speaker.
Story_ID: 10761
Speaker 1: Tell me, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: My hope, my major concern has to do with upgrading the economic and social conditions of black youth, particularly, the black male because in the ghetto, they are not exposed to the kinds of models that would inspire them.  The models that appeals to many of these youngsters is men riding around in big cars, supported by the dope habit.  I want a big car too.  What do I need to do it?  I could sell dope, and I can get more money doing that than going to school, getting education.  So many of them fall into that trap, getting along by breaking the law.  Then there is a lack of sufficient inspiring programs for these young people.  Some churches have what they call after-school programs--some other places have that, that reaches some of these people.  The problem I face is not--not reaching them enough, not reaching them effectively, not having enough money for programs.  It costs twenty-five thousand dollars a year to keep a man in prison, one man, one year.  They are not going to spend half that much in a community to raise the quality of life for these young people so they wouldn't commit the crimes that they send them to these prisons to warehouse them, get them out of the way.  Prison making--building has become a major industry.  People make a lot of money building prisons, but it's at the expense of taking some of that money to help raise the quality of life, and the aspirations of these youngsters.  That's one of my biggest concerns.  What is happening?  But when I talk about what has happened to black males, I discover that it's not limited to black males.  Males as a whole in this society are being completely outdistanced by females in this society.  You go to a law school graduation.  Almost half the graduates are women.  I go to this seminary where I graduated from, commencement.  Half the graduates are women.  And that's true in all the professions.  I was reading this in one of the major magazines--magazine.  I don't know if it was the newspaper or some other magazine; similar magazine.  This writer was talking about this development in American society.  Boys tend to get their ego satisfaction out of being great athletes, and men around campus.  Girls have to concentrate on excelling in--in academe, so that the valedictorians in high school and in colleges are often girls these times, rather than what used to be males.  So this is a big problem, I think, not just for blacks, but for our whole society, but particularly for, for black people that have so, so few opportunities.  I belong to an organization called the Sigma Pi Phi fraternity made up of professional men.  In many of our communities, we target some schools so that these professional men who are physicians, lawyers and other professions, educators, go to these schools and work with the kids for several days, talking to several classes.  In Atlanta, that organization has a group of men who went to, who met on Saturdays, and they had a group of kids that they mentored on Saturdays and talked with and inspired them to raise the level of their aspirations.  One illustration of this need is, was a student I had.  I'd been having some problems with him, so I asked him to come by to see me.  He came by to see me, and I was trying to motivate him.  And I said, "What do you expect to be doing ten years from now?"  He said, "I don't expect to be living ten years from now."  He'd grown up in a society where there was murders all around and life was cheap.  And that was his outlook.  So there was much--not much use for him to try to get a college education because nothing--he had nothing that he saw, to look forward.  And that's true with many of our youngsters.  And we've got to, to work at our society at that level, starting early.  In our church, we have what is called a Head Start program, limited to kids, pre-school kids from underprivileged families.  Many of the members of our church couldn't get their children in there because of the limits on those kids.  They come there from these limited environments, and they get a head start into life, into reading and so on, behavior.  It's not always easy for them to get a good head start on behavior because I was there one time.  And the mother had come for her boy.  And she was yelling at the boy, screaming at him as though he were nothing.  And I said, "How can that boy develop a sense of self confidence in this kind of home?"  And it may mean that if he doesn't profit well from what we're trying to do with him at this Head Start program, he might end up like some of the others end up.  So that's one of our greatest needs, meeting these kids at, at that level.  When I was growing up, we didn't have the ghetto.  We didn't have all saints in our society.  Of course, we had jails.  But the whole society in the small town where I was and other small towns was like, who was it said, "it takes a whole city--.
Speaker 1: A village to raise a child.
Speaker 2: That's right.  And that's what happened.  If I--when I was out of school as a, as a youngster, couldn't get into, couldn't go to school, if someone saw me away from home doing something that they thought that I shouldn't be doing, my mother would know about it before I got home.  And that's the way it was with all of the people in those societies.  That's not the case now.  Another aspect that I think about is that around the home these days and in recent years, you don't have the educational advantage of families sitting around the table for a meal.  When I was growing up, we had a very religious home.  We had prayers, morning prayers before breakfast.  As breakfast was done, my mother [Sally Ellis McKinney] would say, "Breakfast is ready, it's time for prayers".  We'd meet in the living room and there would be some religious program.  Then as we came in the dining room we'd have the, the grace again and sitting around the table, we'd talk about issues.  What happens today in many homes, the, the meal is prepared, kids take a plate and go in the kitchen and fill it up and go sit in front of the TV and eat.  There's not this family support.  Around the table in the old days, if the father said, "Well, John, how, how is your math coming?  Mary, what's--how is your English coming?  What problems are you facing?"  And there'd be this close relationship of family and plans for the future.  I think we miss something of that in today--in today's home.  And I think that it's a process, part of a function of our being entertained and losing some of the family values 'cause sometimes, sometimes, of course, the father isn't able to be there because leave for work at 6:00 to get to his job.  And he can't be there at breakfast.  He may not be able to get back in time for a family dinner.  That happens in many situations, but in another--those situations could be different.  But sometimes people don't that background.  They don't think about having a dining table.  I know a home where there used to be a dining room table; no more dining room table.  They use it for something else.  That's one of our problems, I think.
Story_ID: 10762
Speaker 1: What would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I hope that my legacy is that of inspiring students to think of themselves as persons of value, able to achieve through limited liability.  Persons who have gathered some kind of inspiration to me, from me that changed their lives.  Some of my most inspiring experiences have come from individuals who I've not known closely as students, who have got something, gotten something from what I've said.  I think that my legacy has to do with the extent to which I have unknowingly or knowingly helped to change the lives of some young people.  And every time I go to a big social event here in Baltimore, usually there's some man who--or woman who comes up saying, "I was in your class.  And you--something you said changed my life."  [camera reset].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're rolling.
Speaker 1: You were talking about your legacy.
Speaker 2: Yes, so that is, is what I would consider to be my legacy, lives that have been transformed by something I consciously or unconsciously did.  I was at a meeting at Howard University some years ago.  I was one of the speakers at a conference.  A man came up to me after everybody had come up and said the usual thing, and said, "I took off from work today and brought my wife with me because several years ago you spoke at Howard University Chapel, and something you said changed my life.  And I've been on a different road ever since then.  And I heard you were speaking today, and I took off from work and had my wife to come here just to meet you".  I didn't know the man, but that was somewhat satisfying.  Not long ago, I met--I was at a social event, and a man came up and said, "I'm a lawyer.  You don't remember me, but I was in one of your classes, and you don't know how you changed my life."  And he was so moved that he put his arms around me and kissed me on the check.  It was a little shocking but that was the way he felt he could express his appreciation.
Story_ID: 10763
Speaker 1: You're ninety-six years old this week--.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And you don't seem ninety six, but you certainly know about what happened ninety--ninety-two years ago, I guess, (laughter) but to what do you attribute such a long life?
Speaker 1: My stock answer to that question which is frequently raised, is I chose the right parents.  This is by way of saying that I take no credit for longevity because much of it grows out of my biological inheritance.  I have, however, endeavored to abide by the basic rules of good health in terms of what I eat and drink and keeping decent hours.  And also keeping intellectually active.  That has been, I think very important and reading.  I've written books.  That has kept me intellectually active.
Story_ID: 10764
Speaker 1: What are the names of your books?
Speaker 2: My first book had to do with religion in black colleges.  That was published by University Press in 1942.  Later I wrote a history of a Baptist church in Charlottesville, Virginia.  It's the First Baptist Church in Charlottesville, Virginia.  And then I wrote a history of, of the black Baptists of Florida.  My father [George McKinney, Sr.] had begun that history before his death and he brought it up to the year of his death.  But I had his papers, and I'd been in academe and didn't have time to bring it up to date.  So I brought it up to date and wrote the book.  And then my latest book was the biography of Mordecai Johnson, who was president of Howard University for thirty-four years.  I'm now in process of writing a book in the area of theology called 'God and Human Suffering', addressing the age-old question, hundreds of volumes have been written about it, why do bad things happen to good people, and I want to address that issue from my own perspective.  This will be my latest and last book.
Story_ID: 10765
Speaker 1: Well, tell me, sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a person who was interested in, in students and their development and not as one who went out to gain any kind of big reputation, but rather as one who felt that his basic contribution was in the matter of affecting the lives of people, helping them to develop a, a view of life that was positive and constructive, and if people remember me as being that kind of individual, that kind of teacher, I'll be very pleased.
