Story_ID: 120616
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe; I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: It's Reuben Alexander Munday, R-E-U-B-E-N, A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R and Munday is M-U-N-D-A-Y.
Speaker 1: Alright and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is March 2, 1947.  I was born in Orange, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: And sir what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an attorney.
Speaker 1: And you're involved in real estate as well, right?
Speaker 2: Yes I'm a real estate attorney.
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: April 5, 2005
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Offices of Lewis and Munday in Detroit, Michigan.
Story_ID: 120617
Speaker 1: Okay. Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions I ask as a warm up and they only require short answers.  The first one is sir do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I have a number of them and that's one of the problems but lobster.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer
Speaker 1: A favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Paris
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No
Speaker 1: Is that it no (laugh)?
Speaker 2: I try not to, in fact I think it reflects a herd mentality when I hear people just use common refrain over and over again, awesome is one I'm really tired of right now.  So I really try not to have a favorite phrase.
Speaker 1: I think the bishop of Detroit just said that about the pope's funeral.  It was in the paper this morning and he said it was awesome.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, it's just terrible. Words lose meaning when, I know that's right is real popular and we go through different ones.  It's kind of popular to go through different phrases that kind of signal that you're with it and for me it signals just the opposite that you don't do a lot of thinking for yourself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 120618
Speaker 1: Well I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  We will start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes Gustine, G-U-S-T-I-N-E Elizabeth Munday well she was an Alexander it's where my Alexander comes from.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 11, 1906
Speaker 1: Okay and where?
Speaker 2: In Henderson, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Now what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace the ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: Not very far, I think my grandmother was a Jackson, Cora Edna Jackson and my grandmother lived with us for a while.  I met my great grandmother who was Elizabeth Carr and I remember it very clearly because she was blind from cataracts and as a little kid that was scary to me but she looked very Native American and she was of--they said of mixed heritage but she had the high cheek bones and the nose that some Native Americans have.  Never knew my great grandfather, never knew any of the men on my mother's side.  I don't think my grandmother and my grandfather whose name was Augustus Alexander, don't think they were married.  My grandmother later married a Clay and my mother had a half-brother, William Clay who I knew as a child, he lived in Evanston [Illinois] right outside of Chicago.  But it was very hazy maybe a little secretive on my mother's side.  I know my sister--my mother also had a half-sister who I met very late in life who did not get talked about but she was also a daughter of Augustus Alexander, Maude Esther was her name and I went to visit her in Indianapolis [Indiana] before she died.  Looked just like my mother and the story is that they went to the same elementary school in Henderson and everyone knew they were sisters but it was not acknowledged formerly that they were sisters.  So I know a lot less about my mother's family than I do about my father's [Reuben Abraham Munday's] family.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from your mother's family about the end of slavery or reconstruction or anything like that?
Speaker 2: As with most African-American families unless you really pushed on that, there were no stories about slavery from that side of the family.  There are a few things from my father's side.
Speaker 1: Before we get to your father's side did your mother talk about growing up in Kentucky?  Did she grow up there?
Speaker 2: She grew up in Henderson [Kentucky] and then right across the river in Evansville, Indiana.  I think--I'm not exactly sure when the family relocated to Evansville but those are twin cities and she talked generally about going there.  She went to St. Alvers, A-L-V-E-R-S, I think school in Henderson and all of the African-American kids went there through eighth grade, I think.
Speaker 1: So Henderson is right across the Ohio River from Evansville.
Speaker 2: Correct and people moved back and forth, I think, after the war, of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 120619
Speaker 1: So it's pretty hazy on my mother's side.
Speaker 2: Now did your mother [Gustine Elizabeth Munday] go to college?
Speaker 1: Yes she did.  My mother went to--first she went to Indiana State [University] in Terre Haute [Indiana] and then she got her bachelor's degree from Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] in journalism and she got her master's from Tuskegee [the Tuskegee Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama], I'm not sure whether that was in journalism also or public relations.  She worked for years in The Oaks which is the home of Booker T. Washington which was modeled after the home of Frederick Douglass in Washington, D.C. and she was in public relations for Tuskegee Institute and was a very good writer.
Speaker 2: That's quite an accomplishment in those days.  Was there a history of her family going to college?
Speaker 1: I know that my uncle, her half-brother didn't go; I know that her half-sister, Maude Esther did not go to college.  An interesting thing, after my great grandmother died my grandmother [Cora Edna Jackson] came to live with us and it occurred to me that no one ever discussed what my grandmother did for a living and you know how you meet people and the first thing they wonder is well what do you do.  I think because of circumstances African Americans in those days was almost an impolite question unless you knew it was something good, you wouldn't just approach someone with what do you do for a living.  It never--I think those who are proud of what they were doing would just offer it, I'm a teacher, I'm a preacher, I'm a doctor and there were those who didn't want to talk about it.  They did what they had to do and my guess is that--my sense is that she worked in the homes of other people as a domestic worker is what I think.
Speaker 2: As many people had to do.
Speaker 1: Yes but it wasn't--you asked me about slavery, I mean not only no discussion of slavery but no discussion of that either and I think there's a reason for it.  I think that people were very anxious for the younger generation to not relive and to not inherit the bitterness if there was any which was not noticeable, very anxious I think for us not to know in some ways.  I think there are some benefits to that, benefit being that we didn't see any limitations until they hit us and the down side, of course is that when limitations do hit you, you don't understand the history of that (laugh).  So it's a catch-22.
Speaker 2: Did your mother talk about going to school at Indiana State [University, Terre Haute, Indiana] and Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio]?  In those days I imagine it really was rough.  I've heard stories of people sense those times of going to Ohio State before they really integrated the school in terms of the accommodations of those schools.
Speaker 1: Very little conversation.  I really just one comment about--she talked about how the white girls would walk around with no clothes on and how the black girls were much more modest, I remember her talking about how she noticed how free they were--they felt to walk around.  Not in mixed company but just around each other without clothes.  My sense was that there was a segregated situation socially for the most part.  Not a lot of stories about Terre Haute or Ohio State.  Now we had a friend at Tuskegee [the Tuskegee Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama] who was from Terre Haute who knew my mother when she was in college and she talked about how she looked up to my mother when my mother was in college at Terre Haute but my mother was not particularly forthcoming with the details of that experience.
Story_ID: 120620
Speaker 1: Okay. Now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes Reuben like mine, R-E-U-B-E-N Abraham, A-B-H-R-A-M [sic] and Munday is the same of course.
Speaker 1: Okay and what his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay he was born on February 10, 1900.
Speaker 1: Okay and where was he born?
Speaker 2: In Berea, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: What do you know about the ancestors on his side of the family?
Speaker 2: A little bit more.  They grew up on a farm outside of Berea in a place called Bobs Town [sic, Bobtown, Kentucky] and actually I know a lot more about him and he had ten brothers and sisters.  Some of whom I knew as aunts and uncles most of whom lived in Dayton, Ohio.  They left Berea I'm told after the civil war to cross out of Kentucky into Ohio which as I understand it was a pretty popular thing, more opportunities, at least that was the perception in Ohio and in Kentucky.  His father was a farmer and a preacher.  My grandmother's name was Sally Ann and my sister is Carol Ann and she gets the Ann from Sally Ann.  Let's see my father went to Kentucky State [University, then Kentucky Normal and Industrial Institute for Colored Persons, Frankfort, Kentucky].  It's a college now but it was considered a high school.
Story_ID: 120621
Speaker 1: Now that's in Berea, right?
Speaker 2: I don't even remember.
Speaker 1: I think it is-- I think Kentucky State [University, then Kentucky Normal and Industrial Institute for Colored Persons, Frankfort, Kentucky]--(simultaneous)--is in Berea [sic, Frankfort].
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) Okay, it must be because he was still living at home as far as I know.  I met a gentleman in Dayton [Ohio] who knew my father [Reuben Abraham Munday] at Kentucky State. My father was a very driven man and very determined and he talked about working in people's homes to get through school and he told me that a high school teacher took a significant interest in him.  Told him he had a lot of potential and against his father's wishes, his father wanted him to stay on the farm, he went to Hampton [Institute, now Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and the way the family legend goes is that his father asked him to stay and help on the farm and my father refused and said he wanted to go to college and started walking toward the I don't know if it was the bus station or the train station.  What I was told was that my grandfather came along in a horse and buggy and told him I can see you're determined to do this, the least I can do is give you a ride to the station and he went on to Hampton.  At that time, most of the historically black schools you could work there.  Most of the kids didn't have any money so you could work your way through school.  It's like Booker T. Washington did at Hampton.  So my father finished Hampton then went on to, I think after Hampton I think he taught at a school in Arkansas for a while because I went through his file at Hampton and he actually wrote back to the school to talk about how he was doing, that's how paternalistic the schools were.  I saw in that file the announcement of him marrying my mother [Gustine Elizabeth Munday] just amazing.  I saw his application which said that his father was a farmer, I think his father was Reuben H. Munday not sure I have the initial right.  My grandfather I know he was Reuben and said possessions I think it was like two horses a certain number of hogs actually spelled out on the application, the farm animals that they owned and then it named his brothers and sisters some of whom I knew.  There was a Reuben well he was Reuben there was a Joelle (ph.).  He had two sisters, Ophelia and Mary.  Mary lived in Detroit [Michigan] until not that long ago and her daughter, my first cousin is here in Detroit and the rest were boys, there were eight boys and two girls.  I think there was one girl that died in either childbirth or very, very young.  But went to Hampton, went to Arkansas, went on to get his master's degree at Iowa State [University, Ames, Iowa] which is the school of George Washington Carver which I don't think was any accident because my father was a scientist--animal science and genetics and then my father got his PhD at the University of Massachusetts in Amherst the year I was born in 1947 which is why I was born in New Jersey.  I think my mother's brother, Bill was living in New Jersey at the time and I was born there.
Story_ID: 120622
Speaker 1: My sister was born in Henderson [Kentucky] and my sister was born--is four years older than I am, in '43 [1943] and my sister, I don't know if she remembers but my sister spent time with them in Amherst [Massachusetts] while he [father Reuben Abraham Munday] was a student there.  There were stories about putting her in a basket of a bicycle and riding around campus and things like that.  But all very pleasant, very little talk about Iowa State [University, Ames, Iowa].  I don't know I just sense it was a struggle although that was never expressed to me.  My feeling is that things that were enjoyed were talked about and things that weren't were not that was my sense of the way it was.  But education was pounded into me.  We grew up in Tuskegee [Alabama] now my father [Reuben Abraham Munday] taught at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], I think it was right around 1938 for a few years and they talked about living in Nashville and my father was the head coach of the football team.  My father was a very skinny center but he was a fierce football player.  He was head coach at Tennessee State, I think they won a championship in 1938 but I have to check the history on that but one of the years he was there they won the conference championship and he was also an assistant coach at Tuskegee.  He loved football and was a tough coach.  It used to amaze me how tough he was on the guys but he was very much a football player and I was very interested growing up in all the sports, football particularly baseball for southern boys like me baseball is to us what basketball is to city boys.  You know we'd play baseball half the day.  But I got to meet Aunt Ophelia, Aunt Mary, I don't remember others as well the brothers in Dayton [Ohio] but summer vacations we would go.  When I was in law school there in [University of Michigan Law School] Ann Arbor [Michigan], my Aunt Ophelia came to visit me and I remember her very bitterly telling me that my father had arranged for her to go to Hampton [Institute, now University, Hampton, Virginia] and at the last minute my grandfather told her that she didn't need to go anywhere, that girls don't need to go anywhere because there wouldn't be anyone to watch her even though my father would have been there and she told me that--Aunt Ophelia told me that she ended up having to care for him in his latter years and she told him in bitterness to look at her hands and her knees and that if he had let her go with Reuben she could have sat behind a desk to take care of him instead of what she had to do.  That was one negative story that I did hear.
Speaker 2: There are stories like that I know in families where education--people have to strike out and make a big move to get educated at least the first generation.
Speaker 1: It's usually--yeah the conventional lesson is that and the historically black colleges have always been more female than male.  I think that the men were needed for labor and also for whatever reason so more women went to college.  So this story is a bit of a reversal but it only happened because my father was just leaving, as I understand it, he was just leaving anyway.
Story_ID: 120623
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your mother [Gustine Elizabeth Munday] and father [Reuben Abraham Munday] met?
Speaker 2: I'm pretty sure they met at Tuskegee [the Tuskegee Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama].  I think my mother was working for Tuskegee, I'm sure of that at the time because there was a Dr. Peterson who talked about another gentleman at Tuskegee who was interested in my mother and my father competing for my mother's attention and Dr. Peterson teased my mother about how much more he liked my father than this other guy who he referred to as toothy or something, I can't even remember the guy's name.  But I remember the story because it was fascinating to me to think of my father courting my mother and also to think about my mother being sought after by someone else but in the historically black colleges courting was very formalized and I'm not sure if it always played out that way but the public appearance was very formal and my father was a very formal person, very determined and formal.  Everybody called him Dr. Munday and he had a sense of humor but you didn't mess around with him, you didn't go in joking around.  He wanted you to know he's serious--serious business.
Speaker 1: So did he work the balance of his career at Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: Yes he loved Tuskegee and committed to Tuskegee and I inherited that.  It's almost impossible to grow up in Tuskegee on that campus the way we did, you inherit the history because it's being talked about.  The founder Booker T. Washington and Tuskegee's science genius George Washington Carver and his contribution and then at that time with the segregated public accommodations, all the great figures were coming through to speak and of course they would either stay at Dorothy Hall on campus or they would stay with family members because they couldn't stay in hotels like you can now.  So unlike the crabs in the barrel image at least with us as children at the time, people were very proud of the accomplishments of the various teachers who came through.  We were told about where they went to school and what degrees they had, what they had written and we weren't presented with any negative--there's negative about everyone, it wasn't presented to us.  These were people who were held up to us as educated people, formal people and as a kid it was--you internalize it to some extent but you also--the childishness in you resents it to the extent that you want to play, you want some frivolity but it was very rigid.
Story_ID: 120321
Speaker 1: Okay. Let me ask you about--before I ask you about some of the people I want to just ask you about growing up.  Do you have a first childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh we lived in a big house owned by the [Tuskegee] Institute [Tuskegee, Alabama] at the gates of Tuskegee on Franklin Street and the elementary school was right across the street adjacent not across Franklin Street but adjacent, Chambliss Children's House [Tuskegee, Alabama] which I attended from first grade through the eighth grade.  There was Chambliss Children's House, there was a small Catholic school, there was Lewis Adams and there were two or three but most of the kids' parents were affiliated with the institute went to Chambliss Children's House.  My earliest memories were running over to the Children's House playground to play and anxious to go to school to start kindergarten.  I went to kindergarten through eighth grade there and I remember my father [Reuben Abraham Munday] bringing home a new Mercury.  This was before I started school that's an early recollection; the excitement of him driving this car home.  I remember our first television set in that house.  Most people didn't have televisions, the first time I saw television was my Aunt Ophelia's television in Dayton [Ohio] and it had a little round screen like that, black and white.  The other powerful thing is the faculty procession.  Sometimes in chapel and sometimes at--well always at graduation but a powerful image for me was my mother [Gustine Elizabeth Munday] and father and other faculty people in their university gowns marching in together.  I remember just feeling very proud that my parents were in that procession and then some of the people I talked about--the people coming in from outside but William L. Dawson the great musician who arranged spirituals like 'Balm in Gilead' and the music we grew up on.  Strong emotional ties to spiritual music which was played regularly in the institute chapel and he was director of the Tuskegee Institute Choir which traveled all over the country and went to play at Rockefeller Hall [New York, New York].  Of course I was grown before I realized who the Tuskegee Airmen were.  Alfred Anderson who flew Eleanor Roosevelt around to show her the black men could fly airplanes and inspired the Tuskegee Airmen.  I went to grade school with his son; he was always flying around campus in his plane.  I had no idea who he was, people didn't tell their stories.  Herbert Carter of the Tuskegee Airmen, I went to school with his children.  Mr. Curtis who was George Washington Carver's assistant, I went to school with his nephew, Billy Curtis.  Because of the segregation it's just an oasis of talent the leading African Americans in their fields.  You and I talked about Monroe Work.  I didn't know Monroe Work but Monroe Work's 'The Negro Yearbook' which came out of the research division of Tuskegee basically tracked lynchings and is given credit for ending or at least reducing that practice a lot just by keeping track.  In fact in my office I have a 1947 edition of 'The Negro Yearbook' the year I was born and that book's annual publication would tell you the blacks who graduated from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut].  People like to think in terms of affirmative action being the beginning well you can look in there and see who graduated from Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] in 1947, different accomplishments by black people.  It's just rich in data and it's not--when people generalize about Booker T. Washington and just teaching industrial skills, it's not what you think of.  This was a data resource that is like what you're doing here, it's unavailable anywhere else, a very clear parallel to what you're doing here.
Story_ID: 120322
Speaker 1: Yeah Monroe Nathan Work, I mean his tombstone--that little graveyard in the middle of the [Tuskegee Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama] campus, it's near the monuments.
Speaker 2: Right there with Booker T. Washington, George Washington Carver, P.H. Polk the great photographer is there, big jokester, would be around always at the events with a big flash and polka-dot shirts, not tucked in, big sense of humor.  No one thought anything of it.  My sister and I went by to see him at his declining years on Washington Avenue where he lived as long as I can remember which is also where his studio was.  Just photographs everywhere, in piles, our history just in piles, it was unbelievable and just a wonderful, wonderful man with a big sense of humor, basically photographed the history of Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: Kind of describe the campus 'cause it's an interesting place.  A lot of buildings, lots of buildings and the statue in the middle.  I saw the gravestone of Monroe Work and it just says 'Work'; he and his wife and it's a big 'Work' on it.
Speaker 2: We were all proud going on campus.  It was almost religious, not only did the students build the buildings, they made the bricks.  So you could walk through campus and you would see the printing building where they'd print the local paper for the community, shoemaking, food processing, raised animals, processed the food.  The best of beef and poultry, farming, brick making, home economics for the women.  I mean it was an art.  The food that was served at Dorothy Hall, the presentation of the food, the way the food was prepared, I don't know if you know it but George Washington Carver was very much the cook, interested in recipes and different ways of preparing food, agriculture.  Later on a nationally ranking school of veterinary medicine, architecture, architecture building, beautiful chapel that actually burned.  It was struck by lightning and burned and replaced with a beautiful structure that's there now.  The famous statue of Booker T. Washington lifting the veil of ignorance from the slave who's crouching and Booker T. standing erect and pointing. We always wondered what Booker T. was pointing at maybe it's the world and it's opportunities with education would be the guess but he's showing the slave the world, I guess for the first time is the image.  The dormitories, vibrant campus, it's a small town so most of the students lived on campus in dormitories.  Education because we as a people were not permitted to learn how to read, a teacher in our culture was similar to an astrophysicist or something in another culture because a person who could actually teach you--people at that time understood what a privilege it was.  Kids would come from rural areas and be taught for the first time how to use a knife and fork.  Some people got their first pair of shoes at the institute.  It was not a judgmental place, he's ignorant, he's smart, son don't say ain't, don't use double negatives, take your elbows off the table.  So the atmosphere was rigid in a sense that there's a Tuskegee way of doing things but it was compassionate in the sense that no one was dismissed as unworthy or arrogant because there was an acceptance of the condition that people were coming out of.  Right outside of Tuskegee you had neo-slavery basically with the shareholder, not the shareholder the--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Sharecropper
Speaker 2: Sharecropper economic arrangement where people basically did not benefit economically from their own work.  They were able to eat and have a little money to spend but basically economic slavery--the continuation of slavery.  So very little culturally and this was a huge job for Tuskegee and the school was geared to bringing people up as far as they could go out of that experience, so.
Story_ID: 120323
Speaker 1: Now what were some of the sights, sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well mainly the [Chambliss] Children's House was the center of my life and we--Children's House was tied to the Tuskegee School of Education [the Tuskegee Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama], I guess what's called a laboratory school in some places so sometimes you'd have visiting teachers.  We had athletics, we had--we didn't have football, we played football sandlot football but we actually had a basketball--organized basketball team and when we were out of school as I mentioned baseball was very well organized in the various communities.  I lived in Greenwood which is a famous community that Booker T. set up to be a model African American community and I looked forward to after school ended for the summer playing with the Greenwood Giants practicing during the week.  Lots of plays, we were--the expression that it takes a village to raise a child, everyone was a parent.  We were corrected by everyone in the community, everyone knew your parents, everyone knew what was expected of you, very nurturing environment, and you walked anywhere.  Traffic was so slow; we'd walk in the middle of the street sometimes.  You waved at everyone, no one would ask you do you know him or her, it was just a Southern way.  You see another human being you recognized them and if you don't know them, you find out who they are.  Very performance oriented, it's always been a lot of entertainment in our communities so the school plays and performances I remember rehearsing for the mayday and we had a performance to 'The Nutcracker Suite' I remember in the seventh and eighth grade; lots of music, always music the spirituals and popular music.  It's no coincidence the Commodores, Lionel Ritchie's mother taught me in the seventh and the eighth grade.  Lionel is a couple of years younger than I.  Tom Joyner in Children's House a couple of years younger than I am.  We were always singing the Motown songs and you had the blues.  There was a big radio station, I don't know if you remember it Randy's--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah Gallatin, Tennessee, right you can get it up north you know, we could get it in Dayton [Ohio], we could get it as far as Chicago [Illinois] sometimes, you know if you--
Speaker 2: So--
Story_ID: 120324
Speaker 1: The Tuskegee [the Tuskegee Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama] people were not big on blues, were anxious to move away from some of that but we got to listen to it on Randy's and enjoyed it but the black middle class was very ambivalent about, I would say about real emotional gospel and gut-bucket blues.  I really got more into that when I started going to white schools 'cause the white kids were so into it.
Speaker 2: That's kind of an interesting dynamic, educated black people trying to get away from that and educated white people were latching on to it at the same time.
Speaker 1: Absolutely because they were secure economically and it was not a threat to just like what you like because there's no question that while people might not want a particular kind of blues played at the [Tuskegee] Institute, there is no question in my mind people enjoyed it when they heard it because it's uplifting music.  That's the irony of the blues the lyrics are down and out but spiritually it's uplifting to hear it.  So we were moved by that but what was presented was a toned-down kind of religious music.  In the classical music, Tuskegee was clearly the spirituals.  I can't hear the spirituals without going home, I can't be indifferent to the spirituals to this day it's a beautiful gift to us and to the country.  But lots of music and everyone liked to sing and dance, lots of dancing, lots of rhythm.  Then we had formal education, we had to go even in elementary school, we had to go on campus and take piano lessons.  Before I went away to boarding school we studied Latin on campus, we were tutored in math on campus.  So in a strange way we were prepared to go away as it were.  Tuskegee was like a cocoon that you were prepared to leave.
Story_ID: 120325
Speaker 1: Okay. How would you describe yourself when you were growing up, what kind of young man, what did you like?
Speaker 2: Oh man I was outgoing, really liked sports, liked girls.  My parents were--I had no choice about the academics.  It really became more internalized when I went away to school but I was always concerned about how I was doing academically.  Now one very difference about--academic cultural difference--academic performance in Tuskegee [the Tuskegee Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama] is that it wasn't competitive in the sense that you were frantic about doing better than the next person.  So it wasn't the ranking class situation where if you're ranked higher than I am in the class, you get to go somewhere that I don't get to go.  So I think it was enough to be considered smart and it was enough to be considered someone who did well in school.  It was not as necessary to show how much better you were as the next guy.  I learned that in boarding school which I'll tell you about because right around the time I was finishing [Chambliss] Children's House [Tuskegee, Alabama] in the early '60s [1960s] the northern prep schools because of the Civil Rights Movement started opening to southern students.  So many kids from Atlanta [Georgia] and Nashville [Tennessee] and Tuskegee [Alabama] and other places were catching the train to go north to boarding school.
Speaker 1: Now before I take you there, who were some of your teachers in grade school that made a big impression on you?
Speaker 2: Well let's see I remember Mrs. Sprague [ph.] of first grade.  Now Mrs. Sprague's husband was an English teacher who taught Ralph Ellison and Albert Murray.
Speaker 1: Two great writers.
Speaker 2: Yeah and his wife taught me in first grade, the first grade teacher was Ms. Pitts, second grade teacher was Ms. Henderson and her husband Jimmy Henderson was the head of the George Washington Carver Foundation which was a research institution on campus.  Let's see third and fourth grade, Mrs. Flowers, fifth grade Ms. Cox, sixth grade Ms. Mullins and then Alberta Ritchie who was seventh and eighth grade.  Alberta Ritchie was Lionel Ritchie's mother.  Lionel Ritchie's mother was one of the early Ms. Tuskegees and a beautiful person, sweet person.  I had my first non-black teacher--we had two teachers in the seventh and eighth grade.  You had a science/math teacher and then you had Ms. Ritchie who was the English/history type teacher.  In the seventh grade I had my first non-black teacher, Ms. Chan who was Chinese and all my other teachers were black.  Now for nursery school I went to Ms. Logan's Nursery School and Mr. Logan, I think it was Mrs. Logan's--maybe it was her father who was the treasurer of Tuskegee for years and he comes up a lot with George Washington Carver because George Washington Carver wouldn't cash his checks and they'd find George Washington Carver's checks and of course as the treasurer Mr. Logan had to keep the books straight.   So he'd have to encourage George Washington Carver to cash these checks and Carver would give the money to students, people who were in need and of course you know how Carver turned down a hundred-thousand-dollar job at that time from Henry Ford and other people who recognized his brilliance--who recognized the financial potential of his inventions and wanted to put him on the payroll to get the benefit.  Carver just wasn't interested in money.  So as you read the biographies of Carver, Logan comes up.  Anyway I went to Mr. Logan's nursery school right there on campus which was right next door to The Oaks, Booker T. Washington's home where my mother [Gustine Elizabeth Munday] worked.  So I could walk right next door and walk home with my mother.
Story_ID: 120326
Speaker 1: Now how many people were in your household?  Is it you and your mother [Gustine Elizabeth Munday] and father [Reuben Abraham Munday], yourself--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I have a sister, Carol Ann and Carol Ann is four years older, I think I told you she was born in Henderson, Kentucky while my father was--I think she was born while he was studying at [University of Massachusetts] Amherst [Massachusetts] and after my great grandmother, Elizabeth Carr who my mother takes her middle name from died, my grandmother came to live with us so there were the five of us and extended family was another thing.  People took care of each other and my grandmother did not work once she came to live with us.  She kept things organized, my mother and father were working so she kept things organized and helped around the house and helped raise us basically, and I was very close to her.  She brought a different dimension to me.  She would tell ghost stories and--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Did she call them ghost?
Speaker 2: Hants [ph.]
Speaker 1: Hants right.
Speaker 2: I think she called them ghost but stories about haunted houses and--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: When I first heard the term hant, I didn't know what my father was talking about.
Speaker 2: I know the expression but I think she used ghost and we were very close and we would play marbles together and I think at her age having young people around, I think it meant a lot to her.  She was always amused by what I was doing, she would attend the baseball games and very religious.  One powerful image I have coming out of the bathroom upstairs and hearing praying for me and the rest of my family.
Speaker 1: Now was church a big part of growing up?  Did you go to a church and--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Not like in Dayton [Ohio] it was--people were religious, prayed, a lesson before each meal, Sunday school and then church; you had to go to Sunday school and church.  When we visited my Aunt Ophelia they were in church all during the week.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what church they went to?
Speaker 2: I don't but they were--church was I would say church in a way took the role that education played in Tuskegee [Alabama].  I think the culture of the Mundays in Dayton was church.  I think the culture of the Mundays in Tuskegee was Tuskegee [the Tuskegee Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 120327
Speaker 1: You had a big decision to make about school, where you were going to go; I mean this decision to go to boarding school how was it made?
Speaker 2: Well it was a major moral dilemma for the parents at that time because these were parents who had been to major universities for their advanced degrees.  So they knew the demands of those schools and they wanted their children to go to schools like that.  They also knew that the state of Alabama was going out of its way to make sure that the separate but the unequal black schools got poor facilities, second-hand books were not being prepared properly at least for the most competitive schools.  Most parents want their children to go beyond them.  So on the one hand you want your child to have the emotional support 'cause you love your child and you want to spend those high school years with your child.  So you kind of make the choice do I take this leap of faith, send my child to strangers for what I think will be a first-class education or do I just give my child emotional and community support knowing that my child will be healthier emotionally but not as well prepared academically.  Some of the parents including mine were taking the leap of faith.
Speaker 1: Did they give you special instruction before you went?
Speaker 2: That's the amazing thing, you asked me about slavery, and you asked me about stories about my parents growing up, nothing.  I remember my father [Reuben Abraham Munday] shaking my hand and telling me that he expected me to be a good boy and to succeed.  I didn't see anything wrong with it, it's amazing looking back but at the time I shook his hand and told him I would and other people had done it.  There were kids ahead of me at [Chambliss] Children's House [Tuskegee, Alabama], Johnny Robinson went to Mount Hermon [School for Boys, later Northfield Mount Hermon School, Gill, Massachusetts] and Sonny Foster went to one of the great schools.  Sonny Foster was the son of the president of Tuskegee [the Tuskegee Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama].  These were guys that were athletic, they were smart, these guys were doing it.  Alfred Anderson the son of a Tuskegee Airmen had gone, I think to George School [Newton, Pennsylvania], my sister's friend.  So I was seeing people who I admired go off and achieve and go on to good schools.  I wasn't talking to them about the details, now some of them came back and said they--I remember Lailey Washington [ph.] and Sammy Younge who was one of the first guys to die in the Civil Rights Movement came back talking about how unbearable it was, how different from Tuskegee.  But I just expected that I would play sports, I liked the idea of being at a high school that had a campus.  We walked around from building to building as opposed to just one building.  This is a child's thinking.  I looked at the catalog; I liked the way the campus looked.  I think most southern guys at that time in the early '60s [1960s] had the idea that up north you just walk in a restaurant and you didn't have to worry about whether it's the colored section, you just drank out of a water fountain.  I hadn't had a lot of experience with that because really the only time we came in contact with the whites was when we went shopping and because they wanted my parents to spend money, they were courteous and Dr. Munday and Mrs. Munday.  So there was no--the South is a deceptive place because as long as you play by the rules, everyone is delightful really.  No bad feelings it's just a problem when folks try to socialize across lines, that's what was unacceptable.  So I really didn't know any white people to know them.  All the kids at Tuskegee were black as I told you, I had one Chinese teacher; I had never had a white teacher.  So I didn't know anything other than you could go where you wanted to go.
Story_ID: 120328
Speaker 1: Well how did you--how did the school--this is Wyoming Seminary School, and I had to say it, because I think we started off by not (unclear) we didn't say it in the beginning. (Unclear) Wyoming Seminary School in Wilkes Barre, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: It's in Kingston, Pennsylvania a mile from Wilkes Barre, northeastern Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: How did they treat you there?
Speaker 2: Well my sister graduated with honors there.  So I was expected to succeed there and even though it was a step up academically there is a Wyoming Seminary Day School that many of the students went to and they were studying more advance mathematics, they had taken a year of modern language just before high school and frankly they were better prepared than we were and also culturally many of them understood before I did that you're not just there to do well, you're there to compete to go to the best colleges.  If you were to aspire to show how high up in the class you could get, I had to learn this, that whole psychology.
Speaker 1: But your treatment for the most part was pretty decent?
Speaker 2: Oh very much so.  The issues were really more a lack of familiarity and then, of course, they would have little racist sayings.  We would say eeny meeny miny moe catch a tiger by the toe, they'd say eeny meeny miny moe catch a nigger by the toe and then a light would go on that I was there and that this would be offensive to me but this is what they would say.  A brazil nut or what we would call a brazil nut they would call a nigger toe or if something looked amiss there was a nigger in the wood pile.  I remember one teacher saying there's a nigger in the wood pile somewhere and the whole class got quiet, I'm the only little black kid sitting up there.  I remember calling home once because we would get this world magazine of current events and there was an African tribe that puts plates in their lips and I can't remember the name of that tribe but there are social reasons for doing that and of course this was not discussed it was just a big joke about it and I remember calling home upset that there had been all this laughter about this tribe.  My mother [Gustine Elizabeth Munday] said that these folks are ignorant of the culture of those people, people have different ways of living and that I shouldn't worry about that.  But the isolation, it's not--when that got put in the magazine, I didn't take it as though that got put in the magazine to get at me or make a joke about me, it's just when you're different from everyone else, it comes out.  Now the white girls, I knew even then that white women were such a big issue in the South.  All young African-American males in the South knew--I don't even know how--it didn't get talked about but you knew white women were dangerous.  So I didn't consider the white women there dangerous but I knew it was an emotional issue for people like dating white girls.  Other students would say things like well Reuben are you dating Marian or is Walter going to date Marian as though were the only two women at the school, you kind of got the message.
Speaker 1: You said there was one African-American female--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right so which one of you guys--(simultaneous)--gets the girl?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--And you and your friend from Tuskegee [Alabama], right.
Story_ID: 120329
Speaker 1: So we would go--you didn't have a lot of free time they kept pretty tight reigns on you.  We did wander off to Wilkes Barre [Pennsylvania] some and we did find some black girls over there to talk to.  They were very different from what we were used to saying "yous guys" this and "yous guys" that and the white ones would say "yous" too.  We thought that was funny because southerners say "y'all" and northeastern Pennsylvania say "yous."  So we really in a lot of ways, we had more cultural differences with these girls than we did really with the whites on the educational side.  But when it came to music and dance, we had more in common on the black side because that was a big part of their culture just like it was a big part of the Tuskegee [Alabama] culture.  Black folks have sub cultures too and some people--the derogatory word for it is bourgeois blacks during the Civil Rights Movement but nobody wanted to be called bougie.   So we were very defensive and self-conscious about that later on but at the time you're just who you are and I guess we were bougie.  Someone called us white wannabes but that's not really fair 'cause we didn't know any whites so how could we want to be them, but I guess it's possible but if we were wannabes it wasn't because we were thinking about people we didn't know just what we were presented with.  So you would always have the black guy from Mississippi who sounded like he was from England or something (laugh), we didn't know where it came from this was just what was presented.  But anyway we were very different from both the whites 'cause I had never heard the Beach Boys, I think Jerry Lee Lewis or somebody sang 'What I Say' and the white guys were convinced that he was the original singer of that and that takes on a whole importance that you wouldn't even get into.  If you are in Tuskegee everyone knows Ray Charles' song and then our music we would get teased about our music because it's more emotional.  Now I think they've revised history to make it look like everybody always dug Motown and everybody always dug Tina Turner.  Oh well this screaming and hollering back then when it was Ike and Tina Turner the reaction we got was whoa, what in the world are they screaming about.  They would listen to the Four Freshmen and the Beach Boys.
Speaker 2: The Four Freshmen?
Speaker 1: I'd never heard this stuff because the whites in the south were country and western.  So we had heard popular music, rhythm and blues and then country and western.
Speaker 2: This is like the hootenanny (unclear) fan had starting to kick up and beach music and surf music.
Speaker 1: Beach music (unclear) these guys were into cars like we were into girls, Giddy-up, Giddy-up 409, Little Surfer Girl, what did I know about a surf and nobody had any money for their own car and these guys' parents were buying them these supped up cars and they would read 'Motor Trend' and we'd be trying to get our hands on 'Playboy.'  But you got to appreciate 'Motor Trend' after awhile--after you saw what they were talking about but they were very different and the money, we had one girl there and I'll never forget her parents had an interior decorator do her dormitory room.  So these kids had money their assumptions were money.  Kids would go to Bonny Burnside's house, she had a boat, she had a boathouse and their place on the lake, and this was all foreign to us.
Story_ID: 120330
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Because my mother [Gustine Elizabeth Munday] was an English teacher, I really liked novels; I liked English, reading and writing.  I liked history a lot although I thought I was going to be a doctor.  My father [Reuben Abraham Munday] was a scientist and I was always around animals certainly I really enjoyed literature but I took all the science and I think in my senior yearbook they talked about me becoming a doctor.
Speaker 1: Were you involved in like--did they have like clubs on campus and did you run for student office?
Speaker 2: I remember being on the civil court, I was in the glee club; I was captain of the baseball team, most valuable player on the baseball team.
Speaker 1: What position did you play?
Speaker 2: I played a number of them.  I played centerfield, my favorite baseball player was Willie Mays and then I was a hind catcher, I think the last year I was a hind catcher.
Speaker 1: That's something you never hear people say a lot, hind catcher.
Speaker 2: Catcher is what they say now which is a tough position.  I have a finger that still hurts from a tipped ball I got on the finger years ago.  But my first year, this is another cultural revelation, my first year I played football then I wrestled, then I played baseball.  Every season I was in a sport because sports were emphasized in the South.  It's what boys did and it's what guys do and the girls, of course liked guys who played sports and it's fun to play sports.  I realized after my first year that that's not what was going on at that school.  People were being ranked and I was putting myself at a disadvantage worrying so much about making a different team every season.  The kids didn't come out as much to support the team, it just wasn't central.  So we went to chapel at seminary the people who were being recognized were the people who were doing well in school.  The other thing was that if you were a boarding student as I was for four years this was a powerful thing.  You didn't have to go to group study hall if you had a certain grade point average.  I did not want to go to group study hall because I could sit in my room, not be distracted and study.  So I was--I would say after my sophomore year, I was never in study hall again.  That became gradually more important to me than trying to make myself a big deal.
Speaker 1: So you were a pretty good student then?
Speaker 2: By my junior year I picked it up, I could compete by my junior year and my senior year I got the rugles award as the outstanding graduating senior all around graduate.
Speaker 1: That seems like that's how to do it is to make sure peak in your senior year.
Speaker 2: Yeah my parents were very proud.  I was active on campus, I was--I didn't just study, I still--I was very--I loved baseball and I did stick with that in a serious way.  I was in the glee club; I was an active person trying to be rounded.
Story_ID: 120331
Speaker 1: Now where were you going to go to college, had you--by the time you were a senior [at the Wyoming Seminary School, Kingston, Pennsylvania] did you know what you wanted to do career wise and where you wanted to go to college?
Speaker 2: I really didn't know what I wanted to do.  As I told you I thought I wanted to be a doctor but I applied to a number of schools.  I really admired a guy named Mike Trease [ph.] who was an English teacher who had gone to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and I was very flattered that he said to me that he'd like to see me go to Penn and there was also a dean that had gone to Franklin and Marshall College [Lancaster, Pennsylvania] and then my father [Reuben Abraham Munday] had spent some time at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York].  So I applied to all of those schools and I actually got an early admission to Penn and they were pushing me to accept that.  Then I got into Cornell and there were a couple of things about going to Cornell; one was I wasn't so sure how I would handle being in Philadelphia after boarding school; I had never lived in a city.  I think I don't know if it was at a conscious level, the fact that my father spent some time at Cornell, I think I liked that.
Speaker 1: So you decided to go to Cornell?  You go there in '65 [1965], fall of '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: Okay how did you like Cornell?
Speaker 2: It was like being freed, like the Emancipation Proclamation.  You could come and go--the assumption was that you were a serious student or you wouldn't be there.  It was fun, it was going very political because of the Civil Rights Movement--civil rights act, [1965] Voting Rights Act.  There were 1900 students in my freshman class, there were thirty-eight African Americans in my class and there were more Africans on campus when I started Cornell than there were African Americans.
Speaker 1: And Cornell had--did they have the famous--they had a takeover [of Willard Straight Hall]--now at Cornell was it in '65 [1965] they had the big student--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: That was in '69 [1969] my senior year.
Speaker 1: Oh let's--well let's--we'll get there then.  This is--if that was your senior year, I guess we're going to build up to that.
Speaker 2: Right, right--
Story_ID: 120332
Speaker 1: What--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that was--
Speaker 1: (simultaneous)--did you major in at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York]?
Speaker 2: I didn't major in anything the first two years.  The first year was pretty much planned you took a science, you took English, history.  I actually don't remember all the courses but this was at the time when they told you at least freshmen year what you were taking.  For the most part, all the students took that basic English class which I still think was a good thing.  So I got interested--my faculty advisor was an English professor named Dan McCall who I'm friends with to this day who has recently retired from Cornell.  I really got passionate about literature and one of the interesting things about Dan McCall was that he had taught for a while at Langston University with Melvin B. Tolson the poet.
Speaker 1: From Oklahoma, yeah.
Speaker 2: Exactly and so he was culturally competent in African-American literature and one thing I should have told you about my last two years in high school, I got involved in when I went home to Tuskegee [Alabama] in the summer something called the Tuskegee Institute Summer Education Program.  I got involved in voter registration and got exposed to SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] students in particular who were registering people to vote and who were being very vocal about our generation's unwillingness to passively accept what our parents had to accept.
Speaker 1: There is a Dr. [Charles G.] Gomillion at Tuskegee who was instrumental--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes a famous case on gerrymandering, Gomillion v. Lightfoot [1960], I think it is.  A case of constitutional importance because the whites gerrymandered the boundaries of the city to eliminate the black vote and unfortunately there was a lot of acrimony between the people of Gomillion's generation and outspoken SNCC workers.  People you would later hear about who were regularly on campus.  I met Stokely [Carmichael], I met--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah he really was a key figure in Alabama in '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Yeah and they were headquartered in Atlanta, SNCC was.  But traveled around and it really changed my life going out into the county even though I lived in Tuskegee, we really didn't interact with the sharecroppers and the people who--people would come into the institute to get educated but we didn't go out to see how they lived.  So this was really, I would say a life changing experience for me to see the conditions those people lived in.  A combination of hearing Stokely and [H.] Rap [Brown] and less famous people like Ron Woodard from Chicago [Illinois] who were talking about the work of Franz Fanon who were reading [Kwame] Nkrumah who were reading Camus' 'the Rebel.'  I just got voracious in my reading and passionate about what was happening.
Speaker 1: Now this was while you were still in high school, right?
Speaker 2: Right and I admired these guys for their guts as well as their intellect.  Was it over the top in places, yeah but given the conditions those people were living and it needed to be over the top because being a good Tuskegee gentleman was not going to impact that situation and so my generation and the generation before in Tuskegee had a real clash.  When it really came to a head is when Sammy Younge got killed for using a bathroom--a white bathroom.  He was told not to use the bathroom.
Story_ID: 120624
Speaker 1: Well tell us about Sammy Younge [Jr.], what happened?
Speaker 2: Well Sammy was--it was in the early '60s [1960s] [sic, 1966].
Speaker 1: This was before '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: Yeah the early '60s [1960s] [sic], I can't remember the exact year but Sammy was very outspoken, civil rights advocate, he had been in the [U.S.] Navy, he went to Cornwall Academy [Great Barrington, Massachusetts] which was one of the prep schools in Massachusetts and came home.  He was one of the ones who couldn't deal with it but very outspoken and I think some of the older generation felt that Sammy was looking for trouble because from some in that generation having a lot to say about the situation was stirring up trouble in their view.  Sammy was at the bus station in downtown Tuskegee [Alabama].  Tuskegee is two towns, there is Tuskegee, Alabama which was all white and there is Tuskegee Institute, Alabama which was all black, two separate post offices and so the whites were the merchants with the town in Tuskegee, the blacks had the institute.  So you had the interesting situation where the educated people were the blacks and the merchant class was the whites and the whites were really dependent on the blacks 'cause this is in the black belt.  So economically they needed blacks to spend money but they could not deal with social equality with blacks 'cause most of their experience--well they just had this attitude toward black people in general.  That's one of the revisionist history that it made a difference what your educational level was, how intelligent you were that didn't make a dime's worth of difference they're idea was that God intended for black people to be separate from white people and that's the way it was supposed to be.  Well Sammy went down to the bus station for whatever reason and asked to use the bathroom.  Some man named Segrest told he couldn't use the bathroom and I guess Sammy used the bathroom anyway and Mr. Segrest said Sammy grabbed for a golf club or something 'cause I think they found a golf club in his hand but Mr. Segrest shot Sammy in the head and that was it for me because no matter how outspoken a person is or whether you even agree with the person's point of view, to kill a person in their twenties, shoot him in the head over whether they use a bathroom or not this was too much for me and this is being combined when I'm getting a firsthand view of people with dirt floors, sticking newspapers in the walls between the logs.  When rural kids used to come around us, we used to think they stank.  We thought they didn't take baths well if you look into the reasons for things you understand.  Well number one, they bathed but they had wood stoves so the smoke in those places would smoke their clothes up.  We didn't understand as kids, no one explained this to us, so--
Story_ID: 120625
Speaker 1: Personally I was ashamed that I had judged people without understanding their condition and I was embarrassed because going away to boarding school, I had read--it was almost a sickness the way I was reading novels because I wanted to compete and all the educated people as I saw it had read certain major books.  So in the summer I'd just sit down, I might spend a whole day reading through books that's just how competitive I got and I was alienated socially because it was awkward to have a normal social life so I substituted books.  So all this is going on in my head, my idea of an educated man--African American.  I'm getting exposed to how people are living right outside the gates of Tuskegee [the Tuskegee Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama] and then they shot Sammy [Younge, Jr.].  I'll tell you when you're a kid--in Tuskegee when you're a boy, the older ones beat up the younger ones to make them tough.  They didn't hate you and you knew it, it's just that the bigger ones--if you're playing ball they would knock you down, they make you tough.  It happens in just about all black communities as well.  The thing that stuck in my mind about Sammy was I was paying my dues, the stronger, older guys were--if we played football they'd try to knock you out and if you're playing basketball they wanted to block any shot you tried to put up and it would make your whole day if you threw one up in their faces.  You'd just be happy the rest of the day.  Well anyway I remember Sammy saying to a guy who used to just really like to bully me, man don't hit him so hard, don't hit him, don't do that him and just a little thing like that to a kid and you were going to be a man about it and we weren't going to stop going to the playground just 'cause the bullies were out there, we were going to keep on playing ball.  That's how you got tough, that's how you got better and there is no moral judgment because as you got older, frankly you knocked around the little ones.  But this guy was compassionate and that just stuck with me when he got killed.  It really affected me and I couldn't accept that he deserved this and all that kind of stuff and then I started reading, I started reading about the anti-colonial movements in Africa, I started reading some of the psychoanalytical work of Franz Fanon and I was evolving.  I was caught between a political place and my desire--I've always had this I wouldn't say it was a conflict but this dual drive between my desire to excel academically and my political education that I got and so I was hearing [H.] Rap [Brown], I was hearing Stokely [Carmichael], I was hearing Ron Woodward, Wendell Paris from Tuskegee.  I understood what these guys were saying and some of them had problems, life style issues.  It's not that I agreed with everything they said but I just felt that there needed to be a change.  At the time I went to Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], I was evolving from someone who was sent away to school to be a success.  No one told me what that was supposed to mean and frankly I didn't know other than that I was supposed to represent Tuskegee and do well.
Story_ID: 120626
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: It sounds like you were ahead of--politically, way ahead of a lot of people--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: I was even called Tuskegee's--one of Tuskegee [Alabama]'s first hippies, a person said that to me meaning to be derogatory 'cause I was hardly a hippie but I wore sandals, I wore a beard, I got some dashikis.  I was exploring who I was.
Speaker 2: So this is like '65 [1965], '66 [1966]?
Speaker 1: Yeah '64 [1964]/'63 [1963]
Speaker 2: Do you remember when you first heard when Stokely Carmichael marched from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama] in '65 [1965] when he first called for black power?
Speaker 1: I remember that and I had heard black power before.  [H.] Rap [Brown] was in Lowndes County and we would drive over there to help them and at the time the Black Panther Party was not what it turned into in California.  It was a black political party on the ballot in Alabama.
Speaker 2: It was like the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party in Mississippi--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah so the idea was that black--the majority should make the decisions and elect the people.  None of us understood what at all was radical about that other than that realistically we knew these folks could not handle black people controlling their own destiny.  So really it wasn't so much that we were radical as it was that people couldn't handle the American idea when it came to black people.  Democracy is a great thing for whole world until black people want to exercise democracy.
Speaker 2: I just had a question that popped into my mind, what Johnny Ford around in those days?
Speaker 1: Johnny Ford came later, he was the first--he was my sister's age and my sister I should tell you went to Tuskegee High School [Tuskegee, Alabama] a year before she went to the boarding school and they were classmates.  But he came later and he came from working-class people, he was not an Institute person but he came when the Tuskegee, Alabama side started changing because the blacks-[Charles G.] Gomillion and the Tuskegee blacks--boycotted the town of Tuskegee.  This was well before the bus boycott in Montgomery.  Basically broke the economic back of Tuskegee, Alabama so that blacks became more involved politically.  He went out and organized folks out in the county and became the first black mayor and I mean things were so psychologically messed up that in a place as educated as Tuskegee Institute, you actually had well educated black people talking about we don't have anyone who can be mayor.  I mean it was almost psychologically people knew the trouble it would be and it was almost an outlaw thought.  It was like oh God I can't be thinking that we would be Mayor of Tuskegee.  So it was interesting how people accept what they are used to over time until some catalyst for change comes, people tend to keep doing whatever they've been doing.  So Johnny Ford--this was a whole new idea and in another sense I think Tuskegee Institute people and this is just--I'm sure they're a lot of people who would disagree with me, it was almost as though we were too good to be mayor.  I think it would have been viewed that this was beneath us.  Teachers it was lofty teaching and--but actually running for mayor having a little shop down in Tuskegee, nobody was thinking about that and historically given what the people were coming out of, you could understand why.  But Johnny Ford took another approach, a bold approach and it was really the rural people of Alabama more than the Tuskegee Institute people who elected Johnny Ford.
Speaker 2: Okay I just wondered if he was involved in those days.
Speaker 1: You know Johnny and again just my opinion is a traditional politician.  Johnny was married to a white woman, he was a traditional politician.  I don't think-- certainly not a black power guy obviously and--(simultaneous)(unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah he [Tuskegee, Alabama mayor Johnny Ford] became mayor much later on--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yes, yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --in the '70s [1970s] I guess, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah--
Story_ID: 120627
Speaker 1: But, so you took some of the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] ideas and the ideas about what was going on in the world--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, right.
Speaker 1: --I guess in terms of the struggle, people against colonialism and all that to Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] with you before you even got to Cornell.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That's a g- That's right, and I had the Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama] arrogance too because you have to remember that all the blacks I knew were educated until I was fourteen, a heavy mix of PhDs and master's degrees, everybody had a house.  I didn't grow up--everything we had we made, our house was built by a black contractor, the architect was black, if we got sick we went to John A. Andrew Hospital, a black hospital.  So I didn't come out of a culture where I was looking to other people initially.  How should I put it?  I knew there was a problem with race but I didn't automatically associate that with us being downtrodden.  Is that making any sense to you?  Because we weren't downtrodden, we protected ourselves and we evaded situations that would have cost us more than we wanted to pay and that was the big question for Tuskegee [the Tuskegee Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama].  If things are going to change, who's going to pay the price and how should it be done?  The Tuskegee style which frankly now that I'm an older man I think we probably need to get back more to some dignified, educated self-reliant approach.  Now that can be viewed as radicalism to those who it scares but basically the Tuskegee model is really the way most ethnic communities behaved.  It was forced on us with segregation but in Detroit [Michigan] there is a Chaldean [Assyrian Catholic] community, Seven Mile there's a Hispanic community, southwest Detroit.  No one would suggest that anything was wrong with that, certainly all the people of that ethnic group don't live in those places but there are centers of those ethnic groups that are culturally-Dearborn [Michigan] is Arab-American for the most part, it's no accident that these people culturally have a comfort level and want to build institutions that they are comfortable with.  So basically I come out of that on the one hand.  On the one hand I come out of that on the other hand it was built though in an artificial environment that was imposed on.  So when that imposition goes away what happens then?  Do you just run for wind, do you run away from it, is there anything to be learned from what was built in that community?  So there was a lot going on in my mind when I went to Cornell and there was a big change for Cornell because there the minimum was thirty-eight out of nineteen hundred in a freshman class.  There weren't thirty-eight African Americans on campus before we got there.
Story_ID: 120628
Speaker 1: Now Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] did they develop the black studies program [Africana Studies] while you were there?
Speaker 2: This was in response to the takeover of Willard Straight Hall later.
Speaker 1: In '69 [1969]?
Speaker 2: Yeah
Speaker 1: So when you were on campus there wasn't a black studies program?
Speaker 2: We've formed an African American Society which of course later became the Black Liberation Front and being a southern boy cultural differences remained with me.  I was--some of the symbolic stuff that goes on in inner cities never resonated with me, the Black Liberation Front that's not a name I would choose but the African American Society went to that, more dramatic and then when you threw in the Vietnam War and the disproportionate number of African Americans who were dying there and of course, everyone was getting drafted and the student deferments were going away.  So white students who may have otherwise been disinterested were very, very political at the time.  The feminist movement was beginning-the [birth control] pill, the invention of the pill and the sexual revolution, those things--free love, as they--those things went together.  This was pre-AIDS and some of the diseases we have now or at least before our knowledge of those and so just a lot of change in the country at that time.
Speaker 1: Is Cornell--from what I gather is a pretty liberal campus.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah it's one of the few rural major universities, major research universities Ithaca is about Cornell for the most part; Cornell and Ithaca College.  This was--you didn't have people--careerist like you have now.  You grab a kid out of high school now and he's talking about wanting to be a MBA, he's talking about after I get my M.B.A. from Harvard [University, Cambridge, University], I'm going to work for this accounting firm, no people at that time were talking about are you for the war or against it, do you believe in black power, what is black power mean, what's the appropriate approach to moving African Americans along?  So I remember I went back to Cornell to speak and one thing that interested me was when I got on the plane to come back, I realized no one was particularly interested in what I did for a living.  People were interested in what I thought.  Reuben I remember you used to say this or that, you used to think this or that what do you think about that now?  I disagreed with you, do you still feel that way.  It's just very much a matter of intellectual integrity and consistency more so than how do you make your living and I think that's old money, I think in these Ivy League schools people assume if you can get through those institutions, you can make a living.  So unless you're going to sit there and count each other's money and decide who is most successful that way then--which is crude and gauche then I think what you do is you talk about how do you think and how you got there and how you've changed, how you've evolved and you shouldn't think--twenty years later you shouldn't think the same thing you thought twenty years before.  Not because you were wrong but because things change in twenty years and your thinking should have evolved, with them so that's the process they were interested in; I found it liberating, you know, (unclear).
Story_ID: 120629
Speaker 1: But the [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] campus was live, the demonstration you referred to, white students took over the engineering building to protest the Vietnam War.  There were demonstrations all the time.  SDS, Students for a Democratic Society were way crazier than we were when it came to tactics, we knew as a minority group we couldn't engage in those tactics, we weren't trying to bring a war down on ourselves.  So this armed takeover--it really wasn't an armed takeover--there was a demonstration in the spring of '69 [1969] during parent weekend and some [Delta Upsilon] frat boys tried to come into the place and got thrown out on their butts and they said they were going to come back and teach folks a lesson and that's when people went out and got their arms.  I wrote an article about it that I gave you which is kind of my personal view of that experience.  But it was not an armed takeover as I think the--we were told that the newspaper clippings and the magazines afterwards could very well get us killed because the reaction to just the pictures themselves without the story was frightening to people.  It was an unfortunate situation but I think the message rightly or wrongly for the students at that time African Americans were anxious to send a message that African Americans were going to defend ourselves.  If you want to bring dogs and hoses and all of that, some people are going to lie down and some people aren't and people were all over the map.  Everybody--when the history gets revised to make it--to build up the nonviolent demonstration which is historically both an amazing story and also a very wise approach to the Civil Rights Movement.  Clearly there was another philosophy that I'm not looking to fight anyone but I don't want you to be able to rely on the fact that if you just do anything to me, there's nothing you can do to me that will make me respond to you.  I think, particularly young people--particularly young men who had watched these children, four little girls get blown up [in Birmingham, Alabama] and all this kind of stuff, just not in the mood for that at that particular time.  Meanwhile we're all over in Vietnam blowing that place to smithereens and we were under threat of getting sent over there.  We weren't seeing anybody sympathetic to either the American soldiers or the other side, all that blood over there.  Nor was anyone entirely clear why we were over there.  It's a patriotic issue to support the troops which you should, guys putting their lives on the line, they're not making the cause, they're doing--you either do this or you go to jail.  So absolutely the troops are supported but it seemed to be a problem with an explanation of why these fine young men are being put in this position.  When you've got a group of African Americans who you've got a guy like me growing up watching a buddy get shot in the head for using a bathroom, you got to at least admit that this is hard to put together, this was difficult for a nineteen-year-old guy to understand it.
Story_ID: 120630
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: What was the result of the student takeover in '69 [1969] when you were a senior?
Speaker 1: Yeah I did--my wife and I--my wife's a Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] grad and I dropped out for a year after that.  I met up with a guy who was a Vietnam vet[eran], Jimmy, mechanic and went down to Charleston, South Carolina and worked on the waterfront, drove a bus for a vocational school, went fishing every day and kind of grew up 'cause when you look back on my life, I'd never lived off of campus and so my mind was kind of blown and I needed to be out of there but I did some growing up in Charleston.  I found out that I had to go on and be who I am.  That I couldn't just change into someone else just because I dropped out of school and the guys I hung around with I really liked but I didn't want to just talk about women, I didn't want to just drink, I didn't want to talk about hourly wages.  I enjoyed talking about all these books I had read.  There was no escaping the fact that I had an academic background.  So I got real and accepted myself, went back, finished school, got a master's in African and African American Studies.
Speaker 2: This is back in 19--so you got your master's in--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 1: I got my master's in '74 [1974].
Story_ID: 120722
Speaker 1: So you spent a year away from Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] and came back and--were they calling it the Africana studies department then?
Speaker 2: Well I finished my degree in English and then they had started a master's program in African American [Africana] Studies and John Clarke was there, John Henrik Clarke, [HM Yosef] Ben-Jochannan was there, a gentleman named--a number of Africans Ahmed Mohiddin from Makerere University in Uganda had an impact on me, in fact I named--my son's middle name is Ahmed for Ahmed.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: I don't even remember--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well I ask you because somebody's going to transcribe this.
Speaker 2: Yeah Mohiddin, M-O-H-I-D-D-A-N maybe [sic, M-O-H-I-D-D-I-N].
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: Phonetically but I really admired him and he was a brilliant political thinker.  And so I got my master's and got married in '71 [1971], December of '71 [1971] and I started writing news for Cornell's Office of Public Information.  By this time I wanted to write, I was interested in historical issues, I was interested in literature.  So I got the opportunity to write for the Office of Public Information and I did that from '72 [1972] to '74 [1974] and it wasn't enough of a challenge for me.  I really enjoyed the writing, it was just sort of a wonderful initial job but I didn't feel challenged.  I felt I needed to get out of Ithaca and I felt I needed to round out my education so that I wouldn't be limited in any way.  Obviously no one understood the practical side of African American Studies and I didn't really do it as a practical move, I just had an opportunity to spend two years studying my culture with people who understood and I thought this certainly is as legitimate as studying western thought.
Story_ID: 120723
Speaker 1: --and European--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Did anything really surprise you about African American studies?  I mean once you got into it--(simultaneous) (unclear)
Speaker 1: Yes some things surprised me, how little I knew.  The average African American just doesn't know.  Edward Wilmot Blyden and just a--Carter G. Woodson, I guess people know about Carter G. Woodson.  You know except for W.E.B. DuBois and Booker T. Washington and a few others, people don't read [Kwame] Nkrumah.  African Americans just don't normally talk about Franz Fanon nor do they talk about African history, the Ghana Empire, the Mali Empire, the Songhai Empire, the impact of Mansa Musa's hajj and the gold he took to Mecca [Saudi Arabia] and its impact on the world which really was a terrible thing for sub-Saharan Africa because it did signal to other forces how rich sub-Saharan Africa was.  In fact, sub-Saharan Africa were trading gold for salt because they didn't have salt and that's how prevalent it was and of course once people were tempted they went in to get it.  You're just not taught--this is not considered important in majority school but it's important to who you are.  There's no such thing as a slave, they're people who have been enslaved and so if you think of people as slaves, you don't think of them as having a history.  You know learning about Goree Island [Dakar], Senegal and talking about the negative things in terms of culture and cooperation, the African side of slavery, the Arab role in slavery.  There's just a whole world there that people don't want to talk about.  What was the impact of colonialism on Africa?  Walter Rodgers the--I can't remember the name of the book--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: 'How Europe Under-Developed Africa'.
Speaker 1: 'How Europe Under-Developed Africa'.
Speaker 2: Walter Rodney
Speaker 1: Walter Rodney, Edward Wilmot Blyden's 'Christianity and Islam in the Negro Race' talking about the difference between the imitative Christian and the more original-thinking Muhammadan who incorporates his indigenous religion with Islam and Blyden was a Christian.  Just fascinating--a fascinating world that even being from Tuskegee [Alabama] there were so many writers that I'm not familiar with and not exposed to it.  I felt half educated but by that time I finished writing news, I needed something practical to sell to the world that's outgoing and opinionated.  Writing was too passive--
Story_ID: 120724
Speaker 1: Now you were in school with [HM] Earl Ofari Hutchinson too, right?
Speaker 2: Well he was--I was taking--I was getting my graduate degree and I'm not sure if he was in Africana Studies.  We were in courses together and he spoke because he had written a book at the time, 'The Myth of Black Capitalism' may have been one of his first books so I was familiar with him.  I don't recall exactly whether he was in the program or in another program at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] and was just active at the Center and at the Africana Studies Center there's just unbelievable array of speakers that came through to lecture and it was a wonderful period for me.  But I had a young wife, wanted to start a family and my brother in law was a Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] law grad and despite all my political activity had a good academic record because I was a teacher's kid and I always was interested in my studies.  I think I was on the Dean's list at Cornell before I just left which just about killed my parents as you might imagine.  But I was able to go back and finish and decided to go to law school and was going to join my sister and brother in law in California.  I wanted to go to [University of California-] Berkeley [California] but my wife got a job at [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] as director of Baits Houses which is a dormitory and I got a nice package to support my study at Michigan Law School.  So we came out to Michigan in '74 [1974], Ann Arbor and I was on a mission to get in and out of there because Charles Lawrence my brother in law was really the only--I didn't know anything about law, no lawyers in the family, no growing up wanting to be a lawyer, it was really a practical decision.  In law school I discovered how interesting it was; I certainly knew the implications of law from the Civil Rights Movement and also saw that as a very useful tool.  What I thought was that I might be a legal correspondent, go back to the writing but with that specialty or didn't know exactly what I'd do but I knew I needed the credential and so I started law school in September '74 [1974] and was through in December '76 [1976] so I raced through.
Speaker 1: That is fast.
Speaker 2: Yeah I raced through law school.  My son was born in '75 [1975] and I needed to get out of there and get a job and my wife decided to get her Ph.D. in clinical psychology.
Story_ID: 120725
Speaker 1: Now is there any--are there any teachers or any experiences in law school that stand out that you want to talk about?
Speaker 2: It was like a boot camp--like an intellectual boot camp for me.  It's a new territory; it didn't really have any--first time I was in an environment where I didn't really have any instincts because I'm from the academic world and not a business world.  I wasn't really that exposed to business people but intellectually fascinating.  I was really, really interested, very impersonal.  [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] is one of the larger law schools so you were in large classes that practice the Socratic Method.  It's not like going over to my faculty advisor's house and Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] talking about Melville and Hawthorne and all of that or Richard Wright.  But I was on a mission to get in and my idea was that this would give me some control.  I would have a skill that I could market directly.  I was interested in having my own business and--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Do you know what kind of business you wanted to go in?
Speaker 2: My own legal--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Legal firm?
Speaker 2: My own law firm.
Speaker 1: Now did you graduate with a JD or--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes it was a J.D. in December of '76 [1976] and a friend of mine showed me a 'Black Enterprise' article on Lewis, White, Clay and Graves [Detroit, Michigan] which was founded in 1972 and it was funny because they were bragging about him and grossed $250 thousand and a picture of all five of them and all these brothers had gone to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Michigan.  I was really impressed with that and called to get an interview.  I came over and interviewed and joined what was then Lewis, White, Clay and Graves and it's now Lewis and Munday.  Mr. White is general counsel at Triple A Michigan; Mr. Clay is a federal appeals court judge, sixth circuit.  So it was Lewis, White, Clay and Graves then it became Lewis, White and Clay and Graves went on the bankruptcy bench.  Then it was--then White left and it was Lewis, Clay and Munday and then it became Lewis and Munday.  So I went from the newest associate in March '77 [1977] to a named partner.  I was president of the firm from 1994 to 2003.
Story_ID: 120726
Speaker 1: Basically I (unclear)--I thought I'd still be leaving, but Coleman Young was mayor, there was a lot of huge downtown development work going on.  I became the first general counsel to the city of Detroit [Michigan] downtown development authority and just tremendous access to those who were involved in economic development.  We were early on involved in tax increment financing and different kinds of tax abatement, industrial commercial housing, abatement, tax-exempt bonds.  This firm was the first African American firm in the 'Redbook' authorized to give an opinion on tax-exempt bonds.  So I was in my comfort zone because it was groundbreaking territory.  I was getting to be myself; I was a fish in water.  Coleman Young with Tuskegee Airmen originally from Alabama, tough as nails, I think respected as a man but really disagreed with it, very much disliked in some quarters but I think history will be kind to Coleman Young in the long run but he was a man of strong opinions and very much empowering.  This firm would not be here but for Coleman Young and I gave you a film that kind of details the history of this firm from '72 [1972].  It's now one of the oldest continuing firms from '72 [1972] to 2005.  Many of the firms have--that started around that same time have fallen off.  So we're proud that we've been able to continue the institution.  I am very much of the belief that we must build as African Americans build back our business class and our firm is very much involved in working with African American auto suppliers and other institutions as well as Fortune 500 companies.
Story_ID: 120727
Speaker 1: The office we try to present to the community as an example of what educated African Americans can do.  Because we are now integrated, many of our most successful people don't live in our community anymore and many of our most successful people work for majority-owned firms.  So there are very few people out here giving the message to young people that you can start a company, build it the way you want to build it, represent the values that you want to represent and I think, I'm not an educator by training but I think there is a tie between lack of motivation and the belief that you can't build a business because you really don't need a Ph.D. to own a party store, you don't need a Ph.D. to own a gas station, you don't need a Ph.D. to own a fast-food restaurant or family restaurant.  But you do have to know something about accounts receivable, accounts payable, cash flow, marketing, personnel relations and boy when you're an African American employer you really get to see firsthand some of the damage that's been done to the community just by some of the attitudes that people bring to your workplace.  If you're not careful you will find yourself making comments about people that you've heard the majority of people say.  Really the learning ground in America is in the business setting and because people spend more time at work than they do at home or in their community.  So when you don't have a business class with people representing back to the community what the standards are, getting up, getting to work, be properly dressed, properly communicating, being able to communicate in writing, being reliable.  These kinds of basic things not necessarily knowing everything, not necessarily being the smartest guy in the community but business depends on reliability, business doesn't like surprises.  When you buy something, you want to know what you're getting.  If you have a legal problem, you want to know the person is not the last guy at the party, you want to know that this is a person who works hard, can be relied upon, that's committed.  So this is not sitting on the corner, this is not rapping, this is not dancing, this is not playing a game like basketball or football, this is a day-to-day commitment that involves other people and ties a community together.  So a lot of the values of the community are acted out in the business and since integration we don't have that ethnic community in a business sense.  If you look at where say Chinatown is, the core of Chinatown is where the businesses are, the restaurants.  When we say our community, we're talking about houses, residences but if you look at the businesses they are not ours.  You go to Dearborn [Michigan], there's a business community that's at the center of the community.  You go to the Chaldean [Assyrian Catholic] community at 7 Mile and Woodward [Detroit, Michigan]; it's the church and the business community.  We just have the houses and the church and we desperately need this.  So at this point in my life I've tried to be committed to this legal business which is as important to me as the practice of law what this business represents and I've tried to have integrity about that.
Story_ID: 120728
Speaker 1: What's been your biggest challenge as a lawyer--as a legal firm?  You had big legal challenge that you--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well we recently had a group of lawyers leave the firm back there.  A group of lawyers that we thought were going to be the next generation to take this firm forward.  So that was hurtful but we--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Why did they leave?
Speaker 2: It's kind of a long story but we were trying to get more into the large corporate arena and we weren't going to grow the people, didn't have time to grow the people.  So the dilemma is do you get the work and then hire the people which would be great if you could do it or do you hire the people and then send them out to get the work which is really the only way you can do it because you can't offer what you don't have.  The problem is that if the work doesn't come in as quickly as your expenses run on to keep paying people, you're going to have a problem sooner or later.  So the issue became the business was not coming as fast as the expenses were running to keep the team intact so we wanted to cut the team back and my interpretation of what happened was that this group that we brought in saw itself as in some ways independent of the institution because they hadn't grown up in the institution.  They talk commitment to the institution but I think their idea was really to come in and go forward with the institution which would have been fine with us but you can't go out of business, once you're out of business, you're out of business. So they chose to leave in a way that we didn't appreciate.  They had us believing that we were going to just make the cuts that we needed to make.  Obviously if we got a whole lot of work later, we could bring people back because if you have work you can find the people but you just can't carry people because ends just don't meet.
Story_ID: 120729
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a--what are you the most proud of in terms of this firm?
Speaker 2: Long-term commitment, what it represents in terms of community involvement.  All of our lawyers are very, very active in giving back.  I've been with Big Brothers/Big Sisters for example, seventeen years.  I have been on the National Board of Big Brothers/Big Sisters, sitting a year on the national conference for community justice.  When you're in the position to have a business like this, you can take care of the business but you're also able to support the political figures who are articulating things that you think are good for the community.  You have both skills and resources to bring.  You're not just there to protest when something goes wrong but having an institution, you're actually in a position to represent something to the community and to support the institutions in the community that are being helpful.  So this is consistent with my Tuskegee [Alabama] understanding of the world.  This is consistent with me making use of a privileged education that my parents gave me and I'm proud that this firm has been here thirty-three years.  We have--there is no major downtown real estate development that has received any public assistance that this firm hasn't been involved in, in some way in at least the last twenty years and if my son ever has children, I'll be able to ride around Detroit [Michigan] and show my grandson industrial automotive assembly plants and Mack Avenue assembly plants, Cobo Hall Center expansion, Millender Center, one of the few building in a major city named after an African American, an African American lawyer actually, Robert L. Millender, I worked on that, that's important.
Speaker 1: Now Detroit [Michigan] in terms of real estate and land, inner city of Detroit has got probably more challenges than most any other major city in terms of a lot of the property still is dilapidated and burned up--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: More opportunities too because you've probably got the most undervalued international waterfront in the country.  Can you imagine condos overlooking Windsor, Ontario?  The view of the barges going by, General Motors that bought the Renaissance Center and is very much involved in what's called the riverfront conservancy project and actually bringing the waterfront up to what it can be.  We have the two new stadiums for the Tigers and the Lions and the entertainment district nearby the Fox Theater and State Theater.  Young professionals who weren't born when the riots occurred don't understand why they're in the suburbs with a three-car garage with nothing to do but go to the mall.  When they can be in an environment like your city Chicago [Illinois] where something's going on where there is jazz, ballgames, where there are other young people where you can walk the streets and enjoy the company of other people and coffee houses. Detroit's got a lot of challenges but Detroit has a lot of opportunities, I believe that.
Story_ID: 120639
Speaker 1: Okay, Africa Town. Now what happened, what's going on with Africa Town, give us your analysis?
Speaker 2: Africa Town comes out of the recognition that we desperately need a business community.  The old historic African American business community, Interstate--I-75 runs through it now.  It was knocked down and eliminated, we don't think that's an accident but we do not have the business class that supports a city [Detroit, Michigan] that's 85 percent black.  The problem with Africa Town is the way the plan was presented.  The plan was not prepared by people who have experience in real estate.  So what was driving the plan was the goal of increasing the number of African American-owned businesses.  What was missing was the specifics of what property are you going to buy, how are you going to finance it, what's going to be the mix of businesses, what's the demand for the businesses, what are the financial projections to make sure it can carry whatever debt you need to incur to make the improvements you need to make to real estate?  Obviously this can't be done in a racist way, you can't just go out and say this is unless you use your own money as some ethnic groups do, loan money to each other only.  But you can't, as a public body, go out and say only these African Americans can participate in this district.  So the objective, I think, is correct that you can't send all your money out of town and wonder why you live in a ghetto.  You can't not own any businesses and wonder why you are unemployed.  If you own businesses you can be employed and you can employ other people.  So I think we've been told in pretty clear terms that people in this country don't want to hear us crying about what happened to us.  Maybe that's wrong, maybe that's right but I think that's a fact and that being the fact, I don't think there is a lot of room for us to do anything other than to take the initiative to build and support businesses as much as we can.  Now how you do that, it matters and you need people who have experience, expertise matters.  People who have done it before who've made the mistakes, what you get to do depends a lot on where the money is going to come from.  Who's going to put up money for this, how do you decide what businesses will be profitable and which ones won't, where's the support?  Out of nowhere we're going to sell fish or whatever and what was the analysis that got you there?
Story_ID: 120640
Speaker 1: The other thing is when you're in a city [Detroit, Michigan] that's 85 percent black, I don't think a district is your problem, I don't think it's important that you have a district 'cause you're eighty five percent of the population.  We like to talk about the percentage of the population we are, our problem is the percentage of businesses we have in that population.  We're too much in the public sector which has to shrink because you have to get the taxes down to attract business.  So the public sector just has to shrink.  The infrastructure of our city is--I won't say the infrastructure, we have great infrastructure which is another reason I see this great opportunity in Detroit.  You don't have to rebuild all these sewers and roads, we have a great infrastructure.  But we have the government-- people employed by the government for the size of the city, Detroit has lost population and we haven't streamlined the personnel in the city and that's going to be painful and it's going to be most painful if we don't have businesses for people to go work in.  So the objective is right on the money.  The approach was inadequate and I would say in some places a little bit misguided.  There's no reason to criticize or take on other ethnic groups who are doing well with developing businesses on their own, no reason to take them on.  There is no reason not to enjoy the differences, that's the beauty of the thing; you want some Chinese food, Indian food, Lebanese food whatever, that's a great thing to have in your city.  We just need to get on with building our own businesses and as I told you earlier, I think part of the problem is this paradox, we are an ethnic group that has had to fight to try to get people to not see race.  It's very difficult to then as you may some progress in that arena to then turn around and say ah yes but you are still an identified group and you've got to take care of yourself.  It's kind of a double apparently contradictory message but if you look at the way ethnic communities operate in this country, little Chinatown you think it's an accident that the Koreans own all of the beauty products, you think it's an accident that Chaldeans [Assyrian Catholics] own gas stations, they didn't get together as a group and talk about that at all.  It's an accident that we don't have any party stores in our community.
Speaker 2: We have a lot of parties so it would seem like we--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: We buy the lottery tickets from these party stores which is where the money gets made, the gas stations it's not on the gas.  The stations don't make the money on the gas.
Speaker 2: So you're saying that a lot of our people in Detroit [Michigan] and elsewhere properly focus on integration to the extent that they don't look out for their own interest as a people.
Speaker 1: I just don't think we are mindful of how we're spending our money.  We spend our money out of town, we're very critical of each other, for example if you have a business and have a problem with your business, I don't need to decide that I'll never do business with an African American again what I need to do is get over to see you to say here's a problem I'm having Larry and how are you going to address this problem because I want to do business with you because I want to see you succeed and I have to buy bread and milk and the milk is the same, bread is the same, the gas is the same, I have no problem buying these things from you, here's my problem.  I don't need to conclude that I would never buy a bottle of water which you pay two or three dollars for which is the same water.  If I can get all up in arms about why you should be a Supreme Court justice, I ought to be willing to buy a bottle of water from you.  You can make a living at that, you might get in Ebony magazine because you sell bottled water or lottery tickets or the rest of it so what.  Make a good living, support your family, live a good life.
Story_ID: 120641
Speaker 1: What are some of your other hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: We've had a--the educational system has broken down with the family breakdown.  It is hard to be a man in this culture if you're not bringing home a paycheck because men in this culture are defined by what we do and a lot of your eligibility as a man revolves around what kind of earning power you have because that's the kind of lifestyle you have to offer whoever you marry.  In Detroit [Michigan], for example, 17 percent of the children live with a mother and a father in the home.  Now we talk about what's wrong with the school system but you go to a bad school and if you have good parental support you can get a good education.  On the other hand you could go to a great school and have a problem at home and get no education at all because we've been going to terrible schools most of the time and we have a few people to get educated. And (unclear) When you're a grade school kid you don't know why you're getting an education, you don't have the maturity, someone has to say you will sit down and do your homework, you will turn off the television and they can't be out partying trying to be a kid themselves they have to be there to see that you're doing those things.  You have to work with the teacher, you don't need to go to the school and fight the teacher because your kid comes home and says something that you don't like without questioning whether it's even true.  So I think that this business development ties right back into our family structure.  When you're going home proud in your car with that paycheck to your wife, there's some respect there.  You don't have to be a player; you don't have to be a gangster.  You can pay your house note like everyone else and get your respect and get treated like a man.  So my two issues and what I'm extremely interested in--this is why my Big Brothers/Big Sisters activity--these young men have to see some men who get up and go to work.  I'm not a man because I wear a chain or can attract some women or I can buy a fancy car.  Get up and go to work if you have somewhere to go do what's asked of you and try to do it in a way that is competitive and young men need to see.  This is not what's being projected.  Also, a man who is expressing interest and concern for another young man, young man I wish you wouldn't do that, I wish you wouldn't swear.  That young lady you're treating like that, you may not want to respect women but that's somebody's daughter, that's somebody's sister, that might be somebody's mother that woman didn't come from nowhere.  What if that was your mother, what if that was your sister, your cousin then you'd want to go kill everybody 'cause they said something to her.  So figure this out, sit down and figure this out and just being encouraging.  A lot of men are afraid of the young men so you run and hide, get a paycheck.  But Martin Luther King could have done that just to speak he could have been paid any amount of money particularly after he started winning international awards.  He could have lived like a king, he didn't have to keep going back, and we need to keep going back.  Harriet Tubman got out of slavery, she's one of our moral teachers, got herself out of slavery, turned around and went back and got some other people and morally it's fine to talk about individual achievement and I did this and I'm from here and all the rest of it but the real, we owe the people who made those sacrifices.  We have a responsibility to those who opened the door because it used to not matter what you wanted to study or where you were from or it's great that you're here asking me all these questions but it wouldn't even be possible but for some of these people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 120642
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: No major you always want to be better, I think part of never being satisfied I'm not a self-satisfied person.  I wish we could have held the whole firm together, we will eventually build back up to that but what I'd like to have in place before I either stop or can't go on I'd like to see the next generation step in and see the value of continuing the institution, institutions with continuity.  As people, since we don't know why we're on the earth, tradition plays an important role--positive traditions play an important role 'cause they're landmarks, good things we should do.  So people who respect themselves take care of their tradition.  So I'd like to--I hope we can get that in place before we have to stop.
Story_ID: 120643
Speaker 1: Now by the same token when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: A lot of what I told you, I came to Detroit [Michigan] as a lawyer.  Most people they may know I'm from Tuskegee [Alabama] but they don't know I went to boarding school.  So there is your idea of who you are and then there's what the world sees so I think I'll be viewed as one of those lawyers from that firm Lewis and Munday, I've heard that name Lewis and Munday and people say to me oh you're Munday and I'm hoping that name will represent positive African American professionals who have not lost touch with what their history is and have vision for the future and--
Speaker 1: Do you--
Speaker 2: That's what I would hope for.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 120644
Speaker 1: Now did your parents get a chance to see you become successful?  What do they think about your career?
Speaker 2: Yeah my father [Reuben Abraham Munday] died in '72 [1972] before I ever went to law school.  He died shortly after I became a news writer at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] and my mother [Gustine Elizabeth Munday] saw me become a graduate from [University of] Michigan [law school, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and saw me become a partner.  She died in '88 [1988], she did not see become president of the firm but before she died she really set me free, she told me that--I thank her for the opportunity and the sacrifice that she made on my behalf and what she told me was that all they ever wanted for me was for me to make the best of it and she felt that I tried to do that so that gave me a lot of peace.
Speaker 1: Now what about your family today?
Speaker 2: Well my wife's a professor at the University of Detroit Mercy [UDM, Detroit, Michigan] and she also has a clinical practice.  I've been married since '71 [1971] thirty-three years.  I was twenty-one, she was eighteen, she's an army brat born in Osaka, Japan, lived all over the world and my best friend. We are empty-nesters now; my son is twenty-nine, Reuben Ahmed.  He's in Detroit, works for Aflac Insurance, went to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] and did not finish.  I'm still hoping that he will get that done for obvious reasons.  He also has an interest in a cleaners, he is taking to heart our talks about entrepreneurship and is very much interested in business.  He studied accounting and we're also very close, he's an only child.  One thing I wish I had spent more time with him, you can't do everything and you look up and they are grown.  Parents are making choices just like the leap of faith our parents made.  My idea was to put myself in a position to give him the best possible education which I think I did to the extent that he wanted it.  So there are three of us and my sister is in California, a filmmaker by the way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) California.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 120645
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we haven't discussed that you think you want to raise before we ask our last question?
Speaker 2: Just that I appreciate you doing this.  I have enough modesty to not know how important my particular story is but I really appreciate that you're doing this so that there will be a record of what people have contributed and those who want to research legal institutions and African Americans and the law whatever it is, why have this resource so I really appreciate that.  We've talked about Monroe Work and the Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] record that was made in the 'Negro Yearbook' and self-respecting people.  Love starts with yourself, you just can't love anybody if you don't love yourself and I think that having an interest in each other and protecting the history is evidence of the kind of love that offers the larger world the possibility that we can reach out and continue to contribute as we have in areas we've been allowed to like music and sports.  I think we'll do the same thing in other areas over time but I think institutions like Lewis and Munday--I hope that this institution will help people believe that we can because people believe what they see not what they hear and I hope that this will be a little pebble in the water toward a belief in ourselves and business and law--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --real estate.
Story_ID: 120646
Speaker 1: Our last question similar to legacy but a little bit different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Good husband, good father, loyal partner, good lawyer, good citizen, a guy from Tuskegee [Alabama] who did his best, that's good enough.
Story_ID: 120647
Speaker 1: Okay, so just describe who this is and where (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a picture of me, these doors we still have in this office but that was in an office in the same building but across the hall, 1300.  We were in that office from 1981 to April of last year.
Speaker 1: What's the significance of those doors?
Speaker 2: Those doors--when we first moved to the First National Building where we are now on 81, we had those doors made.  I think they are made by Laser and Mexico and when people visit the office they always remember those doors and it's kind of one of our marketing tools.
Speaker 1: Real impressive doors.
Speaker 2: Okay that's me as a little boy, I'm not sure exactly what age but it has to be early grade school.  There were two photographers in town, that's either P.H. Polk or Hawkins Studio.  I'm not sure which photographer but you can see the dress on a little boy and how that Tuskegee formality of everyone was always crispy at that time so when I came back from up north with the beard and the sandals, you can imagine.
Speaker 1: That's you and your sister, okay tell us about this one.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is one of the earliest pictures I have of me and that's my sister, my older sister Carol, and I remember the table.  This must be in my home because the table was sitting in my living room.  But that's us as very young kids.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: (Off-Camera discussion)
Speaker 1: This is my senior photo from high school--from boarding school.  This is the alumni magazine and as a tribute to my parents I went on the board of that prep school.  I considered it kind of a moral victory to go back there on the board and this is a story about me going there, leaving Tuskegee [Alabama] to attend Wyoming Seminary [School, Kingston, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: This is the cover of a magazine when the firm was Lewis, White and Clay and you'll see Mr. Lewis standing to the left, Mr. White with his arms folded, Mr. Clay who is now Judge Clay, Court of Appeals and yours truly on the far right and the doors again you'll notice.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: The cover of Corp! magazine, a recent edition this year and it's on Michigan's Extraordinary African American Achievers and if you look for the A in African you'll yours truly among the faces.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is another article in Corp! magazine on Michigan's Most Influential African American Business Leaders and this is when I was president and CEO of the firm.
