Story_ID: 208787
Speaker 1: My name is Regennia Williams and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer today is Matthew Hickey and we're very happy to be in your home and to let you know that you're close to interview number one thousand.  The archive that we're building that will eventually house five thousand interviews of African American history makers and thank you for agreeing to be a part of this.  We are growing in popularity; we have technology now that would soon allow people to access some of the interviews by way of the Internet.  So we expect that the activities that we're investing in now will ultimately impact the lives of millions of people across the globe and those who access the information by way of the worldwide web.  It's very generous of you to tell your story today.  We plan to be here for about three hours getting to know you and your life and the story of your work.  I want to begin by slating and to ask if you would first state and spell your name including your middle name?
Speaker 2: Dianne Ruth McIntyre, D-I-A-N-N-E, R-U-T-H, M-C-I-N-T-Y-R-E
Speaker 1: And would you please state your date of birth and the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: July 18, 1946 in Cleveland, Ohio.
Speaker 1: And would you also state for the record today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June 18, 2004.
Speaker 1: And finally the location of this interview with the address?
Speaker 2: The address here is in Cleveland, Ohio 3703 East 140th Street, Cleveland, Ohio, 44120.
Speaker 1: And will you tell us please what your occupation is?
Speaker 2: I'm a choreographer.
Story_ID: 208788
Speaker 1: Just to continue with the slating, we're going to ask a series of questions and they may sound silly but please know that we'd like serious answers to these.  First would you please tell us what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, wow that's tough maybe I'd have to say you don't ask a favorite drink do you?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay well there's a drink that's called a mango lassi, I think that's my favorite food and drink even though it has dairy in it and I don't drink dairy anymore but it's very good, mango lassi. L-A-S-S-O [sic.]
Speaker 1: All right and do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like the summertime.
Speaker 1: And how about favorite color?
Speaker 2: Maybe light blue, light blue.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Once I was in a place in Virginia called Chincoteague [Virginia], I've only been there once but it was very special, Chincoteague.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Carry on.
Story_ID: 208789
Speaker 1: Now, our interview is basically organized into three main sections and then in the last section is pretty much whatever you'd like to say.  But the first one asks about your family background beginning with your childhood here in Cleveland [Ohio] and your immediate family and grandparents if you remember them and then we talk a lot about education, formal education, school elementary, middle and secondary and post secondary and graduate work if you did that.  And also in the third section we focus on your public career and your contribution especially to dance.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So we'd like to start with your roots in Cleveland and I'd like to begin this section by asking if you could please tell us about your mother?  What's her name and where was she born, where'd she grow up and just things that you know about her childhood based on what she told you?
Speaker 2: Okay so my mother is Dorothy Lane McIntyre [HistoryMaker Dorothy McIntyre].  She was born in Le Roy, New York which is outside of Rochester [New York].  It is its own town; it's not a suburb of Rochester.  She was born there in 1917.  She had a sister [Ruth Layne Marshall], she and her sister--her sister was a little bit older, two years older.  They were both born there in Le Roy.  Their father [Clyde Layne] was from Virginia, their mother [Lena Hart Layne] was from Virginia too, Culpeper, Virginia and when my mother was five, her mother passed away and several years later her father remarried and then that mother [May Sellers] passed away when my mother was twelve, her stepmother.  So she was raised a lot by her father, her grandmother [Lizzie Lightfoot Hart], her aunt.  A lot of influence in her life was their father, Clyde Lane.  He was a farmer and he was foreman in Le Roy, New York.  He helped manage huge farms.  So the children grew up very comfortably on those big farms, huge farm houses and it was quite an area where there were very few blacks.  A number of the black people came to the area were because my grandfather was there and they came from Virginia.  So a lot of the people in that Le Roy, Rochester area have roots in Virginia.  Her mother's name was Lena Hart and her father was a Hart, her mother's mother was a Lightfoot and we keep a lot in touch with the Lightfoot side of the family.  We have a family reunion every two years.  So that group comes together and their roots were in Virginia as well and there is a burial ground there in Virginia where the first Lightfoot who was born in 1803, James Lightfoot [ph.] he is the oldest relative we know of.  And he was a slave during that period; his father was the slave master.  He married his wife Leticia Lightfoot [ph.] and he bought her freedom.  Somehow along the way he bought his own freedom and as time went on he was able to buy her freedom as well and we have the graves of the two of them and their descendants are in Culpeper, Virginia, was quite a special story because those graves were on their land, sometime in the 1960s they wanted to put a highway through that area.  My aunt at the time, my mother's sister owned that land.  They asked her, they said they want to buy the property to put a highway through there, she said, "Yes but you must move all of the graves from that area."  They agreed to do that and she said, "I would like them moved to the town cemetery."  At that time there were no blacks in the town cemetery however, because she had the upper hand and I don't know what the discussion was, they moved those graves to the town cemetery--the white cemetery.  They were the first people interred there even though they had been dead for many, many years and then my aunt when she passed away in 1977, she was the first person buried there--I would say directly.  So that was quite a unique story about the Lightfoots but we keep up with that side of the family.
Story_ID: 208790
Speaker 1: My father, Francis with an I, F-R-A-N-C-I-S, Benjamin McIntyre was born in Jacksonville, Florida.  He lived there till he was two years old, I believe and then he moved to Cleveland [Ohio].  His father was from Jamaica--Kingston, Jamaica, his mother was from Summerville, South Carolina.  Her whole family had moved to Florida, I guess when she was in her teens which is where she met my grandfather.  He moved first to the North to explore where a good place would be to settle and later he brought the rest of the family.  Before they here moved here, they lived in the New York City [New York, New York] area with relatives.  So my father's roots in Cleveland go very, very far back.  He was born in 1914 so I believe he came here in 1916 or '17 [1917] and he had three brothers, all boys.  Two of those brothers have passed away, one just about a month ago.  And so they were a quite visible group of young men in the Cleveland area.  We do have other history on my father's father's side because I have a cousin--had a cousin in New York who always tried to keep that Jamaican side of the family connected.  Her name was Felicita [ph.] Morris and she always just lets us know who our relatives were.  Many of them--well a number of them live in New York City now.  And my grandfather's sister was named Aunt Mae [ph.] and we were very close with her.  She was born in Venezuela and my grandfather was a merchant marine and also--my father's father--merchant marine and also had a number of jobs here.  He was a really brilliant man so was my mother's [HistoryMaker Dorothy McIntyre] father [Clyde Layne].  They had different ways of being brilliant and my father's father was also an inventor and he worked a lot with technology, radios.  He built radios, they had many bands on them, we used to talk to London [England] or hear London and people were interested in his local--technical people in that field were interested in his inventions.  So that's a little bit about some of my--and my mother's--my father's mother, Albertha Simmons [ph.] McIntyre from Summerville, South Carolina, she was really beautiful.  She was a descendant of the Seminole Indians [Native Americans] and African American and she was a domestic worker and a very, very fine seamstress and tailor.  She made all of my father and his brothers, she made their clothes when they grew up, their suits, everything.  And when we were little, she made some of our clothes which I didn't realize till later.  She even made our dolls' clothes.  I thought they had just come from a store; they were so neat and perfect.  She was very loving but she died when I was ten but she made a great impression on me.  I've always felt very close to her and my mother was close to her because she didn't have a mother, you know, since she was a little girl.  So she felt very close to my grandmother on my father's side.
Story_ID: 208791
Speaker 1: So my mother [HistoryMaker Dorothy McIntyre] grew up in Le Roy [New York] as I'd told you, she went to West Virginia State [College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] which was a college then it's a university now and while she was there she studied business administration and at the same time she became very interested in aviation.  There was a program there offered by the government, my voice is, offered by the government, civil aeronautics authority and they were training young people to be pilots preparing for the Second World War [World War II, WWII].  I believe there were eight schools around the country that had this special program for aviation and West Virginia State was one that was selected.  I believe it was the only black school that was part of the program.  It had an airport [Wertz Field; Yeager Airport, Charleston, West Virginia] right next to it which made it very convenient for that type of activity.  My mother had been interested in aviation since childhood because in Le Roy there was an airport there and my grandfather [Clyde Layne] used to take my mother and her sister [Ruth Layne Marshall] on rides on the airplanes.  So she wanted to do that, she signed up, they were allowing one woman in every group of ten men and she got her private pilot license through that program.  She was the first woman, I believe maybe in all eight of these schools that got her license in that program even though she was in the second year of the program, she actually got her license before the woman who was in the program ahead of her, I think a day or two before.  She also after flying, she flew sometimes after that and then she flew somewhat in Cleveland [Ohio] after she married.  She and my father [Francis McIntyre] met in 1942.  She got her pilots license, I think in 1940.  They met here in 1942; she didn't want to pursue flying so vigorously because it was a dangerous activity especially after she had children.  She also had some doors that were closed to her because of being black.  She tried to become part of a program called WASP, Women's Air Service Patrol [sic. Women Airforce Service Pilots].  They carried bombers back and forth during World War Two and she applied for that and when they realized what she school she had come from they told her they were all filled up.  In recent years she met of those women.  They made here an official WASP.  It's funny the name of the program too (laughter).  So she was--there's a really a very famous man in the history of Cleveland named Alonzo [G.] Wright, he became a millionaire actually in the service station--gas station industry.  He owned several gas stations, Standard Oil [Co. Inc.] in the Cleveland area.  He went to West Virginia State looking for a person to be his assistant and work with his books--his accounting and he selected my mother.  He wanted her to start right away in fact she didn't get to graduate.  She graduated but she didn't get to march with the class.  He brought her here and this is how she came to Cleveland and she met my father here and they married in 1942.  She's had work in that field, she also worked as a social worker and she also retired as a school teacher in Cleveland public schools.
Story_ID: 208792
Speaker 1: My father [Francis McIntyre] worked as a factory worker and he worked for the [U.S.] Postal Service for most of his life.  One time his work was very exciting because he was a railway mail clerk which meant he threw and caught mail on the train.  The mail used to be delivered in that way so that you get to a certain train station and the mail worker on the train would throw the mail off so that it would land on the platform and the mail was delivered that way.  And then there was a little catch arm a little further ahead and the person would have to snatch the mail from that pouch to take it inside so it could get sorted for the next mail throw.  So he did that for several years, it was exciting, he liked it a lot.  There were also not many black men doing that type of work.  So he retired from the post office.  I think both my parents retired in the '70s [1970s].  That's a little bit about--one other thing that was related to--okay there was something I skipped--oh my grandfather was also a driver for a man in Cleveland [Ohio], his name was Mr.--I'll have to come back to it but this man was a doctor, Dr. [Hamilton Fisk] Biggar and Dr. Biggar was a good friend of John D. Rockefeller.  For people who may not know, John D. Rockefeller started his business in Cleveland, the Rockefeller wealth.  It started in Cleveland, Ohio with Standard Oil [Co. Inc.] of Ohio.  Dr. Biggar was a good friend of his and my grandfather--my father's father he used to be a driver for Dr. Biggar.  They became very close and Dr. Biggar actually left a what you called a kind of stipend in his will he helped support my grandfather with a small amount of money until my grandfather's death in the '50s [1950s]--'60s [1960s].  In the old days it wasn't a small amount of money because it was even during the [Great] Depression.  Dr. Biggar died in 1928 so all those years--and he also put the down payment on their first home which is right here in Mount Pleasant, 142nd Street [Cleveland, Ohio].  Years later when I did a play about my father, I connected with the Biggar family and they were excited to hear about my father's association with Mr. Biggar--Dr. Biggar 'cause none of them remember him, they were too young.  So that was another little tidbit I wanted to put in that.  I think Cleveland had a lot of philanthropy in the early days.  I have a sister, Donna [McIntyre] Whyte, there are two of us--two siblings my sister and myself and my sister recently received her Ph.D. in social policy history.  She wrote a beautiful dissertation about the history of segregation and integration in the Cleveland public schools and she is the assistant vice president for minority affairs at Cleveland State University [Cleveland, Ohio].  She's also a dynamic writer and I think that's about it.
Story_ID: 208793
Speaker 1: Well Ms. [HistoryMaker Dianne] McIntyre you tell a richly detailed story about your family's history which I think is great and I know that information has informed some of the works that you've created for stage and just for the record I wanted to ask if you would be willing to state the names of some of those pieces that are based on your mother's [HistoryMaker Dorothy McIntyre] life and work or your father's [Francis McIntyre] life and work and where people can go to read more about how life informed art for the McIntyre family.
Speaker 2: Okay so I created a work called 'Take-Off from a Forced Landing' in 1984 and the inspiration for that work, it's almost purely a dance piece--a full evening dance drama and most of that was inspire by mother being a flyer.  It's a piece about a woman who is a flyer and her children.  The children are somewhat hypothetical however their stories are stories that I've lived or my sister [Donna McIntyre Whyte] has lived but we've changed the situation of their lives.  And a number of my mother's own words are in the piece that was really exciting.  So all the dancers were flyers; we wore jumpsuits and flying helmets like that.  It was premiered at the Joyce Theater in New York City [New York, New York] and that particular work there is information about it at the Schomburg Collection [sic. Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] in New York City and this is--right now is 2004, June and sometime in the very near future all of the materials about my dance work and theater work will be at the Jerome Lawrence Collection [sic. Jerome Lawrence and Robert E. Lee Theatre Research Institute] at [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio].  So people will be able to read about my work there as well in the dance collection at Lincoln Center [for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] part of the New York City Public Library [New York Public Library for the Performing Arts] which is also another place where there are some videos and literature about my work.  Another work I did which is completely my father's words about his growing up in Cleveland [Ohio] and all his adventures is called 'I Could Stop on a Dime and get Ten Cents Change.'  That phrase was one of my father's favorite phrases.  That work I premiered at George Mason University [Fairfax, Virginia] in their Theater of the First Amendment.  There are some wonderful producers there who believe in my work and then it went on to the Cleveland Play House [Cleveland, Ohio].  It was performed here in Cleveland at the play house.  It's a full evening work but this one is a play, it's a more traditional play with a lot of dance in it.  Each of the dancers--there are seven performers and each of them takes on the words of my father and then after it was in Cleveland, it was at Baltimore Center Stage which is the big regional theater in Baltimore [Maryland].  So at each of those theaters, Theater of the First Amendment, Center Stage and Cleveland Play House they have video records of those dances--of those plays and that's how people could see those.  And again, there will be written material, reviews and interviews that I've had about them at Lincoln Center Dance Collection and at Ohio State University.
Story_ID: 208794
Speaker 1: I do have a few more questions.  First about your mother's [HistoryMaker Dorothy McIntyre] childhood in [Le Roy] New York, I'm a city girl so when you say huge farm, a couple of acres would probably be huge to me.  But what really--do you have any sense of how large the farm actually was as far as number of acres or how far removed they were from other families in the community?
Speaker 2: No I don't know they were big farms.  You can ask her that.  They were big farms and the big houses, I just know they had to have a lot of people working--they had to have quite a few people working.  One time they lived on an orchard farm that had acres and acres of trees for fruit and then another time they lived on a dairy farm.  So I think if you looked out, you couldn't see somebody just like a few steps away--being the next neighbor would be quite a ways.  So these were farms that they had their home, my grandfather [Clyde Layne] as the foreman or the boss of the farm.  The owner was someplace--I'm not sure (laughter).
Speaker 1: You said that your mother was living in Le Roy, New York that other African American people came to that area from your father's hometown [Culpeper, Virginia].
Speaker 2: My grandfather's--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, yes, from your grandfather's hometown in Virginia?
Speaker 2: Right, yes he would invite them--young people he would get them work in the area.  Yeah go on.
Speaker 1: Okay, well I'm just trying to get a sense of how the community came together and who was actually working the farmland and in conjunction with the blood relatives who were working there as well.  So it's family and friends primarily and employees that were a part of that farming environment.
Speaker 2: Right I think that mostly they were other people, they were not necessarily too many other relatives who were those working the farm.  They were people--sometimes they were people who lived in the house with them until they got established and they were mostly not relatives.  I think some of the relatives may have moved to the area but they weren't working necessarily directly in that farm industry.  Maybe they found other livelihood there.
Speaker 1: Your mother's story of her early life is unique for a number of reasons.  First of all that she's in a rural community in the North when at that point in the 20th century most blacks were in the American South and many of them in the cotton South, a former plantation South or the Lower South and so that she's in that part of the world and they are doing that kind of work itself makes the story interesting.  But her migration story also is so very different from some of the others that we hear in that period because she's in the North and she's going--choosing to go south for her education.  Did she ever tell you why she chose to go to West Virginia State [College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yes she chose that because in her growing up she was mostly with white people and she didn't feel she had enough connection with other people of her own background.  So she wanted--she made a conscious decision to go to a predominantly black school.  So she looked at different schools and this is one she felt was very good. That was her choice, yeah.  Like some people would go the other way, right?  Yeah because there were--you know and her friends were other people in that community.  They were the, you know, the other Italian people or Jewish and of the various backgrounds.  She wanted to know more people like herself.
Story_ID: 208795
Speaker 1: Ms. [HistoryMaker Dianne] McIntyre, you'd mentioned that your mother [HistoryMaker Dorothy McIntyre] studied at West Virginia State University [West Virginia State College, Institute, West Virginia] by choice.  She's in this historically black college community and enjoying it but I had a chance to speak with another HistoryMaker [Lillian Burke] who was born in 1917 and she said often she had to try to figure out if she was being discriminated against because she was a woman or because she was an African American.  Now, because your mother chose to go into a rather non-traditional field, you know, to become a pilot do you know from her stories that she shared with you if she faced any discrimination either because of race or because of her gender?
Speaker 2: Well I know she didn't feel discrimination related to her gender.  She told me that she felt that there was nothing she could not do that a man could do.  She felt capable maybe that was partly because there was so much influence from her father [Clyde Layne] and he had these girls and like they could do boy things and the men who are in the setting with her in her training, the other people who are training to be pilots they were very respectful of her and she felt comfortable with them and I guess they would curve some things of their language at certain times that she was around.  And later, many years later when I created the piece, 'Take-Off from a Forced Landing' based on some of her stories, I met some Tuskegee Airmen who knew my mother or knew of her.  This was in New York City [New York, New York] and they spoke about what a great flyer she was.  They meant compared to everybody, you know, they could put her in her place in that way where she couldn't say those things to me as she grew up.  She did well, you could see by her marks in her log book but they said, "Yeah sometimes she could fly rings around a lot of the other guys."  Some of the people became Tuskegee Airmen, the guys did when they left Virginia State--West Virginia State then they continued--the Tuskegee [Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] program was developed after that time so they went into that program, a lot of them.  So she has associations with the people who were the Tuskegee Airmen.  In terms of race, yes she felt that discrimination.  A couple of stories she told me, one when she tried to apply for the program WASP [Women Airforce Service Pilots] and they told her no they were all filled up.  Another time she was going to-she was in Baltimore [Maryland] and she was staying in Baltimore after she and my father [Francis McIntyre] married, she went to stay with her sister [Ruth Layne Marshall] in Baltimore because my parents got married and just maybe a few weeks after that my father was called up to go to the war [World War Two, WWII] and he was away for three years.  During that time my mother went to stay with her sister in Baltimore.  During that period she went--she saw something in the newspaper that said the Civil Air Patrol was looking for people with their pilot's license to be stationed on the shores to look out for any enemy aircraft, it was during the war.  So she called them and they said, "We're having a meeting very soon or this afternoon so come on down."  So she went down to the place they were having this meeting and she had her license in her hand, she knocked on the door and they looked at her and said, "What do you want?" She said, "I came here for the meeting, I was told to come down here because I have my private pilot's license," she said, which she had in her hand and then they said hold on just a minute.  The person went away, came back to the door and told her, "We're all filled up and we don't need anybody thank you," just like that and closed the door.  So it was very shortly before that that she called them, they told her to come down.  So she did feel that racial discrimination and it wasn't because she was a woman, it was because she was black.  So yeah those were a couple of the stories that I heard from her.  Many stories I know the Tuskegee Airmen experienced as well more after they returned to the [United] States after the war.
Story_ID: 208796
Speaker 1: Well I often hear students of history refer to World War II [WWII] as "the Good War" if World War I [WWI] was the Great War.  There are lots of heroes and heroines too I suppose who come out of the World War II era.  Just thinking back on that history that your mother [HistoryMaker Dorothy McIntyre] made with a handful of other women, she's among the pioneers of flight.  Do you believe that she also has earned that heroine status in our history?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes because she was there to do that and had it been another time in history, a later time, who knows what she would have done with the credentials that--and the skills that she had.  Yeah but she was pioneering and she inspired other people to be able to do whatever it is they felt that they dreamed.  In Baltimore [Maryland] she also taught in a factory [War Production Training School No. 453, Baltimore, Maryland].  She taught aircraft mechanics to men who were building--I guess, you know, they were putting together aircraft.  So I think she had a good time with that and the people wanted to be in the class with a woman who is teaching aircraft mechanics (laughter).  It was unique for them so this was something--she wasn't doing part of the WASP [Women Airforce Service Pilots] or some other things, this was her contribution during the war to be able to teach in that factory.
Story_ID: 208797
Speaker 1: But this war [World War Two, WWII] as good as some people say that it was, came to an end, a very horrific end in 1945 when victory was secured in the Pacific with the bombing of [Hiroshima, Japan and Nagasaki] Japan.  But there are a lot of men who come home and settle down in that post war period and your father [Francis McIntyre] was one of them.  Can you tell me about how they decided to put down permanent roots in Cleveland [Ohio], start a family?
Speaker 2: Well I think because my father's parents were here and I don't think he ever thought about living in another place and it seemed like a good place to raise children.  When he came back, he was originally working at Westinghouse [Electric Corporation] and it was a very good job, factory job, however my mother [HistoryMaker Dorothy McIntyre] was nervous that factory job because the people go on strike from time to time and she didn't want my father to be out of work.  So she encouraged him to take the test for the post office which is what he did.  He also--my father was also proud that he had a wife who was pilot.  Some people asked that question, he always liked that, he thought it was great.  Yeah so he--I don't think he thought-he was a Clevelander, a strong Clevelander.  He liked traveling.  One job he had for a number--I don't know how many years but he used to drive for a traveling salesman who didn't drive.  They drove all over the northeast, New England, I guess as far south as Baltimore [Maryland], Washington [D.C.], areas in the Midwest and he did take the on vacation out west, Yellowstone [National Park] or something, the man and his wife.  So he loved traveling, he always loved driving and traveling, however I guess Cleveland was his favorite place, so he just, you know, wanted to stay here.  They were able to, I don't know if it was the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] they got their home or if it was because--or if it was through my grandfather.  My grandfather had very good credit from way back related to Dr. [Hamilton Fisk] Biggar (laughter) so it continued into the next generation.  So we first moved in the area, I don't know the exact name--I don't if it was the Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio] area but we lived on 105th [Street]--we were living on Westchester [Avenue] off of 105th.  That's what I remember; I was born in Mount Sinai Hospital [Mount Sinai Healthcare Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio].  I think they lived someplace else before that.  They bought a two family house, duplex side by side with my father's brother.  So they shared the cost of that house and then later they came and moved here, East 140th Street, and we were one of the first black families in this area.  Even though my father had lived on 142nd [Street] from 1928, the neighborhood never changed from 1928 to the '50s [1950s].  There were all these--just a few black families around Mount Pleasant [Cleveland, Ohio], however in the '50s [1950s] when we moved in it was the beginning of a changing neighborhood.  So it was a period of what's called white flight.  So when we moved here in about ten years it had become predominantly black and our schools were like that too.  At first it was just a few blacks in the school and then it expanded so by the time I was in high school the school was half and half.  By the time my sister [Donna McIntyre Whyte] two years later was in high school it was predominantly black.  A few years later it was all black.  That was a common thing in the cities at that time.  So our education was really good, we had great schools in this area.  [Andrew J.] Rickoff [Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio], [Alexander] Hamilton [Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio], John Adams [High School, Cleveland, Ohio], we had brilliant teachers, in fact some of the teachers at John Adams were there when my father was there (laughter).  A lot of teachers that we had were there in the nineteen--I guess in the '30s [1930s] when my father was in high school.
Story_ID: 208798
Speaker 1: You said that when your father [Francis McIntyre] and mother [HistoryMaker Dorothy McIntyre] were deciding to establish a permanent home in Cleveland [Ohio], they sensed that it was a good place to raise children and I wonder, since you were born here, if you could tell us some of your earliest memories of growing up in Cleveland, were they pleasant memories?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had fun when we were little.  Yeah it was okay, let me see my earliest memories, I don't remember before I was--I remember when I was getting ready to go to school the first day in kindergarten.  I was going to Dunne [ph.] School then and we had little books--we had books around the house and there was a dictionary we had that for each letter of the alphabet there was a picture to describe something of that letter and under T was teacher and it had a picture of a teacher.  So for a couple of years I thought that my teacher would look just like that figure in the book and it was a drawing, you know, like a cartoon (laughter).  So I was really shocked when I got there and the teacher was very young and pretty.  She didn't look like that teacher or like an old-fogey in the book and that is a memory I have, the first day of school.  Another thing I remember is once I was sitting in the living room/dining room with my father and I asked him a question, he always--you know maybe how children ask a lot of questions?  So I asked him a question and he said, "You know I don't know everything."  I was like, "You don't?" I'll never forget that.  I was like my father doesn't know anything.  I figured by the time you got a certain age you knew everything, everything in the world there was to know and I thought he was such a wise person.   When he told me that, it did not change my regard or how I held him in high esteem, it was just a revelation, like I thought grownups knew everything and I remembered that our school was--it had some tough kids in the school.  That school was predominantly black, the teachers were very good too but I only went to the first grade there and there was a little boy in the school who was really tough.  His name was Golden [ph.] and the teachers sometimes used to ask me to take bad kids to the principal's office--to escort them and a couple of times I had to escort Golden to the principal's office.  He probably was mild maybe compared to 2004 children but anyway.  So one day I was walking home from school with my friends and I felt this huge blow on the top of my head and then I saw stars even though I was still walking.  I turned around, it was Golden and he had taken his hands like this and just did a big hammer hit like on the top of my head.  I turned around, "What are you doing?"  I wasn't afraid of him even after that but I guess he had some resentment of me.  It was kind of a surprise, I guess because I used to escort him to the principal's office and I turned around and yelled, "I'm moving away from here soon, I'm moving away, I'm not going to be in this neighborhood much longer."  So I threatened that for several months, I knew my parents had spoken about moving.
Story_ID: 208799
Speaker 1: --And then we moved, and when we moved out here [Mount Pleasant, Cleveland, Ohio] and I saw that [Andrew J.] Rickoff [Elementary] School [Cleveland, Ohio] and the school was low, it was flat.  You know it was low, it had a huge, big yard, big playground all the houses here there was bigger lawns.  It was like we were moving to a paradise way far away.  It's not that far away (laughter) but it was more spacious, out here was just more spacious and even though my parents [Francis McIntyre and HistoryMaker Dorothy McIntyre] say maybe even the house where we lived before even though it was a duplex may have been bigger than this house even in it being two sides.  So it was just great.  I remember the first day coming into the classroom they said, "It's a new girl here," and I remember some of the black kids looked at me like, "who is she?"  You know like when there are only a few of you and a new one comes in it's like, "Oh is she going to be taking our territory or something," but soon we became fast friends.  At night we used to play out till late, hide and seek and different games.  There were a lot of children on the street at that time.  When I first moved here--not first but a few years after we moved, next door there were some white families and there was--once there was a group there and we were friends with two girls named Beatsie [ph.] and Twyla [ph.] and we had a great time and then some of our also best friends were down the street.  They were called the Tamaras [ph.], their father was Japanese and the mother was Chinese and white and there were four kids in the family and they were some of our best friends.  And my parents were friends--well, especially my mother was a friend with their mother.  They'd sit on the front porch either my mother was on their porch or she was on this porch and then over time there were other best friends.  After--the Tamaras lived there all through my high school years [at John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio].  Most of the white families moved out and then our best friends became the people next door, the Sanders [ph.] family and they had two girls who were close in age with my sister [Donna McIntyre Whyte] and I and I had a best friend across the street, Sandra [ph.] and another best friend down the street, Willie Pearl Clay [ph.] and we used to walk to school together to [Alexander] Hamilton [Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio] or Adams  and we used to play together in the evenings and in the summers.  And also Carolyn [ph.] next door and I started a group called the Little Bo Peep Club and with the Little Bo Peep Club we used to do activities for the littler children in the neighborhood.  It was something like a--not daycare, we weren't babysitting, we just created this club and we did drawings, we did drama, we did very creative things, ceramics I don't know where we got the materials and put on little dramas with them.  It was fun sometimes we'd see things on TV on 'The Little Rascals' and then we would do that, (laughter) our lives were something like that, adventures we had adventures.  We couldn't drive yet but we used to go--our parents took us a lot of places, we traveled a lot.  They would take us to [Washington] D.C. or to see relatives, sometimes we'd go sightseeing in cars and sometimes it was on the train, sometimes it was visiting relatives.  We went to Virginia, upstate New York, Detroit [Michigan], to our family reunions just all around, we loved traveling.  Sometimes I remember when we were little and the summer would be hot and my father would just take us for a ride maybe it would be ten o'clock at night, we might have our pajamas on, they'd put us in the backseat and we would just ride in the country.  It was nice growing up; we had a lot of fun.
Story_ID: 208800
Speaker 1: And I used to also then take dance classes every Saturday from when I was four.  My teacher was Elaine Gibbs; I'll tell you more about that.  And so that was a part of my life from the time I was four years old, I was always taking dance classes.  So then when we had family reunions or any kind of gathering, I created a dance event for the family.  I had my full out first dance event which was a dance drama maybe like a little kid's version of 'Stop on a Dime' ['I Could Stop on a Dime and get Ten Cents Change'], I had that when I seven and it was produced at the library which is right here at the corner.  So there were kids from school and from the neighborhood in that production.  So we had a creative upbringing and our parents [Francis McIntyre and HistoryMaker Dorothy McIntyre] were very supportive.  They didn't push us to do this and that but if there were some activity they felt was very--would be something we would like or we would get a lot out of it, it was something we were a part of.  So we had piano lessons, I took mellophone, cello besides the dance and it could be like the night before it's like, I'd say, "Oh Ma, we have to have so and so in school tomorrow and we need a costume for it."  So she'd be up all night making that costume.  Or, "Daddy, all the kids have to get to this place and I volunteered you to take us there," and there he would--they always gave everything for us--for the kids.  We didn't like lack anything and they would go the extra mile whatever for the children.  In my sister's [Donna McIntyre Whyte] generation when she was grown and had children, my parents also did the same thing for her children, her two girls because Donna was a single parent and often they'd take Miata [ph.] and Mariama [Whyte] on these same kinds of trips that they did with us when we were little.  We had a very rich upbringing.  I didn't feel--we were in an integrated neighborhood for part of my growing up--most of my growing up and we didn't feel that--I never felt that experience of racism.  Our teachers were teaching in those school systems probably before there were many black people in the schools and they--it's not like they shifted something about their teaching methods because they had black children.  In fact, I had one teacher named Ms. McNamara [ph.]; I never will forget I learned a number of things from her.  One day there was a little boy reading his name was Dennis [ph.], I can't remember his last name.  Little Dennis had a round, fat face, a little white guy--no he was big and Dennis was reading, he was trying to get through these words and he was stumbling a bit and I think I did something like (sigh), like that like, okay let's move along here, he is taking so long.  I was in the second grade or third and she called me on it.  She said you know, "[HistoryMaker] Dianne [McIntyre] we're not all at the same level in reading, so we have to be respectful of each other."  It was something I think that stayed with me always.  So this same teacher, I don't know if it was before or after, one day she told the class, she said you know, "One day we're going to see Dianne McIntyre on 'This is Your Life'."  I don't remember what the situation was and she was serious.  She felt that there was something special about me and this was a statement she made to the class.  Yeah, our teachers they gave us all they had.
Story_ID: 208801
Speaker 1: You know, you said just a few minutes ago that you would tell me more later about those dance lessons that started when you were four, but you can tell that now if you'd like because actually you had anticipated my question, where this great love and appreciation for dance and drama too with 'The Little Rascals' antics, where that came from, if it was in you or something you were introduced to by your parents [Francis McIntyre and HistoryMaker Dorothy McIntyre]?
Speaker 2: Yeah I think when I was little also I did track and things like that.  I was very athletic as well in school.  But my parents say that I always danced, I almost maybe came out dancing.  So when I was--I remember I used to dance in the living room over on Westchester [Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio] and I used to wish that there were people driving up and down the street who could see me out the front window and think that that was a dance studio.  Okay so when I was four my parents sent me to a friend of my father's named Elaine Gibbs.  Elaine was a dancer and she was going to start a dance school so I was one of her first students if not the first student and she had her dance school then in her basement.  It was in that area where we lived over, I think it was called the Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio] area so it was in that area and I'd go to her house and I'd have class with her once a week but I was a solo student.  I don't know if she had any others at that time.  So we'd do a little ballet and acrobatics.  So I stayed with her and eventually she taught at Cory [United Methodist] Church [Cleveland, Ohio] which was I think right at her corner, it was very close by.  So then her school grew and I studied with her ballet, tap, acrobatics from the time I was four, I really continued, I guess through my high school years [at John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio].  Now something I didn't know at the time was that if I had been a little black child and had tried to go to a school that was not a black school that I would not have been admitted, I didn't know and it didn't even occur to me that all of us in the school were black.  Maybe at first because that neighborhood was like that, it was a black neighborhood and these children were from--actually the children were from all over.  She was the dance teacher for black children at that time in Cleveland [Ohio].  Then she moved out to the Mount Pleasant [Cleveland, Ohio] area and--right at 139th [Street] and Union [Avenue].  She was a wonderful inspiration; Elaine Gibbs and that was her name at the time, Ms. Gibbs.  Also when I was in about the fifth grade another wonderful thing about this area was called the Mount Pleasant Community Center [sic. Community Services Center of Mount Pleasant], it was called that at the time now it's called the Murtis [H.] Taylor [Multi-Service] Center [Murtis Taylor Human Services System, Cleveland, Ohio].  It was started by Mrs. Murtis [H.] Taylor.  One time she told me a lot about the history of the Murtis Taylor center.  If there is anybody that knows her history, it will be very special to capture 'cause it has a lot to do with the history of Cleveland and social consciousness.  So Ms. Taylor's center had afterschool programs in theater, dance, and music.  So I signed up for some dance and I had a teacher named Virginia Dryansky who was a modern dancer and we had classes sometimes they were at [Andrew J.] Rickoff [Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio] and then they moved to this library and Virginia Dryansky was a Karamu dancer.  She was white and she was with Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio] which was an integrated company.  She was a brilliant dancer and she encouraged us to create our own dances and she gave us a whole modern dance technique which was fantastic.  And we also did--she brought in music for us to work with that was related to our heritage.  I remember that we did--I didn't know they were current popular songs at the dance like we did 'Oh Freedom' by Odetta, we were like ten years old.  So that's why it got my interest in modern dance and over time I gravitated more towards the modern than to the ballet.
Story_ID: 208802
Speaker 1: We've been talking about your school days in Cleveland [Ohio] both elementary school at Dunne [ph.] and A.J. Rickoff [Andrew J. Rickoff Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio] and also your studio experiences and your introduction to dance as an art form.  I'm just wondering did that continue through your junior high school years [at Alexander Hamilton Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio], the study of dance and combining that with classroom work?
Speaker 2: Right so that modern dance group also continued when I was in junior high school.  Somehow I continued that study maybe till I was thirteen or fourteen and my dance with Ms. [Elaine] Gibbs continued, I think all through my high school [John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio].  So I was doing that on Saturdays with Ms. Gibbs and through the week, maybe we met once or twice a week, the modern dance group.
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned the Karamu Dancers also that one of your teachers from Murtis [H.] Taylor [Multi-Service Center; Community Services Center of Mount Pleasant, Cleveland, Ohio] was a Karamu dancer (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right Virginia Dryansky--oh you mean who was part of that center, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Story_ID: 208803
Speaker 1: --Can you tell us about a little bit about Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio] and the dance program there?
Speaker 2: Okay, yes. I also want to mention we went to summer camp also through Murtis [H.] Taylor [Multi-Service Center; Community Services Center of Mount Pleasant, Cleveland, Ohio].  That was a very vibrant center.  And, okay, there is something that I don't want to forget.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Which is that Murtis Taylor also had something we called the Center that was when I was in high school [at John Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio].  It was the Center and it was a social dance.  So we would go every Friday night to the Center, kids from all over the area would just go and dance to records at the gym over at Hamilton that was a lot of fun.  So I'm going back to, I forgot (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well I was just curious about Karamu, it comes up a lot in the Cleveland [Ohio] interviews, everybody has a connection to Karamu House.
Speaker 2: Okay well my connection to Karamu when I was little was through that teacher and also because we would go to plays at Karamu at times and I loved the plays--well it was my introduction to theater and what was very unique about the Karamu plays is that the cast were integrated.  To me it was not unique it was just the way it is.  So you could go to a play, the mother might be a white woman, the little girl might be black it was all mixed.  It was whoever was the best person for that role and I just felt that was normal.  I didn't know that it wasn't like this all over the country.  And however, I did not take classes at Karamu in dance until I was grown.  I tried to take classes when I was about thirteen and fourteen going over there on the bus but somehow it was a little too far and too many transfers, it wasn't convenient.  So when I was in college [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] I actually went to Karamu in the summertime and took classes because they had modern dance classes there and modern dance was what I was studying in my college studies.  But Karamu is, just for the record, of what I know it is the first institution in this country that really supported the arts of African American creators.  Black or Negro it depends on what era you're talking about.  So they did theater productions and they were called the Settlement House [sic. Playhouse Settlement] originally.  All over the years many people have come through Karamu.  Many people have gone to become very fine professional actors and dancers move from here to New York [New York] and made a big name for themselves, however Karamu itself was a big name and over the years it's had dips and high points and low points and however that institution has carried on with its reputation and continues to be a beautiful facility.  And right now they have a new artistic director who has the dream to bring back that glory of Karamu.  Yeah and in the 1930s their dance group started.  There was a woman, [HistoryMaker] Marjorie Witt Johnson who actually started the Karamu Dancers.  They didn't know it was going to start as that they were teenage girls and they became so proficient that they were invited to perform at the New York World's Fair in 1939 [sic. 1939-1940].  They were a big hit and I'm also working on a piece now about Marjorie Witt Johnson that will premiere at Karamu next spring 2005.
Story_ID: 208804
Speaker 1: So you're gonna be a part of that renaissance at Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: This is great. Great homecoming.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, I wonder too, because you mentioned this great arts organization and also the community center in Mount Pleasant [Cleveland, Ohio], Murtis [H.] Taylor [Multi-Service Center; Community Services Center of Mount Pleasant].  If there other institutions or fraternal and benevolent organizations that your parents [Francis McIntyre and HistoryMaker Dorothy McIntyre] or you and Donna [McIntyre Whyte] were active in while you were living in Mount Pleasant?
Speaker 2: No.  We were in activities that had a focus like it could be like for track, something in sports, it could be something in dance or drama or like that.  But we weren't any social organizations or fraternal or sororities like that.  My sister [Donna McIntyre Whyte] was in a sorority.  We had a church club; I grew up at St. Andrew's Episcopal Church [Cleveland, Ohio].  It was a very old Episcopal church established in the early 1900s.  My father is--he may be the oldest--not chronologically in age but he may be the oldest person living who was a member.  What I'm trying to say is he was a member so far back, there's nobody else who was a member that far back.  He was an acolyte, an altar boy that's a photo we'll show to you.  He was an altar boy from probably 1920 maybe earlier than 1920.  So we grew up in the Episcopal church and it was called a high church.  So my sister and I were part of that church group.  It was St. Andrew's Episcopal youth group; it was a youth group so that was the only really kind of social organization we were a part of.  We weren't part of like cotillions and things like that; it wasn't our thing (laughter).  Some people it was, I don't even know if you're a Jack and Jill [of America, Inc.] or there's another one.  Now my aunt [Ruth Layne Marshall] in Baltimore [Maryland] she was connected with all that, those kind of social groups.
Speaker 1: Now, St. Andrew's historically has been an African American congregation.  As a child, did you think that was unusual that so many of your other experiences were integrated in school and also in the arts and then on Sunday you had this all black congregation?  Did you think that unusual?
Speaker 2: No see I guess when you grow up in it that's just how it is.  Until somebody points it out--maybe that's the way it is with people who are segregationist also.  Do you know what I mean?  Now that I'm thinking about it, it's just the way it is until somebody points it out that it's weird.  It's a--its just what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Now I didn't say it was weird (laughter).
Speaker 2: You said it's unusual--
Speaker 1: Noteworthy and--or did you think it was unusual--
Speaker 2: --you said did I think that it was unusual.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: No but it would be unusual once in a while if there was a white person that came to the church.  Its like, "Oh that's interesting they would come to the church"--not that, it wasn't anything bad about it, it was just like, "oh isn't that interesting?"  So yes I guess I grew up where even though I lived in the North, I was accustomed to churches being all black or all white.  In the early days you'd see in my growing up in Cleveland [Ohio], the early days we did not have too many people, other ethnic groups even though some of my best friends were the Tamaras [ph.], they were Chinese, Japanese and however we didn't have a lot of other people who were like Indian or other Asians.  Now there is much more diversity.  We had no friends who were Hispanic but I guess I just felt that yeah the church was black, yeah that's interesting and the dancing school was black--
Story_ID: 208805
Speaker 1: And I'd go to school and we were integrated. However, in the school--when I was little, in elementary school [at Andrew J. Rickoff Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio] some of the little white children and I were good friends.  Then when we started getting older, we were more segregated actually.  We were in classes together maybe we had class projects to do together that was across racial lines, however in our social coming together, we didn't really socialize with the white children.  In fact, even at Adams, John Adams [High School, Cleveland, Ohio] in the cafeteria, we all ate in different parts of the cafeteria and even that, we didn't feel that that was unusual.  It was only as it got to be the--later in the '60s [1960s] because those civil rights philosophies not philosophies the civil rights activities were beginning to take place.  So that was the beginning when we looked around and said, "Oh this is interesting."  For instance, I'll tell you the biggest experience I had related to race at John Adams because sometimes we would be elected to high office and all and there was not a racial tension.  We just did not socialize with each other even though like a black person might be elected to the head of a club that might be primarily white.  You would always go for whoever you thought was--like at high school when I graduated the American Legion gave an award called The Most Outstanding Boy and The Most Outstanding Girl and I was elected by the whole class as the most outstanding girl and this boy named Kenneth Levin [ph.] was elected as the most outstanding boy so there was no--people did not--we didn't discriminate at all related to ability, achievement or who does this in this and that way.  It was only when you are hanging out with somebody as we got older it was usually with our own racial group.
Story_ID: 208806
Speaker 1: A situation that happened was that from the time I was in elementary school [at Andrew J. Rickoff Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio], I used to see photographs of the cheerleaders at John Adams [High School, Cleveland, Ohio] and one day I wanted to be one of those cheerleaders and there was a shoe store near 140th [Street] and Kinsman [Avenue] and in the shoe store every year they would have a picture of the John Adams High School cheerleading squad and on this cheerleading squad back as far as I remember seeing those pictures they always had one black girl who was on the cheerleading squad.  The next year you'd see another picture of the team, there would be one black girl, the next year on another picture, one black girl.   Okay so at first I wanted to be that one black girl.  I didn't think of it like--I wanted to be on that team and I knew there was an opportunity for me to be because there was a black girl there--in that time we were colored.  So then--and I was athletic, I had the dance background and I tried out and I did make the varsity--junior varsity team and then it was time to go into to try out for the varsity cheerleaders.  Okay so one of my best friends, Carolyn [ph.] from next door, she was very athletic, she was already on the cheerleading team, she was black.  She was not graduating yet so if I had made it on that team, it would have been the first time in Adams history where there would have been two black cheerleaders.  So we were going into the finals and there was another girl on our team who was very--on the junior varsity team who I felt was my closest competition her name was Ann Hadley [ph.].  Ann was very sweet; we were in classes together maybe she was a little older than me.  She was very sweet so we had our try out and the results came back that Ann Hadley had become the cheerleader for that team.  So again it was Carolyn who was going to be the one and only, that's how we called it the one and only.  Anybody we'd speak to said, "Yeah she's the one and only."  So then it became a little gathering of small protest.  There was a number of people who wondered why I didn't get it.  It's hard to say when you look back if Ann Hadley or I was better.  She had a lot of athletic ability but if racial--that was about in '63 [1963] so racial issues were starting to come up at that time.  So there's little group of people that were protesting it and they encouraged me to go to the gym teachers and ask was it because they didn't want to have two colored girls on the cheerleading team at the same time.  And I remember it was a little tough because I had emotional stuff inside 'cause I was very connected with those teachers and the whole team.  So for me to bring this up was difficult but I felt it was something that I had to and I don't know it wasn't like a whole bunch of people--it wasn't like rallies and things going around it maybe two years later it would have been but it wasn't like that, it was only a few people.  It was a little tension for awhile 'cause they said, "No she was one who should have been," but I felt good that I had stepped forward to ask about it.  Eventually the issue dissolved so we were all still compatible with each other but there was a period of several weeks where that question happened and other people raised it too.  Then in the next try out then I made it and Carolyn had graduated.  So then I was still the one and only, yeah, and I think the next year it changed because I was part of the team even though Carolyn was probably on that board also but I think I was the last person like that.  I think I tried to make it so that me and somebody would be there before I left.  Yeah I was the last year of the one and only (laughter).  And if you remind me I have some photos of me with that team.
Story_ID: 208807
Speaker 1: You know, I'm just starting to wonder as I listen to you talk about your dance studies and your encounters with the professional dancers from the Karamu Company [sic. Karamu Dancers].  If you're aspiring at that point in your life by the high school years to be a professional dancer, choreographer or is it sort of a hobby?
Speaker 2: Yeah it's a hobby, I wanted to be as professional as I could and I always liked choreographing.  Every talent show at [John] Adams [Adams High School, Cleveland, Ohio] or [Alexander Hamilton] Junior High School [Cleveland, Ohio], I always did a dance either for myself or for other people and I really did love that but I--oh there is another little story I'll tell you that's back, back if you remember it, its back elementary school [at Andrew J. Rickoff Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio]--that I did love it but I didn't think I would go into that profession because it actually didn't seem practical even for me (laughter), it didn't seem something practical to go into and I did well in my academics and it seemed like it would be a waste if I didn't use academic talents to further my career whatever career that might be.  So it was still kind of suppressed in the back of my mind but I never stopped dancing, yeah.
Speaker 1: And is this a dance related story from the elementary school years that you wanted to share (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is, yeah it is dance related and a lot of things.  Another thing that the Mount Pleasant Community Center [Community Services Center of Mount Pleasant; Murtis H. Taylor Multi-Service Center, Cleveland, Ohio] they used to have big programs that people from all over the community would go to and they would take place at John Adams and they would have a big program on brotherhood week. Brotherhood week was called brotherhood week then, now it is black history month.  Back then it was one week in February called brotherhood week.  It did not distinguish about one race; it was a time when people thought about coming together across cultural differences.  So I was with the-we were having a big assembly with Mount Pleasant Community Center and they were also sponsoring a contest for elementary school children maybe it was junior high school also.  The contest was an art contest for brotherhood week.  So I drew a poster for brotherhood week and I remember that my teacher Mrs. Young [ph.], she was the art teacher, she was my fifth grade homeroom teacher and she gave me support with creating this.  She was kind of cold, very tall maybe Scandinavian looking, however she had a warmth in her heart but she didn't just like to show it.  She helped me somewhat with that poster on some of the shading and all. So we were dancing--the dance group was performing at that assembly.  One day before that assembly the principal came into our fifth grade class and she said, "I have a booster shot for you class," and we were like, "a booster shot?"  But she was smiling so we knew it wasn't going to hurt.  She said, "I have a booster shot for you class," she said, "[HistoryMaker] Dianne McIntyre has won the poster contest for brotherhood week," and everybody went, "oh, yeah, yay."  So anyway, so my poster that had won the contest and the award for it was going to be given at that assembly and we were dancing-the dance group that Virginia Dryansky directed.  We were dancing 'Oh Freedom' or something from Odetta.  We wore red blouses and white skirts and we finished off stage and then the man came out--the announcer and said, "Now I'm going to introduce the person who won the poster contest and give her prize and it's Dianne McIntyre," and I had just gotten off of stage, I'm like oh I don't have any shoes or anything.  I threw on some shoes and ran out on the stage and he gave me my prize which was a ten dollar check that was very special.  It was a warm community and that program was very integrated, you know.  Yeah, I came up in a special time and a special place, I just hit it like that (laughter) 'cause I felt inspired in all many different directions.  Yeah a lot of inspiration from my parents [Francis McIntyre and HistoryMaker Dorothy McIntyre], my grandparents and very fine teachers in the arts and in academics.
Story_ID: 208808
Speaker 1: Coming of age as you did in the 1960s, and you said especially around 1963, there are some rumblings perhaps on the campus of John Adams [High School, Cleveland, Ohio].  People are aware that there is change in the air and they begin to question certain things and I'm just wondering in that year with the great March on Washington and going forward were you questioning more of what you saw around you in Cleveland [Ohio] as far as race relations are concerned?
Speaker 2: Yeah I guess it was a questioning and also it was a feeling of rallying forth for more civil rights for us as a people.  We did get to see [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] here in Cleveland.  My mother [HistoryMaker Dorothy McIntyre], I think my sister [Donna McIntyre Whyte] and I when we went with this guy named James Barrett [ph.].  We saw him down at the stadium; I think we saw him at Cory [United Methodist] Church [Cleveland, Ohio] as well.  And my mother remembers seeing him around at Murtis [H.] Taylor [Multi-Service Center; Community Services Center of Mount Pleasant, Cleveland, Ohio] wearing the overalls, maybe I was in school then, I don't remember that but I remember hearing him and the energy of the people and hearing him speak, it was very inspiring.  Now did it have us question things, maybe it had us question--it didn't have me question--we felt our situation was okay but that things could be better in general, in general for us as a people and that everybody should be doing what they could to make everything better and more equal for peoples everywhere.  Yeah it was in the air.  There was a strike at our school which actually I don't remember but my sister remembers and she remembers it because I went to school on that day and a lot of the black students didn't go.  I don't remember that at all but it was when there were protests because in Cleveland they were building annexes onto schools in order to keep more black students in those communities rather than the population expanding into white school areas.  So the classrooms were overcrowded.  So instead of taking those additional students and having them go to another school close by which was a more predominantly white school, they built annexes on all these schools in the inner cities.  Sometimes they built a whole school in the inner city to contain us as a people in that area.  And there was a protest like that when the gentleman who was a minister [Reverend Bruce Klunder] and he--the protesters went to lie down in the--on the ground so that the bulldozers would not, you know, so that there would be no activity, they couldn't build and accidentally one of the bulldozers backed up and the gentleman was killed and this caused a lot of sadness and anger on the part of the whole community.  And there was a boycott that happened around the school systems for the young people to boycott in order to protest the building of that particular school and on that day I went to school and my sister didn't go to school.  I'm telling you because she told me that and I think she always held that against me and I somehow blanked it out but she didn't go to school along with other protesters.
Speaker 1: Was that a student led protest or were there parents backing the students who were choosing to skip school that day?
Speaker 2: Well maybe it was more a high school thing, no so the students chose, yeah the students chose whether to go to school or not.  Yeah, I don't know if elementary and junior high school parents joined the protest by not sending their children to school that day, I can't remember.  Yeah so it was in the air.  It was more--see it wasn't so much that we were looking at our circumstances and questioning them, we were looking in a way at larger issues, things that were big and see what could we do to impact the larger picture.
Story_ID: 208809
Speaker 1: I spoke with another John Adams [High School, Cleveland, Ohio] alum who is now a judge in the City of Cleveland [Ohio] and she talked about the opportunities at Adams and what a fine education students were getting there in the 1960s and how parents really wanted--African American parents really wanted their children to be able to avail themselves of those opportunities.  Were you aware of how special you were at that point in time that you were at Adams, and its excellent track and field facilities and also great classroom opportunities?
Speaker 2: Yeah we knew it was special.  It had great teachers and had the greatest of everything like in choir, the art.  There were people I know who-in art they could have gone on directly to be professional artists.  Things were just, they were on a very high level.  We realized it and maybe we realized it more because of the way other people would talk about Adams and also we were called like the elite school.  Sometimes was like, "Oh yeah they go to Adams (laughter)," like that, you know.  So it felt maybe something like we were a little university even though it was a high school, we knew it.  No, it was no question; it wasn't like 'cause you were in it did you realize that at the time, we knew it was special.  We had a lot of school pride and we knew that from there we could soar and go into anything and also after I graduated, I was in New York City [New York, New York]; I would meet people who had gone to Adams in the arts.  Once Gilbert Moses who was a great director, he's passed away now, we were at a gathering of AUDELCO [Audience Development Committee, Inc.] black theater awards [AUDELCO Recognition Awards] and I was standing next to him, there were Cleveland people there and a lady who is his girlfriend was standing beside me and she said--I said, "I'm from Cleveland too," and she said, "you are?" I said, "Yeah I went to John Adams," and she said, "not another one, I keep hearing about this school and he talks about it all the time how it was the greatest high school in the whole country," she said, "oh my goodness it really must have been something."  So that--we knew even while we were there it was a great place.
Story_ID: 208810
Speaker 1: Ms. [HistoryMaker Dianne] McIntyre we were talking about awareness raising activities in the 1960s among high school students at John Adams [High School, Cleveland, Ohio] and other places but I'm wondering too if those kinds of civil rights activities that you mentioned briefly began also to inform your vision as a choreographer.
Speaker 2: They did, I don't know--even though I told you the story about the cheerleaders there was little that we were kind of talking about in school but it wasn't like we were doing activities at John Adams that was going to be protest or anything 'cause we realized that we were in a good place and at the same time this consciousness raising was happening within us and all around.  So most of my experience related to the '60s [1960s], it came after I was in high school.
Speaker 1: So when did you finish up high school?
Speaker 2: I finished in 1964; I went to [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio]. Want me to tell you a little about that?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Yeah I went to Ohio State University and there I was studying French along with other academic things.  I thought I wanted to be a linguist or something in the French field and at the same time I was taking dance classes in the dance department.  They allowed me to audit the classes in a way.  My high school gym teacher was named Charlotte Honda [ph.] and she was actually a dancer.  In those days you had to teach dance through the physical education department in high schools and she was a beautiful dancer and I realized she had gone to Ohio State.  So it was because of her being at Ohio State that I went there even though I wasn't pursuing a major in dance at the time.  However, because there was flexibility they allowed me to take dance classes in the dance department.  Then in the third year there I actually declared my major in dance.  So during the end of my time there, I was there until '69 [1969] and there were things--it was the '60s [1960s] and there were things happening we'd see on television.  There was the Chicago [Illinois]--there were not rallies and all like that happening there as yet and just like at Adams, there was a separation socially with the races and then they did have fraternities, sororities and big activities.  You'd go to big dances and it was all black dance, you know.
Story_ID: 208811
Speaker 1: So it was actually after I left Adams [sic. The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], I went to teach at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] for one year, it was in 1969.  This year and the year--that school year '69 [1969], '70 [1970], it was a time when students across the country were starting to take over administration buildings.  Ohio State students were the first in the country to do that, the black students.  They took over the administration building, many of those people are friends of mine and I was teaching in a university, I was teaching in the dance department.  I had done some work on my master's degree but I hadn't completed my master's but because Ohio State had one of the, if not the finest dance program in the country, I had the credentials and the background courses to teach what they needed at the University of Wisconsin.  I was regular faculty, I wasn't adjunct. During that period Madison, Wisconsin they were having protests, all over the country these things were happening and I was working with a director there who was in the theater department.  His was name was Cheston Everett and he did pieces that were all related to black history or through poets and drama--poets, dramatists, writers who wrote of the African American experience, it was the black experience.  In fact, that was the first period we were really calling ourselves black.  Cheston Everett--I was inspired a lot by him related to this consciousness raising. So though I was teaching in the dance department, I would also work with him on these productions and the productions were really brilliant. They were with community people and students from the university.  I would choreograph them and be in them.  And I started learning a lot about our history through these dramas and his brother was Ron Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga] and Ron Karenga started our Kwanzaa and he was quite a revolutionary in those days and so his brother was in his own right as well.  So a lot of this energy was coming up inside of me related to that we as a people need to be in the forefront of what--we need to take our place one way or another.  It was all inside of all of us at that time.  It was very few people who weren't thinking way especially if you were of a certain age.  And these dramas at that time that was expressing it.  So then it came to be around the spring of that year and the students at that school protested.  They went on strike to get--it was just a period where all of the--even across racial lines the young people were feeling that the way this country was operating, the way this society was needed healing, it needed some shifts and that poor people weren't given their due, people of other racial groups were not given their due, something has to change.  Things have to be more equal.  All these students were having this feeling so even in this school and they want to shift some things in the curriculum so they were more all-inclusive.
Story_ID: 208812
Speaker 1: So at this school, the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] they protested also.  They said all the students have to go on strike.  So the students went on strike and the head of the [dance] department was very conservative, his name was Myron [H.] Nadel.  So a couple of students were--and the teachers were supposed to go on strike also if you supported the ideals of the protest and because the protesters would come into your class and stop it if you were teaching.  So I talked to a few people and I decided to move my classes at a church across the street.  So I continued teaching the classes, however they were in another facility and all the students had information of where to go and take the classes.  So then Myron Nadel called me a striking teacher because I wasn't taking the classes right--teaching right there.  One thing that made me sad about that strike is that there was a guest artist named Erick Hawkins; he was a pioneer in the modern dance tradition.  He was in his late sixties, he might have been even--yeah I guess he was in his late sixties at that time and he was a guest artist at the time and he was teaching at the University of Wisconsin then and his classes were stopped by the strikers which was sad 'cause the students didn't get to avail themselves of his expertise during that period.  So Myron called me a striking faculty and we got into it.  There was a number of things he had asked me to do over time that were not ethical.  He wanted the black students who I was working with in my dances, he wanted me to actually insist that they join his ballet company which wasn't part of the school and if they didn't they were going to fail his course (laughter).  A lot of things very strange happened, a number of things.  So anyway to make a long story short after that and all kinds of things came up in the newspaper, the local newspaper and the school newspaper [UWM Post] about the tension in the dance department and Cheston Everett initiated a lot of it.  He made the newspaper write stories, he said this is a racist dance department and look at what's happening and they are using her like this and it's not--and he'd get it in the local Milwaukee Journal [Sentinel] too.  It was like ah! (Laughter) It was a lot of stuff, you know, something that you could find and put a fire under in that time it happened.  So I was in the middle of this and so that experience in Milwaukee; that was enough for me.  I said if I can live through Milwaukee, I think I can go to New York [New York].  Yeah 'cause nothing could be worse that this even though some very beautiful, creative work came out and I loved working with the students.  So from then I went to New York City in the fall of that year.  However, all of that fire had come inside of me related to yes I feel--what we felt at that time is that you are a black artist that your work somehow needs to help further the cause of all of your people.  That was the feeling; you didn't have the luxury to just do a dance about a flower.  If your dance was just about a flower somehow it had to raise the consciousness of your people.  It could be about a flower and at the same time it had be something that was elevating or educational to the masses about us as a people.  So I became very--that became instilled in me and so then my early works, they were very reflective of that when I first went to New York City.
Story_ID: 208813
Speaker 1: So that Black Arts Movement, which I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black art, yeah I was part of that.
Speaker 1: Many of us traditionally think more of the literature of [Amiri] Baraka [LeRoi Jones] and some of his colleagues with the writing but it affected dance as well.
Speaker 2: Yeah we were in it too.  The dance and the music, yeah we were in it--
Speaker 1: Now, when you decided (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And we all knew each other.  We were all connected, all the artists, the poets, the dancers, the musicians, the playwrights, we all knew each other, and it was a community, a very close knit community.
Speaker 1: Nationally or was this regional?
Speaker 2: It was mostly in New York [New York] but even if the people weren't in New York you knew them.  Yeah if they were in other places you knew them if they had a national reputation, yeah.
Speaker 1: So when you left Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and went to New York did you already have connections there or did you need to establish them?
Speaker 2: Well I came back to Cleveland [Ohio] for a summer.  I taught some dance classes at Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio] for that summer.  I met another lady named Gwendolyn Childs [ph.]; her name was Gwendolyn Childs at the time.  She was going to New York City for her master's degree at Columbia University [New York, New York].  So we decided to be roommates and my father [Francis McIntyre]--I don't know if he took both of us but he took me, he might have taken both of us to New York.  My connection with New York--there were two connections; one was that a friend of mine from [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] dance department, I didn't talk that much about Ohio State dance department but I received so much encouragement from there and fantastic training.  One of my friends from the dance department named Carol Boggs was working at the dance collection at Lincoln Center [sic. New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] and she let them know that she had another friend who was coming who would like to be part of that same project.  So before I got there I already had a job.  I could work it part time or full time, either.  So I worked in that as a library technician. We were cataloging all the material they had, all the dance material so it was in my field.  So I had that and also the place we stayed was a women's residence until we found an apartment which was my cousin's apartment in Harlem [New York, New York].  My grandfather's sister's son and he had lived in that apartment for thirty years or so and he had gotten married and moved upstate Rockland County [New York].  So my roommate and I shared that apartment.  It was eighty-five dollars a month, beautiful apartment in Harlem on a street called Convent Avenue.  It's a street people long to live on.  It's like, "Oh you live on Convent Avenue, it's a really lovely block."  It's looked the same probably for the last seventy years.  So we only paid forty-two [dollars] fifty [cents] a piece for rent at that time.  So that's how I got that New York connection.  Then I started studying--working at that dance collection and studying dance in different places.  I went there originally just to study and I felt I was going to come back to the Midwest and start a dance company.  I wrote that in--I mean, somebody interviewed me in the Milwaukee Journal [Sentinel] once and that's what I said my intention was.
Story_ID: 208814
Speaker 1: So were your studies for a master's degree in dance--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or just post-baccalaureate?
Speaker 2: No, so my studies were in dance studios, they were dance masters.  So I did do some study on my master's in--at [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], however I wanted a practical--I wasn't thinking of being a dance scholar even though I was very interested in dance history and dance of peoples who are not in the western cultures.  That was an area I would have studied but I was studying it actually on my own as I was in that dance collection [New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, New York, New York].  So I was studying with certain people in New York City [New York, New York].  These people had been guest artists at Ohio State which is how I knew them.  One was named Viola Farber. She was a great--brilliant dancer and wonderful classes, another was Alwin Nikolais who was a dance pioneer and another was Gus Solomons, Jr.  Gus I actually ended up dancing with his company [Solomons Company/Dance] for a few years.  So my studies were actually in the practical part of the dance, yeah.
Story_ID: 208815
Speaker 1: We've talked a little bit about all these various movements of the '60s [1960s] going to the '70s [1970s].  The student movement, the Black Arts Movement, the--we hadn't talked about the anti-war movement but I just know that was going on too.  So there was a lot happening in the era of the Civil Rights Movement and yet you find your own voice in the midst of all those other voices and it seems that you succeeded in combining the culture or the awareness, the black presence in America with your first love of dance. Did you find mentors along the way, African American dancers who sort of steered you in that direction?
Speaker 2: No because that era, we were the beginning of that era, the people my age.  The people before, yeah they had done some work but I found dance--African American dance mentors related to the dance not necessarily related to this movement, do you see--to the Black Arts Movement 'cause it started with people who were in a way of my generation.  Now there people ahead of me who had done works that were related to the so called African American experience or challenges that had happened in the African American experience, like Pearl Primus she was really a queen in the early dance from I'd say 1940s, '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s] and in the '70s [1970s].  She was an anthropologist and a dancer and choreographer.  Some of her dances reflected the challenges of the African American experience and some of her dances were directly dances that were from West Africa or the Caribbean that she recreated for the stage so they weren't so long.  Another person who was really an inspiration to me was [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham and Katherine Dunham had her own dance company [Negro Dance Group] and the 1940s and '50s [1950s] and they toured internationally.  They were one of the biggest dance companies maybe in the history of this country.  They were very popular and just the fact that she made all that headway and all that, a huge splash throughout the whole world and being a black woman was very, very inspiring.  The style of my dance was not like hers however the energy behind it was the same.  So they were mentors that I didn't really work directly with although Pearl Primus I did take a class with her when I first went to New York City [New York, New York].  I also took classes with a man named Tito[s] Sompa who was from the Congo 'cause I wanted that experience of the African dance in my body.  And he was--and I met him when he first came like how they say off the boat (laughter) when he couldn't speak English yet; he was speaking just French so my French was very helpful in that way.  A lot of my mentors in the beginning of my work were those poets, the playwrights and the music; my inspiration, a lot came from that.  I gravitated toward listening to the music which at that time was called new music or new jazz.  That music had that protest in it.  It didn't have to have words it was just the power, the energy.  The music was such that it was like nothing is stopping us, and nothing is stopping us, we're invincible and elegant and beautiful beyond compare.  This was the energy of that music and I gravitated to it.  So I would go to different clubs or sometimes there were settings that were not club like.  There was a place in Brooklyn [New York, New York] called The East which was like a club but they had no alcoholic beverages, they had all vegetarian food.  That was also a period where everybody was very conscious of their body and how they are not suppose to eat pork or anything bad, you know, anything that could be detrimental to your health, everything was to uplift you spiritually.  So I used to go to The East and the musicians would play there for very little or a nominal fee and mostly it was a black--maybe they even had some kind of rule.  There were a few places that had that in New York at a time that only black people came to the places and then you go to hear them in the clubs downtown where there would be very few black people at all in the clubs.  So that music I gravitated to it so that eventually I actually started working with some of the musicians in my work and it became a constant in my work and my company, which I called Sounds in Motion.
Speaker 1: And when was that company formed?
Speaker 2: In 1972.
Story_ID: 208816
Speaker 1: So very soon after you went to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're working at the [Lincoln] Center [for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] cataloging the dance materials and running your own company [Sounds in Motion]--
Speaker 2: Well at first I was--while I worked at Lincoln Center I simultaneously was working with Gus Solomons' [Gus Solomons, Jr.] company [Solomons Company/Dance].  He's an African American, however I was the only African American in his company.  So I would run from his rehearsals and go to the dance collection [New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] 'cause his company was starting, he didn't have enough money for people to be there full time and that's all you did although there were a few people in the company that was all they did like one woman was married and another, I think was independently wealthy and there another guy in the company named Rudy [ph.] who was actually a fabric designer and he worked with an amazing designer named Willi Smith, fashion designer.  And so I met Willi in the early '70s [1970s] and actually he ended up designing some costumes for some of my pieces.  So it was after--it was in '72 [1972], it was just a little overlap of when I was at the dance collection and starting my own thing maybe a few months overlap right there, yeah, and what I did then is I went to the Harlem School of the Arts [New York, New York] and they employed me as a dance teacher there.  So while I was starting my company I was teaching children and teens at the Harlem School of the Arts which was run by Dorothy Maynor who was a classical singer, sang at the Metropolitan Opera [New York, New York], really she is very renowned in our history.  So she hired me for the Harlem School of the Arts, I think that's how I made a living through the dance collection and Harlem School of the Arts while I started my own thing.  Eventually my own thing did pay for itself too.
Story_ID: 208817
Speaker 1: That was going to be my next question, how do you sustain a project like that [McIntyre's dance company, Sounds in Motion]?  It's absolutely wonderful what you're describing, the consciousness raising and the spirituality and the no smoking, no drinking you want to be a better person and healthier too.  But financing all of that is that through grant writing or friends of the arts?
Speaker 2: Well originally I had places where we had our studio.  The first place was called the enter--our first people gave me space for free in order to have my rehearsals and then finally I wanted rehearsals like almost every day and we found a place called the Ministerial Interfaith Association [Of Harlem, Inc.] in Harlem [New York, New York] that let me rent the space for just seventy-five dollars a month and finally I went to residence at the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York], very renowned organization and our company was actually in residence and we had our classes and rehearsals right in the galleries which was amazing at that time.  Afterwards about in '74 [1974] and we would have little concerts here and there.  People had their own way of making a living and then they would be committed to being at every rehearsal.  Then at the concerts I would be able to pay people for their time.  Eventually in '74 [1974] I started some classes, I always had classes for the dancers and the company.  When I started these classes there was a gentleman who was interested in helping support me as a manager just kind of volunteering and he said you can get a grant from the National Endowment for the Arts [NEA] for your school [Sounds in Motion School].  At that time they were supporting arts in education, I mean arts that had related to education.  So we did get a grant in that first time we applied maybe because we were in Harlem, well you know I was kind of new but we got a very good grant that first year and helped pay for the teachers who were also company members so that was the beginning.  And I did have a board of directors so little by little we were sustained by--just as any nonprofit organization through donations, through grant writing and through our performances till in the end of the '70s [1970s], '78 [1978], '79 [1979] and all like that we did--started touring quite a bit.  Different colleges, universities, performing art centers around the country and then our earned income from those tours helped sustain the dancers really almost throughout the whole year and in the summer they could get unemployment.  So it built up, yeah it built up.  It was a lot of work, a lot of energy and a lot of fun and then we got, finally, own dance studio maybe it was in '78 [1978] also.  From that touring fund we had enough to actually renovate a space in Harlem.  It was on 125th [Street] and Lenox [Avenue], perfect place it had huge picture windows just like when I was a little girl and I wished that somebody could look in and see that there's a dance class in here, it was like that.  The whole--people all over the area in the evening could see us dancing 'cause we left the--we had no drapes on the windows.  So we had dance classes and my rehearsals there and eventually I had performances where I would support upcoming artists, dancers, musicians, poets; I call that studio works.
Story_ID: 208818
Speaker 1: You mentioned just a little while ago that your style was very different from [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham's style.  How would you describe the style for your company [Sounds in Motion] beginning in 1972?
Speaker 2: Well the style it is a modern dance style and for people who don't know modern dance, it's very eclectic so it's hard to put your finger on one thing about it.  But a lot of movement in modern dance emanates from the inside and moves out and you have a lot of use of the torso, the center of the body to initiate movement.  Each modern dance will have their completely individual style.  So through my style, I would say is characterized by sculptural movement which means that I feel like the body is sculpting the space.  Also I like to use a lot of very fast and intricate movement.  The movement is very closely related to the music not that it mimics the music but the energy of the music is reflected in the dance and a lot often it's to live music.  And also if there is some kind of narrative or some kind of emotion, the emotion guides the movement.  And so it's very closely aligned with whatever the intention of the story, the character or the feeling is.
Story_ID: 208819
Speaker 1: Ms. [HistoryMaker Dianne] McIntyre, you mentioned in an earlier segment that some of the dancers had opportunities in your company [Sounds in Motion] to wear designs by Willi Smith.  So there is Williwear [Ltd.] for the dancers in this era where there is so much of a focus on this idea that black is beautiful.  But can you tell me how that kind of thinking shaped your vision as a choreographer because I know you're concerned about how the dance looks as well as how the dancers are moving?
Speaker 2: Well I think I've come to that--it was really an honor being able to have the dancers wear Willi Smith's clothes and I think for him it was a great opportunity because his clothes were usually on models and of course then the general public, however for him to see his clothes moving on the stage, I think that was exciting for him 'cause he had a great--he could create some pieces that had a lot of flow where they are really swirling and moving in a beautiful way.  The thing is about black is beautiful, this particular concept, I think it was already inside of me, it wasn't something that I had to punch up.  All of the people in the company, I felt were very beautiful and even if they just stood there no matter what they had on the people were going to get that, they were going to get it from the movement.  So actually in my work I tried to avoid creating work that was specifically what you think dance--what person thinks dance is suppose to look like.  For instance, in certain dance forms the dancers are suppose to be what we feel is beautiful.  Maybe it's a European concept or it maybe isn't a European concept but beautiful in line, the shape of their body, in the way that heads look on their necks, in the hair everything.  Well in my work I try to avoid a stereotypical look of what beautiful might be and what the movement was like and sometimes the dancers had to work hard against their concept of what dance is.  We did a lot of improvisation, we still do.  A lot of improv work in our dances and in the improv if a dancer is trying to do something every time that looks spectacularly great or graceful or really what they feel is beautiful, they could missing the point of improvisation.  They might be missing the deeper part of their own soul's expression which is to allow them to be free to come out with whatever wants to be expressed at that time.  So sometimes I work with people and have had to see if they can let go of a preconceived idea of what beautiful in dance is.  I hope that that makes sense--
Story_ID: 208820
Speaker 1: For instance, we [McIntyre's dance company, Sounds in Motion] did a piece once called 'The Voyage.'  In this piece it was about--it was five people who were getting ready to be sold into slavery.  They had a chain around their ankles and there was a point where they would be walking, step close, step close, step close and they were facing the audience to the front and they could see the horizon past them, they were in a new land that they didn't know and there was no music when they did the step close, step close so you heard that chain dragging along the floor.  Then one person would step forward almost on the auction block and from that time, then he would have a dream of what he wished things could be and in that dream there's a beautiful spiritual that would be sung.  In this time we were looking for what the clothes would be for those people and I couldn't find them till I went to a rental place in New York City [New York, New York], costume rental and I brought the clothes back that I felt looked actually like they were from slave times, they were from probably some theater production and I throw them all out on the floor.  Some of them were burlap very heavy weave--heavy clothes and I threw them out on the floor and the dancers picked them out and they put them on and it was something like a ritual.  It was almost like they knew exactly what to do with each piece of clothing.  They wrapped their heads, they put the clothes on, the skirts some of them they tie up in a partial tuck in the apron it was very moving and when they finished they were their ancestors--they had become their ancestors.  It was very moving and when they did the piece after that it was like walked back in time.  I'm telling this story to say that they in their hearts and their souls were beautiful as were their ancestors.  What they wore on the outside was not beautiful but because the statement they were making there was a beauty beyond the surface beauty.  And the funny thing about it, the clothes were so perfect that I didn't want to take them back to the costume place, they were only rented.  So I'm like what am I going to do?  So I had a person who was helping me with costumes and she went to a secondhand store and she found a piece--you see when you sign the things out the person who signs them out makes a description.  You have one red striped apron, one long skirt but it was very general.  So we bought a bunch of things that fit the description that we had on the little slip and that's what I returned (laughter) 'cause we didn't feel it was illegal 'cause we felt that those costumes were actually ours in order to tell that story.  So the black is beautiful can take different shapes, different forms.
Story_ID: 208821
Speaker 1: I'd like to ask a question about one of your works I saw performed in Cleveland [Ohio], 'I Can Stop on a Dime and get Ten Cents Change' [sic. 'I Could Stop on a Dime and get Ten Cents Change'] and this whole notion of moving beyond preconceived notions of what it means to be beautiful.  I remember one of the dancer/singers in that Cleveland Play House [Cleveland, Ohio] production, didn't look like the other dancers, she wasn't tall and slim, she wasn't quite short and stocky, she was sort of voluptuous black woman and I'll never forget these men who were sitting around and behind and all over the section where I was, every time she moved there was this sort of undercurrent of giggling and she could perform all of the moves that all of the taller more slender dancers performed.  But somehow it was funny when she did it.  I just wondered if you heard anything about that, was there any feedback that got to you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no that's interesting, no but I guess that's why it's important more and more to have people of all different sizes be performing because then it will not be funny, it would be just like normal.  In other societies some of the greatest dancers are maybe some very large individuals.  It's based on their ability not on their size but you see because that's so ingrained in us like a dancer is supposed to look a certain way.  Now I'll you something that's interesting related to this.  When I was casting for that, it was in New York City [New York, New York] and the person who was the casting director who was a white gentleman--he does casting for musicals and for plays and for film and he told me, he said, "Well in the play you need at least one heavy set black man or woman," I'm like, "why is that?" He said, "You know it's in all those shows.  You have a heavy person," you have heavy person because it's something like comic relief or something like that.  I was astounded when he said that because he said it out loud as if it is a formula and I said, "Well you know I'm not going that way, I'm going the way--I'm a different type of person than maybe you worked with before, I'm just having whoever is going to do this the best."  Now this young lady was not even part of that audition process, I couldn't find the final woman, I needed a very, very fine singer.  So she came and auditioned for me when I couldn't complete the cast.  When she auditioned her singing just knocked me out but she had to dance and the person I asked if she was a good dancer they said yes, she moved well.  So in her audition she could do all of the moves that I wanted.  I find often that some people who are a little heavier they suppress it but sometimes they are the greatest dancers and I don't if it's their center of gravity, their center of the way they can turn very well and they loved the opportunity to be able to share that in performing but often they don't get the chance.  And now there's some straight ahead modern dance companies who are now being more conscious of not having all the same slender type looking people.  So no I didn't have any feedback of that and I intentionally didn't do anything that would make her look comic 'cause she was doing the same movements as the other people.  So that's interesting that you shared that.  That's an eye opener for me, yeah.
Story_ID: 208822
Speaker 1: I wondered if you would comment on another very famous dance work.  It's one that I saw in, I think I must have been in sixth grade, Harvey Rice Elementary School in Cleveland [Ohio] but our teacher took us downtown to see a performance of Revelation [sic. 'Revelations'] and I never forgot it.  I don't if it was because Judith [Jamison] was there but I wondered that must have been around 1970 or so but what would you say about the place of that work in dance history?  Is this me overreacting or was there something special happening there with the dancing and the music?
Speaker 2: Right the--'Revelations' is one of the finest works in the repertoire on the history of American dance, I would say in world dance, concert dance and it's a classic.  It is always--say like if any dancer or a dance historian would list ten of the greatest dance works across the board with ballet and modern dance or jazz and whatever 'Revelations' would be in that.  In fact, there is a woman here in Cleveland, she's part of the Cleveland Arts Prize, Ann Innis [ph.] and recently she was saying she introduced this meeting in saying well I don't know if we're going to be able to give a prize to choreographers who would a piece like the great pieces of dance history, she said in my estimation those great pieces are and she listed five pieces and 'Revelations' was one of them.  So it is across the board it's felt like that.  So for 'Revelations' is a work that was choreographed--one of the first works that Alvin Ailey choreographed.  He choreographed it, I believe in the 1960s, early '60s [1960s] for his company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater].  Maybe it wasn't even a company when he first created it and it was inspired by his experiences of the church in Texas, he came up in Texas back in the '40s [1940s] when he was a child.  And so each segment is a spiritual that's danced and we see the baptism and the women and the men in church.  It's a classic and continues--generation after generation his company continues to do it.  It's the only company so far that's done it, it's never been--I don't think they've ever allowed anybody else to do it.
Story_ID: 208823
Speaker 1: So you were telling us about the place of 'Revelations.' Alvin Ailey's creation and the history of dance.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it is. And so he did many wonderful works that was the one that always stands out and when people go to see an Ailey show they're always hoping that--especially if it's out of town away from New York [New York] they're hoping that's going to be on the program bill, it's called his signature piece and I did have the opportunity to meet Alvin Ailey several times.  In 1975 we were working on--there was a benefit--it wasn't a benefit there was a celebration concert for a great dance woman, her name was Syvilla Fort.  She worked with [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham's company [Negro Dance Group] for many years and she was a fine choreographer and teacher in her own right.  Syvilla Ford [sic.] was I think at the time only forty-nine years and she was ill with cancer.  So the organization called The Black Theater Alliance created a dance concert for her in her honor and as they were planning it they were hoping from week to week that she would still be living to be there and she was, I think it was November 3, 1975.  Earlier the concert was on the stage of 'The Wiz'--where 'The Wiz; at the Majestic Theatre [New York, New York] was taking place.  So when we went to--all the black companies in New York City were performing something at that time and I was honored to be part of that and I was doing a piece with a musician named Cecil Taylor and Cecil's an astounding pianist.  So while I was rehearsing the dancers in the afternoon, I was standing on the floor and the dancers were on the stage, my back was to the audience.  I was walking in front of the stage telling them what to do, "Move a little more this way, that way," and Cecil was in the back with the piano but there was a nice light on him and when we finished this one segment I heard a voice from behind say, "[HistoryMaker] Dianne [McIntyre], Dianne," and I turned around and I saw a person, looked like an uncle of mine.  I don't know which uncle but it was very familiar and it was Alvin Ailey, I'm like oh this is Mr. Ailey.  And I had never met him before and he came up to me and he said seeing me working with the people and I guess he had known about my work even though I just started it three years before.  He said, "I would like you to do a work on my company sometime," I was like, "you would? Oh thank you I'd love to do that."  So that was our initial meeting and shortly after that I did do a work on his junior company [Ailey II] which was called 'Deep South Suite' and it became a signature piece of that group and also I put it on my own company [Sounds in Motion] and it was a piece--it was for his Duke Ellington festival [Ailey Celebrates Ellington] which was in 1976 and Willi Smith did the costumes for that.  It was a suite of four sections and then later--several years later I did a piece on his regular senior company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] and that one was with music by Cecil Taylor and it wasn't as successful.  It just, it didn't work as well.  The first one is something that I hoped to have some other companies do and they would like revive it as well.  Over the years I would keep up with them, I'd go and teach some classes at the studio and sometimes Alvin would talk to me about his--just the trials of having a company and how the board of directors was actually running everything and he had certain things that he had no choice about anymore so it just keeps on and on.  It was quite revealing and from the things that he said helped me to avoid certain directions in my own work.  He was very generous; he was always supporting and elevating younger choreographers.
Story_ID: 208824
Speaker 1: His [Alvin Ailey] story is a rather tragic one at least the way it's been presented in the materials that I've read but his dances were just glorious.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Yeah he was in an era of certain artists of his generation, they were elegant men, that's the way I put it and they were very international. They could speak French and different languages, they were extremely well-read. Cecil Taylor is in that generation also, he may be a little older than Alvin was but they were just--one time Jennifer Dunning who writes for dance in the New York Times, she gave a beautiful memorial speech for Talley Beatty who was also a great, amazing choreographer.  He was one of my favorite choreographers.  When she spoke of him she spoke of the men of his generation and their elegance, the black men who are artists and they just knew everything about the world, about history, about all cultures and all types of music and dance.  It wasn't just focused--they were more--in my generation we became more focused on our black arts. They knew the whole world and from that they pulled and made great art and ours started from our understanding of African American experience in art and we over time then expanded from there, you know (laughter).
Story_ID: 208825
Speaker 1: There is one historian in particular who describes the Harlem Renaissance as this era in our past when the Negro was in vogue but that era passed by about 1935.  When you think about the Black Arts Movement was that sort of a passing fad or is it something that's still very much alive?
Speaker 2: It was a period, it was a period of great energy and also it was a period of a lot of money.  You see there was a lot of money for the arts during that time so we thrived during that period.  The Black Arts Movement was able to get funding.  Some people didn't take any funding but it thrived partly because of that money that was available in the dance, the music, the visual arts, and the theater and also there was that interconnection.  It was a period not necessarily--now the people have continued, a lot of the people doing their work, however that was an era that related to the social experiences of that period and so the Black Arts Movement is contained within a period not because it faded away or people lost interest in the black arts.  It was that the energies in the country shifted for instance like people in the '60s [1960s] or early '70s [1970s] who are hippies, by the time the '80s [1980s] came those people were executives in offices and they had families, they were living in the suburbs.  You can only sustain that for a certain period (laughter).  Then they were becoming more like their parents, okay and so the Black Arts Movement--some of those people--in your youth you can be just free and you can be taking daring steps.  A number of those people then became university professors. They were still able to express themselves however they need some security, they were having families.  So the era took a different turn somewhat because of economics, that's the way I would see it and you still hear their voices although maybe some things we understood in a different way rather than, "Tah!" like all the people before if they didn't know, they were talking about, "tah!" like that.  When you're actually living life and you see there were so many efforts before, we have to honor that and now our children are coming up.  We want to still be alive for these children and we want to give great beauty and understanding to them and so it's not as blatant as it was in that original period.  But that period was necessary.  Yeah a lot of people became educated about what, you know, who African Americans are through the arts in that period, yeah.  And our contributions, a lot came through the arts in that period.
Speaker 1: So in spirit you think there's still a Black Arts Movement or the remnants of one still around?
Speaker 2: Yeah I don't think--it started something that didn't--it's not a movement now, it just continues.  I think the young people if they are interested in being artists it's more feasible, it's more feasible, although in the '90s [1990s] there were fewer young people who were just going in that direction--I shouldn't say fewer but those who are the very dedicated.  Yeah it continues it's not a movement.  I don't know there might be another wave of a movement, but you see for instance in the '70s [1970s] when a I was a much younger person, I'd go to the bookstore and I'd see these novels by black authors; I knew every one of those books.  Sometimes I knew the authors or the poetry books.  Then over time I'm going to a bookstore there is like a volume of works by African Americans.  Some are novels, some is philosophy, some are self help books, and some are, you know, gardening.  We are just every place, I'm like who are these people, I don't know everybody anymore.  You see it has expanded, it's expanded because it's now somewhat merged into the general consciousness.  So it doesn't necessarily right now have to be what's called a movement that movement helped spur all the rest of that, yeah.  However, at the same time we don't want to lose that consciousness that was developing so much at that time and it is still there. Some of that might be more underground and sometimes I hear young people who really, really want to know about the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] 'cause they still have that consciousness and their work will take them in that same direction.
Story_ID: 208826
Speaker 1: Now I wanted to ask also about something I read in your resume that suggested to me that your work with your company [Sounds in Motion] also was somehow linked perhaps spiritually to the Harlem Renaissance especially through Zora Neale Hurston. So can you tell me about what drew you to the work of Hurston and how that figured into your choreography?
Speaker 2: Yes well a musician who I worked with very closely named Steve Solder he was a drummer, he's passed away now.  He said, "[HistoryMaker] Dianne [McIntyre] the work that you're doing, some of it has historical areas in it and you are going down to Haiti and you're going to South Carolina.  I would go to these places and interview people about their dances," and he said, "you're doing those things just like Zora Neale Hurston," I said, "Who is that?"  That was in the '70s [1970s].  I said, "I don't know Zora," he said, "You need to go get some of her books," he said, "Go get her book 'Their Eyes Were Watching God'."  He said, "You are like Zora because Zora was a researcher and an artist."  So I had the experience that if I were not a dancer, I would have been an anthropologist.  I loved hearing about people's experience in their culture, people as Dr. [Pearl] Primus would say peoples who live still close to the earth because their dance was vital to their community.  When I learned that there were places where dance was vital to the community, I knew that I could be a dancer and it wouldn't be just fluff that it could make a difference in people's lives, not just by studying dance but by viewing or participating in some way. So that's how I had that link to anthropology.  So when I read about Zora and that she had been studying anthropology and she became a great novelist and I picked up her work, I was just like oh my goodness she's amazing.  I just really--I liked her a lot and I read other authors from the Harlem Renaissance. Sometimes I did works that were a little bit inspired by them as well so that's how I connected with Zora and then later [HistoryMaker] Woodie King, Jr. who's a producer in New York [New York] at the New Federal Theatre [New York, New York], he suggested that if I did a work that was based on a famous novel where people were connected with the name of the novel, the title then that modern dance could run more like a play and could be very palatable to people who don't necessarily go to modern dance concerts.  Sometimes modern dance is really farfetched to people even people who like the arts.  Sometimes people would just fall asleep in a modern dance concert (laughter).  So I said, "Oh that's a good idea."  So they didn't fall asleep too much in our concerts because it was very lively.  So I created a work based on 'Their Eyes Were Watching God', not based on it, it was 'Their Eyes Were Watching God [(A Dance Adventure in Southern Blues)]' with no words.  We were all the characters, it was not like 'Stop on a Dime' ['I Could Stop on a Dime and Get Ten Cents Change'], there were no words.  It was like a story ballet and Felix [E.] Cochren [Jr.] did the set, Olu Dara and Butch Morris did the music and my whole company were the characters and once we first performed it one day there was a group of young people in the audience and when the person who played Tea Cake just came walking on the stage all the girls of that group said, "It's Tea Cake, it's Tea Cake!"  The book is so famous that, you know, they knew everybody.  So Woodie King was right, it was a very popular piece.  It was not easy to travel because the set was big and so that's how I became connected and I felt that our period was similar to the Harlem Renaissance because the different artists were connected, we connected with the music and writers like Ntozake Shange and her associates, you know, we were all friends.  My studio became a little bit somewhat like a salon.  Our studio on 125th [Street] and Lenox [Avenue] was where the different artist, the musicians would come sit there, just talk and jam and the dancers and poets, it was a gathering place, yeah.  There were other gathering places like down in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York] and--that was a rich period culturally, yeah, in our history.
Story_ID: 208827
Speaker 1: Ms. [HistoryMaker Dianne] McIntyre you mentioned at the end of the last segment that you had some encounters with Ntozake Shange and I'm familiar with her, 'For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide/ When the Rainbow is Enuf' and that's the only choreopoem (laughter) I know.  But what was your experience with that work or with another work by her?
Speaker 2: Well when I started my dance classes in 1974 the year I told you we first got a grant, we also opened it up for scholarship students so people could come and take classes for free or a certain percentage.  So Ntozake came to one of those auditions for the scholarship students and she was a student at Barnard [College, New York, New York] and her little sister came, [Ifa] Bayeza, I think their mother was there too.  She remembers it better than I do.  So she became a scholarship student and so she took classes at Sounds in Motions Studio [New York, New York].  She loved dance, she really did, she has always loved dance and over the years she tried to keep up with dance. So then she was working on--I knew, kind of knew she was a writer and she was working on a play which had done in San Francisco [California] and she did it in some club settings in New York [New York]. So she was working on this play and they gave me the script because they wanted me to do the choreography for it. So her director whose name was [HistoryMaker] Oz Scott and the thing is that over the years I went back and forth with it, do I regret this but I didn't do the choreography for it. At the same time I was working on that 'Deep South Suite' piece for the [Alvin] Ailey junior company [Ailey II].  It was like a little too much and I read that script and I was like, "'Zake can really write," 'cause she was a student in the class and a dance student which she danced very well.  I didn't know that she could write like that.  I was like this is amazing, she writes well and I had done the choreography for one play in New York City at that time it was called 'The Great MacDaddy' it was for the Negro Ensemble Company [New York, New York]. So the director had seen my work in theater and I was the closest choreographer to 'Zake at that time so the thing is he kept begging me and I told him no I can't do it.  I think there was another reason I didn't want to do it which I can't remember at this time, right now.  So they went ahead and did it and didn't have a choreographer per se.  One of the dancers in the company did the choreography and a number of the dancers in the original 'For Colored Girls' were met at the Sounds in Motion Studio, they were dancers in my class and so I told them in the future let me know--keep me posted on any other works that she did.  So she did--soon after that she did another work called 'Spell #7' and in 'Spell #7' I worked with Ntozake and her director Oz Scott along with a brilliant cast with Avery Brooks, Mary Alice, Michele Shay, and [S.] Epatha Merkerson is in that. Epatha you may see her on 'Law & Order,' she's the boss of those guys and Samuel L. Jackson, he was an understudy so was Epatha.  It was a whole brilliant cast.  'Zake got the best people together and oh Laurie Carlos who was the--she was an original for 'Colored Girls' and she had Ntozake's rhythm in her consciousness.  She really interpreted, I shouldn't say it in the past but she is a great interpreter of Ntozake's work.
Story_ID: 208828
Speaker 1: And 'Zake [Ntozake Shange] was in it ['Spell #7'] at first, she used to always put herself in the first version of the production.  So we worked on that and it was a fascinating experience because it wasn't a play at first, in rehearsal she would bring in a series of poems. She had a concept for the beginning of it and it started with a dance, a mammy dance.  It was something about whether actors--performers are performing like a minstrel as they do their work or are they really being who they are?  Are they really being the black person they are or are they putting on a show like somebody would do in black face in the old days?  These were the questions that came up so it started with the mammy dance.  That dance was set then something in between but the concept of the dances was very clear from her.  Then these poems that she had written over several years came to the table and then [HistoryMaker] Oz [Scoot] and 'Zake would figure out what person was going to say the poem and how it interfaced with movement and how the people's characters were developing related to the poems.  So it wasn't a play when we started rehearsal, it developed into a play through the rehearsal process.  It was amazing, quite amazing just quite all brilliant people. Some of whom I have kept up associations with over time and then 'Zake and I have done some other pieces together over time that have been maybe smaller, you know, not as known to the wider public and the last thing I did with her was in 2003, last spring, she's been teaching at the University of Florida [Gainesville, Florida] and I came and worked on a piece with her down there.  The two of us were in it too, 'Zake and myself and some of her students.  So yeah she's one of my favorite people to work with.  She's had some challenges in her life and at the same time no matter what those challenges are she's always the consummate artist.  She's clear, direct and the ideas are just flowing and her writing just flows.  I think she's also one of the finer writers of the America present--presently in American literature.  Well, let me take this back, it's not like I read everything, it's just I would like to say to her the way her flow really inspire me, the way she can really get across an idea and the flow of her music is--her poetry is like music.
Story_ID: 208829
Speaker 1: It sounds like you were very busy in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I collaborated with a lot of different people.  Yeah, I've worked in theater as well as doing my dances.  I've created movement for a lot of theater pieces, some of it was in regional theater and I also have choreographed a couple of films--two films.  Well more I did do the choreography for the film 'For Colored Girls [Who have Considered Suicide/ When the Rainbow was Enuf]' and I did a TV show in New York--two one was called 'Violence in America' in the '70s [1970s] and another was called 'Women of the Regent Hotel' [sic. 'Women of Regent Hotel'].  Some women who were welfare mothers that lived in a hotel and they wrote about their lives in poetry.  So there was a whole TV program done of that and I did the choreography for a TV movie, HBO 'Miss Evers' Boys' and for the Disney produced film 'Beloved.'  So those have been my film experiences.  So all of it comes together, modern dance, the theater and the film and from those directors and actors in the other media, I've learned a lot to bring forward in the dance.  I feel very fortunate.
Speaker 1: I noticed too that you did the choreography for 'Treemonisha,' one of the earliest African American operas. What was that experience like?
Speaker 2: Oh that was really fun, you know why because you know I've locked myself into over the years doing music that was working with music, people are used to me working with the so called jazz musician music or, you know, and music that I've worked with is not traditional so called jazz those are very sometimes avante garde type of music.  So I did have a longing to do something with classical music.  I always have 'cause I loved it when I was little so 'Treemonisha' was that opportunity 'cause it was classical and ragtime combined.  So we did it at the St. Louis--the Opera Theatre of St. Louis [St. Louis, Missouri] and the dancers were from New York City, I auditioned them there, they brought the crew of dancers there and it was quite exhilarating working with opera and I was nervous at first because opera singers do not like to move 'cause their voices will jiggle around and somehow in their training they were taught that maybe they're not supposed to be moving around in choreography.  However these people were absolutely so open even though some of them were middle age they actually somehow were not in that mold of, "No we are divas, we're not going to move around while our voices have to hit those high notes."  I tried to make it so they--it was actually the musical director who would protect the singers.  He would be directing the pianist and he'd say, "[HistoryMaker] Dianne [McIntyre] I don't know if that movement is going to work, all these people are singing that complicated line right there so maybe we have to pull back a little," but the dancers and the singers went for it and the last part of that 'Treemonisha' is called 'A Slow Drag' [sic. 'A Real Slow Drag'].  Oh that is--oh I love that song and the whole cast had to do this.  Some of the cast members were students and they did not all have a professional type of way--they didn't have the whole protocol of how to be in rehearsal.  Sometimes I had to wrangle them in like they were children.  So it was not that easy to work with them to create that last segment 'cause everybody was in it but they pulled it together and what was fascinating was that the musical director used my feeling about the tempo of the music because I had the idea that some people over time play that music faster than it was intended to be.  I felt that Scott Joplin really wanted it to be a slow drag and the tempo was listed in the score and we adhered to that even though the musical director at first wanted to make it a little faster.  But it had a deep impact and a kind of emotional rise that comes up inside with that slow tempo.  Yeah, so I liked working on 'Treemonisha' a lot.  I think it was the only time I've worked in opera. Yeah, I liked it.
Story_ID: 208830
Speaker 1: So you've had a number of really diverse experiences with your own company [Sounds in Motion] and then producing choreography for other projects, other individuals.  How long was your company together?
Speaker 2: From 1972 to 1988 yeah sixteen years, sixteen years, yes.
Speaker 1: And what happened in '88 [1988] to let you know it was time to do something else?
Speaker 2: I think it was just that I felt that my entire being was totally absorbed in my company.  Though I was able to do other projects from time to time, my almost every waking moment was about the survival of the company, fundraising, the studio, the rent, making sure the dancers had the payment and were we going to have a good enough season for next year, everything was geared to that.  I started the company originally because I loved to choreograph, I've always loved to choreograph and by the time 1988 came along I was able to spend very little time in the studio just exploring and other people were in the studio.  It was like my energies were being used to make sure that other people could be in the studio to their choreography, to do their thing which all that was fine but I didn't plan to be an administrator and then a part time choreographer or part time dancer.  I said it was another thing that someone told me many years ago--no it wasn't that many years before that was Romare Bearden.  It was so many amazing individuals I've had the opportunity to meet and work with.  So Romare Bearden--I'm going to say this little aside, even though that work, that second work I did with the [Alvin] Ailey company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater], it did not turn out to be successful but a successful part of it was that Romare Bearden did the costumes and set design for it and we became friends after that time.  It was Alvin's idea to bring us together and so he was always very supportive of my work and there's a lovely film that does have part of that dance in it about Romare, Romare Bearden.  So shortly-sometime he would come to my studio.  He told me that the place where my studio was is where he took classes in art during the WPA [Works Progress Administration] period, that same building.  Well, one time Romare told me he said, "Why do you need an institution, you're an artist."  It's something that just kind of stayed with me. At the time he said it I didn't--I said, "I'm trying to raise money for the company doing this and that," and he was like, "[HistoryMaker] Dianne [McIntyre] why do you need an institution you're an artist."  There was that and I used to see how he would go every morning to Long Island City [Queens, New York, New York] and he worked by himself on his collages.  There was another artist working with us at the time, a musician named Don Pullen, brilliant pianist, in our last concert in the studio and I said I want to dance like Don Pullen plays; I want to dance like Mary Alice speaks.  They were artists totally absorbed in what they did at the same time I was running an institution.  It was not that easy for me to get totally absorbed in my art.  So I felt that I could continue with the people in the company on individual projects but not have all the overhead of the studio and holding on to the whole organization.  So that's when I said I think it's time.  And we had quite a number of--well three grants that were coming to us during that time.  So I called the National Endowment for the Arts [NEA], New York State Council on the Arts saying, "We're not going to be having those monies forwarded 'cause I'm stopping the company," and they were very supportive, it was moving how supportive they were.  They understood, they could understand probably better than any other people 'cause they got applications, they knew the lives of each choreographer, each person running the company, they knew it was like it's a tough, tough job and the National Endowment for the Arts, the head of that department of that area at the time was named Sali Ann Kriegsman and when I wrote to her on how I was not continuing the company there was a certain amount of money that was coming to our company for our next activities in the next year, somehow she gathered the whole panel together maybe it was even on the telephone and she allocated those funds to me as an individual artist.  She said, "You have to continue your work and we want to do this to encourage you."  So it was a very special transition.
Story_ID: 208831
Speaker 1: You've described an era in which you met some wonderful people, I'm pleasantly surprised to know that you had that kind of warm relationship with Romare Bearden, a visual artist when I think his wife was the dancer was she not?
Speaker 2: Yes she was, Nanette, Nanette Bearden.  Yes, I knew him before I knew her; yeah Nanette was a lovely--she's passed away now too.  Yeah she was lovely and she was not, no, she was not a dancer but she had a dance company [Nanette Bearden Contemporary Dance Theater], she ran a dance company.  Her sister was a dancer in the original company of Arthur Mitchell's, Dance Theatre of Harlem yeah Sheila Rohan a beautiful dancer (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now that you mention it, I think Nanette Bearden's dance company was here perhaps in the early '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: Oh okay yes they probably were, yeah.
Speaker 1: Since you're moving out of that stage of your life with running a company [Sounds in Motion] and going on to do other things what are some of the other works that come out of that period in the 1990s?
Speaker 2: Well one of the first--I did some more work with Don Pullen who was a wonderful pianist and then I did a work in 1991 which is called 'How Long Brethren'  Now this piece was special, it was choreographed originally in 1937 by a choreographer named Helen Tamiris.  She was of Russian Jewish descent.  She did a couple of pieces with Negro music.  One was called 'Negro Spirituals' and the other was called 'How Long Brethren.'  'How Long Brethren' was part of the WPA [Works Progress Administration] Federal Theatre Project and people at George Mason University [Fairfax, Virginia] said that they were going to have a federal theater festival, they housed all the archives of the federal theater festival and they invited me to try and recreate that piece of Helen Tamiris.  So it was like over a years' time or so I did research on the piece through their archives and we recreated the piece in 1991.  So it was an integrated cast of sixteen women and a full choir.  The choir was from [Washington] D.C. and it was quite successful and I danced the opening section which was her 'Negro Spirituals' but the other 'How Long Brethren' were Negro songs of protest which were found by an ethnomusicologist in the 1920s in the South.  The words in it were very strong, stronger than anything from the civil rights era very out and out how the situation was and how they felt about the white man and what the white man was doing to them.  The man who recorded those was Lawrence Gellert his life was actually threatened because he was recording the Negro songs, by the white establishment.  They felt that if these songs got out it was spoiled the image of the happy go lucky Negroes in the South.  So she did it as part of the WPA and ran on Broadway for quite a while.  I recreated that and that help bring a lot of attention back to that choreographer who had never had her due as one of the modern dance pioneers and I worked with some of the women who are in their eighties who were in the original piece and I kept up an association with them over time.
Story_ID: 208832
Speaker 1: Another piece I did at that time, I started a connection with George Mason University [Fairfax, Virginia] and I did my first work that was like a dance theater drama where people were speaking and it was called, 'In Living Color[: A Gullah Story]' and it was about the Gullah people in South Carolina.  It came from some interviews I had done with the people there in South Carolina and from different books that I had read and OyamO, a playwright, put all those pieces together and my long time collaborator Olu Dara who is a great musician, jazz, blues, folk.  He created the music for it, it was a big hit at George Mason University 'cause it was about the people's lives there on the island off the coast of South Carolina and also all the building that's happened in recent years where they're losing their land, they've been on that land for many years.  So it was the first thing where the work kind of brought attention to something that was happening in the social, political arena.  Then I did another work there--the next work I did there was 'Stop on a Dime' ['I Could Stop on a Dime and Get Ten Cents Change'] and somewhere in there I worked with 'Miss Evers' Boys' which was--originally I did it in the theater of Baltimore [Maryland], Center Stage and this was a piece was about the Tuskegee [University; Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama] study where the men in Alabama were in a study by the government.  The men had syphilis and the government started a study with them where they were trying to see the results of this syphilis and then when penicillin came in they didn't give the men that penicillin they continued to have syphilis but they thought they were being cured and that went on from the 1930s to 1970, the 1970s when it came out to the public.  It was a very sad situation in this country that went on for many years.  So a play was first created about it and then a film by HBO.  The reason it had dance in it was because one of the main characters in the play--in this fictitious story was a dancer and he aspired to go to the Cotton Club [New York, New York] and get out of his situation in Tuskegee [Alabama] as a farmer to make it big and all his friends were his backup musicians.  So that was delightful experience, I'd say more than delightful, it was transforming working with the actors, the director and people had told me in film it's going to be different because the money is running with the camera, they're going to be in a hurry, they're going to tell you to do this and that.  I had to do a little study with some books about movie terms because I didn't want them to know that I'd never done a film before (laughter) and sometimes I'd have to call a friend of mine on the phone and say, "The director said this what does he mean by that?"  So I held my own and I loved seeing in the camera while sometimes I couldn't be in the actual space where it was being filmed, I had to be off to the side otherwise I'd be in the shot and I loved seeing how the movement connected with the camera.  The cameras catching the movement was just fascinating to me it was almost like I was in my element. I was like I am in my element.  So I'd like to do more in film and I was just trying to think of that director [Joseph Sargent], I have him on that sheet, but his name doesn't come to me right now.
Story_ID: 208833
Speaker 1: And also, then I got to work with 'Beloved' that was with Jonathan Demme who was the director for that.  The reason I was part of that was because Sweet Honey in the Rock, their director at the time was Bernice Reagon Johnson [sic. Bernice Johnson Reagon], she's now retired from them just this year and she suggested, she said, "Well if there's dance in this, you need to get [HistoryMaker] Dianne McIntyre."  I did do some things with Sweet Honey also, a couple of dance events.  So they called me and I met Jonathan Demme the director and I said how is he going to know if I'm the person to do this.  So we talked a little bit, he showed me some films from Brazil and he said, "I think the movement should look something like this."  I was like, "Hmm," 'cause it takes place in 1860-something when none of us were there to know what dances of black people were like at that time, however I didn't think they'd look like the movement in Brazil only from my historical studies.   I didn't want to out and out tell him that but I did tell him I had done some study in Haiti and it was not that Haiti was related to what I thought we should do in the film, however later I found out that he has a very strong connection with Haiti and I think it felt that there was sensibility about the two of us that was matching.  So at the end of that conversation he said so we'll be seeing you and we're glad you're working on this film, that's how I knew and that was an amazing experience also.  So there were 150 people in that particular scene which was called In the Clearing and I also worked on the music for that segment.  Some of the dancers and myself created the music for that section which the composer for the film honored as something that inspired and influenced her.  So it went to the clearing--well I created the movement along with the energies of the people and then finally we went to the actual place which was so powerful was that this movement was also led or the inspiration for them to move was led by Baby Suggs who was played by Beah Richards, one of our great all time actors in the theater and film history.  So Beah Richards was a little feeble at the time, she came and sat down in a chair before we began.  I had told all of the dancers, dancer, actors some of them were regular people they weren't all real trained dancers, little children to older people.  I had told them about Beah Richards so when she came down there some of the men ran forward almost bowed at her feet, you know, and we had to give her a little space, I think her nurse was with her.  So when she got up there and she called them in to do their dances I was quite far away then, I was on the hill but we could see in the monitor what was happening and finally she just spoke to them as it went on.  There was one long scene in the actual film that's broken up into three sections but actually all that happened all at one time even though certain parts they did over and over again.  When she spoke to them about loving themselves, she says you have to love--you know, from Toni Morrison's absolutely amazing book ['Beloved'], she says, "You have to love yourselves 'cause them yonder is not going to love your hands, you have to love your hands 'cause that master just wants to see them tied and bound" [sic.].
Story_ID: 208834
Speaker 1: Ms. [HistoryMaker Dianne] McIntyre at the end of the last segment, you were talking about your experiences in working in film first with 'Miss Evers' Boys' and who was the director for that?
Speaker 2: That was Joe Sargent [Joseph Sargent], yeah, a veteran director, very fine and he was very supportive.  I felt a lot of support from him, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then with 'Beloved.'
Speaker 2: Yes with Jonathan Demme, was the director there.  Yeah, very giving, generous man.  He said, "You just go ahead and do"--he said, "I've been seeing what you did with the people, you know choreography I don't, you just do"--I said, "everything I've seen you doing in your films," I said, "you do know choreography, you choreograph with that camera," he just laughed.  So the very strong experience in 'Beloved' was hearing--after everybody is doing their dancing and the dance was what I would--I wanted to make a dance that would be--that that community created itself, had some historical movements in it and it also they were in that Cincinnati [Ohio] area, some of them were very close to their ancestors who were from Africa and at the same time they had the influence of the people they worked for.  So we tried to put--I tried to put that in there and then we had some set movements and the men were able to have individualized movements coming out of their set movement.  So Beah Richards, the goddess I'll call her, she led that segment, invited them to dance, the little children she invited them to laugh and then to dance and the women to cry.  After that she spoke to them about loving themselves and they responded to her for real.  They weren't acting and the camera as they were going around in a circle focusing on her, you could see the faces of the individuals listening to her.  They were totally grabbed by every single word that she said because it was about them even though she was talking in 1863 or whatever year that was even down to the littlest child, she was piercing their hearts.  It was very moving, sometimes the people applauded after she said certain things, they applauded because she caused that feeling to rise up in them and I remember where we were at the camera they were saying, "Oh the applause that's kind of modern, I think we're going to have to take the applause out."  They were thinking ahead of editing but they didn't, it was too real, they could have taken it out.  And then toward the end she finished she said, "And the greatest thing"-- I cannot remember the exact words, it was about love your heart, that is the prize, she said, "Hallelujah!"  After that she went and she sat on the edge of the rock that was not a real rock, it was created for the set and some of the little children came around and they sat with her and she hugged them and they were just there and the singing still went on.  And Jonathan Demme didn't know when to cut; he didn't know when to cut so he just let the camera roll for about ten minutes after she finished like that.  So that was an experience I'll always remember.
Story_ID: 208835
Speaker 1: Well you have described for us so many wonderful experiences from various times throughout your career.  But you know in thinking about these signature pieces that we've talked about for other artists, if 'Revelations' is a signature piece for Alvin Ailey and maybe 'For Colored Girls [Who Have Considered Suicide/ When the Rainbow is Enuf'] is a signature piece for [Ntozake] Shange.  Is there a signature piece for [HistoryMaker] Dianne McIntyre?
Speaker 2: Well there's a couple signature pieces I guess would be 'Their Eyes Were Watching God [(A Dance Adventure in Southern Blues)]' and oh my mind has gone blank, 'Their Eyes Were Watching God' and another piece I do called 'Love Poems to God', 'Mississippi Talks, Ohio Walks' with Olu Dara that is a nice one.  Yeah those would be some of my signature pieces and 'Deep South Suite' that was an early signature piece, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well those of us who have resided in Ohio all our lives are very glad that you decided to come back home to Cleveland, Ohio and I'm just a little curious about what's on the horizon now for Dianne McIntyre what are you working on in 2004?
Speaker 2: Okay so I have three pieces--three things I'm working on one project--four.  One is ongoing, it's a play called 'Crowns' and 'Crowns,' written by wonderful actress, actor and amazing writer Regina Taylor and Regina invited me to choreograph that play and it ran this season in three theaters.  In Atlanta [Georgia], [Washington] D.C. and Chicago [Illinois] and the Cleveland Play House [Cleveland, Ohio] invited me to direct and choreograph 'Crowns' for their fall season.  So in 2004 I'll choreograph that which is about African American women and their church hats.  It has wonderful gospel music and the real words again they are from the real words of women who've told their experiences of their hats that's in a book called 'Crowns.'  Then I am scheduled to work on a new piece that will be again at George Mason University [Fairfax, Virginia] that's about Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954].  It's about the Virginia case [Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County, 1954] of Brown v. Board of Education.  In February of this year I started interviewing people in Virginia.  Mr. [HistoryMaker] Oliver [W.] Hill who's ninety-seven years old now and he was one of the lawyers on that case and also some of the people in Prince Edward County [Virginia] who were affected by the school's closing.  After the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision that segregation was not legal in public schools, some counties in Virginia completely closed their schools instead of integrating so I spoke to some of those and we're creating a theater piece based on that and will premiere January of 2005.  Here in Cleveland, I'm working with Michael Medcalf's Cleveland Contemporary Dance Company [sic. Cleveland Contemporary Dance Theatre (CCDT)] and I'm working on a piece based on the life of [HistoryMaker] Marjorie Witt Johnson who was one of the pioneers in dance at Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio].  She was the pioneer bringing dance to Karamu here in Cleveland and her background; she was born in Wyoming so we're calling it the 'Daughter of a Buffalo Soldier'.  The piece about Brown v. Board of Education is called 'Open the Door Virginia!'  Those are some of the upcoming projects.
Story_ID: 208836
Speaker 1: Sounds wonderful, looking forward to it. And I want to say also that I'm convinced by everything that I read in your resume and everything that you've shared with us today, that you weren't a starving artist, that you've enjoyed some success in your career and you're still smiling (laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm still smiling.
Speaker 1: I guess you are looking forward to the future too.
Speaker 2: Yes I've figured out how to--yeah I've never done anything I didn't believe in and I never had to go do some work that I thought might have been drudgery, I've been very fortunate and there have been some slim times and I chose that life, I chose the freedom of that life and it's also given me the opportunity to be free to work on different projects.  So I feel the blessing completely being able to live as an artist in America (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: As we approach the end of our conversation today, I wonder if you have any words of advice that you would offer to aspiring choreographers who might view this tape.
Speaker 2: Yes my advice would be if you are planning to--if you are interested in choreographing, I would say please do go for it.  There are not that many people who grow up and say, "Oh I want to choreograph," and if you are one of those people try to follow your heart.  I've met a number of people over the years who were interested in dance or choreography as young people and they went into different fields that were more practical and later in their lives they wondered if they should have pursued it.  So sometimes it's not the field to go into however I always try to tell the young people go for it in that field while you're young you don't have too many responsibilities of taking care of other people, you can experiment and then maybe that's not your field as an artist, you might not want to do that.  The other thing as a choreographer I advise them is to keep exploring until they find their own voice, their own movement voice.  You may see another choreographer whose work you really enjoy.  In the modern dance what we do, we do not--it's not like the thing to do to copy that other choreographer, you find your own voice and sometimes it may be the only movement that might feel like out of whack like, what am I doing?  Explore that, explore that.  When you find your own voice then try to stay on that track and it will shift a little to something else, be inspired by all the things around you and let it come from that real place not from what you feel is the ideal of the dance.  So that's my advice for the young choreographer, go for it and if you go for it that way than the universe will support you and your art.
Story_ID: 208837
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Tell us a little bit about this photo.
Speaker 2: Okay this is the second concert I did in 1972, June 1972 and in the foreground are two of the dancers, William Donald [ph.] and Dorian Williams [Byrd] they were in my first company [Sounds in Motion].  I'm in the background with my hands out stretched very low and the musicians you can't see very well, but they're in the background.  This is at Washington Square [Methodist Episcopal] Church in New York City [New York, New York].  Yeah there I am (laughter). Yeah (unclear), improv [improvisation] movement in it.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay it's called what?
Speaker 2: 'A Free Thing,' number two ['A Free Thing II'], each would name it again.  That's that one.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Ready?
Speaker 1: Yeah is this from concert in New York City, June 1972 at one of my first concerts with a group called Sounds in Motion and in the foreground you see the dancers Dorian Williams and myself curving over and in the background that's Bernadine Jennings and William Donald plus the musicians and that's Aiye Niwaju and Will Crittendon and the base player I can't remember his name.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a concert I was in December 2002 called 'New York Dance Divas' and all of us in the concert were those who were--I would just say we were not young and there were people that the public had enjoyed seeing us perform over the years and we were all then on the same concert, three of us. Myself, Blondell Cummings and Sarita Allen were the performers for that night.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Ready.
Speaker 1: This is a piece I did with Olu Dara who is there with the guitar, wonderful musician and this is part of a longer work we did called 'Blues Rooms.'  This particular version of it was done at George Mason University [Fairfax, Virginia] and the section we're doing was called 'A Brand New People on the Planet' which was actually just Olu and myself in that segment.  In New York City we won a Bessie Award for that piece.  Bessie is a New York dance and performance award in, I think '97 [1997] or '98 [1998].  We got--
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  And ready.
Speaker 1: This is a photo of myself and Olu Dara in a piece 'Mississippi Talks, Ohio Walks.'  This is about 1987.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is from 'Their Eyes Were Watching God [(A Dance Adventure in Southern Blues)]'.  I played Janie, most of these photos are by a New York photographer named Johan Elvers, J-O-H-A-N last name E-L-V-E-R-S.  He's been photographing my company since about 1975.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This is a picture that was in the New York Times. This is from 'Take-Off From a Forced Landing', the piece based on my mother's [HistoryMaker Dorothy McIntyre] stories.  In this photo the company--we are wearing the outfits designed by Willi Smith and it was coincidental that same year we were doing 'Take Off' he had an aviation theme in his clothing.
Speaker 2: Is another picture of the dancers from 'Take-Off From a Forced Landing' and in this particular photo we didn't have--it was a promotional photo and we didn't have our Williwear [Ltd.] costumes yet--Willi Smith costumes as yet.
Speaker 1: Photo of Olu Dara and myself at the National Black Dance Festival in Atlanta [Georgia] 1994.
Speaker 2: Very special.  This was on the opening night of 'I Could Stop on a Dime and Get Ten Cents Change' which is a piece with all my father's [Francis McIntyre] stories from him growing up in Cleveland [Ohio].  This photo is taken at the Cleveland Play House and they had a very extensive exhibit they did of Cleveland memorabilia and photos, that's what you'll see in the background.  So seated you see my mother, Dorothy Lane McIntyre next to her is my father, Benny McIntyre [Francis McIntyre] in the background starting on our right is Ralph Caldwell [ph.] one of my father's oldest friends next is Mariama Whyte who was my niece, my sister's daughter, next is my sister, Donna McIntyre Whyte, next is me [HistoryMaker] Dianne McIntyre and then last is Sylvester Owens, Jesse Owens' brother who was a very good friend of my father.  My father grew up in Cleveland and had a lot of very close old buddies so that's that.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Ready.
Speaker 2: So this is a picture of my cheerleading squad. This is probably 1964 or three [1963].  That's at John Adams High School [Cleveland, Ohio] and there I am in the upper left hand side and in front of me is a young lady I spoke of in the interview named Ann Hadley [ph.].  All these girls were dynamic and some of them were part of a gymnastics team called The Soulful Tears.
Speaker 1: Is a picture of my parents, Dorothy and Benny McIntyre.  This photo is probably from the 1980s or early '80s [1980s], something like that.
Speaker 2: This is poster from 'Take-Off From a Forced Landing.'  The photo you see there is a photo of my mother in 1940 next to her plane.  The inserts are the dancers in 'Take-Off From a Forced Landing,' this was at the Joyce Theater in New York City and on the outside the dancers from the cast signed notes to my parents.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is photo on 2004 maybe it was 2003 but it's a recent photo of myself and my sister, that's Donna M. Whyte and on that evening she had received an award from--were you there--from UPCaM, United Protestant Campus Ministries.  She had been on that board for many years and they honored her for her work with diversity in that organization and she's going to return to their board in the fall.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  The top center.
Speaker 2: This is myself with renowned composer Eubie Blake.  This was about late '70s [1970s] and Eubie was a fan of mine and I choreographed a number of works to his music and this was at Delacorte Theater outdoors in Central Park, New York City.  He came up on the stage, we honored him after the piece was performed which is called 'Memories [of You].'
Speaker 1: This is me.  My mother made this collage.  This is me in a piece called 'Jesus' Children of America' created by a choreographer Quincy Edwards [ph.]; he created it for my company that was about 1975.
Speaker 2: This is from one of my first--my second concert of Sounds in Motion, Washington Square Church, June 1972.  That's me in the foreground, Dorian Williams in the background.
Speaker 1: And this is a solo that was created on me for a piece by Elbert Watson called 'Reins,' R-E-I-N-S.  So these solo pictures my mother really liked, so she created this collage in a way in a picture frame which was from our ancestors.
