Story_ID: 261850
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Janet [Angel] MacLachlan, J-A-N-E-T, MacLachlan, M-A-C-capital L-A-C-H-L-A-N.
Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Angel.
Speaker 1: Okay, is that spelled the regular way?
Speaker 2: A-N-G-E-L.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I tried to change it when I was a kid, but that didn't work.
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind your middle name?
Speaker 2: Well, my father [James McLachlan] named me.  My father named me Janet because he thought that way I wouldn't have a nickname.  And he named me Angel because that's what he thought about me.  I was his first child.  And when I was in junior high school [Julia Ward Howe Junior High School 81, New York, New York], I had a friend whose name was Constance Lynette Curtis [ph.].  And I rather liked the sound of Lynette, so I tried to change it to Angelle [ph.], but it didn't take.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My real date of birth (laughter)?  August 27th, 1933.  I was born in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  What part of New York City?
Speaker 2: In Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an actor.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is March 30th, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  You don't have to give your address, just--
Speaker 2: No, we're in my apartment in Silver Lake, in California, in Los Angeles, California.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 261851
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions we all, we always ask for some reason, and they only require a short answer.  And the first one is do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue really.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: All right, now, continuing with these questions--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is, you know, it changes.  So right now I'd say my favorite food is pasta.  I really love pasta.  I think I like it because I really love cheese (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's a good excuse to have the cheese, to have some parmesan.
Speaker 1: All right, now, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is spring to summer, you know, when it's still a little cool.  You need a jacket.  It's not gotten hot; it's not got ridiculous, and, and it's dry and sunny and beautiful.  That's my favorite.
Speaker 1: About like it is now, or--
Speaker 2: About like it is now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, okay, I don't take a lot of vacations, and that's because from the time I came out here, I used to go on location a lot, and I used to consider that a vacation.  But I would say my favorite place to go has been Greece.  And I love it there.  It's beautiful.  I love, I love the, the sea there; I love the sky; I love the white buildings and everything.  I, I haven't been there in a while, but that longstanding has been my favorite place.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have, oh, the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't know, quite frankly.  I don't think so.  Maybe a cuss word, but I, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so if you hit your thumb with a hammer or something you might--
Speaker 2: I might cuss, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 261852
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [James McLachlan] side.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Ruby, R-U-B-Y, Iris, I-R-I-S, South, S-O-U-T-H.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Ooh, she was June 20th, 1905.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  Wait a minute--no, 1910.  I'm sorry.  I keep confusing her with my aunts, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Kingston, Jamaica.  My information about my parents' families is kind of sketchy, but I'll try to give you as much as I have.  She was born in Kingston.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How far back can you trace the ancestors on that side?  Are there any--
Speaker 2: Not very far.  I mean, what I remember her telling me was that her grandmother, her mother's mother, was a German woman, a mean German woman who came to Jamaica and married a Jamaican man and ran a plantation.  That much I remember that she told me about.  That would be my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was, your great-grandmother was a mean German woman, as described--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My great-grandmother was a mean German woman.
Speaker 1: And was she, were there, are there any stories about her meanness or something that, that come down.
Speaker 2: Well, apparently she was very mean to her husband.  So, as a child, and I was told this as a child, I just imagined this, this big, burly woman and this very small, winji guy, do you know.  Winji, that's Jamaican--
Speaker 1: Winji is a--
Speaker 2: --for small and weak.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so the German woman I take it was a white woman.
Speaker 2: I guess.
Speaker 1: I would guess, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and her husband, the Jamaican, was he a black Jamaican?
Speaker 2: He was a black Jamaican.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know anything about my grandfather, about my, my mother's father, or his, his background, his family.  All I know is that he was, he worked in a prison, as did my mother--I mean my, my grandmother [Katherine South (ph.)].  And I don't even know when he died.  I know that when my mother was a teenager her mother--my father [sic. grandfather] at, by that time had been dead.  My mother might have been around fifteen, sixteen years old, somewhere in that area.  My grandmother put her in a, a--what do you call it?  Okay, here we go--
Speaker 1: In an orphan (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in a nunnery.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean in other words it was a school run, run by nuns, and it was a boarding school run by nuns.  And she stayed there a year, maybe almost two, while my grandmother came to New York [New York] and got a job, got settled, and then sent for her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother tells me that, that I could not know my grandmother because she died when I was a year and a half.  But I have memories of my grandmother.  I have memories playing with her, and some of them are mine, and some of them are memories that were given to me by the one or two stories that were, that were told, right.  So when I was about a year and a half she went to the hospital for a, for an operation on her sinuses, and she died.
Story_ID: 261853
Speaker 1: Now did your, your mother [Iris South MacLachlan] talk, tell any stories about growing up in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: My mother, my mother told me that she was the last and, the last child, the only girl of eleven.  I don't know how many were alive at the same time, because I'm quite sure that some of them died very young.  And I think that, that when my grandmother [Katherine South (ph.)] left Jamaica it was because the sons had all gone off.  The only--I met two of her brothers.  One lived in Brooklyn [New York, New York], and one ultimately came to live with us when he was, when he was disabled because there wasn't anybody else to take care of him.  That was Uncle Cyril [ph.].  And Uncle George [ph.] lived in, in, in Brooklyn with his wife, with Aunt Edith [ph.], I believe it was.  I'm not really sure what her name was.  They had no children.  When I was--let me see how old was it--maybe in my early twenties, I went to Jamaica for my, for a vacation.  And I stayed with my father's [James McLachlan] family.  And my mother's cousin picked me up to take me, to show me all his property (laughter) and to show me the, the living relatives.  And what he said to me was--in his house, he had this wonderful house.  He was quite wealthy.  He said, "This room I was saving for your mother's room, but she never came," something of that order.  And when I told that to my mother, my, my mother just went--you know.  She didn't want to have anything to do with her family.  And she was not that interested in going back to Jamaica.  I think she may have gone once with my father.  Neither one of them went very often.  I don't have the kind of family that, that celebrated being Jamaican, that welcomed other Jamaicans into their, their group, you know, their family group.  My father went to visit Jamaica because he was a chiropractor, and his, his sister's children were still alive, and they would, they would send for him when they weren't feeling well, where they'd send for him to go and, and deal with the prime minister or whoever it was.  But he, they, we never went as a family just to have a vacation there, do you know.
Speaker 1: Did, did you have any since that there was some, some reason for them not to want to relate to Jamaica as much at--
Speaker 2: I have no idea, no real idea of why that was.  I think it bothered me for a very long time.  And even now I try to remember things.  I try to have some sense of why, why they, they weren't interested.  But I, I just think it was the way that they were raised and what they felt they were doing in New York [New York].  I mean they came from Jamaica to New York.  They left the old world and their old relationships behind, and, and there, and there they were.  They were also not particularly adventurous I don't think.
Story_ID: 261854
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Iris South MacLachlan] go to school in Jamaica?  Did she--
Speaker 2: She did.  She graduated, she--I don't know if she graduated.  No, she didn't graduate.  She did go to school.  She didn't graduate from high school.  And when she got to New York [New York] she started working, and she became a hairdresser.  If I seem a little confused, it's because I'm just trying to figure out when things happened, you know, in order.  But I can't really remember 'cause I was never really told, you know.  That's bothered me a lot, by the way, the fact that I don't have a lot of family stories.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, she because a hairdresser.  She studied, and she got married, her first husband [Earl Riggins].  She had a child, my brother [Gene J. Riggins], and then she got divorced.  And then she was, she was teaching, I believe, at a--I don't what, I don't know what, what school of hairdressing it was, but she was a, she was an instructor until she met my father [James McLachlan] and married my father and had me.  And then she, she had me and my brother, who was maybe five years older than me, and so she worked at home as a hairdresser.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 261855
Speaker 1: Can you give us your, your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: James, J-A-M-E-S, Murray, M-U-R-R-A-Y, McLachlan.  Okay--
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: First of all, my father's, my father's name was M-C capital L-A-C-H-L-A-N.  My mother [Iris South MacLachlan] added the A and made it M-A-C when I was in probably middle school [Julia Ward Howe Junior High School 81, New York, New York], junior--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --high school.
Speaker 1: --is there a reason for that, that, that you know?
Speaker 2: She did that because of it, numerology.  She thought that it would give the family more luck.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's, that's a theme that runs through some--I know there's some entertainers have done that, [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick has added letters.
Speaker 2: Added the E.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll has done--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the same thing.  There, there are some others I've heard about they add letters to their name, so it's--
Speaker 2: Right, she added the--
Speaker 1: --for the same reason--
Speaker 2: --she added the A.
Speaker 1: --for numerology (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --reasons.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, tell us about your father's side of the family.  What do you know about the ancestors on the McLachlan side?  Oh, was he--oh, his date of birth and place of birth you didn't--
Speaker 2: Okay, his date of birth was May 24th, 1896--1895.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was born in Jamaica or maybe just outside--no, he was born in, outside of Kingston [Jamaica].  I'm trying to remember.  It'll come to me.  He was born outside of Kingston.  He had, his father I believe was a, a contractor or a construction worker.  He had one brother and seven sisters.  He was the, next to the youngest.  The youngest was an aunt of mine that died in '93 [1993].  My father was a hundred when he died.  He died in '96 [1996], and my aunt was 101.  She died in, in January of '93 [1993].  They lived in Albert Town, Albert Town, Jamaica.  They lived there for I don't know.  My, my, my grandmother's name was Elizabeth [ph.].  And her, her husband's name I think was James.  I think my, my father was, was a junior.
Story_ID: 261856
Speaker 1: He died under very mysterious circumstances.  My father [James McLachlan] told me one thing, and my aunt told me another thing.  There was always a lot of conflict in, in my family in terms of stories.  There were, there was always someone who would dispute a fact.  And so I was never really sure exactly what the circumstance was.  I do remember my father telling me that his father [James McLachlan, Sr.] had come home one night, and had dinner with the family, then got on his horse and went out with, to go and meet friends.  I gather he drank a lot and he gambled a lot.  And he came home dead on his horse.  The horse just came back to the house, and my grandfather was laid across the horse.  And my father said to me: "He was poisoned, and I know who did it."  When I asked my aunt what she knew, she said, "Oh, that's ridiculous.  Mack never gets anything straight"--Mack was my father's nickname--"He had a heart attack."  And that's all that anybody ever said to me about it, so I have no idea.  I think it's a much more romantic story, to think that my grandfather went out and got poisoned, then was sent back on his horse, but I don't know.
Speaker 2: I guess either story could be--is plausible, but you don't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Either story is interesting, right.  So I never knew, I never knew any of my grandparents except my, my mother's [Iris South MacLachlan] mother and the few memories that I have.  I remember that I used to play in her room, my mother's mother, who was Katherine [South (ph.)].  I used to play in her room with, with colored balls.  I told my mother, "Gee, you know, I remember grandma lived in this room, and I used to play with colored balls."  And my mother says, "Oh, you couldn't remember that because you were just eighteen months, you know, when she died."  And they were, my, my grandmother used to knit, and they were barns of yarn that she kept there in the room.  I was told that I used to, when she came home from work, I used to go get her glasses, get her slippers, and get something to, to--I would have her read to me, and that was, you know, the, the, well, that was our relationship really.
Speaker 2: That means that you were sort of a precocious little kid--
Speaker 1: I was.
Speaker 2: --as at year and a half, you're--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I was.  And that sort of, because of my, because of my family, I think all of that got to be very dreamy and creative, you know.
Story_ID: 261857
Speaker 1: Sometimes I'll remember something, and I'll think, well, you know what, maybe I just dreamt that.  I couldn't tell the difference between what I dreamt and what was real when I was very young growing up.  But, when my, when my father's father [James McLachlan, Sr.] died, it, that left his mother [Elizabeth McLachlan (ph.)] with nine children.  And so she sent my father [James McLachlan] and, and my youngest aunt to live with my oldest aunt who was already married and starting her own family I believe.  So they left the household, and they went to live with my Aunt Bea [ph.] in Kingston [Jamaica].  When my father was, I don't know, nineteen or so--he was born in what, '95 [1895]?  World War I [WWI] was, began in what, 1912, 1914?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fourteen [1914], right.
Speaker 1: So that meant he was about nineteen years old, nineteen. Twenty.  He, he joined the Army, the British Army.  They had a West Indian division [British West Indies Regiment], and he went to war for England.  He ended up in Italy, and he ended up as a, as a sergeant.  He said that, that, in the British Army a black soldier could only go so high.  But he ended up as the highest because he could read and write and, and because he was very flowery, you know.  And so, he spent his time in the Army in Italy.  When he came back to Jamaica, he and a friend went to Panama.  They were building the [Panama] Canal, and he went to Panama.  And because he could read and write and because he was so literate, somebody had found a letter that he'd written to his mother, and they called them into the office and they wanted to know, "Did you write this," because they thought, my God, this black man wrote this letter.  And he said, "Yes, it's my mother," and they gave him an office job.  He was, he wasn't there very long.  A friend, another friend came by and offered him the adventure of going to sea.  So, they left, they left Panama, and they got on this boat, or this ship, whatever it was, and he ended up in New York [New York].  By that time, he said that my--the four sisters, the four of my aunts that I spent the most time with were already in New York.  He was going to look for them.  He thought that they may have left New York and gone up to Massachusetts or what have you.  At any rate, he stopped in New York, and he ran into them on the street.  So he stayed in New York, and some years later he met my mother [Iris South MacLachlan] in church [First Church of Illumination, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Okay, so that, they met in church, huh?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, they met in the, they met in church.  My mother then was, was divorced, had my brother [Gene J. Riggins], was living with her mother [Katherine South (ph.)] and working.  My father, I don't think he was working 'cause this was early [Great] Depression if I remember.  That would be, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, so this'll be about 1930?
Speaker 1: Yeah, somewhere around, somewhere in there.
Story_ID: 261858
Speaker 1: So your parents [Iris South MacLachlan and James McLachlan] met in church.  Now what, what church?  Were they Episcopalian by any chance, or--
Speaker 2: No, they, it was called the Church of the Illumination [sic. First Church of Illumination, New York, New York].  It is a, a sect, a spiritual sect.  It's always been very hard for me to describe.  But it was a, a tiny church in Harlem [New York, New York] on 120th Street.  The main, the main church [The Church of Illumination] was in Quakertown, Pennsylvania.  It was Rosicrucian.
Speaker 1: Rosicrucian, okay.
Speaker 2: Rosicrucian, right, because I remember my father telling me to, that we weren't Rosy Crosses; (laughter) we were Rosicrucians.  The Rosy Crosses were some, whatever, some other sect [sic.], but, but this church was Rosicrucian.  My father eventually became a minister and a member of, of the, the board in, in Quakertown, as well as being a, a chiropractor.  I think the first job he got, because he was a tailor in Jamaica, he got a job, in, in upstate New York, Yonkers [New York], pressing; he was a presser, because at that time they wouldn't allow a black man to be a tailor, although he was trained and apparently very good at it.  And he did that for years, and, and put himself through school, became a chiropractor, and ultimately quit the job and opened his own office in Harlem on Striver's Row.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's something that's quite of a, a, an accomplishment.
Speaker 2: And he practiced until he was ninety-eight, yeah, right--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: --yeah, ninety-eight.
Story_ID: 261859
Speaker 1: My brother [Gene J. Riggins] was also a chiropractor.  He, he went to Quakertown [Pennsylvania] in order to work at the, at the church's [The Church of Illumination] central office, where they also had a, a chiropractor's clinic.  And he went to be a part of that and the church.  He took his wife [Lucia Sims Riggins].  They left upstate New York and went there.  And my father [James McLachlan] and my mother [Iris South MacLachlan] went with him.  My father, thinking that he was going to be able to assist my brother, in his office, and when he got there he realized he couldn't because he didn't have a license for Pennsylvania, and my mother at the time was very sick.  This was in '75 [1975].  My sister [Carol MacLachlan] got married in '75 [1975], and right after she got married, everybody made the move to Quakertown.  It turned out that my sister married (laughter), I'd call him a crazy guy.  My sister was mentally handicapped.  And she married this guy, and apparently it didn't work out, and within a couple of months they were separated.  My parents stayed in, in Pennsylvania, and my mother died there a year after my sister was, was married.  My daughter [Samantha MacLachlan] and I went--my daughter at that time was very young.  And they had made a dress for her to be in the wedding, to be a flower girl, and had sent it to her.  And she just couldn't wait to get to, to New York so she could wear this dress and be in the wedding.  And I saw my mother--I think I talked to my mother on the phone at least twice a week, sometimes more.  She never told me that she was not well.  When I saw her, she told me she'd lost weight because she was on a diet.  And the following year my father and my brother called me from Pennsylvania to say, "If you want to see your mother, come now because she's dying of cancer."  It was like a huge surprise.  So, I did, I went, I flew to Pennsylvania, and Samantha came after.  Somebody put her on a plane, and she came out.  And that was the last time I saw my mother alive.  She died, oh, maybe two months after I left.  She had cancer of the bladder, and she was seventy-five pounds, eighty pounds, something like that.  It was awful.  At any rate, so that was '75 [1975], '76 [1976].
Story_ID: 261860
Speaker 1: My father [James McLachlan] really considered my brother [Gene J. Riggins] his son because he had no sons; he had two girls: he had me, and he had my sister [Carol MacLachlan], who is thirteen years younger than I am.  And they were, he and my brother were very close.  When my brother decided that he couldn't stand working at the clinic, at the church [The Church of Illumination, Quakertown, Pennsylvania], because what he realized is that all of those people were, were very racist.  And he left there, and he left the church.  He bought a property and started his own clinic.  And he lived there with my sister-in-law [Lucia Sims Riggins].  And he died in '92 [1992] of a stroke.  He had actually, maybe three years before, that had a stroke, and then had a whole series of little strokes, and, and he died.  By that time, after my mother [Iris South MacLachlan] died--okay, this is getting confusing, but after my mother died, my brother and sister-in-law adopted two children who were brother and sister, and they now all live in Pennsylvania.  I would, I used to take Samantha [MacLachlan] into New York [New York] for Christmas.  It eventually became Thanksgiving because I just couldn't stand the snow.  And maybe, maybe one other time, maybe not, but at least once a year we would go to New York for a couple of weeks.  A lot of it had to do with my daughter's school, you know.  As she, as she got older, her school vacations got shorter, and so I, I saw my mother on an average of once a year.  My mother and father came here [Los Angeles, California] to visit twice when my daughter was little.  After my mother died, my father came with my brother twice, and he came once by himself, which was a big surprise to me.  But when he came once by himself, he was already ninety--ninety-five, ninety-two, something like that; he was in his nineties.  He, he looked twenty years younger.  But he did come out once and at, my, my daughter was not here.  She was at school.  My, okay, she was in school, so my daught- my father--she was in school.  My father was then ninety-four, and he came to stay with me for a couple of weeks.  I took him, and Bridgette [ph.], and Peter [ph.], and Sonja [ph.], 'cause Stephan [ph.] wasn't born yet, to--where is the Michael Jackson trial [People v. Jackson, 2005] being held? Where, in where?  It's outside of Santa, Santa Maria [California].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Santa Maria was where my daughter's school was, and I took them up there because she was appearing in a play.  And my father spent a few days up there with me visiting his granddaughter and going to see another friend of ours who had a horse ranch.  And he really had a wonderful time when he was with me.  That was the last time he was out here.
Story_ID: 261861
Speaker 1: You said that your earliest childhood memory is probably your [maternal] grandmother [Katherine South (ph.)], right?  Was that true, or do you have an earlier memory than that?
Speaker 2: I have a memory--okay, I'm just gonna tell this.  I, my crib was in my mother [Iris South MacLachlan] and father's [James McLachlan] room.  And I have a memory of my mother and father making love.  Maybe I was a year old.  I don't think I ever confirmed that with them, because I, I don't think I've asked them if that could have been true, but you know, but I really think it was true.  I have another memory.  You know, I don't think it was mine.  I think it was one that they gave me.  My mother had been rehearsing a, a program for church [First Church of Illumination, New York, New York], and she would rehearse out loud.  And I learned her, her part, and we used to do it together.  And I think, and it, if I remember correctly, I think I was still in that crib, so it was, I was less than two.  But, you know, I slept in my, in my parents' room until I was maybe eight or nine, something like that.  It was an unconscionably long time, but all the other rooms were taken.  My brother [Gene J. Riggins] had a room; my, my father started his chiropractic practice in one of the rooms in the apartment; later that room became my mother's hairdressing parlor; and we had a roomer.  So that was, we had a room in the back.  That was, the roomer was there.  When the roomer left, my brother took that.  Then we have the room that was my father's office or my mother's shop.  Then we had another small room that my Uncle Cee [ph.] lived in, and we had my mother and father's bedroom and a living room, kitchen, bath, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where did you live?
Speaker 2: We lived at 60 St. Nicholas Avenue in Harlem [New York, New York].
Story_ID: 261862
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, we lived in the seventh floor on 113th [Street] and St. Nicholas [Avenue, New York, New York].  And I, I was not a physical child.  Early on my mother [Iris South MacLachlan] had been told that I had a heart problem.  So I wasn't allowed to exercise or go out and do very vigorous play.  And I think that's probably why I, I taught myself to read very early, and my time was taken up with my home and reading, okay.  But I would sit in the window and watch the kids playing on the, on St. Nicholas Avenue, watch my brother [Gene J. Riggins] playing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were close to the park, right, over there?  Is that, that--
Speaker 2: Well, we were three blocks from the park, three blocks from the park.  When my sister [Carol MacLachlan] was born, I would put her in a carriage and take her to the park and pretend she was mine, you know.  But I would sit in this, in the window of the apartment and look down and watch the kids playing ball, you know.  We would walk to church [First Church of Illumination, New York, New York] every Sunday.  My father [James McLachlan] had a car, but we walked to church.  We walked from 113th to 120th [Street]--Penn 7th [Avenue] to church.  Sights and sounds, that block, that, the block or two blocks that I lived in are very dear to me, you know.  I still have, I, I still have visions of it, still dream about it.  I still dream about that house.  You know, when, after my mother died, I dreamt about her all the time.  And I dreamt about her and my father living at 60 St. Nicholas.  The truth was that they had moved out of there, and they lived in downtown New York [New York].  They lived out in Jackson Heights [Queens, New York, New York], and then they lived in the Bronx [New York, New York] before my parents moved to Pennsylvania, so there were several other places that they lived.  But when I dreamt about them, they were always in that apartment, and they were always, I could always see them through the window.  It's very interesting.  And I sometimes, when I have, when I'm having trouble getting to sleep, I sometimes try to remember where everything was on the block and across the street from me.  And I went to school, I went to elementary school, P.S. 170 [New York, New York], which was on 111th, maybe 112th Street--not re--I think it was 112th Street and Lenox, Lenox Avenue.  I was, I skipped a year because when I went to school I was already reading and writing, and they put me into second grade.
Story_ID: 261863
Speaker 1: Then I went to Julia Ward Howe Junior High School [81, New York, New York] on 119th [Street] and 7th [Avenue].  I went there for a couple of years, and then I took the test for Hunter [College] High School [New York, New York] and Julia Richman High School [New York, New York].  I didn't get into Hunter and, and also [The] Bronx High School of Science [New York, New York].  And I, I was on the waiting list at Hunter and at Bronx High.  And I was accepted at Julia Richman High School, which was on 67th Street and Lexington [Avenue].
Speaker 2: You're saying Julian Richardson?
Speaker 1: Julia--
Speaker 2: Julia Richardson--
Speaker 1: Julia Ri--
Speaker 2: --Okay.
Speaker 1: Julia Richman.
Speaker 2: Richman?
Speaker 1: Um-hm--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in the country school, which was the smart school.  During my first year of high school, I think, I got a notice from Bronx High School that they then had space for me, but I decided not to go.  I think I was afraid of boys.  I was afraid of being in a school or a classroom with boys because--
Speaker 2: Now was Julia Richman an all-girls school?
Speaker 1: It as an all-girls school--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so was Julia Ward Howe, my--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --late, my middle school.  And you know what, I think that, I think that in elementary school [P.S. 170, New York, New York], at third grade they separated the boys from the girls.  Don't ask me why I think that, but I, I think so.  Because what I remember is that I went to all-girls school all the way through college.  And it was a choice, it was my choice.  I went to Hunter College [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Now was there something about boys that was particularly scary or, to you at that point?  'Cause you said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I didn't--
Speaker 2: --you weren't a real active girl--
Speaker 1: Well, I wasn't--
Speaker 2: --doing things that you couldn't do.
Speaker 1: --I wasn't very physical.  I didn't, you know, I, I would, I could play on the street, but I couldn't do physical things.  I, nobody ever taught me how to ride a bike.  When I was skating I had an accident and put, and, and then wasn't permitted to skate anymore, so.  And my brother [Gene J. Riggins] was older than I was, so we didn't really play together.  We didn't have mutual friends.  The kids in the building, my mother [Iris South MacLachlan] allowed me to play with a couple of them, but only the girls.  My mother was pretty strict.  And so I, I think that just by having the experience of only going to school with girls, the idea of going to school with boys was scary to me, and I was younger than everybody because I had skipped that year.  So when I graduated from high school I was sixteen.
Story_ID: 261864
Speaker 1: --Let me take you back to grade school [P.S. 170, New York, New York] for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, back to grade school.
Speaker 1: Now did you have--what were your primary interests in, in grade school?  And what kind, how would you describe yourself as a little girl?  What, what were you like?  What, what did you like to do, and you know?
Speaker 2: Really, I liked to read, and I liked to read fairy tales and novels.  I wasn't really attracted to nonfiction, biographies.  I didn't really want to know about real people.  I really just liked the fantasy and fiction.  What else did I do?
Speaker 1: Did you like movies and, and radio--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I loved the movies--
Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: --and I loved radio, and I drew.  I drew a lot when I was a kid.  I would listen to the radio and draw at the same time, so that was very important to me.  I would listen to the radio and sort of imagine myself being a part of whatever it was I was listening to.  I would go to the movies every Saturday, and I sometimes stayed for the second showing.  And remember, it was a double feature, plus news reels, plus short, so I could be at the theater for hours--
Speaker 1: 'Cause you see, you see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) on a Saturday.
Speaker 1: --twice, the, both movies--
Speaker 2: I would see it--
Speaker 1: --twice and the, and--
Speaker 2: --twice.  I could--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --twice, you know, if I would--who would I go with?  I would go with my brother [Gene J. Riggins] and, but we never sat together.  He would sit with his friends, and I would sit--and there was a, there was a matron who would wander up and down the aisles and, and make sure that the kids were behaving themselves.  And that was a fun part of, of Saturday.
Story_ID: 261865
Speaker 1: Was music a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I took piano lessons.  I took piano lessons until I was what, twelve, fourteen, something like that, when I really didn't want to do it anymore, and I told my mother [Iris South MacLachlan], "I'm not doing this anymore."  But, so I took it for maybe four to six years, something like that and played in recitals.  We'd go to church [First Church of Illumination, New York, New York] on Sunday.  School (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now was it, was the Rosicrucian church like other chur- I mean I, I don't know if you would know, since you weren't in others.
Speaker 2: I wasn't allowed to go to any other church.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but--
Speaker 2: It--
Speaker 1: --since you've--yeah, but what's your assessment of it now, hmm?
Speaker 2: I think it was very Church of England, in a sense, because all the parishioners were West Indian.  They may not all have been from Jamaica, but they were from Barbados or other islands--
Speaker 1: Trinidad--
Speaker 2: --small--Trinidad or even Nevis [Saint Kitts and Nevis] or some smaller islands.  And I got the impression that because my family was from Jamaica, they were on a higher level than the other families, you know (laughter).  I was, how old?  Maybe I was about seven or eight, whenever it is that little girls start to gain weight.  I started gaining weight.  I thought for a very long time that I was always fat, chubby, fat.  And then I found pictures of myself when I was four and five years old, and I was a skinny little kid.  So I think hormonally I changed at whatever age that was.  I think it happened to my daughter [Samantha MacLachlan] when she was like nine.
Speaker 1: So were you actually plump, I guess I would say?
Speaker 2: I was plump.  Thank you, that was, that's a very sweet word.  I was plump, and I stayed plump until I was thirty.  I wasn't quite thirty.  I stayed plump until, I would say, twenty--twenty-eight, twenty-nine.  Because when I was thirty, I was in Minneapolis [Minnesota] with the Tyrone Guthrie Theater; that's what it was.
Speaker 1: What's what theater?  Which one?
Speaker 2: The Tyrone Guthrie Theater--
Speaker 1: Tyrone Guthrie, okay.
Speaker 2: --in Minneapolis.  That was in '63 [1963].  But I remember having all of the anguish that an overweight girl who's smart and young has growing up.  I remember, I remember my, my friends, if we went to a dance or something, my friends would, would give me their purses to hold, so I would sit and hold their purses.
Story_ID: 261866
Speaker 1: Okay, now here you are--
Speaker 2: Here I am.
Speaker 1: --in your mind.  I mean, well, in actuality you're kind of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --plump.  And you're really afraid of boys--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --and you, you're going to dances with, and the other girls would give you their purses and load you down with their purses so they could have fun.  And--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --and so did you--well, well, how did you feel about all that?
Speaker 2: I felt awful.  But the interesting thing is that I didn't talk about it to anybody.  I didn't talk about it to my mother [Iris South MacLachlan].  My father [James McLachlan] was hardly home.  My brother [Gene J. Riggins] wouldn't have cared--probably because, while my mother was home all the time, she really would not have approved of my going to dances.  You know, there were some local Boys & Girls Clubs, and there was a dance club or something, or maybe there was a party at somebody's house.  And I remember I was getting very good about lying to get to go to these places that my mother really didn't want me to go.  But when we got to [Julia Richman] High School [New York, New York], it, it, it was going on in high school.  I, I volunteered with a committee in high school to arrange the, the dances between Julia Richman and other boys' high schools, I remember.  And so my mother would allow me to go out because I was really doing work, you know.  But I, I, you know, I don't think my mother knew a lot about what I was doing.  She may have guessed, but I wasn't telling her stuff.
Story_ID: 261867
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers or mentors in, around in your life at that, at that point, I mean by the time you got to [Julia Richman] High School [New York, New York]?  Had there been anyone in grade school [P.S. 170, New York, New York] and any teachers that took a special--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, there, there--
Speaker 1: --interest in you?
Speaker 2: --there was a teacher in, in grade school, in fourth, I think it was fourth grade, Mrs. Callahan [ph.].  We had white teachers in elementary school.  And I remember I had gotten very sick.  I had--I can't remember what it was, whether, whether it was my lunch or it was heart or something.  But I, I was very sick, and I had to stay home.  And she would come and bring my homework.  And I remember she, she favored me in the class, and she favored me in the class play, for instance.  She was, I was kind of her pet.  That was the only, that was the only teacher that I was fond of in, in elementary school.
Speaker 1: Was that the first teacher that staged a class play that you, you were involved in?
Speaker 2: I believe so.  I don't remember any others.
Speaker 1: But you know, it sounds like that you would have been shy, but yet you acted--
Speaker 2: I was very shy.
Speaker 1: --you, how did you get talked into being in a play?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I think it was because it was a spring play, and (laughter) there was another girl in the class that had been cast as the spring fairy, or I think that's what it was.  And that's the role I wanted to play.  And I remember telling Mrs. Callahan that I should be playing that role because I had this great green dress that was net and, and bows and flowers, and went perfect for the role.  And she gave the role; she dropped this other kid and gave it to me.  I remember that.  I remember I was very happy about that, and I remember that the kids in school didn't like me, nor at least I thought they didn't like me.
Speaker 1: So did you do a good job in the role?
Speaker 2: I think I did.
Speaker 1: Did you get good feedback from people?
Speaker 2: Who would I have gotten it from?
Speaker 1: Well, did your parents [Iris South MacLachlan and James McLachlan] see it? Or--
Speaker 2: I think my mother may have seen it.
Speaker 1: I know kids are hard on each other but, you know, a lot of times (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think any of the kids ever came and said to me that, "You were really wonderful," 'cause they were really mad at me for stealing the role from this other girl.  And when I think about it, it was a kind of mean thing to do, you know.
Speaker 1: But you think, you know, when you think back at this, I'm sure it wasn't the dress that persuaded the teacher to choose you.
Speaker 2: No, I'm sure it wasn't, but because I--that was my, that was my good reason to make the suggestion to my teacher.
Speaker 1: Maybe, you know, it, it kind of, when I think of, I think maybe your teacher wanted you to step out and do something.  And she was glad that you did (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's very sweet of you.
Speaker 1: I'm sure she was glad that she saw that you actually wanted to do it and was, was at, was glad to give it to you.  That's what I, I mean that's what it seems to me, 'cause I'm, I'm sure the dress didn't persuade her to do it.  It was that, that you wanted to do it--
Speaker 2: You--
Speaker 1: --so bad.
Speaker 2: --you don't know.  Girls are pretty funny.  Girls are really pretty funny.  Anyway, yeah, well, maybe.  I'll take yours, and I'll ponder it, you know, for--
Speaker 1: Okay, well, you were there.
Speaker 2: --for a while.
Speaker 1: And I--
Speaker 2: I was there.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: But listen, I'm telling you, my whole childhood is, is fuzzy.
Story_ID: 261868
Speaker 1: When I say fuzzy, it's because I lived in my head a lot and, and in my fantasy a lot.  And so, there were times when I thought something was a dream or something was my fantasy, or if it was real, it was somebody else's reality.  I had a big problem understanding reality for a long time.  I remember that; I remember that.
Speaker 2: The way you tell it, I don't, you sound like it was kind, you were kind of isolated a lot of the time, so, by--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --yourself and--
Speaker 1: I was by myself a lot.  I made from friends in, in junior high school [Julia Ward Howe Junior High School 81, New York, New York].  One friend I really was very close to and, and--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Okay, so, and you're at this girls' high school [Julia Richman High School, New York, New York].  And you're arranging dances between the boys' high school and the girls' high school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But at that juncture in your life, did you, what did you project as your occupation, or did you have any kind of projection?
Speaker 2: I had no projection.  If I remember correctly, I really didn't have an ambition to do something.  I think the only thing that I--I thought that I wanted to do was to be a teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you were in the smart high school and all that.  Did, did you--
Speaker 2: I was in the smart high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you think you were going, you knew you were going to college I imagine?
Speaker 2: I knew I was going to college.  I wanted to go away to college, and my mother [Iris South MacLachlan] wouldn't let me because she said I was too young to go away to college.  So, she said, "But you can stay here, live here and go to NYU [New York University, New York, New York]."  And I said, "No, I'm gonna go to Hunter College [New York, New York]."  Again, that was my safety.  I think I was afraid of boys because I was fat and not, not ever popular.
Story_ID: 261869
Speaker 1: Now were you in plays in high school [Julia Richman High School, New York, New York]?  Did you get--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: None?  So grade school--I mean junior high [Julia Ward Howe Junior High School 81, New York, New York] was the last you were in a play?
Speaker 2: Junior high was the last time that I was a play, if I remember correctly.  In, in junior high school, I remember all I wanted to do was become a--you know, they had a system of, of kids being monitors and hallway monitors and what have you.  And I got to be one, and I really wanted to--I got to, I got to be a monitor, and I had a blue cap.  And then as you--they had progressions.  You know, there was a blue and gold cap, which mean that you were kind of like a sergeant.  And then the gold cap was the generals.  And I wanted a gold cap, and I never got it.  And I had a teacher in junior high school that was the oldest sister of a, of a friend of mine who lived near me, and she was just very elegant, I remember.  I remember she was beautiful, and she dressed beautifully, and she wrote beautifully.  I remember trying to copy her handwriting.  But, but that was the, that was the extent of my relationship with her, do you know.  I don't think that I ever approached a teacher to, to, to form a relationship with them, do you know.  It was always in my mind.  In high school, my relationships were with my classmates.  And in my last year I was on the yearbook [Spotlight], and I was one of the--I ran for treasurer of my class.  I didn't make it, but I ended up volunteering on, on the committee.  And (laughter) the, the girl who as the treasurer couldn't handle it, and I remember taking over for her, but I never was elected.  And when college time came I was so angry and disappointed that my, my mother [Iris South MacLachlan] put her foot down, and I was not going away to school.  I just applied to Hunter [College, New York, New York] and was accepted, and so I went to Hunter.
Story_ID: 261870
Speaker 1: Now what year did you graduate from [Julia Richman] High School [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: In 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that by the time I got, that by the time I started college [Hunter College, New York, New York], I had, had a birthday, and so I was seventeen.  When I graduated from high school at sixteen, I got my working papers, and I went to work for New York Life Insurance [Company], and I was--and I loved it.  I just loved the whole idea of it.  It was--
Speaker 1: Now this is--
Speaker 2: --great.
Speaker 1: --right after high school?
Speaker 2: This was right after high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I worked that, the summer between high school and college, because, you know, I lied.  I told them that I wasn't going to college.  And of course, when August came around and my birthday came around, I said I was going to college.  And they didn't, you know, they were sorry to see me go, but I left.  And so starting with college, I had various part-time jobs.  My first one was I, I was a babysitter.  Did any of you go to, live in New York [New York]?  Do any, are any of you familiar with New York?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER):  I am.
Speaker 2: Hunter College was on 68th Street and Lexington [Avenue], but they had an auxiliary up in the Bronx [New York, New York].  And so I went to the Bronx Campus for my first two years, and then after that, I went to the 68th Street college.  The Bronx college was really almost like being away.  It was very green and very open.  There was a campus, and you know, it was, it was, it was more fun (laughter) than going to Hunter on 68th Street 'cause I'd get out of the subway in the college and then I'd be in a, like an office building, then get back on the subway to go home.  So when I was in, in, at the Bronx campus, I made some friends, one of whom was a big sister in AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority].
Story_ID: 261871
Speaker 1: She got several of us together to pledge AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], which I did--I think I did it my first year [at Hunter College, New York, New York], and I became--so I went through the whole process of pledging and wearing pink and green and making paddles for my big sisters and doing all that stuff, learning the Greek alphabet backwards, you know, that kind of stuff.  And when I went over, the night that I went over, after I went over, I then went to a meeting of AKA and realized that I didn't like any of the, the girls there.  They were, as far as I was concerned, they were a little arrogant, and I found it kind of unpleasant, and so I never went back.  So that was my whole experience with AKA.  When--I then met, I then met another girl who we became very close friends.  We're still friends today.  As a matter of fact, I'm still friends with, with Connie, Connie Carr [ph.].  Do you know Connie Carr in New York [New York]? Who, who persuaded me to, to join AKA.  And this other friend was named Julia Schiff [ph.], and she, she was very bright, extremely bright, and her, she was not living at home.  Her father had kicked her out.  And this was the first person that I had met who had no home life, do you know?
Speaker 2: Where was she living at?
Speaker 1: She was living with, with, in a Catholic residence at the time.  And she left school to go to work, I remember.  I lost track of her for--for a few years. And after I had graduated and I, I was working for a, a brokerage firm [Special Markets Inc.], her brother was in the same office as a salesman.  And I remember it took me a long time to ask him if he was related to Julia Schiff, and it turned out that this was her brother.  So I got in contact with her again, and we've been close friends for a long time.
Story_ID: 261872
Speaker 1: What was your major in college [Hunter College, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: My major--
Speaker 1: Was it education--
Speaker 2: --was psychology.
Speaker 1: Psychology, okay.
Speaker 2: My minor was sociology.  And I had these, I had these part-time jobs after school in offices, and I taught myself how to do, how to use a lot of office machinery.  And I remember enjoying that whole experience.  And in my senior year, I told them that I really wanted to change my major and become a business major because I liked working in the office.  They told me I couldn't do that.  And so I, I went to night school.  I didn't graduate with the class because I had, I'd started working full-time, and my last semester I worked full-time and, and finished school at night.
Speaker 1: Okay, who were you working for then?
Speaker 2: I was working for a frozen food company [Global Frozen Foods, New York].  And I was an order taker, and I, and a substitute operator on the, on the, on the, the system, the telephone system.
Story_ID: 261873
Speaker 1: So now, you weren't involved in theater or anything in the arts during this whole period of time?
Speaker 2: I, I was involved.  What--let me see how can I do this?  I was involved.  I, I met some people who were involved in Little Theater [Harlem YMCA] in Harlem [New York, New York], and I did a few plays with them.  As a matter of fact, I even took the company over to the [First] Church [of Illumination, New York, New York] basement.  We did a play there in the--
Speaker 1: Now how did you--
Speaker 2: --church basement.
Speaker 1: --how did, you remember when you first ran across 'em, or how did you, how did you get involved?  Did you seek them out, or did they seek you out?  Or did you kind of sidle up to it (laughter), and show up and watch or what?
Speaker 2: Okay, let me try to explain this simply.  I, I made a friend who was not going to school, who was working while I, while I was in school [at Hunter College, New York, New York], and we became very close friends.  She lived in Harlem on 118th Street, and so we could see each other a lot.  And she lived next to a very, very famous jazz club [Minton's Playhouse, New York, New York] on 118th Street between 7th [Avenue] and St. Nicholas [Avenue].  And it was called--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That was a good gulp.
Speaker 2: --it'll come to me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was a good gulp, I must say.
Speaker 2: It'll come to me.  At any rate, her name was Vy [ph.], Violet [ph.].  And Vy was really pretty, very slender, and very adventurous.  And she had a cousin [Earl May] who was a, a bass player--
Story_ID: 261874
Speaker 1: So Earl [May], Earl was the bass player with [HistoryMaker] Billy Taylor, and Vy [ph.] took me to meet him.  And we started hanging out at, at the jazz clubs where he was playing all around town.  Vy also met some people that she introduced me to that had parties every weekend, and there were actors there.  Sidney Poitier would, would show up.  And that was all just extremely exciting and, and different for me so that I--
Speaker 2: He--he'd actually started to make movies by then, right, in '54 [1954], right?
Speaker 1: He was making movies.  And when I knew him he had that restaurant in Harlem [New York, New York], that ribs restaurant [Ribs in the Ruff].  He and a partner [HistoryMaker Harry Belafonte] had a ribs restaurant on 7th Avenue, can't remember what street [127th Street].  And these other friends that were friends of his--and we would all go over there and hang out in, in the restaurant and all hours of the night.  So I was going to school [Hunter College, New York, New York] during the day, hanging out with, with Vy at night going to jazz clubs, and staying out until 4:00 in the morning.
Speaker 2: Now this is, is this late in your college life, or--
Speaker 1: This is like my--
Speaker 2: --fifty-three [1953]?
Speaker 1: --second year?
Speaker 2: Oh, second year, '52 [1952]?
Speaker 1: --second year.  It started actually right after I pledged AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority].
Speaker 2: This is around '52 [1952] I guess then?
Speaker 1: Fifty-one [1951], fifty-two [1952].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Red Rooster [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: The Red Rooster.
Speaker 1: That's the name of it?  Is that it?
Speaker 2: Was that the name of the club on 118th Street?  No, the Red Rooster was on 7th.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Right.
Speaker 2: No, this was--yeah, we'd hang out at the Red Rooster.  As a matter of fact, pledge, as a pledgee, we used to go to the dances at the Savoy [Ballroom, New York, New York], this, the weekend afternoon dances at the Savoy.  So my social life began when I started pledging because I met a lot of girls my age who had brothers who I--we met the frat [fraternity] boys at, at Alpha [Phi Alpha Fraternity].  We went to the Omega [Psi Phi Fraternity] boat rides.  We did all of those exciting things that, that I hadn't done before.
Story_ID: 261875
Speaker 1: You're describing yourself, you're getting cool now, sort of.  You're getting, you're going out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm--
Speaker 1: --in a--
Speaker 2: --I'm getting cool, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, okay, and you're, you're--
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm really getting cool here.
Speaker 1: --checking out jazz and--
Speaker 2: Checking out jazz and--
Speaker 1: --hanging out with theater people.
Speaker 2: --hanging out with theater people--
Speaker 1: And these are, I'm sure these are--
Speaker 2: --musicians.
Speaker 1: And coming in at 4:00 in the morning.
Speaker 2: Coming in at four, maybe six in the morning.
Speaker 1: My gosh.
Speaker 2: See, we had an elevator in my building.  And the elevator stopped working at midnight, and it started working again at six in the morning.  So if I was coming home after midnight, I'd just go out and have breakfast with everybody, and wait until the elevator started and go home, and pretend that I had been sleeping, and get up and go to school [Hunter College, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask if--
Speaker 2: That was really hard.
Speaker 1: --was your mother [Iris South MacLachlan] was upset about this activity, you know.
Speaker 2: My mother and I weren't really talking a lot.  I think she knew that I was doing something, but most of the time she wasn't aware of what it was, I don't think.  You know, we never discussed it, and I'm really, I'm, I'm really sorry about that, that we didn't talk about the--okay (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: We didn't talk about some of the problems I was having, some of the relationship problems that was going on, the crushes that I was developing that were disappointing, the, the, the, the questions that I was having about school.  There were a whole slew of things that I could have been talking to my mother about, but I think I knew that, or I believed that she would just get very angry and, and prohibit me from doing anything.  So my, my excuses got very inventive, you know, where I was going, what I was doing, when I was coming back, you know, whatever.
Story_ID: 261876
Speaker 1: How did you get on stage in a, in a production?  I mean how did that happen?  What's the--
Speaker 2: One of the people that I met at, at these parties was an actor who had a girlfriend that Vy [ph.] and I got close to.  And they were doing a play.  I can't remember where it was exactly, but I remember that they had lost one of the members of that cast.  And so Frank [ph.] asked me if I would do this role in this original play, and I said, "Sure."  And so I did the play, and I did get some positive feedback from, from my friends.  And I loved the whole idea of it.  I think I, as nervous as I was about doing the first performance, once I was on stage it was, I was fine.  So I began to work with this group of actors to find another theater.  And at that point I thought, well, the basement of our church [First Church of Illumination, New York, New York] there's, there's like a, a meeting hall, and there's a stage there.  And so I asked permission, and we went into theater.  And I think we did one other play there.  I can't remember what it was.  And so, I decided to take some acting class, not in school [Hunter College, New York, New York], had nothing to do with school.  And that's when I found this professional workshop, and would take classes in the summer.
Speaker 1: What was the, what was the name of the workshop?
Speaker 2: It was, it's on my resume.
Speaker 1: That's okay, all right.  We'll just keep going.
Speaker 2: Herbert Berghof [Studio (HB Studio), New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And okay, and so I, I began my training that way, away from school and working with this little company and, and then in my imagination as well.
Story_ID: 261877
Speaker 1: The last year, my last semester at Hunter [College, New York, New York], where I went at night, I took my first acting class at school.  But when I graduated I had no, no thought about doing this professionally at all.  I just found another job, you know.  I found it, I found this job at, with this frozen food company, Global Frozen Foods [New York].  And, and I believe I continued working with, with Frank [ph.] and his company.  You know, it was all, it was kind of patchy, but it went on for maybe three or four years, something like that.  And--
Speaker 2: So this takes us to about what, '57 [1957], '58 [1958] or so?
Speaker 1: Well, I--let me see, I graduated in, I was supposed to graduate in June of '54 [1954].  I actually graduated in January of '55 [1955].  But if June '54 [1954], I was twenty-one, and my father [James McLachlan] had told me that I could not leave his house until I was twenty-one.  So I left at twenty-one, and found a roommate, and, and an apartment.  And so that, that was in August of '54 [1954].  So that last semester, from September to January, I was going to school at night, working during the day to finally--
Speaker 2: To pay--
Speaker 1: --support myself.  And, you know that, the name of that bar keeps coming back. But, so, I worked in various offices.  I remember I had met this guy.  He was so gorgeous.  He was a director, and he was putting together a--he was teaching at the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)].
Speaker 2: 135th Street?
Speaker 1: 135th Street Y [Harlem YMCA, New York, New York].  And I was taking classes with him.  And we got engaged, interestingly enough.  And he helped me get a job.  He sent me to the [New York] Urban League.  There was a job for a, a receptionist at a black, the first black brokerage company [Special Markets Inc.] on Wall Street.
Story_ID: 261878
Speaker 1: I got a job [at Special Markets Inc.].  I got the job as receptionist, answering the phone.  My experience with, at Global Frozen Foods [New York] with answering the phone, you know, being a telephone operator, was very helpful.  While I was there I taught myself how to type.  I went to school at night to learn to take dictation, to, to use--what is it called, shorthand. And because this, this was very interesting to me that, you know, working in this office and what have you.  So I was there for a couple of years, and the vice president there was, was asked to leave and start his own mutual fund office on 57th Street [New York, New York].  Special Markets Inc. was the name of the--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --brokerage firm.  So I went with John [T.] Patterson [Jr.].  I don't know if you know him, if you knew him, John Patterson, Jr.  Anyway, I went with Pat to 57th Street, Financial Industrial Fund [Inc.], and ran his office for a few years, maybe four years.  And I did everything, you know; I was his secretary; I was the office manager.  I just did everything.  There was never anybody else working there.  And I was even trading at some point.  And then a white company approached Pat to buy his office and his salesmen out and take 'em back down to Wall Street to, to their company, McDonald, Holman & Company.  And I went down there as well and worked for the president [Hugh McDonald] of the company down there.
Story_ID: 261879
Speaker 1: Now are you doing any acting during this period of time?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  I'm trying to run through the years because they went by so quickly.  I'm trying to run these years, and I was not doing any acting.  I was, I was just working at this point.  I was working--
Speaker 1: So, so you didn't have any serious aspirations about theater (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't have any serious aspirations to be an actor.
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: No.  That was just a great pleasure to me.  I think I was, I did take a couple of classes during that period of time, but it was not a career.  My career really was in, in the business world 'cause it's really what I wanted to do.  And I then--McDonald, Holman [& Company] fell apart.  The SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission] went after them and it closed down.  And I got a job with the public relations company, small public, you know, business public relations.  And I got a job there and again, it was a one-girl office.  There were a couple of writers and the boss, and I did everything.  You know, I typed, I filed, I edited copy.  And, and I got, I got a little crazy I think.
Speaker 1: In what sense?
Speaker 2: Well, in the sense that I think I just got very depressed, you know.  As a matter of fact, thinking about it now, I think that all through my childhood I was just a little bit depressed, you know, only because I, in my childhood, I can't remember, other than going to the beach, I can't remember, and family dinners, and that was only because the food was so wonderful, I can't remember any other happy times.  You know, I think I was happiest by myself, listening to the radio, or going to the movies, and drawing, and sort of, you know, in my head kind of thing.  So, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you, were, how did you, how were physically?  I mean I know the initial reason for keeping you in and kind of restricting your activities--
Speaker 2: Was because of my heart.
Speaker 1: --'cause of your heart.
Speaker 2: I had--
Speaker 1: Did you--
Speaker 2: I, I don't think I ever outgrew it, you know.
Story_ID: 261880
Speaker 1: Do you have a heart problem now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I ignore it, but I, you know, I do.  And I had a, I had a, I got very sick very several times in my childhood, and I, and I had bad tonsils, and they were always bothering me.  And I remember the doctor coming to the house and telling my mother [Iris South MacLachlan] that unless she had my tonsils out, I would die before I was twenty-one years old.  I mean I remember something, something as drastic, as melodramatic as that.  And, and that was part of my, my reason for, for leaving home before I was twenty-one, 'cause I just wanted to get out of there.  I was not happy at home.  My parents were, my father [James McLachlan] was largely absent.  I adored my father, but he was so involved in his, in his practice and in his church [First Church of Illumination, New York, New York] that he had very little time for us.  My mother was amazingly busy all the time.  She did all the housework, all the cooking, and she was a hairdresser.  And she, you know, her favorite word to me was, "No, you can't," yeah.  And my brother [Gene J. Riggins] was never around, and my sister [Carol MacLachlan] was, was retarded, you know.  She was very slow, and she had problems adjusting.  She never wanted to leave home; she, she was scared to go to school; and she was slow.  So I just, and besides, by that time, by the time I was twenty-one, I had found that there was all this stuff going on out there that my mother didn't approve of, you know, all this showbiz stuff.  And that's, that's pretty much what I wanted to be around, not what I wanted to do, but what I wanted to be around.
Story_ID: 261881
Speaker 1: When did you first get seriously involved in, in--
Speaker 2: Theater?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean as a--
Speaker 2: Well, when I, when I was--I went to my first therapist, okay, and I lost weight in 1960, '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Now those, those events related, I mean going to the therapist and losing weight?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did your own training in psychology in college [Hunter College, New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was that, that an attempt to kind of understand what's going on, too (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it might have been an attempt at, to try to understand people because I don't think I understood people, you know.  I really didn't understand how it all worked, loyalties and friendship.  And people seemed to always to be leaving, and you know, it was, it was very murky for me.  But, so I, because I had, I got, I felt depressed, at this time I went to a therapist.  And there was a school nearby my, near where I worked so I was able to go there, met this incredible guy and had nine months 'cause it was a school, and they operated from September to June.  I had nine months with him, lost a lot of weight, began to understand a little bit about what was going on with me.  And that year in '61 [1961], I had a vacation coming up, and I decided to go to Europe.  I had never been to Europe.  My friends had been there.  And I wanted very much to go, and so I, I went to Europe.  I went to, to London [England], to Paris [France], to Copenhagen [Denmark], and to Rome [Italy].  And I had a really wonderful time in Europe when I, where I realized that everybody was not like Americans, you know, that people were very open; they were very friendly, and I trusted them.  I didn't have a problem with trusting.  And I decided then that when I got back to New York [New York], I would find a, a theater company and work for another year, save all my money, and go back to Europe to live.  That was my plan, okay.  Now--
Speaker 1: Now, now did you go to Europe by yourself or--
Speaker 2: I went to Europe by myself and had a great time, had a great time.
Story_ID: 261882
Speaker 1: I had been working at the, you know, the, the 92nd Street Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] in New York [New York].  My friend, Julia [Schiff (ph.)], that I had met at [Hunter] College [New York, New York], I had lost track of her, regained her friendship.  She was living across the street from, practically across the street from the 92nd Street Y.  And there was a, a theater instructor there, so she and I worked with this theater group, and I was doing Jewish plays and you know.  So, yeah, there was, there was some theater activity, but again, it was always, it was always to make my after-work much more interesting than to make it my work, you know.  So when I came back, I, from Europe, I made the--I determined that I was going to find a theater company and then move to Europe.  And I, I met these actors who were doing a television show at the time.  And I asked one of the actors if he knew a theater company in Harlem [New York, New York] that I could work with.  He had a theater company, and he told me, "Well, I'm doing this play; I'm stage-managing a play downtown [at St. Mark's Playhouse] called 'The Blacks[: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet]. Why don't you come down and see it?"  So I went down with, one, one evening, and I saw 'The Blacks' and went backstage and met the company, and once again, I was thrilled, okay.  And I, I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now this is a Jean Genet play--
Speaker 1: Jean Genet.
Speaker 2: --'The Blacks: A Clown Show.'
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And this is nineteen--what, sixty--
Speaker 1: Two [1962].
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962], okay.
Speaker 1: No, sixty--
Speaker 2: No?
Speaker 1: --one, the end of '61 [1961].  The play had actually, the play was actually almost a year old, not quite a year, almost a year old, because, let's see now, hold on.  Let me recreate this.  I was asked to understudy, understudy 'The Blacks.'  And I had to audition for the producer, and so I studied the play.  Everything was very--what's the word?  Very, it was crazy.  Let's, let's put it this way: it was crazy.  The original actors, Cicely Tyson and [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones, had left the play, and they were rehearsing another play off-Broadway, in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York].  There had been several changes of cast members.  People would, would leave the show to go do another show.  Other actors, these understudies would come in and play, and do the play.  Then the, the original people would come back, and people would switch roles.  I mean it was--and so the, the producer was never around to audition me.  And when he finally did, he had, he was never around to give me an answer.  And in the meantime now, I was really getting enthusiastic about this, this whole business.  I went to audition for understudy for the play ['Moon on a Rainbow Shawl,' Errol John] that Cicely and James Earl were doing.
Story_ID: 261883
Speaker 1: I had this job as understudy for this play ['Moon on a Rainbow Shawl,' Errol John] that wasn't, that wasn't open yet.  And I remember going to the, to the theater [St. Mark's Playhouse, New York, New York] to meet, you know, the cast afterwards of, of 'The Blacks[: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet].  And I told the, the house manager, I said, "Well, you know, I just got a job as, as an understudy for this play."  And he said, "Well, wait right here."  We were in a bar.  "You wait right here.  I'll be right back."  He went to the theater, and he got the producer's okay for me to understudy 'The Blacks.'  So now I had two understudy jobs.  And the other, the other play, because it was, it was being produced by, by a Broadway producer, offered me five dollars a rehearsal.  And I would rehearse that play on a Friday, and 'The Blacks' rehearsed on Sunday, and of course there was no pay.  So now I had this thing; I had this conflict.  I was working [at 92nd Street Y, New York, New York].  I could do 'The Blacks.'  I wanted to do the other play, but I would have to get Fridays off from my job.  I didn't think my boss was going to give me Fridays off to go and rehearse an off-Broadway play, so my solution was to quit.  So I quit my job, and I, I was rehearsing both shows.  And because of the Committee for the Employment of Negro Performers [CENP], which they were, they were picketing the Broadway shows that had, that were set in New York [New York] that had large companies, the musicals, and, and did not hire black performers.  So we were picketing that, one of those shows, or a couple of those shows.  I think there were picket lines everywhere.  And I was--it was a Saturday, and my, my time was in the afternoon because the, the actress who was playing my role [Stephanie Virtue Diop] in, in 'The Blacks' was on in the morning. And when I went to relieve her, she said to me, "Listen, I've got bad cramps, and so you'd better go down to the theater and get your costume because you're gonna have to go on for me."
Story_ID: 261884
Speaker 1: Most, if not all, of the black actors who were working in New York [New York], at some point or at some time or another did 'The Blacks[: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet].  They were either an understudy, or they came in and replaced, and they were kicked out, or they came in and they did the show and then they behaved badly and they were thrown out, or they, you know, whatever.  It was just the kind of show that there were two, two sets.  You know, there was the royal set, and then there were the street people, if you know the play.  Do you know the play at all?
Speaker 2: No, I've, you know, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You've never seen it?
Speaker 2: No, I've never seen it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's very difficult to, to, to explain because it's, it was difficult for me to understand going into the play.  There were, there were--it was very stylized, and there were, there were people dressed as, as the queen.  I think [HistoryMaker] Maya [Angelou] played the [White] Queen at, at some point.  And the--
Speaker 2: Maya Angelou.
Speaker 1: Maya Angelou--and the, the religious leader or the, you know, there, there were all those, those characters that were taken from, from countries that had, that were, that were run by European countries, you know.
Speaker 2: Colonized--
Speaker 1: It was that--they were colonized.  Thank you, I knew I could count on you (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, I'm sorry.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: At any rate, and then there were other people who were performing this play for the royalty.  And then there was another group of people who were backstage, who were off the stage, and they were preparing the revolution.  So there were three sets of people going.  And if, if one of them was replaced, everybody just adjusted to this new character.  It's not like it was a traditional play where--where relationships were, were important to maintain, you know.  It's a, it's an incredible play.
Story_ID: 261885
Speaker 1: So I was sent down to the theater [St. Mark's Playhouse, New York, New York] to get ready for this matinee for these two performances [of 'The Blacks: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet] on a Saturday.  One was at seven, and one was at nine or something like that.  And I had not been fully rehearsed in the play; I had no costume; and I had never fully done this show.  At any rate, so I went down to, to find a costume.  And some of the other people had done the show, that there was a costume there that was readied for me.  And as, as the other actors came in, they said, "Don't worry about it.  We'll get you through the dance."  There was a, you know, there was a very stylized kind of, of dance.  And they got me through the first act--I mean the, the first performance.  I was a nervous wreck.  [HistoryMaker] Roscoe [Lee Browne] later said that when he looked at me, he thought, oh my God, I have to take care of this child, you know, which was not what my character was about.  My character was the character that Cicely [Tyson] had started, who was a hooker.  She was, you know, she was whore, and her name was [Stephanie] Virtue [Diop].  And she was tantalizing the audience and having this relationship with, with [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones [as Deodatus Village] at the time.  So, so I did the first show.  Everybody had dinner.  We did the second show.  And during the second show, the girl that I replaced that night, that I was understudying, came in to see the show.  And the producer saw her and fired her because she was supposed to be sick, and she came back to see what I was doing.  And he fired her.  And there was a lot of craziness going on, but they offered me the role, so I went into the role immediately.  And I played it for a few months, and the, the guy that I engaged to, we'd broken up, but he was producing another play in a, another theater [Provincetown Playhouse, New York, New York] off-Broadway.  And he wanted me in that play, so I left 'The Blacks' to go into rehearsals for 'Raising Hell in the Son.' It was a spoof on '[A] Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry].  But, it was an equity show, and I was gonna get my equity card, and that was like really important.  And so I did that show.  We didn't last very long, but I got good reviews.
Story_ID: 261886
Speaker 1: Then all the protests and all of the, the work that the Committee for the Employment of Negro Performers [CENP] had done, which was get a list of our members and submit them to various producers, started producing contacts.  The Lincoln Center [for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] was about to open, and they were going to open with a company.  They, they called me up and asked me to come down to read for this company.  The Minnesota theater, the Tyrone Guthrie Theater [Minneapolis, Minnesota], they were getting ready to open their theater, and they, they needed a company.  And they asked me to go and read for them, and I was hired by [Tyrone] Guthrie.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is in Minneapolis [Minnesota]?
Speaker 1: In Minneapolis.
Speaker 2: And this is what, what year, this 1960 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So now all of this happened in '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I went into, I went into 'The Blacks[: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet] in '62 [1962].  I did 'Raising Hell in the Son' in '62 [1962].  I auditioned for the, for the Minnesota theater company in '62 [1962], and the, and the season was to start January '63 [1963].  In the meantime, I was also doing commercials for, for black products.  There was a, there was a black gospel show on, and they, they hired me to do these commercials for this company for this show.
Speaker 2: This is for a local New York [New York]--
Speaker 1: It, well, it was, it was New York and probably East Coast; it wasn't national.  So I went to, so I went to Minneapolis in the middle of winter, was freezing cold, and I was there for the season.  And I had been told that I was going to be in 'Hamlet,' [William Shakespeare] in 'The Miser,' [Moliere] and in 'Death of a Salesman,' [Arthur Miller] that I was going to play one of the two hookers in 'Death of a Salesman.'  I don't know if you remember.  They're, the, the boys [Biff Loman and Happy Loman] take their father [Willy Loman] into this bar.  And there were two girls there, and they try to hook him up with the girls.  I was gonna play one of those girls.  And when the time came to, to cast and rehearse that play, they changed their mind.  By that time also, one of the, one of the stars of the company had left.  She was pregnant.  She left, and everybody had to scoot around and, and do different, you know, take on different roles and what have you.  And, but it, but by the time they got to casting 'Death of a Salesman,' I was not one of those two girls.  I was the secretary in the office.  When he goes to the office late in the play and he asks for money, I'm the secretary that very nervously goes in to tell the boss, "He's here again," and he's, you know, acting crazy.  And I was really upset and disappointed at going through, you know, the whole, the whole season.
Story_ID: 261887
Speaker 1: In 'Hamlet' [William Shakespeare] I was--pardon me--I was a court lady, so, you know, we had our gowns made for us and what have you.  And I had a couple of, of scenes in court, but I had no lines.  In the 'Three Sisters,' I was not a part of that at all, a very Russian play.
Speaker 2: [Anton] Chekhov is (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  In 'The Miser,' [Moliere] I was one of the--there were several of us who wore masks, and we were, we sat around the edges of the stage.  And we, you know, sort of had no lines, but our bodies commented on what was going on in the, in the show.  And so I was looking forward to 'Death of a Salesman,' [Arthur Miller] and that didn't happen.
Speaker 2: Now, this all sounds, it sounds as if when you were in black theater, you actually had some parts.  And when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --went to the integrated theater--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --there was nothing for you to do.
Speaker 1: There's nothing for me to do.  When [Tyrone] Guthrie interviewed everybody and either asked them back or didn't ask them back, and there was a lot of it, it was like, it was like (laughter) being in a private school, and everybody was, was, you know, "Did you--were you asked back?  Were you not asked back?  Did you pass?  Didn't you pass?"  I was asked back, to, to come back to the [Guthrie] Theater [Minneapolis, Minnesota].  And I had, I had made a friend with, with one of the producers.  And I went to have, have lunch with him and I said, "I don't understand why you're asking me back.  Are you gonna give me any more roles than you did this year?"  And he said he--that he couldn't say; he couldn't be sure.  And I, and I said, "Well, if I don't come back, would you offer this role to another young black actress?"  And he said, "No."  And I said, "Was I hired to balance off Graham [Brown]?"  Graham Brown was hired to play Horatio--not Horatio--yeah, no.  Who was Hamlet's friend?  It wasn't Horatio, was it?  It was Horatio.  It was Horatio.  Graham was hired to play Hamlet's friend, and I was hired to balance off Graham, to give him somebody to relate to because everybody else in the company was white, including all the students that they brought from the--from, from the University of Minnesota [Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  So I had to think about what I was going to do.
Story_ID: 261888
Speaker 1: I tried to apply for a, a fellowship to go and study in London [England], and I didn't get it.  So I came back to Minnesota in the following January.  And when I saw the cast list, I realized I had pretty much nothing to do.  So I had to, I had to quit.  I remember talking to a friend of mine that I'd, I'd made there and crying: "I have to go and talk to Dr. [Tyrone] Guthrie, and I have to ask him to release me, and oh, what am I gonna do," and you know, "so hard," and yada yada.  At any rate, I had the meeting with Dr. Guthrie, and, and I told him I had to leave because I wasn't being given anything to do.  And, and if, if I had to have more experience before they offered me a role, then the only way for me to get it would be go to New York [New York] and do it.  So he left me go, and I went back to New York.  And when I got back to New York then, I just got rid of that.  I had my, my resume was in two short years.  This, all of this happened in two, within two years, okay.  So within two years I had these credits.  And, and there, there wasn't that much happening in '63 [1963], '4 [1964], you know, for black actors in New York.  I did a, a Broadway play that unfortunately opened during the newspaper strikes, with no reviews (laughter), and so there was no, you know, no audience.  And I was then offered a, offered the Washington, D.C. Shakespeare--outdoor Shakespeare festival, where I was to play Titania [in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream,' William Shakespeare].  And so I did that for the summer.  And while I was there for the summer, an agent that I had met, a white agent that I had met--pardon me--in New York called me and said that he--when I came back to New York at the end of the summer, he wanted to introduce me to, to some people who were representing Universal Studios [Inc., Universal City, California].  And he wanted to get me to go out there and screen test, and he wanted Universal to sign me to a contract.  And I said, "Okay," you know, and, and so I did that.  I auditioned in New York.  They sent me out here to Los Angeles [California], and I screen tested here.  And all of this is now '64 [1964], this is '64 [1964].  I screen tested.  I went back to New York.  They signed me to a seven-year contract, and I came back here in November of '64 [1964] to start my contract.  And I remember I was staying with a friend, who was the only person I knew out here.  And Christmas was coming, and I remember feeling really strange 'cause I had never been away from home and the family and you know, that whole spread of people.  Sometimes twenty-five, thirty people would come for dinner at Christmastime.  And here I was out in Los Angeles, and it was very strange.
Story_ID: 261889
Speaker 1: What kind of feedback did you get from your, your mother [Iris South MacLachlan] and father [James McLachlan] and--
Speaker 2: Well, my mother and father, my mother and--my mother and father came to see me I 'The Blacks[: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet] because I was very excited about it.  They weren't thrilled that I had quit this job [at the 92nd Street Y, New York, New York], where I was making a hundred dollars a week, to take an understudy job for five dollars a week and to be in theater.  And you know what kind of girls are in theater, you know.  But they came to see the play, and my mother was horrified at 'The Blacks' because of the language.  And she was so upset with me and so (laughter) tight-lipped, she didn't want to go backstage; she didn't want to meet any of the actors; she was just upset that I would be on the stage identified with, with these people who were using all this bad language and doing all this dirty stuff.  So, when I was, when I was doing the play ['Raising Hell in the Son'] for Hal, Hal De Windt, my picture got into go, The New York Times, plays that were opening.  And there was a picture of me on the front page of the theater section rehearsing this play.  My mother was so impressed, you know, that she accepted the fact that oh, well, you know, you're an actor, but you know, you're doing classy stuff.  So, at that point, I was no longer living at home, and she, you know, her opinions--pardon me--her opinions really affected me a great deal, in terms of the kinds of roles that I would do, because I didn't want my mother to be upset with me, you know.  I, I was a grown woman.  I was over thirty, pretending to be twenty.  And, but if the role was a little bit dicey, I wasn't interested in it because I didn't want my mother to be disappointed or embarrassed or what have you.  So I think that had a--pardon me; I have to drink some water.  I think that had a lot to do with, with the kinds of roles that I was, I was given when I, when I arrived, do you know.  I mean I turned down some projects that now are classic projects, you know, like 'Blacula,' because I didn't like the whole premise.
Story_ID: 261890
Speaker 1: So any rate, so I came out here [Los Angeles, California].  I was greeted by everybody at Universal [Studios Inc., Universal City, California].  I realized that there was one black guy under contract, and he and I became sort of friends.  And there were maybe two or three other black women, black young women, in town who were under contract to a major studio or a network.  Somebody was with NBC; somebody was with Paramount [Pictures, Los Angeles, California].  And I can't remember what else there was, but there I was at Universal.  And so I asked, you know, "What should I be doing?  Should I come to the studio every day?  Should I," you know, you know, "watch directors?  Are there classes?"  And I was told, "Don't do anything.  Don't worry about it.  Just go to the beach; enjoy yourself.  Don't take any acting classes.  We don't want you to change."  You know, "Just sort of be," you know, "just enjoy yourself.  You're under contract.  You'll be paid forty out of fifty-two weeks."  Twelve weeks they'll have to put me on a, on, on no salary, and, and everything was gonna be fine.  So, one of the directors that I had met when I was--who, who actually had directed me for my, for my scene, my, my test scene, you know, I became pretty friendly with him.  And he requested me on a show that he was, he was directing there that I should start getting used to working for camera.  I mean I had done three little television shows in New York [New York], like one scene each.  And I'd done these little commercials with no dialogue, but I really didn't understand the whole process of filmmaking.  So, I worked with him.  I think it was a, it was a [Alfred] Hitchcock.  Then it as a '[The Alfred] Hitchcock Hour' show.  I really did one, two, another Hitchcock, "The Monkey's Paw[: A Retelling," 'The Alfred Hitchcock Hour'], and a--'Bob Hope [Presents the] Chrysler Theatre.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a scary one, "The Monkey's Paw."
Speaker 1: "The Monkey's Paw"?  Yeah, that was, that was me.  It was a very, but it was a very modern kind of jet set group.  And, and a loan-out, they loaned me out to do 'The FBI' and a, a fashion show [Edith Head fashion show] for Universal Studio Tours because the tour center had not been built in '64 [1964], '65 [1965].  And that's all I did for Universal, and so they fired me.  They fired me June of '66 [1966], which was like a year and a half.  Actually, they brought me in in November.  So, the following November they, when, when contract renewal time came, they said to me that because they had, had not used me a great deal, and they had not made their money back on me, they were not gonna give me my raise.  And (laughter) I said, "Well, if you're not gonna give me my raise then let me go, you know.  I don't want to be here."
Story_ID: 261891
Speaker 1: Well, that made everybody very crazy.  And my agents, 'cause I had an agent here [Los Angeles, California] and an agent in New York [New York], and I had a woman here at Universal [Studios Inc., Universal City, California] who was sort of taking care of my career, and then there was her counterpart in New York.  And they all got to talk, and they, and they convinced me to sign the contract, that they were gonna do better; they were gonna find me some roles, and what was it that I wanted?  And I said, "You know what I really want to do?  I really want to cut my hair."  I had seen Cicely [Tyson] do that show on television when her, when her hair was short, and I loved the look.  And I said I really want to cut (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now--
Speaker 1: --my hair short.  And they said--
Speaker 2: Was it just short or was it a natural?
Speaker 1: It was a natural.  It was--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know, yeah, it wasn't just short, no.  It was a natural.
Speaker 2: That was a big deal in those days.
Speaker 1: It was a huge deal in those days.  And, and they told me, "Ah, no, don't do that."  I mean, you know, "You cut your hair when you came out here.  It wasn't shoulder length.  It's, now that it's growing, it's fine.  No, don't cut your hair; don't do that; don't do"--so at any rate, that was the end of the, the end of the year, end of '65 [1965].  So in June of '66 [1966], when my semi-annual contract renewal came up, they dropped me.  And (laughter), and so I went and cut my hair.  And I, I was a year without work.  I remember because I was trying to think of, should I go back to New York, or should I stay here, and I decided to stay here.  And I had to, you know, get little part-time jobs and--
Speaker 2: Now, why was it hard to find a job after (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Well, there wasn't that much that--you know, they, they weren't hiring that, that min- many black actors for television, you know.  I mean there wasn't very much to do.  Now what had happened was what, I came out here in '64 [1964].  In '65 [1965], the Watts riots happened, right?  Yeah, it was happening in '65 [1965], and I had gotten involved with, you know, a lot of the committees.  And I was, you know, I was going there, and I was working with some youth groups, you know, doing some stuff.  And, but because of that, and because of all the demands that were being made on the studios and on the networks, then all of those black actors, all of those black roles started appearing on television.  And people were being hired to, to play, you know, second, second to the star.  All of that explosion of work began to happen just at about the time that I was dropped.  And, and then The Music Center [Los Angeles, California] was about to open.  And I auditioned for them, and they offered me a role in, in their company.  But I had also auditioned for 'I Spy,' and I wanted to do that show, but I had to wait for them to come back from, from location.  And so I, I turned down the Music Center to wait for the 'I Spy.'  And the 'I Spy' happened, and my career happened.
Story_ID: 261892
Speaker 1: We were off camera, we're discussing the hair and your--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --your decision to cut the, the hair and to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My decision to cut my hair.
Speaker 1: --get your hair natural.  And I was talking to someone about the history of Miriam Makeba being on TV first, and Cicely Tyson, Abbey Lincoln, and you being among the first, first wave of people, of black women that had the courage to do that.
Speaker 2: Well, it was, you know, people have asked me or they've take, they've, they've made, they've come to some kind of understanding about it, that, that I was either a, a radical; I was a revolutionary, and I was making a political statement, and (unclear).  I just did it because I thought it was cute (laughter).  I had, you know, there was, I wasn't making any kind of a statement.  It didn't occur to--my mother [Iris South MacLachlan] was a hairdresser, okay.  So I grew up with her doing women's hair in the kitchen while she was cooking dinner, you know, all my life.  I grew up with my problems with hair in New York [New York] in the summertime that, you know, were horrendous.  And this was just a way for me not to have to keep straightening my hair and putting it up in rollers.  All the time that I was out here [Los Angeles, California] at Universal [Studios Inc., Universal City, California] I mean I was straightening my own hair.  I was putting it up in rollers.  I would sleep in it.  I, it was, it was awful.  And I thought golly, I, I just cut it off, I won't have to worry about it, you know.  It was, it was purely my comfort.  And, but it, it was read as a political statement and a revolutionary statement.  And I found that really very interesting.
Story_ID: 261893
Speaker 1: I was waiting for, for 'I Spy' to, you know, to hire me, and, and they did.  And I went to Greece to do this 'I Spy' and had a fabulous time in Greece.  And when I came back--
Speaker 2: Well, let's talk about that for a second, 'cause you played (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What?
Speaker 2: --many, millions of people watched 'I Spy'--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: It was, a, it was a, a breaking show.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: --do you know.
Speaker 2: Bill, Bill Cosby--
Speaker 1: It was incredible.
Speaker 2: --playing a--
Speaker 1: Right
Speaker 2: --a hero.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --though with a kind of comedic kind of twist to it.  But he was still a hero, an--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --action hero, a Rhodes Scholar he played.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Alexander Scott could speak many languages.  He was, and he, he spent all of his time with his white friend, Robert Culp [sic. Kelly Robinson played by Robert Culp], a great friend, doing spy missions.  Robert Culp would fall in love every week.  Alexander Scott didn't have a girlfriend.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: So, we wondered sitting at home when is he going to find a woman, and when is there going to be a woman.  And there was you.
Speaker 1: Was, I wasn't the first though.
Speaker 2: You may not have been the first, but he didn't have many.
Speaker 1: He didn't have many, no he didn't.  He did have a, a couple.  He did have some.  But I don't think I was the first because this was the second season, if I remember correctly, because--
Speaker 2: It seemed like he went through almost a whole season without--
Speaker 1: He, he may have gone through the first season without it, because I remember he'd got the, the Emmy [Award] for the first season.  And in the second season, a lot of the press questions to me was: "How are they doing?" "Was--Do you think he's going to win the second year?"  "Is he, is he and Robert having any problems about his getting the Emmy and, and Robert not getting the Emmy?"  And I didn't know anything about anything.  I mean I had known, I had known Cos [Bill Cosby] before.  I had met him and his wife [Camille Cosby] and you know, hung out at his house while they were shooting the first season, before it was on the air.  And now he was a big star, and he, he had his mother [Anna Pearl Cosby] and his wife in, in Athens [Greece] with him.  They had actually come off a ship where they had, they had gone around the, the Middle East, and it had come to Athens.  We did the show in which I was this African young woman [Laya] who worked in some office.  I can't remember what kind of an office, whether it was a business office or a spy office or a political office, whatever it was, and got in, and, and got involved in whatever case they were working on, and I got killed, okay.  It was--but there as this, you know, there was also this wonderful--it was his show, I think, in that Culp was around, but he, he wasn't really majorly in the show.  This was really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not in that episode, yeah.
Speaker 1: Not in that episode.  This was, this was Cosby show.  And I worked with [HistoryMaker] Maya [Angelou].  I called Maya on the phone, and I said, "Maya, I'm going to Athens.  I'm to play an African girl, and I need some help with an accent."  So I went over to her house.  She was getting ready to move.  We sat on the floor, and she worked with me about, you know, about the accent and about the mannerisms and behavior and what have you.
Story_ID: 261894
Speaker 1: They were in Greece, and I was going to join them when they told me that I was hired.  And I had been reading the script [for 'I Spy'], and there were some wardrobe issues that I had talked to a couple of the producers about in terms of, what was I going to be wearing, where was it coming from.  And it was hard at that time to find African clothing, do you know.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, I remember going out to shop for an evening gown for the scene where, you know, we went to this dance together.  And I remember finding something that was very simple, very plain, and I thought maybe I should buy it just in case.  And I thought no, they'll have something for me.  But when I got over there, the wardrobe guy had shopped for me at--what is that place on Hollywood Boulevard [Hollywood, Los Angeles, California] that sells all the underwear that--
Speaker 2: Frederick's of Hollywood?
Speaker 1: Frederick's of Hollywood.  He had shopped for me at Frederick's of Hollywood, and he had all of this nylon, polyester bullshit, if you'll pardon me, that disturbed me.  And I went to the producer, and I said, "I am not wearing any of that stuff.  That's awful.  It's ugly, and it makes me look cheap.  I'm not gonna wear it."  And so he said, "Well, we'll just have to go shopping for you."  And I said, "In Athens [Greece]?" you know, explain to me.  So, actually we went out; we found fabric.  And the scenes where I wore, you know the fabric wrapped around my, my shoulder and all that--I can't even remember what it was called--it, it was based on having found this fabric there.  And the other scenes that I was in Western clothing, it was my clothing.  And the evening gown, I don't know where they found it.  But they found this green--you know what, it's like that dress, my fourth grade dress.  It was green; it was net; it was fluffy; it was, it was just, you know, it was just incredible.  I just made that connection, by the way.  And so, that, that was my clothing; that was my wardrobe in the show.  And, and I think the reason that I, the reason that I complained was that I had a vision of myself, and I had a vision of this, this character that just did not go with Frederick's of Hollywood, do you know.  It wasn't, I, I wasn't pushing for anything.  I wasn't working for anybody.  I wasn't trying to make a statement.  I just didn't want to be embarrassed on public television, you know, on national television in tacky clothing.
Speaker 2: None of this political, of course, okay.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: None of this was political.  But everything I've read about it was political (laughter).  Just, it just amazed me, you know.
Story_ID: 261895
Speaker 1: After 'I Spy,' then I got a lot of work, and then the shows were on the air.  And so I worked a lot.  I worked a lot.  I was here [Los Angeles, California], and there were very few actresses here.  Everybody was in New York [New York].  The theater company was in New York.  Now I had, I had been going with, with, with [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks before I left for Minneapolis [Minnesota], and that was the year before.  So when I came back and left again, The Negro Ensemble Theater [sic. The Negro Ensemble Company (NEC)] began in New York, and I missed it.  I was really upset about having missed it, but I was out here, you know, starting a career in film, television.
Speaker 2: Okay, now during, during the '60s [1960s], we have all, we have it from the late '50s [1950s] we've got like [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] in, in Montgomery [Alabama].  We got like the '63 [1963] Birmingham [Alabama] and the, the Civil Rights Movement is, is really heating up.  Did you pay any attention?  I mean I know you had paid some attention, but were you--
Speaker 1: Oh, I paid attention.
Speaker 2: --were you--how did you feel during those days, summer of '64 [1964], '65 [1965] and Selma [Alabama] and all that?
Speaker 1: I remember feeling, feeling really badly for black people in the South, but I didn't understand what, what, what they were experiencing.  My understanding of it came from reading about it or watching television.  I had never experienced that.  The few, the few times, at least one time in particular that I, I really realized it as a racist moment, I was a, a college kid [at Hunter College, New York, New York].  And I did not, I didn't realize, I didn't realize how much, how much was happening to me and around me until later, much later, when I began to pay much more attention to it.  I, I loved Dr. King, just from television, just from watching to him, and listening to his, listening to him speak.  But I wasn't moved to go there.  I was afraid of that.  I was afraid of being some place where people were able to be cruel and mean to me without any, without any recall, where I could not accused them of anything.  That terrified me, that, the idea that, that that could happen, if I had been born someplace else that that could be happening to me was really scary for me.
Story_ID: 261896
Speaker 1: Stoke, I think it was Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] that coined the phrase Black Power in 1965 or '66 [1966], I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, and it was after--
Speaker 1: --during a march.
Speaker 2: --it was after the Watts riot, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, march from Selma to Montgomery [March] that's '65 [1965], yeah, '65 [1965].  And it was shortly after that time that you, you cut your hair and--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right.
Speaker 1: And, and probably, I mean as, you may not have picked up on it, but I think that, I'm sure that a lot of people--
Speaker 2: A lot of people--
Speaker 1: --didn't see--
Speaker 2: --really read a lot into it, and I tried to, to own that.  It, I think if, if anything at all, if I was being confrontational at all, it wasn't to the world.  It was really about the people at Universal [Studios Inc., Universal City, California] that were laughing and smiling and not letting me do anything, you know.  But then remember, too, that, from high school [Julia Richman High School, New York, New York] on, I went to school mostly with white people.  My friends were black, and by [Hunter] College [New York, New York] they were mixed.  So, I guess I assimilated a lot, because up until that time I had lived in Harlem [New York, New York] and had very little contact with white people except store, storekeepers.  Do you know what I'm saying?  But I don't remember having a problem with them.  I don't remember their treating me in a way that was different, because if they were storekeepers or owners, they were store owners on my block.  So, they accustomed themselves to treating us in a way that could keep them there.  Do you know what I mean?  So, so when I came out here [Los Angeles, California], I, my friends, they were, since there were very few black actors here that I knew, my, I began to develop friends, and they were black and white and Asian, do you know.  They were, they were everything, and I did not see anything strange about that, I really didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay so you weren't trying to--there's no movement type of set--I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't--
Speaker 1: --motivations--
Speaker 2: --no, I (laughter), I was not--
Speaker 1: or anything (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --trying to make a movement or join a movement.  Do you know what I mean?
Story_ID: 261897
Speaker 1: I found myself with Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] in, in certain meetings and situations because I began to be invited to attend certain meetings or, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What kind of meetings?  What, what--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --meetings were you--
Speaker 1: --well, there was a, a meeting of, of people to meet with the Panthers.  And I remember being nervous about possible police intervention and what have you, and, but I went to this meeting.  I remember that I was asked to--there was a, an organization called Women Against Violence Against Women.  And I was asked to come to a meeting to, to speak at a meeting and, which I did.  And I made contributions, and I would speak for them, but mostly it was because I was asked to do this.  In the '70s [1970s], I was asked to join Screen Actors Guild [SAG; Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAF-AFTRA)] on the board.  And I began working with the women's committee chair and the ethnic committee chair, and we, we set up programs to measure how many non-white actors were being used as opposed to the white actors--we--how many women were being used opposed men.  So we set up that whole system of recording and making sure that we were getting those answers from the people who, who took these numbers out there in the real world.  And so, I worked really pretty hard with them until the actors strike in '80 [1980] I believe it was.  And at that point I realized that I, you know, my whole life almost was now devoted to Screen Actors Guild and to the, to the negotiations.  And I was sitting on the, on the committee and going into negotiations.  Somehow or another the, the, the thing that happened is I would go somewhere that people were organizing, and they would want me to join them, and I would join them.  And then all of a sudden they would want me to be a part of it, and then I would do that.  And then I would get to be the, the vice president, then I would get to be--somehow things like that happened to me where, not because I was asking for it or looking for it, but I got positions of, you know, little bit of power, medium amount of power be, only because I was there, you know.  Do you understand what I'm saying?  You look like you don't understand what I'm saying.
Speaker 2: I understand what you're saying.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, a lot of things that I did happened when I was with Screen Actors Guild.  And that was late '70s [1970s], maybe '76 [1976], '77 [1977] to '80 [1980].
Story_ID: 261898
Speaker 1: By that time I had a daughter [Samantha MacLachlan], too, you know; I had a kid and--
Speaker 2: When was your daughter born?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: When did you have your daughter?
Speaker 1: My daughter was born in 1970.  And so I had, I had responsibilities to her; I had responsibilities to some of the organizations I belonged to; I had responsibilities to my career.  So I, I felt like I had a whole lot of things to sort out and to try to figure out what was going on there.  But, so just, just about after the actors strike [1980], which really was very important, and it took a lot of energy, I was asked by, by John [ph.]--don't, don't ask me--(laughter) by an actor--it will come to me--to be a part of this group that he was putting together to go to East Germany.  He was very much a socialist and very much interested in the org- in an organization that, that made friends with East Germany at the time.  And this was in the late, this was in 1980 that I went.  And so I, I went, I went to East Germany and I went to Europe.  And I was in, I was away for about six weeks, which is a long time to be away from your kid, you know.  But I--she was at the time nine, ten years old, and my cousin Bridgette [ph.] was living with me at, at this time.  She'd come from Jamaica, and she was living with me, and she was going to school.  And I had a, a housekeeper; I had a live-in housekeeper.  And somebody was taking care of her, and I just thought I can go and take a break, so I did.  I went to East Germany, and it was, it was really because it was, it was an interesting place that I was being offered, you know, the opportunity to go to.  When I came back, what happened in '80 [1980]?  What happened?  My daughter was ten.  She had, had chicken pox while I was gone, poor baby.  And I began to work with Brock [Peters] and DiDi [Peters] on--
Speaker 2: That's Brock Peters and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Brock Peters--
Speaker 2: --and, and--
Speaker 1: --and Brock and DiDi Peters--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --on Communications Bridge [Institute] in '82 [1982].
Story_ID: 261899
Speaker 1: Now what was Communications Bridge [Institute]?
Speaker 2: Communications Bridge was the program of the nonprofit company, Maga Link [Inc.].  They had formed a nonprofit called Maga Link.  Communications Bridge grew out of a program that they had developed the year before to, to teach youngsters, high school students, you know, college students, to, to use cameras, sound, to develop television, videography, and sound, what have you.  So, they had gotten a grant through a friend of theirs.  And the grant was going to come again the following year because the program apparently, I wasn't part of it--was, was pretty good their first year.  So the second year, now they had this grant, and they were going to start this program in, in, you know, seriously.  And they were, they were gonna need more money, and they were gonna need a board, and they were gonna need a lot of things--pardon me.  And so I got very interested in doing that, to train kids in, in video technology and to find jobs for them under grants.  I mean I just thought that was a wonderful thing to do, and, and so I got to do it.  And I brought a friend of mine, Brandy [ph.], in to work with the company, and we found a place to rent.  And we went to schools, and we auditioned kids.  And we made a selection, and we just were up and running.  And DiDi [Peters] had an incredibly sage mind for this kind of work, for finding funding, finding jobs, the whole, and then the whole PR [public relations] aspect of it.  She was, she was really incredibly smart, okay.  And because I was the, I was secretary of the corporation, it turned into practically another full-time job.  It seems as if everything that I, that I wanted to do because I thought I could be of help and things were interesting, turned into this incredibly time-consuming event.  And it consumed five years of my life.  In 1987 I quit, you know, because it just got way too crazy, and crazy in terms of the way the business was being handled and the programs that we were reaching out for all of a sudden--we were going in places that I thought--well, I knew that we were capable of doing a lot of things, but I just felt that some of this was going on, and it was way beyond what we were able to do.  And--
Speaker 1: You think you were taking on too much, and you weren't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yes, and then DiDi--
Speaker 1: --as, as effective as you could be.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I thought we were--yeah, I mean it was exciting.  We were given at that, there is that, that, the [National] Black Programming Consortium.  Well, we were giving that, plus we got a grant to redo our studio.  By this time we were in the studio on Pico Boulevard [Los Angeles, California].  I think you remember that, [HistoryMaker] Paul [Brock].  And I was helping by finding the, the workmen and the contractors to come in and, and give us estimates on the, on the, on the studio.  And, and also I was developing some programming that we possibly could, could make ourselves.  And Brock [Peters] and DiDi were shopping it because they were really good about, you know, being out there with the people.  They had these other kinds of connections.  And then DiDi and I got, when we drank a lot, okay--we drank a lot.  It was like, you know, at the end of a day it's what we wanted to do.
Story_ID: 261900
Speaker 1: The more intense the business got at Communications Bridge [Institute], the longer our days got there and the more we went out to drink after with various friends or people who came by or ourselves; or we'd just go over to Brock [Peters] and DiDi [Peters]'s house and the longer my days got.  And it got really crazy for me.  And my relationship with DiDi started changing.  Now the thing is that I never really discussed this with, with Brock.  They were extremely close, Brock and DiDi.  And I began to realize how much DiDi was manipulating people and events for Communications Bridge and Brock, do you know.  And then, of course, we'd go out and have these long nights of drinking in which we would end up arguing about I don't even know what.  At any rate, it all got to be a little much for me, and it, it, once again, I sort of woke up and realized my daughter is just growing up by herself it seemed to me, do you know.  And she was getting ready to--she had one more year of high school.  She was going to the L.A. County High School for the Arts [Los Angeles County High School for the Arts, Los Angeles, California].  And I thought, she's gonna be getting ready to go to college, and I have to be there to help her and you know, help take her around and show her colleges and try to get this funding together.  And so I quit Communications Bridge.
Speaker 2: This is now '87 [1987]?
Speaker 1: This was in '87 [1987].  And I, I went, I got sober that year.  And, and I was able to help Samantha [MacLachlan] choose the college she wanted to go to, which was in Santa Maria [California], was, it was a, it was a theater academy [Pacific Conservatory of the Performing Arts, Santa Maria, California] connected to a college [Allan Hancock College, Santa Maria, California] there.  It was this theater academy that gave a degree--I mean a, yeah, a certificate, an A.A. [Associate in Arts] certificate.  And I took her up to Santa Maria.  She auditioned with her friends, and they were all accepted.  And then we came back here and started to get her ready to go away to school.
Story_ID: 261901
Speaker 1: In the meantime, I was going to AA [Alcoholics Anonymous], and going to meetings, and dealing with stuff that I had never dealt with before, and--
Speaker 2: So you're talking about some real serious drinking, right?
Speaker 1: Oh, it was serious.  Now, it did not start with DiDi [Peters].  Do you know what I mean?  It started in college [Hunter College, New York, New York].  But it, it got, it got serious with DiDi.  Do you know what I mean?  So, Samantha [MacLachlan] went off to school [Pacific Conservatory for the Performing Arts, Santa Maria, California].  I, and I was left in this house by myself and going to AA meetings, and going to the gym and trying to work out, and stay sober and do all that stuff, and missing her terribly, you know, and working when I could work, and you know, doing whatever I was doing.  And the second year was easier because she was able to come home.  It's only about two and a half hours out of Los Angeles [California], so I could go up there and spend time with her.  And she could come home and bring her laundry and do whatever she had to do, and so that was fine.  My father [James McLachlan] came the second year that she was there.  It was a two-year college, two-year program.  And we saw her do 'Peter Pan' [J.M. Barrie] and, which was fun.  And this was 1989.  Okay, so, also at that time, I was, I, I go, I forgot this whole stretch of time when I was, I had left SAG [Screen Actors Guild; Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAF-AFTRA)], and then I got on the board of the Television Academy [Academy of Television Arts & Sciences].  And that also started to become a full-time job.  I was, I was, I chaired the, the membership committee, and I went to meetings.  And all of that was going on.  And then the Motion Picture Academy [Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences] called to ask me to join--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: --asked me to, to join their, their scholarship committee, their grant, their grants committee, which I did, and I've been there ever since.  I also was on the SAG scholarship committee for a while.  And I mean there were just a lot of things that I was doing, do you know, besides working.  The work was getting smaller, and further apart, and strange because the industry was changing at the same time.
Story_ID: 261902
Speaker 1: The industry was going from the, from the television show that--I understood it--was character-driven, where there was a lot of dialogue between people, you know, learning about their character, learning what the problem was, what the thing was.  And now it was becoming more, more crash and burn kind of, of television, do you know.
Speaker 2: What do you mean?  What (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Crash and burn? Car chases and you know--
Speaker 2: Just a lot of action--
Speaker 1: A lot of action, a lot of action and a lot of men, and the movies as well, you know.  And also the, the nature of, of black people on television started to change.  When I was working a lot, it was all about the revolution.  It was all about black power.  It was all about racial issues.  It was all about that kind of, of, of world.
Speaker 2: Let's, let's go back a little bit to the, some of the projects that you were in.  You, you were, you were in, I know you were in--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You're going to ask me things.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: --'...tick...tick...tick...' with Jim Brown this was a--
Speaker 1: Yes, I was in '...tick...tick...tick...' with Jim Brown.
Speaker 2: This was, wasn't a typical blaxploitation-type movie, but--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --it was, it was a, it had a--
Speaker 1: I played his wife.  He was a, he was a, he was a police officer, and there were, there were racial problems.
Speaker 2: He was the sheriff of like a southern town--
Speaker 1: He was the sheriff and--
Speaker 2: --sort of thing.
Speaker 1: --he, you know, there were racial problems.  And I was worried about him 'cause I was pregnant, and there was all that, yeah, there was a lot of that stuff.  But mostly, all of those shows had something to do with race, had something to do with, with the issue of being black in a white world.
Story_ID: 261903
Speaker 1: 'Sounder' was probably the most acclaimed movie that you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right--
Speaker 1: --actually in.  And--
Speaker 2: --right, right.
Speaker 1: --the character [Camille] you played was a schoolteacher--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and a dignified character.  That's, that's the way the community saw it as--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --as someone who--a young--
Speaker 2: But isolated.
Speaker 1: --teacher, yeah, yeah, that's true.
Speaker 2: It was very isolated.  I was out there in the middle of the country, and I had no friends, no relatives.  All I had were these cute little children, do you know.  It was a very, almost science fiction, fantasy kind of, of character that had no family around them.  Do you know what I mean?  I didn't read the book ['Sounder,' William H. Armstrong] until I got here on the set.  And I realized that in the book, the teacher was a man.  And Lonne Elder [III], who wrote the screenplay, had taken some liberties with, with the story and made the teacher a female and had made some other changes in the, in the story that created really wonderfully interesting relationships, you know, particularly between Cicely [Tyson] and Paul, Paul Benjamin [sic. Paul Winfield].  And so I, you know, I did that.  I had no idea that that was going to be as, as classic a story as it was, as classic a movie as it was.  I did 'The Man' with [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones that was supposed to have been a movie, and they decided--no, I'm sorry, wait a minute.  It supposed to have been a television show, and they decided that because the performances were so good they were gonna make it a movie.  And they meaning the producers and the studio.  And most of us said, "No, don't do that because we have a good chance on television to, you know, to be nominated for an Emmy [Award]. But, we're gonna be lost out there with a movie."  And this was in '71 [1971] [sic. 1972].
Speaker 1: That's based on Irving Wallace (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, yes.
Speaker 1: --novel ['The Man']--
Speaker 2: --right.
Speaker 1: --about a black man who becomes president--
Speaker 2: Who becomes president.
Speaker 1: --through a series of disasters to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And there were liberties taken with, with the characters as well.
Story_ID: 261904
Speaker 1: I think the daughter was a son in the, in the book ['The Man,' Irving Wallace], I think it was, but--
Speaker 2: So you played his daughter [Wanda], right?
Speaker 1: I played his daughter.  Actually, there was a girl, there was a really, really pretty black girl who was in a lot of the blaxploitation films.  She was unbelievably pretty.  And they cast her as the daughter.  Don't ask me her name.  And when--because I knew, I knew one of the producers, and he called to tell me he was really sorry.  He wanted me in that, that picture ['The Man'], but he was overwritten, and they were casting this, this young girl to be the college student.  And then he called me to say, "She's not working out," and they're gonna drop her and, "Would you come and do the role?  We'll have to reshoot one of the scenes that she's in, and, and then make the character older," do you know.  "She's now a graduate student," or something.  And then they had to gray down [HistoryMaker] James Earl [Jones]'s hair, you know, for him to have me as a, as a daughter.  And in the, in his office in the, in the, in the oval, in the oval room, Oval Office [White House, Washington, D.C.], her picture was on a (laughter), a table.  And--
Speaker 2: This is the other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) --the other girl.  And because what they did was they shot my side of the, of the scene because his side was good.  And so every time the scene switched to his side, there was this picture.  And everybody said, "Oh, they won't notice it."  And I realized that what that meant is, they won't know the difference because we all look alike, so you know what I mean, that this strange (laughter) girl is sitting up there.  And, and the way it was shot, he's, he's here, and her picture is here.  I mean, it was amazing.  At any rate, so, that, that's why I did that and then 'Sounder.'  I did 'Sounder' after that.  So, let me see, what were we talking about, what?
Speaker 2: I was just asking you about some of the roles and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Some of the roles I did.
Speaker 2: So you did 'Sounder' with Paul Winfield and Cicely Tyson.
Speaker 1: Paul Winfield.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Cicely.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you, you were--(unclear)--isolated scene by yourself basically.  You didn't interact with the other characters.
Speaker 1: Just with the kids.
Speaker 2: With the kids.  There's that scene where you--the, there's a dialogue in a classroom I think is one of the greatest things in--
Speaker 1: I know, yeah, where they're--
Speaker 2: --but--
Speaker 1: --telling these stories.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I'm, I'm sitting at the desk smiling, a little bit, you know, so they won't see, they won't think I'm laughing at 'em.  And my hand is over my--and that happened because it happened.  During one of the rehearsals it happened.  I was watching these kids, and I was thinking, oh my God, they are so cute.  That little boy, the little loafer boy was so bad, but he was just so cute, do you know.
Speaker 2: He was completely sincere, wasn't he?
Speaker 1: He was, he was, absolutely.  And so the director [Martin Ritt] wanted me to do that in the scene.
Story_ID: 261905
Speaker 1: You were saying earlier that you would always kind of hear your mother's [Iris South MacLachlan] voice about the roles and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: --so you turned down a role in 'Blacula' because you didn't--
Speaker 2: I did because--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I, yeah, I just didn't think it was good enough for me.
Speaker 1: Were there other movies that you turned down, 'cause there's, there's a--you seem to have a reputation, from what I've read, as being someone who's picky and, and--
Speaker 2: That's not true.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You, you didn't read that.
Speaker 1: I did read it.
Speaker 2: No, you didn't.
Speaker 1: I can show you in this--
Speaker 2: Where did you read that?  No, you didn't.  You never read that.  Did you really?
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, no, no, no, I didn't, I didn't.
Speaker 2: No, you didn't, of course you didn't, no.
Speaker 1: Of course not.
Speaker 2: I had a wonderful reputation as a matter of fact.  I mean everybody loved me and--
Speaker 1: Well, it's not necessarily bad.  This is--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --is not bad, but I think that--
Speaker 2: To be picky?
Speaker 1: --to be, to be someone who's just, just discerning and of course there's nothing political about any of this, but you're, but you, I could look at, you chose your parts carefully is what, and, and what you would do and not do on, in a movie.
Speaker 2: Right.  I mean Sidney [Poitier] was, Sidney was directing a picture where he was this magical, ambiguous creature where--
Speaker 1: Oh 'Brother John.'
Speaker 2: Was it 'Brother John'?
Speaker 1: 'Brother John,' yeah, because, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, is, and isn't that where he met Joanna [Shimkus], on that movie?  I think it's the movie that he met Joanna.
Speaker 1: No, I think it's another movie ['The Lost Man']--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  It's another movie.
Speaker 1: --about a--
Speaker 2: Okay, no--
Speaker 1: --kind of spy thing that he met Joanna Shimkus, yeah, I think, yeah.  It's one about a, yeah.
Speaker 2: No, okay, I'm crazy.
Speaker 1: But 'Brother John' was the one where he--
Speaker 2: Right, but that--
Speaker 1: Will Geer was in it and some other people.  He--
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Will Geer was it as a sheriff.
Speaker 2: Okay, no, it wasn't that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It wasn't that.  It was another, it was another movie, I guess.  I can't remember which one it was, but he wanted me in that.  And I had, you know, one scene or a couple of scenes with, with an actor from New York [New York].  And I was then offered another show.  And at the same time that I was offered this other show where I was about to turn it down 'cause I had this, this, this movie to do, Sidney came and said well, he was cutting the role, you know.  And I said, "Well, I'm not doing it," (laughter), "because you're cutting it," right.  And I did this other show, and he got--God, she's, she--he got somebody, really pretty girl, really pretty.  There were a lot of really pretty actresses, do you know.  Some of them were good, and some of them were really good, and some of them were not so good.  But there were a lot of pretty actresses floating around at that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you--
Speaker 2: --period of time.
Speaker 1: --did you have the feeling in those days that being pretty was more of an asset than being a good actress?
Speaker 2: I think that I thought that being pretty gave you access to a different kind of role and that at that period time being light-skinned or medium brown gave you access, more access to a different kind of role.  If you were very dark, unless you were extremely beautiful, your roles were smaller.  So, I think that I just lucked into all of this at a very propitious time, you know, and that it all happened so quickly that I was, I was kind of amazed.
Story_ID: 261906
Speaker 1: --It did seem like, it does, as you describe it, it does seem like a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It happened really quickly--
Speaker 1: --just a couple of years.
Speaker 2: --do you know.  And a lot of people, a lot of women actresses who'd been around and working for a long period of time were mad at me because I came out of nowhere, and then all of a sudden here I am, you know, in Hollywood doing guest stars and what have you.  The one thing I never got was a series.  I never got a series that ran for more than twelve weeks.
Speaker 1: Do, do you have a, a favorite project that you worked on, something that you really were the most proud of--excuse me--
Speaker 2: I think probably 'The Man' and working with Jimmy [HistoryMaker James Earl Jones] actually, with James Earl.  I think 'The Man' because of the nature of the role and Gideon's [sic. 'Gabriel's Fire']--what was his show called, Gideon's what?  Gideon's--
Speaker 1: 'Gideon's Trumpet'?  Is that the--
Speaker 2: Was it?  I'll have to look it up.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm--
Speaker 2: I'm gonna look it up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm just gonna move right out of camera.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: It was--I bet you I find it before you do.
Speaker 1: We're both flipping through the (laughter) pages here, pages of, of her filmography.
Speaker 2: That's funny because I just saw it today, and--
Speaker 1: You saw it on television or--
Speaker 2: No, I just saw it written.  I mean I saw it because I'm, these are all my old, my old resumes.  And I'm keeping them because if I put 'em all together, this will eventually be everything that I've done.  You know, it goes back to--your stuff is even better than mine.  It's amazing.
Speaker 1: I still can't find it.  Gideon's--
Speaker 2: That's funny, I can't--
Speaker 1: Is this, this a TV series or--
Speaker 2: It was a TV series that James Earl Jones did, where he, he came out of jail and--I can't, I can't find it.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At any rate, I did that show.  And in that, in that show I played his, his, his wife, his ex-wife [Ellie Graves].  We run into each other, and you know, they, they divorced because of, of Gideon's lifestyle--Gideon's Fire [sic].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Gabriel's Fire,' pardon me.
Speaker 1: Gabriel, okay--
Speaker 2: 'Gabriel's Fire.'
Speaker 1: --that's why it's--
Speaker 2: That's why you couldn't find it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause I gave you the wrong name.  At any rate, it was, it was a, a romantic character.  The character was involved in this, in this old romance with Gabriel, and that was very exciting.  I didn't have--'I Spy' was, was a favorite really because (laughter) I loved Greece; I just loved Greece.  And the character was, was filled out, do you know.  But do I have a favorite?  I don't, I don't know that I have a favorite.
Story_ID: 261907
Speaker 1: Is there a role that you really wanted to play that you didn't get a chance to play?  And I say that in light of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I'm sure that there were.  I'm mean, you know, certainly in, in movie and television projects that I read for that I didn't get, there were some that I really wanted.
Speaker 1: I realize there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But--
Speaker 1: --are not a great projects for black women actors--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --in Hollywood--
Speaker 2: No.  But, in terms of plays, and I've never really done a lot of plays.  I did I think three in New York [New York] and, or more, some little off-Broadway shows, one Broadway show ['Tiger, Tiger Burning Bright,' Peter Feibleman].  And I did Minneapolis [Minnesota].  We'll say that I, I did that season.  And here, I, I did maybe three, four plays here.  And the role that I, I always wanted to play was Gertrude in 'Hamlet' [William Shakespeare].  And that was because I spent so much time studying the play, and though I had no lines, and, and our, you know, the classes that we had with, with Dr. [Tyrone] Guthrie were all about 'Hamlet' because he was directing that first play, but there was something about that, the character that I found really interesting that wasn't necessarily, wasn't necessarily explored by, you know, in that, in that play, in that production.  And the few other times that I've seen 'Hamlet' as movies or I think one other time on stage, I realized that those characters are played in different ways.  They emphasize different things.  But the one thing that I remember that really, that really stuck with me was, was someone saying that Ophelia was pregnant.  And I thought, wow, if she played it as if she were pregnant, without it ever being discussed or mentioned, this was just her own internal information and knowledge, it made her mad scenes even richer.
Story_ID: 261908
Speaker 1: As someone who is supposed to be thoughtful, even though you say all this stuff is accidental (laughter), what roles or what, what projects, what roles or projects do you--would you like to do if this was a, this was your Hollywood, and you could do anything you wanted?  What would you, what kind of projects would you be in, and what kind of projects would you like to see done?
Speaker 2: Those are two different questions.
Speaker 1: Well, they are, yeah.  But they're, they're, they're related though.  What kind of, well--
Speaker 2: No, they aren't (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) --roles and projects, yeah.
Speaker 2: No, they aren't because--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --there was a time when I was working with Georg Stanford Brown and Tyne Daley, and they had a production company [Nexus Productions].  And I had the rights to a children's book.  And a friend of mine had written the script, and Georg was trying to sell it.  Now, I've never, I'm not a producer; I'm not a director, you know, but I really, really loved this book.  And if, if I was able to, to do what I wanted to do, I would produce children's movies.  That's what I would, that's what I really want to do.  What are the roles would I want to play?  I have no idea.  I don't know what's out there, really, and I don't know what--well, let's put it this way (laughter): I, I've never, I've never been really attached to the stage because I've never been in a play that went a long run.  So I've never gotten that rhythm, and that energy, and, and that persistence to want to do a play.  I think at the moment the best roles for women and for black women will probably be on stage, will probably be legitimate theater.  So, I've, I've done a few plays, and I'm getting ready to do a reading of 'The Old Settler' [John Henry Redwood].  I don't know if you saw that play.  And I start rehearsals in about a week and, little over a week.  But I saw the play produced, and I, and I thought it was really wonderful.  I saw Phylicia Rashad and Debbie Allen do it.  It's about two sisters on television, and I thought it was really good.  And they called me to ask me to replace [HistoryMaker] Hattie Winston because Hattie Winston just got sick.  And, and I said, "Yes, I would like to do it," 'cause I remembered the play, and I remember the character, and I remember that character as being just really interesting.  But, then again, this is because in theater you have characters that are explored.  You have women who have relationships with other people, and you find out things about them during the course, the course of the play.  Short of my, my lucking up on, on a, on a real role on television, I don't see that happening anymore in television.  I don't see that happening in any of the shows that I, that I go up to read for.
Story_ID: 261909
Speaker 1: What I see, in terms of what I'm reading for, is I'm reading for, for people who you take a chunk out of their life at--between four and seven on a Tuesday, and it has no relationship to anything else that's going on except what's happening in the scene, what's happening between the characters that are in that scene.  There's no, or very little, information about who I'm playing in terms of my family and my friends, if I have problems, if I have, you know, if I have children, if I have a lover, if I have a husband, if I have, you know, what, you know, what is going on with me.  You don't know, but, but I am a doctor, or a lawyer, or a judge or, you know, somebody in some kind of official position, and, and it hardly matters, seems to me, hardly matters, you know.  The last time I did, I did an 'Alias'; I did a couple of, of 'Family Law.'  I did, the first 'Family Law' I did I played a judge [Judge Anne Taft].  And it was a judge who, who took the position that she favored the woman in the trial.  And the men were being assholes.  And the, the lawyers, the stars, were, were representing the women.  And so it was, it became then a kind of a battle, be, you know, the men against the women.  And the women won, and I helped make the women won, win.  So I had something to do besides just sit there on the bench and, and you know, rap my--whatever that's called.
Speaker 2: Gavel.
Speaker 1: My gavel, thank you.  So, the second time I went I was playing the same judge with a different director.  And, and it was, of course, a different case.  And this director had me race through the dialogue because he had other things.  And he kept saying, "Just faster, just faster, just do it faster.  Don't even think about it; just do it faster."  And I said, "That doesn't make any sense, and it doesn't make any sense to me in terms of, of what my character was like the last time I played it."  He said, "But this is a different case, different lawyers, and just, just race through it; just keep racing through it."  And I raced through it, and I hated it, do you know.  So, a lot of it has to do with how the show is written and who directs it, how it's directed.  To get back to what would I like to play, I have no idea.  I really don't know.  But my feeling is that I may have more fun reading this play and maybe reading some other plays than I would have, you know, doing a couple of days on television.
Story_ID: 261910
Speaker 1: Are you still the chairperson on the grants committee for the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not because I'm on my one-year off.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: I was year off.
Speaker 1: --you did that for a few years, quite a few years, right?
Speaker 2: I did that for a long time, yes.  I mean I would--when, when I came on to the committee, there was a chair there.  When he had to go off, they made me the chair, and then he came back and he took over the chair.  And then I've been the chair, you know, so it's, it would, it just rotated between a couple of people actually.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, who do you give grants to?  I mean who does (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We give grants mostly to, to universities and colleges with, with film study departments, to organizations here and abroad and any place that, that can get a, a proposal to us that work with bringing film to the community in a, in a knowledgeable way.  Some of the things that we used to fund got to be so big like film festivals that we had to create another whole committee for that one because it got to be taking too much money out of what we are given every year to take care of.  We have, we usually, we have, what, close to a million dollars a year.  And then we get eighty, ninety proposals that we have to think about.  You know, many just don't fall into our purview; many of them aren't, you know, not, not of our interest.  And we, it takes, it doesn't take very long.  It takes, we, we, work on it for an afternoon.  They send us this giant book (laughter), giant book of proposals.  We read it; we make our notes; we come in; we discuss it; and we, and we vote on it; and we do it.
Story_ID: 261911
Speaker 1: Now, as a member of the Academy [of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences], you also vote on the Academy Awards [Oscars], right (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you, you know, behind us are videotapes and DVDs that are sent here by the Academy for you to review and so forth.  What has that been like?  And you know, recently we've had all, we've had more black winners than ever before.
Speaker 2: That's true, we have, we have.  What has that been like for me?
Speaker 1: I guess, if you have any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: -- (simultaneous) or for anybody?
Speaker 1: --any perspective on, on, I mean any--
Speaker 2: Well, no, I, I was a little disturbed when all, all of this press about the black market films that were available and where they were coming from.  And they finally found somebody that had, that lent--I, I don't know if you read about it.  They finally found this member who lent his, his DVDs to a friend out of state.  The friend would copy them, and then the friend would sell them and return the original to him.  And they finally found that, and there's all kinds of punishments for that.  But, and I understand that that's a problem, I do.  I understand that that's a problem, and it represents a huge problem to producers and to studios.  However, it's not my problem (laughter), do you know.  I mean it's, it's not a problem that I connect to in any way.  I know it affects, it affects my work; it affects my career, because the more money that they spend on, on special effects and, and $20 million to a star, the less money they have for me.  Do you know what I'm saying?  But the thing is, I'm not, I'm not bitter about it, no.  I had a good run.
Story_ID: 261912
Speaker 1: Well, in terms of the Academy Awards [Oscars] a couple of years ago, when Halle Berry won--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and Denzel [Washington] won.  Some people thought, well, it seems like too coincidental that they would both win the same year.  Is, is the Academy [of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences] trying to make up for past transgressions, you know.  They'll say, "Denzel was better in 'Malcolm X' than he was in that."  He didn't get anything for that, you know.  And why, you know, why now?  Why two at a time?  And I mean there's a lot of--you know, Jamie Foxx just won for 'Ray.'  And people really think that he should have won.  I mean a lot of people think he should have won for that.  It was, he, he really--
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of people thought Don Cheadle should of won, too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Don Cheadle was very good in, 'Hotel Rwanda.'  But is there--do you think the, the Academy--well, I mean do you have a perspective about the political feelings or, or disposition of the Academy around giving awards and that sort of thing?  They, they really--
Speaker 2: You know, I used to do, and I'm not, I'm not dismissing this, but I used to do the voting, the screening and the voting for the Television Academy [Academy of Television Arts & Sciences] fifteen years ago, when they would get all the people who volunteered together.  And they would take them to a hotel in Beverly Hills [California] and they, where they would have taken over several, several rooms and what have you.  And they would show different, different categories to people.  They would, they would separate the people into, into little groups.  And they'd put ten, fifteen people in a group to watch best actress comedy.  And we would watch five shows, and then we would vote on them, and that would be the winner.  As television grew and got to encompass cable, and DVDs, and foreign and what have you, it got unmanageable.  There's no way in the world that I could legitimately vote in television because I can't say that I have legitimately seen a major percent of television; plus, my viewing habits are kind of peculiar.  There are a lot of things I won't see because I find them corny or bad or whatever.  You know, I don't like 'em, so I don't watch 'em.  I end up watching a lot of, you know, cable shows that don't register for the Emmys [Emmy Awards], you know.  Like, my recent love is poker.  I love watching poker on television.  Now, the same is true for, for film.  Over the, over the last, what, decade, films have gotten more violent; they've gotten more racy; they've gotten more involved with, with sex than with people; they've gotten more involved with, with the things that didn't, that don't matter to me, do you know, than with the kind of issues that I'm really interested in.  So I see less and less movies.
Story_ID: 261913
Speaker 1: I saw Halle Berry in 'Monster['s Ball']--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Ball.
Speaker 1: --Ball.  I thought she was wonderful.  I have no problem with that.  I think Denzel [Washington] is wonderful.  Do I think that this, that everybody decided this is the year to honor the black folk?  That could be true, because while actors nominate actors, the entire Academy [of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences] votes on the nominations.  And while we are the largest group, by the time you put all these other groups together, the producers, the directors, the cinematographers, the, the, the crafts people, you have a lot of other points of view as to who should get what, do you know.  I think, I, I would say that the SAG Awards [Screen Actors Guild Awards] are probably the most honest because its only actors, and they're only dealing with actors.  But what do I know about whether this is the best sound editing job?  And this is something I'm supposed to vote on.  I think, I like to think that the year that, that 'Monster's Ball' was, was released and produced, that Halle did the best job there was available.  That didn't mean she was the only good person, but I think she was really, really good.  A lot of people don't agree with me.  But considering who she is, what she'd been doing, to come to that is, is for me amazing, as an actor.  Denzel is, whatever he does is, is wonderful, actually.  And I think he probably got it at that, at that point for his, for his body of work so far, I think probably.  There was so much talk about 'Ray' this year that I got sick of it, do you know.  Every, every magazine I looked at, every newspaper that I opened, every commercial on television was all about 'Ray' and how incredible Jamie [Foxx] was, and he was; he was wonderful.  But of, of all the people who were nominated, he got the most press, and it's the press that, that does it.  How much press you get has a lot to do with your success in, in, in the competition.
Speaker 2: So you're saying this, this system is, is what it is, but it's not perfect (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The system is what it is, and it's getting to be more what it is, actually, do you know.  It can't help it.  It's just the way it's going.  The way things are driven now and the way things are produced now, you, you know, you can't, you can't get away from it.  It's, it's amazing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 261914
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My concern is about, is about understanding, understanding exactly what freedom is in, in this society, in this section of this society, because it's different in different parts of this country.  And it's, it's, it's a social freedom, a religious freedom, a financial freedom.  And my hope is that we will find a way to, to really make a move on the very, very important parts of this, of this freedom that we find.  What's the most important part at the moment?  I think the most important part at the moment is education, I think.  That's where we have, we have dropped the most and where we're in, in terrible shape in terms of what's happening with our children and how they're being taught, trained, turned out, treated.  I think it's awful.
Story_ID: 261915
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything that you've done so far, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Yes.  If I knew then what I know now, I would have a different kind of career.  The kids in this generation are so much smarter than I ever was in terms of producing, in terms of, of making contacts and keeping them, in terms of using their contacts, in terms of, of finding projects and producing them on their own, in terms of making those relationships with, like actors with writers, and keeping them until something happens and you know, and it gets done, so much smarter than I ever was, really.  I think if I, if I had come to all of this years before and spent a lot more time trying to make a career of being an actress in New York [New York] and learned more, I would have been better prepared when I got here.
Story_ID: 261916
Speaker 1: Likewise, and when you look back, back at everything you've done to this point, what would you consider at this juncture to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say that whether it was deliberate or accidental, that, that I, my work had a certain amount of influence on, on the community.  And I'm always surprised when I hear it, but I don't dismiss it.  And it, it really makes me sort of kick myself that I didn't know it before and make some good use out of it.  Do you know what I mean?  I mean when I (laughter), when I meet actors--okay, I'm on a show.  I'm on 'Murder One,' and I'm playing the mother [Mrs. Latrell] of this really handsome young man [Rickey Latrell] who's on trial for murder.  And he's got his friends around him, and so I'm surrounded by three or four really fascinating, terrific looking young men in their late twenties. And I'm thinking, you know, if I had, if I had understood any of this before I got here--you know what, I just lost my point.  But if, but I found my, oh, but I found that they looked at me as if I was a, I was a trendsetter, as, as if, as if they were following in my footsteps, as if they had a lot to thank me for because I opened doors and windows for them.  And I, and you know, and I heard all of this coming from them.  Yes, they knew who I was.  They watched me when they were children.  They, they realized that when I did 'Uptight' that I had on a short, I had on a mini, a (laughter), a suede miniskirt.  And they were looking at my legs because they were, they were so young when, when I made it.  And I'm thinking to myself: they were so young, and I was fifteen years older than I was playing.  My God, there's such a huge difference between us.  Do you know what I'm saying?  But I find that amazing.  I find it amazing that even now when I go out, there's somebody there.  If I go to a dinner for, for, you know, some organization, there's always somebody there who remembers me.  I find that wonderful.
Story_ID: 261917
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a, as a classy, talented actress, because at this point, I, I really can't think of anything else that I could or would do except produce, and that's a whole other trip.  But I would like to be remembered as somebody who put a lot of energy into the things that I cared about and believed in, some of which were politically correct, some of which were socially correct, but that I, I, but because I believed in them I gave it a lot of attention.  I think I'd like to also be considered a good friend, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much.  Thank you for spending your time with us (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're very welcome.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 261918
Speaker 1: That's me and my sister.  That's my sister, Carol [MacLachlan], who lives in New York [New York].  And we were in New York for a friend's wedding two years ago, June '03 [2003].
Speaker 2: Okay, on the left is my Aunt Kitty [ph.], Catherine Fletcher [ph.], who--and on the right is my Aunt Hopie [ph.], Hopie McLachlan.  Hopie died many years ago.  Kitty died in 2004--2003, January of 2003.
Speaker 1: That's me as a baby.  I was awfully cute, but look at that forehead.  Look at how big and fat that forehead was.
Speaker 2: Only to make you smart.
Speaker 1: Even then I was figuring out what was, trying to figure out what was going on.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother [Iris South MacLachlan], and I think it was taken in the '40s [1940s].  I remember that picture because I remember as a child I drew it.  I drew her in that pose.  I thought she was so beautiful.
Speaker 1: This is my father, Dr. James McLachlan.  And this was taken in, in the '80s [1980s].  He was--when was the, when was the [1984 Summer] Olympics here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], '84 [1984]?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Eighty-four [1984].
Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984]?  Okay, my brother was here, and he was being honored at an organization of black chiropractors that was being held here in Los Angeles.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is my brother, Dr. Gene [J.] Riggins.  Gee, I have no idea when this was taken, but it was taken in the church.  And to the right in the background that's my father in his minister's clothes (laughter).
Speaker 1: And that is my father on the left with is cooperating minister on the right.  And this is at the, it's in the church [First Church of Illumination, New York, New York] at the altar.
Speaker 2: This is my father in his uniform when he was a soldier in the British Army during World War I [WWI].  It's been hand-painted, and he's amazing looking.
Speaker 1: Me with, okay that's me on the right with my oldest friend, Christine [ph.], on the left.  She came to live with us when she was about six years old.  And she happened to show up just around my birthday.  I thought she was my birthday present (laughter).  It was amazing.
Speaker 2: That's me on the left with Charlotte [ph.] on the right.  Charlotte was the daughter of my mother's closest friend.  When my mother was in, was in the Catholic school in Jamaica waiting for her mother [Katherine South (ph.)] to send of her, she met Charlotte's mother.  And, and then we just kind of grew up together.
Speaker 1: This is my cousin, Verna, Verna DeCosta [ph.], who lives now in, in the Bronx [New York, New York].  And she grew up with my father's brother, who was her father, in, in Albert Town, in Jamaica.  And she has two sisters who still live in Albert Town I've, that I've talked to in, you know recently, not all the time.  This is her father and my Aunt Kitty.
Speaker 2: Hold on a second.  Let's get it up her.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: My father's brother on the left, Malcolm [ph.], and my Aunt Kitty.  This is in Jamaica and obviously this is in Albert Town.  When Verna, my cousin, met me, she gave me this picture along with another one that belonged to her because I had never seen Malcolm and I never met him.  I'd never seen a picture of him.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is my Aunt Kitty at her wedding to Uncle Luther [ph.].  And this was in, in 1940, what, '43 [1943], '44 [1944], something like that.  She was really quite beautiful.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This was at my Aunt Kitty's one hundredth birthday. And she was at home eating her birthday cake and drinking champagne and having a good time.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, that's just a, a picture of me taken by a photographer for, to be used as a, as a publicity shot or a, a head shot.
Speaker 2: About what year?
Speaker 1: I don't remember when that was, but I was younger.
Speaker 2: Is this when you were with Universal [Studios Inc., Universal City, California], or were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I have no idea.  I had that set up sort of in alpha, in chronological order that set of--
Speaker 2: So this is me on the right and my daughter [Samantha MacLachlan] on the left, and we are at a friend's wedding.  This is, let me see, this is about two years ago, I believe, Brandy's [ph.] daughter's wedding.  I don't have a picture of Brandy, but that's Brandy's daughter's wedding.  I just thought it was a good picture of the two of us.
Speaker 1: It's just a shot, it's just a headshot.  It was one of my very early headshots.  I think that was--you know what, there's a group of, of--
Speaker 2: No, you know, he didn't take that because my hair is short, and this is, that's the only way I can tell.  I never cut it in the '70s [1970s].  I remember that shirt.
Speaker 1: That's my wig.  I remember that's my '80s [1980s] wig, right, right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Ten years ago, eight years ago, something like that.  These are just all my headshots.
Speaker 2: This is my--this is me as a blond.  I was a blond when I moved into this building in 1990, in 1990, as a matter of fact.  I was a blond for two years, until it just got to be too stressful (laughter)--just liked it.
Speaker 1: This was taken maybe three, four years ago, because I'm always running out of headshots.  My, my headshots always seem to be too old, and I don't like still photography.
Speaker 2: This was me in New York.  How about that?  Isn't that amazing?  When I came back from, from Minneapolis [Minnesota] that was my resume.  Then there were a lot of--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-two [1962], there's [HistoryMaker] Roscoe Lee Browne and I'm sorry I forgot her name.
Speaker 1: And this was 'Raising Hell in the Sun' and the one that my, my mother got a picture of me in that outfit.  I, I was playing a, a very pretentious young society girl (laughter).
Speaker 2: And this is also from 'Raising Hell in the Sun' with my, my ashtray.
Speaker 1: This was a picture taken by--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Oh, now this was taken, this was a Universal publicity shot.  Somebody had a whole bunch of clothes, and they wanted me to pose in them.  And of course, since I had no idea about modeling I was very interesting and clumsy about it.
Speaker 2: Now this was, what was this one?  Oh, I just forgot.  Hold on, where--darker than--no, it's not.  It's 'Halls of Anger.'  This was 'Halls of Anger.'
Speaker 1: About what year?
Speaker 2: I did this in 1970.  Yes, I--no, I did this in 1969.  It was released in 1970.  Right it is, my goodness.
Story_ID: 261919
Speaker 1: Okay, this was 'The Man.' This was done in 1971 [sic. 1972].  I am, that's, I'm [HistoryMaker] James Earl [Jones]'s daughter.  The next thing I do with James Earl is when I'm playing his ex-wife.  It's really amazing.
Speaker 2: And this is 'The Dating Game' (unclear).
Speaker 1: That was 'The Dating Game.' Yes.
Speaker 2: We, we won a trip to Jamaica, and I had to give it over to him because I had a film to do.  I was going to, to do a film that year.
Speaker 1: This is Jim Brown having a moment, with his bad self.  I look like his grandchild in that movie [--'...tick...tick...tick...'], I mean, really (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's Penny Marshall.  We did a series of comic commercials for Selanee's Fabric [ph.].  And there were a lot of comics there, and somebody asked me to join them, and I'm not a comic.  It was really amazing to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was that?  That was, hold on, hold on, hold on, tell you in a minute.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: So this is you and the--
Speaker 1: This is me.  This is Noel Harrison in--what was that, what was that--it was a television series where they were playing spies.  And I was supposed to be a, a harem girl with Fernando Lamas.
Speaker 2: Is that 'Man from U.N.C.L.E.' [sic. 'The Girl from U.N.C.L.E.'] or something, or?
Speaker 1: No, it, is that 'The Man from U.N.C.L.E.'?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: No, it's not 'The Man From U.N.C.L.E.,' but it's, it's something based on that, really strange--'The Girl from U.N.C.L.E.'
Speaker 2: Oh, 'Girl from U.N.C.L.E.'
Speaker 1: I played Nur in the UFO in 1967, oh my gosh.
Speaker 2: What's going on here?
Speaker 1: Oh, I was in Washington [D.C.], and I was meeting with, with, what's her name?  There's another picture there with--oh wait, she, this is, this was for PBS [Public Broadcasting Service].  I was, I was sent to Washington to do some proselytizing for the Communications Bridge [Institute] and--
Speaker 2: You had some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and PBS in Washington, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: We were in Cleveland, Ohio, to do 'Uptight.'  And I was on my way to the swimming pool, and the photographer stopped me to take some pictures of me.  So he got this shot, and they used this shot as part of the publicity for the movie.
Speaker 2: 'Cause you looked uptight.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I looked uptight.  I was really pissed, right.  That was it.
Speaker 2: --and Raymond [St. Jacques].  Raymond and I were supposed to be engaged [in 'Change of Mind'], too.  We didn't go into that, which is fine.
Speaker 1: Dick Anthony Williams on the left.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Jackson.
Speaker 1: Right, Raymond St. Jacques and me.  Can't remember the names of the other two actors.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That ['Uptight'] was a, that was a, that was my first movie, the very first movie.
Speaker 2: Here's you and Julian Mayfield.
Speaker 1: Right, yes.  And the next series of pictures is when I smack him (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Exactly, Max Julien was my brother in this movie, and I smacked him.
Speaker 2: Smacked the crap out of him.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: That was me being thoughtful.
