Story_ID: 156170
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Nathan Jerome McCall, and that's N-A-T-H-A-N, middle name, J-E-R-O-M-E, McCall, M-C-C-A-L-L.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is November 25, 1954, and I was born in Norfolk, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is our occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I am a lecturer here at Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia], and that is the title.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February 19th, 2014.
Speaker 1: And just a--you're a lecturer in the African American Studies department, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, at Emory, okay.
Story_ID: 156171
Speaker 1: And now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm-up, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  I have a favorite food category, seafood (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I love seafood, but particularly scallops, shrimp, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, that kind of seafood, not the--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --seafood--okay.
Speaker 2: I don't eat beef and pork.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Don't particularly have a favorite color, color.
Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year, I'd say spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, actually not (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Closest thing I could think of is Murphy's Law (laughter).  I'm always conscious of Murphy's Law.  So that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And that law is, for those who may not be--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: What--
Speaker 1: --culturally attuned--
Speaker 2: --what can go wrong, will go wrong (laughter).
Story_ID: 156172
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  We'll start with your mother.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Her full name is Lenora Alvin.  And that's, first name is L-E-N-O-R-A last name A-L-V-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And her date of birth and place of birth.
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is December 13th, 1935 and she was born in Laurinburg, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: And that's L-
Speaker 2: L-A-U-R-I-N-B-U-R-G.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace them and, and what, what were they doing?
Speaker 2: In terms of tracing them back, not very far.  They were--they stayed mainly--they came from the North Carolina area; we know that.  And they were--it was a rural area, and so they essentially were farmers.
Speaker 1: Okay and did they own their own land?
Speaker 2: Some did, but most did not.
Speaker 1: Did your grandparents own their own land--I mean, her, her parents, your mother's parents?
Speaker 2: No, as far as I know, they were tenant farmers.  And you know, they owned--like many, they owned small patches, but not much--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to speak of.
Speaker 1: Now was your mother raised in Laurinburg?
Speaker 2: Yes, Laurinburg, the Lumberton [North Carolina] area, in that general vicinity.
Speaker 1: In Lumberton.  I've heard of that and--yeah.
Speaker 2: It's named after a tribe of Native Americans called the Lumbee Indians.
Speaker 1: So what was your--well, tell us about your grandfather.  Did, did you know him?  Did you know him?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  He died when I was very young, and so I know very little about him.
Story_ID: 156173
Speaker 1: Now what about your grandmother [Sadie Benton]?
Speaker 2: My grandmother worked primarily as a domestic for much of her life.
Speaker 1: Right in Laurinburg [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --she was from that area as well, and lived in that area along with my mother [Lenora Alvin] and her other children, and eventually moved out to [Norfolk] Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your moth--your grandmother ever talk about the history of the family, or did she have any stories about emancipation or where the--if the family was from some other part of the country?
Speaker 2: No, my grandmother didn't talk much at all and talked very little about the past.  Most of what I learned, I learned from my mother and other relatives.
Speaker 1: Okay, did, did she have any--were there any stories about your grand--who your grandmother worked for and how she had to work, you know?
Speaker 2: No, not in the North Carolina area.  In the Virginia area, yes there were stories about, you know, who she worked for.  She eventually worked for a long time for one family, actually until she retired.
Speaker 1: Okay, anything significant about that?  I mean, when people work a long time for one family, there's gotta be some stories.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she--I remember as a child, you know, at a very young age, she--we lived in--when my stepfather [Bonnie Alvin] retired from the [U.S.] Navy, we lived in Portsmouth [Virginia].  And the family that my grandmother worked for lived in Norfolk, and I just remember she would get up before daybreak every day, and she'd have to catch two buses to get to work.  So she'd catch a bus from Portsmouth to downtown Norfolk, and she would transfer and catch another bus to the home of the family that she worked for.  And the family, their name was Diamondsteins [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, a Jewish family?
Speaker 2: Yes, Jewish family.  And she would--she'd occasionally talk about them.  And I learned a lot about that family because she'd have to work on certain holidays.   And you know, if they were going on vacation, she might say that and so, in some ways as a domestic, her life evolved their lives.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well a lot of her life was--you know, that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's what you're saying.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: She was there a lot.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and so this is after your grand--grandfather passed--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That she--okay.  So she moved from Laurinburg into Norfolk--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --at that point.
Story_ID: 156174
Speaker 1: Now what about your mother [Lenora Alvin]?  Did she--how old was she when her mother moved to Norfolk [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: I think she was a teenager.  I think she was a teenager, and my mother and my father [John McCall]--my blood father met, married--I'm not sure if they married in North Carolina or in Norfolk.
Speaker 1: They met in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Did your mother have a chance to, to plan for some kind of oc--I mean, did she want to--did she have something that she wanted to do when she was growing up that, that required her to go to school or anything like that, or did she see herself as being a housewife?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think she--I know she had ambitions to, to finish school.  She had my oldest brother, though, when she was about fourteen, and so the--you know, there were three of us, and she had us all two years apart.  And so she had my oldest brother when she was fourteen.  His name is John, and she--my--her second son she had when, when she was sixteen, and she had me when she as eighteen.  And so I think she dropped out of school somewhere around the ninth grade.  And I've heard her say from time to time that that was one of her biggest disappointments, that she was never able to finish high school and never able to shape her life because she was--you know, she spent much of her life responding to having had children at an early age.  And so I think for her life was always--you know, it--in reaction to that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she felt she had missed, missed out by, by having children so early.
Speaker 2: Missed out, yeah, right, on being able to be proactive in terms of planning and shaping her own future.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so would have had three chil--three children at the age of eighteen.
Speaker 2: That--that's right.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay, so what did she do?  Did she end up work--working too?
Speaker 2: Yes, she would get occasional--you know, occasionally she would get jobs, you know, working at retail stores and places like that.  But she never got in a position to formulate a career for herself.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were growing up, she, she--you're, you're saying she worked intermittently sort of?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was, you know, mostly a homemaker, but as I said, occasionally she would get jobs at department stores.
Story_ID: 156175
Speaker 1: Okay, now let--I'm gonna go to your father's side of the family, then we'll get 'em together.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name is John McCall--first name, J-O-H-N, McCall, M-C-C-A-L-L.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I'm--I know he was born in North Carolina.  I'm not sure exactly where.  I know very little about my father's life and his family.  He and my mother married, and by the time I was two years old they divorced, and from that time on he was not a part of our lives.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were divorced in 1956 or so, that, that right?--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you know if he was about the same age as your mother [Lenora Alvin] or much older or?
Speaker 2: He's older.  I would say about seven or eight years older.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, so--okay, so he's, you know--okay--born, born in the late '20s [1920s], yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so do you know what he did for a living, or fi--finally did or--
Speaker 2: Yes, he worked for a long time as a longshoreman, and he retired as a longshoreman.
Speaker 1: Now that's, that's not a--not a bad job in those days.  I mean, it's a--it's a--if he retired from it, he--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, right, and especially in that area.  In the Norfolk [Virginia] area, many of the people work at the shipyards or they--they're in the [U.S.] Military.  And then many of them, you know, form careers as longshoremen.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was a steady worker.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know that.
Story_ID: 156176
Speaker 1: And do--now he [McCall's biological father, John McCall] disappeared.  I mean, after your parents divorced, he, he didn't come back into your life until 1982.  That's what I was reading, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right, and so when my stepfather [Bonnie Alvin]--my stepfather and my mother [Lenora Alvin] married, my stepfather was a career [U.S.] Navy man.  And so when he retired, we lived in Portsmouth [Virginia], which was his last duty station.  And so, as you may know, Portsmouth and Norfolk [Virginia] are next door.  And so my, my family, we lived in Portsmouth.  My blood father lived in Norfolk.  And for me as a child, those two places were worlds apart, because I didn't see this guy over the span of decades.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so--let me get this straight.  So he left in fif--'56 [1956], but, now how soon did your mother marry your stepfather?
Speaker 2: I think I was about--I maybe four or five when they got married.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--so this would have been in 1958 or so?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they get married in '58 [1958], and, and you all actually move from the Tidewater area altogether, right, to--
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: --to follow--
Speaker 2: --my--
Speaker 1: --stepfather's career.
Speaker 2: Right, my, my stepfather, once he was in the Navy, we were stay--he was stationed for a while in Morocco, and I think we spent about two years there.
Speaker 1: So in, in Morocco--overseas-
Speaker 2: In ma--in Morocco.
Speaker 1: --in North Africa.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: I have very vague memories of that.  I was maybe five years old.  And then--so we spent a couple of years there, and then my stepfather was stationed in Key West, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we stayed in Key West for a few years, and in 1964, we moved--we returned to Virginia and settled in Portsmouth.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was your stepfather's name?
Speaker 2: His name is Bonnie Alvin.  And--
Speaker 1: And how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: B-O-N-N-I-E middle initial E for Edward, last name, A-L-V-I-N, and he was a junior.
Speaker 1: Now that's unusual.  Is there a story behind his name, Bonnie?  You know, most--that's, that's usually a woman's name.
Speaker 2: Right.  I don't know the story behind, you know, the decision to name him Bonnie.  I assume his parents wanted a girl.  I don't know, but I know it was the source of a lot of grief for him growing up--
Speaker 1: That's like a boy named Sue.
Speaker 2: --having to explain it, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so he--did he have any stories about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it helped him to learn how to fight (laughter) because he was teased a lot about it.
Speaker 1: Was he ever attempted to say his name was Alvin Bonnie?
Speaker 2: (Laugher) well, he--I know he was--at, at times he was caught--you know, people assumed that it had been written down wrong--incorrectly.  And so sometimes he would be referred to as Alvin Bonnie, and he would have to correct them and you know, say Bonnie.  And I just remember going places with him where he had to, you know, give his name for one reason or another.  And what he would do is he would say his name and then he would immediately begin spelling it, so--you know, because people would assume that he was saying Barnie, B-A-R-N-I-E, and so he would very quickly say B-O-N-N-I-E.
Speaker 1: And he was named after his father?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he couldn't much--he couldn't do much about his--
Speaker 2: Well, but his father decided to pass it on (laughter).
Story_ID: 156177
Speaker 1: All right, now, well, he, he must have had a pretty decent rank in the [U.S.] Navy I guess.  Was he like an equivalent of an [U.S.] Army sergeant or something in the Navy or?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think he ever reached the, the officer ranks.
Speaker 1: I mean, the enlisted man--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as an enlisted man, was he the highest ranking like, like--what do you they call 'em in the--in the Navy?  There's a name--
Speaker 2: They, they--
Speaker 1: --for the top--
Speaker 2: --go up--right, and they go up numbers--
Speaker 1: --for, for the equivalent of a sergeant.
Speaker 2: Right, then the go up--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--and then an E something.
Speaker 2: --E7--I think--I think--
Speaker 1: No, not--ensign's a lieutenant.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But E--it's an E something.
Speaker 2: It was an E something, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, E5 or--I don't know, but it's the equivalent of a sergeant in the Army.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: 'Cause if he allow--if they would allow him to bring his--take his family to Morocco, he had to be a high rated enlisted man for that, which would me--mean that kind of status.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So did, did he spend like a career in the--in the Navy?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, he went in when he was seventeen years old.  He's--his parents were tenant farmers, and he said he hated the farm life, and so he went in as soon as he came of age, because he wanted to escape the farm life.  He was born and raised here in Georgia in Milledgeville [Georgia], and you know, he's told stories about how difficult life was.  The racism that they had to deal with in Milledgeville, and just the difficulty of, you know, living life as tenant farmers.
Story_ID: 156178
Speaker 1: So your father [John McCall]--your, your biological father, if he wanted to see you, he wouldn't have been able to--wouldn't have been able to see you for a while.  But you did come back in '67 [1967].  Did he know that you all were back in--
Speaker 2: We came back in '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964], right.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And yes, he knew we were back.  There were times when he actually made arrangements to come and see us, to visit us, to come pick us up for the weekends, and for, for one reason or another it didn't happen.  And one of my most vivid memories around that is that he had arranged to pick us up--to have my mother [Lenora Alvin] drop us off on a corner downtown.  I guess they weren't on speaking terms, and so she was to drop us at a corner, and he was to come and pick up and take us and buy us school clothes.  And so, you know, I'm a young child, and we, we were waiting and we waited, and he never showed up.  And I just remember this sense of anticipation, because they divorced when I was so young, I didn't have a sense of what he looked like.  And so I was eager to see this guy, and he never showed up.  And so that was sort of end of the story.
Story_ID: 156179
Speaker 1: When you think about--now, so, so your household growing up consisted of your, your, your, your mother [Lenora Alvin], your stepfather [Bonnie Alvin] basically, and you, you, you have how many brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I had--and so I had--initially, there were three of us, three boys two years apart.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And for a time, my grandmother [Sadie Benton] came and lived with us.  Her name is Sadie Benton.
Speaker 1: And that's your mother's mother?
Speaker 2: My mother's mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the three boys and there, there--there's you and who else?
Speaker 2: The, the oldest is John McCall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he--he's born in--
Speaker 2: He was born in 1950.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: November 30th--yeah, 1950 [November 30, 1950].
Speaker 1: And what did he end up doing for a living?
Speaker 2: He ended becoming an accountant.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so he's the oldest and then comes?
Speaker 2: Dwight--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --McCall, D-W-I-G-H-T, last name, M-C-C-A-L-L, and he was born November 5th, 1952.
Speaker 1: Okay, then you, right?
Speaker 2: Then me.
Speaker 1: Oh, wa, wa, wa, what did Dwight do?
Speaker 2: Dwight in the [U.S.] Military for a while.  He went in--he graduated from high school; went into the [U.S.] Army.  He was stationed in--at Fort Bragg [California].  And after he came out of the military, he worked, and has continued to work, various jobs at the local shipyard.
Speaker 1: Okay, so would you say he's a longshoreman or (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No, he's a painter.  He does--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --they, you know, bring the ships in to the various docks for repair and painting, and so he mostly works as a painter.
Story_ID: 156180
Speaker 1: When you consider--I guess your, your--the influences on you growing up, but I know your biological father [John McCall] wasn't a direct influence, but through inheritance he might have--you know, he is your biological father.  When you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, how they walk, how they talk, what they think about or interested in, their, their talents, you know, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I don't know.  I really don't.  I think I--my personality was, was probably shaped by things and people that I saw and liked and didn't like.  I know that my yearning for my biological father played some role in terms of, you know, how I began to perceive life, and it played some role in terms of the relationship that I developed with my stepfather [Bonnie Alvin].  At some point, it became a very difficult relationship, and you know, later--years later, when I thought about it in hindsight, I think maybe it had to do with some resentment about the fact that I didn't have my biological father in my life.  And my rejection of my stepfather was perhaps a, a reaction to that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, but you--but you think you take the most after?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't--I, I really don't--you know, maybe my mother [Lenora Alvin].  Both of us are very spirited, and so I would have to say her, because my stepfather is very laid back and low-key.  But both my mother and I are--we're fighters.
Story_ID: 156181
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  Oddly, it's a memory of when I was in Morocco one day, and I must have been about four or five years old.  And I was walking down a street with--and my mother [Lenora Alvin] was holding my hand, and we stopped at a street corner, and some guys pulled up in a truck.  And I remember the guys looking at the window of the truck, looking at my mother and one of the guys saying something to the other.  And there was something about their body language that I felt threatened by.  And as I look back in hindsight, it was strange because I, I was too young to know anything about sex, anything about sexual in--innuendo, and at the same time, something in me felt threatened by the way these guys were looking at my mother.
Story_ID: 156182
Speaker 1: So you're in Morocco at age five.  This has been--it would be 1959.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: There's Cold War activ--activity.  The [U.S.] Navy's probably spying on somebody, and they were being spied on too.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --More than likely.  So you're there for two--did--didn't you ev--do, do you remember--you have any memories of gettin' amongst the, the native people in Morocco?
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember playing, you know, playing with the children.  Like I said, there were--the--they were very pleasant memories and you know, I remember the scenery, I remember seeing my parents [Lenora Alvin and Bonnie Alvin] interact with Moroccan adults, and it was just--you know, of course, I didn't have the political perspective that I have now to really be able to appreciate that, but I associate it with very pleasant memories.  And as I've said, in talking with my parents, it was pleasant for them as well in a--you know, in hindsight, I understand it even more.  If they were here in America and they were not being treated as Americans, it was--my sense is that it was a great relief for them to go someplace where they were fully accepted.  And so that probably explains, in part, my stepfather wanting to extend his stay in Morocco.
Speaker 1: Yes, I mean, that would be a place where a lot of people look like him.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And there would be no discrimination based on being a Negro or anything as it--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was here.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And in the Navy.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, yeah.  So did you ever--I mean, did that affect--did you--is this an experience that stayed with you the rest of your life--I mean, in terms of--you know, a lot of us have a world view just based on the locality that we're in.  We never leave, leave that locality (unclear) a little town or even a big city neighborhood.  Do you--could you look at a map and say I was in Morocco, you know?
Speaker 2: Yes, it stayed with me.  It stayed with me, like I said, because of the--just the sense of pleasantness and--
Story_ID: 156183
Speaker 1: We went from Morocco to Key West [Florida], and my memories of Key West as a child are pleasant as well, but I think that's the first time that I heard of a [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] rally.  And I vaguely remember there being a Klan parade in Key West, as well as, as you noted, you know, the Cold War was going on.  And I remember that when I was in school, we used to have to do these bomb drills, and we'd have to--you know, they'd sound the alarms and we'd have to get under our desk and that sort of thing.  And I remember constantly hearing about Cuba and the fact that Cuba was only ninety miles away from Key West.  And so there was this sort of--you know, whereas Morocco, there was this sort of pleasantness and this child's paradise, Key West, in terms of the climate was, you know, a kind of paradise.  But there was some serious, you know, geopoli--political stuff going on that I had as a child very vague notions of, but they were quite frightening.
Speaker 2: In '59 [1959], it was the Cuban Revolution.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: When Fidel Castro took over Cuba.
Speaker 1: Right.  And so there was the sense that--I, I just remember as a child, you know, doing these drills, there was a sense of wow, they, they may bomb us (laughter).  So it was an interesting contrast going from Morocco to Key West.
Speaker 2: Okay, so by the time you're at Key West, you were like seven or six?
Speaker 1: Key West--I would say from six to eight or nine.
Speaker 2: So that's a long--that's a pretty long time.  That's about three years.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, so until about 1963?
Speaker 1: Right, we move to--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --we left Key West in '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Okay, so, yeah, you were--you were at least nine years old.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so you started school in Key West then, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 156184
Speaker 1: Now, well before I move on, we always ask this question, and considering Morocco and Key West [Florida], and even Norfolk [Virginia], what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: In Morocco, there were the sights--you know, it was--you know, I--it was like there weren't many trees.  I remember brightness--you know, brightness everywhere.  You know, the--many of the houses, the dwellings were made of this kind of clay.  And you know, there was--you know, dirt and desert--you know, that sort of look.  And, and it's maybe stark in my mind because Key West was just the opposite visually.  Key West was lush, and I associate, you know, various trees with Key West--coconuts as a child.  You know, we would play baseball, and it was nothing for us to take a rock and you know, throw it up and you know, knock a coconut out of the tree; and we'd take a nail and, and a hammer and you know, hammer a hole into a coconut and drink the juice.  And so--and they had you know, vam--you know mangoes; and they had something call sapodilla, which was like a--looked like a pear, but it was also--it was very sweet.  I went back recently, last year as a matter of fact, the first time I had been back since I was a child.  And that was one of the things that I looked for when I went there.  I went--I looked for a sapodilla tree--didn't find one, but I associated it you know, fruits and lushness and you know, fairly pleasant experience.  Juxtaposed, you know, beside this, this fear that there was something happening in the larger world or something about to happen that could be cataclysmic.
Speaker 1: Those were days of certain the, the risk--the threat of nuclear war.
Speaker 2: Right, Cuban Missile Crisis.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was going on in '62 [1962].  And you were there--
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I was there then, right.
Speaker 1: --the Cuban Missile Cri--Crisis, the boats were less than probably forty, fifty miles away from you.
Speaker 2: Right, we on--we were on high alert (laughter), and so as a child, I knew there was something.  And there was this, this fear, but I didn't know the particulars.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause you were probably a little young to be watchin--well, you would have been about eight.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so I--
Speaker 1: Kind of young for--
Speaker 2: --wouldn't--I, I, I don't--
Speaker 1: --the news but--
Speaker 2: --think I was watchin', watchin' news.  I was hearing adults talk about the issues.  And of course, like I said, they took the--you know, the drills that we did in school, they took it very seriously, and we had--we did those drills on a regular basis.
Story_ID: 156185
Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Not early on.  I remember we went--when we were in Key West [Florida], there was a church that we went to, but I think it was just the church on base.  And I don't--I don't even know, you know, whether it was Baptist or what.  When we moved to Virginia, when we moved to Portsmouth [Virginia], there was a Presbyterian church in the neighborhood.  And so I think my parents [Lenora Alvin and Bonnie Alvin] joined that church more out of convenience of location than you know, embracing the belief system so much.  At any rate, they joined the church, and they are still members of that church.
Speaker 1: Now this is an African American Presbyterian church--
Speaker 2: Presbyterian church, yes.
Speaker 1: You know, that's--there are some of those.
Story_ID: 156186
Speaker 1: Okay, now take you back to Morocco for a second.  Now you started school in Morocco, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't have memories of, of my schooling.  I don't have memories of first grade for example.  I have memories of--I, I know I did second and third grade in Key West [Florida], and I started fourth grade in [Portsmouth] Virginia.
Speaker 1: Now do you remember the names of your schools?
Speaker 2: Yes, in Key West it was [Frederick] Douglass High School [Key West, Florida].  And I guess I remember it because it's the only school I know that actually went from the first to the twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: Now this is an African American school (simultaneous) that's right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And this--I've learned through these interviews that it's, it's common down South to have--to call the school--the high school--because that's where terminate--termination--it's termination--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was first to twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: First through twelve.  And now did your parents [Lenora Alvin and Bonnie Alvin] have the option of sending you to school on the base?  (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know the particulars around that.
Speaker 1: Okay, but I suppose you went to a base high school in Morocco--I mean, a, a base school, not high school, but base--
Speaker 2: I would assume so--
Speaker 1: --kin--kindergarten.
Speaker 2: --yes, because we--yeah, we were on post.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We didn't speak the language, and so I would assume so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 156187
Speaker 1: Now at [Frederick] Douglass [High School, Key West, Florida]--now you were there from first grade through the fourth grade.
Speaker 2: Maybe, yeah, and maybe second and third grade.  I know I was in the third grade because I think that was the year [President John F.] Kennedy was assassinated.  And I remember being in class, and the teacher coming into the classroom with tears in her eyes, and telling someone else--another teacher coming to the door and telling her what had happened.
Speaker 1: This would be November 19--
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you were in--yeah, you were in third then?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, November 1963.  So did, did you know much about Kennedy at that point--I mean, it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no, I, you know, had the sense that my parents [Lenora Alvin and Bonnie Alvin] thought that Kennedy was a friend to blacks.  Later when we moved to [Portsmouth] Virginia, I'll never forget my mother had--she had these statuettes, and she had one of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], I think one of Jesus, and one of Kennedy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that kind of (unclear)--I mean, ev--everybody's grandmother seemed to have some kind of plates--
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: --or a tapestry or something of Martin Luther King and the Kennedy brothers, usually, and sometimes Jesus.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Yes, was a popular--
Speaker 2: And so I think that's, you know, how they transferred values around, you know, who was admired most.  And so that was my sense growing up, that Kennedy was somehow a friend to black people.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you--do you remember in '63 [1963] the--were your parents talking about the March on Washington?  Did they talk about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know there's extended coverage on television, but the Kennedy assassination, from what peep--people say now, and it's, it's probably true; I was about thirteen when it happened--was that it was the longest continuous telecast of news ever on network television.
Speaker 2: Up 'til that point?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, they covered it round-the-clock pretty much.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you say everything happen from the aftermath of the assassination to the killing of [Lee Harvey] Oswald and then the--you know, the search for Oswald and the killing of him--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --which was actually live on television.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I just--I don't remember my parents talking much about it.  I just remember the image of my teacher just weeping uncontrollably.  And so I think that transferred to us, you know, the children, of this, this fear and this sense of dread that something really, really horrible had happened.
Story_ID: 156188
Speaker 1: Now, now what was your interests in, in grade school [at Frederick Douglass High School, Key West, Florida] as a--as a little kid?  Did you--did you like reading or art or, or math?  What was your primary interest?
Speaker 2: I was--ver--very early on I was--I, I, I was good at topics--subjects like English and literature.  You know, I was involved in the spelling bees, that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have any au--have any thoughts about being--becoming a writer as a--in, in el--elementary school?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think I associated that at all.  It was simply that, you know, language exercises came easy to me for some reason.  I enjoyed them much more than math and science and history. I scored--generally scored high on aptitude tests in that area.  I remember one day bringing home the results from a test that show that I scored fairly high in aptitude in the area of English and, and literature.  And I brought it home and get--you know, showed it to my mother [Lenora Alvin], and my mother looked at it and you know, she said, "Oh, that's nice."  And you know, she put it away in her drawer.  I always think about that because, you know, now and knowing what I know now, had my mother and father [Bonnie Alvin] been more educated, they probably would have been able to identify that as a potential talent or gift and you know, begun finding a way--trying to find a way to, to nurture that.  But I just sort of took it as, oh well, you know it's, it's something I--you know, that comes easy to me, but I don't--I didn't make anything of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and they didn't make too much of--I mean--
Speaker 2: I don't think they knew what to do with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, my stepfather--I'm not sure.  I think he got as far as the--I wanna say the sixth grade, because they constantly had to quit school whenever, you know--you know, they were harvesting crops and that sort of thing, and so he was constantly in and out of school.  And again, my mother, she went as far as the ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, though she had aspirations to do more to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --she didn't get a chance to.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 156189
Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers at that level in--at, at the elementary level that, that you remember that were role models or, or mentors to you?
Speaker 2: Not in the early years, not in Key West [Florida].  I, I remember the face of a particular--that particular teacher who cried when [John F.] Kennedy was assassinated.  I remember her face because as a child I sort of honed in on it.  There were teachers later in my, my fourth grade teacher, for example, you know, I remember her name, Mrs. Moore [ph.].  She lived in the neighborhood, my fifth grade teacher, Mr. Lee [ph.].  I think he lived in the neighborhood.  He was the first male teacher that I had--my sixth grade teacher, Mr. Barkley [ph.].  And so for some reason, you know, they--the, the names of these teachers stuck with me.  And I think it may have had more to do with the fact that in those days, you know, the teachers weren't just tea--teachers, they were also part of your community.
Speaker 1: Right, so that--did you--so you would see 'em in the neighborhood and--
Speaker 2: Right, right, and there was the sense that they were sort of an extension of your parents, you know, and so, you know, they disciplined you.  But you know, you really got to know them.
Story_ID: 156190
Speaker 1: Okay, well, were, were your brothers kind of role models and guides for you, you know?
Speaker 2: I paid attention to what they did, you know.  My oldest brother [John McCall], he was--he was a dancer, and you know, he liked to dance and party.  And so he and his friends would come over, and I would, you know, watch them if I could if they would let me hang around, and the same with the brother who was in between, Dwight.  I watched him and imitated him because I was closest to him.  And then when we moved to [Portsmouth] Virginia in '64 [1964], my stepfather [Bonnie Alvin] and my mother [Lenora Alvin] had--they first child between the two of them.  My stepfather had been--had also--like my mother, he had also been married before and he had children.  And so the two of them had not had a child between them.  And so when I was nine, they had a fourth son, my brother, Bryan, and so he was born in '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And at some point later, my stepfather--well, we--my parents had one of his children to come and live with us, and he stayed with us until he went into the [U.S.] Military.  So at some point, there were five boys living in this three-bedroom house--five boys, my grandmother [Sadie Benton], and my parents living in this three-bedroom house.
Speaker 1: Wow, so how, how did they divide up the space?
Speaker 2: Bunk beds.
Speaker 1: Okay, five boys.  So one room was your parents, one bedroom--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: One bedroom.
Speaker 1: And was another one your grandmother's?
Speaker 2: My grandmother's.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the boys are in the--five--and the bunk beds in--
Speaker 2: In--right.
Speaker 1: --one room?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Oh wow, that's--sound more like a dormitory--(unclear).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) right, right.
Speaker 1: It was--so was, was discipline a big issue growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, especially with my stepfather.  I think with the Military training, he tried to you know, enforce discipline.  And so he had very strong values around work, the importance of work, and he tried to instill that into us, and we resented it deeply.  You know, he would--you know, he believed that you should have certain chores that you did on the weekends.  You should wash the cars; you should rake the yard; you should cut the grass; you should--you know, you should have structured duties that you did inside the house and outside the house.  And so I remember inside the house, when I became old enough to get into the rotation--you know, we would rotate, you know, who would wash the dishes, sweep the floor, take out the trash.  And so it was strong--you know, strong rules around that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and if you didn't do it, did you get cor--corporal punishment, or did you?
Speaker 2: Yes, we got--if--depending on what the infractions were, we might get--we might get a whipping or we would be placed on punishment, where we had to stay in our room for you know, a set amount of time.
Story_ID: 156191
Speaker 1: Okay, you were in Portsmouth [Virginia], which is--how, how many miles from Norfolk [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Portsmouth and Norfolk are separated by a tunnel, and so it's a very short distance.  It's a tunnel and you know, a body of water, you know, the Elizabeth River and--but they're very close together.  You can catch a ferry from one side to the other.
Speaker 1: In fact, I think (unclear) made this point, I think, at the beginning when we just started talking before we, we started the formal interview, that the Tidewater area follows what, what seems to be smaller towns spoken of by themselves, actually make a bigger metro area that's--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --very urban, right.
Speaker 2: Right, Norfolk, Portsmouth, Virginia Beach [Virginia], Suffolk [Virginia], Newport News [Virginia], Hampton [Virginia]--
Speaker 1: Chesapeake [Virginia]--
Speaker 2: Chesapeake, right, all of that.
Speaker 1: And so yeah, you're right (unclear)--so, there's there a lot of black business activity in that area and--
Speaker 2: There was, especially in Norfolk.  They--you know, Norfolk had an area called Church Street, and Church Street was to Norfolk what Auburn Avenue is to Atlanta [Georgia].  At one point during segregation, that was the booming black district of the area.
Speaker 1: So, I know [HM] Tim Reid was describing this to us--you know, in his interview, but, but what was it like?  I mean, what, what actually was over there that black people had?
Speaker 2: You know, various businesses, funeral homes--I remember that, you know, there were bars, there was nightlife there, there was the black newspaper, the [New] Journal and Guide, just about--you know, there were clothing stores, black-owned clothing stores.
Speaker 1: Okay, so all of this was in--there are some theaters too, I--
Speaker 2: Theaters, that's right.  And so that was the, the social and business and political hub in the area.
Speaker 1: This is where the nightlife would be in the black--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --community.
Speaker 2: Right.  The sailors would go--you know, black sailors would go over there for entertainment.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now did you, you get there, you're, you're, you're like in the fourth grade, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so you're there--you bay--basically grow up there, right--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --grew up there in Portsmouth, now.
Story_ID: 156192
Speaker 1: What are some of the stories of growing up, you know, there in Portsmouth [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Stories?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause I know you got a book and there are several things in the book, and I don't know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Portsmouth was interesting.  You know, the racial politics have always been very intense.  Just, you know, Portsmouth is a microcosm of America.  And Virginia was one of those states that was very resistant to integration, and so, you know, you had Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, 347 U.S. 483], 1954.  By the time we arrived in Portsmouth in '64 [1964], the schools were, were still segregated; they were segregated in '66 [1966].  My brothers, my older brothers, all went to segregated schools; I did until 1966.  And in '66 [1966], rather than integrate all out, they came up with this elaborate plan that they called Freedom of Choice [also known as free transfer] and whereby--you know, there was a selectivity to it.  I--you know, I'm not--still not sure exactly how it worked, but I was one of the ones who had the opportunity to integrate one of the white schools [Alford J. Mapp Junior High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] across town.  And so up to that point, I was an honor roll student.  I loved school.
Speaker 1: How, how old were you?
Speaker 2: I was eleven.  I was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Eleven.
Speaker 1: So you're in like sixth grade.
Speaker 2: Sixth grade.  It was my sixth-grade year.  And so my parents [Lenora Alvin and Bonnie Alvin] came to me once and they said look, you're gonna have an opportunity to go to a better school, and so --you know, this is how they presented it, you know, that I would get this opportunity.  Oddly, they did not talk with me about what was happening on the larger scene with regard to race and resistance to integration.  I think maybe they didn't wanna frighten me.  I wasn't race conscious per se.  And so it, it--you know, I--they sent me to this school, and I remember from the very first day, when I stepped off the bus, there was the--this sea of hostility.  And I just remember being called nigger more than I had--I heard that word more than I had ever heard it in my life.
Story_ID: 156193
Speaker 1: You're in the sixth grade and you're--and what is the school you're leaving first of all and which one are you integrating?
Speaker 2: The school--there was a school called Moffett Place [Portsmouth, Virginia], and I think it was M-O-F-F-E-T-T.
Speaker 1: That's the one you left?
Speaker 2: That was the, the school that I would have gone to--
Speaker 1: Okay--oh, but you--
Speaker 2: --that year.
Speaker 1: It would have been like a middle school?
Speaker 2: A middle school.
Speaker 1: All right, and the one you're going to was?
Speaker 2: The one that I was going to was called Alford J. Mapp [Junior High School, Portsmouth, Virginia], A-L-F-O-R-D, initial J, and Mapp, M-A-P-P.
Speaker 1: Okay, Alford J. Mapp Middle School or--
Speaker 2: Junior high.
Speaker 1: Junior high school, okay.  All right, so how many African American students were with you on that experiment?
Speaker 2: There were only a handful, not even enough to fill a bus.  And I remember that because every day there were--they'd pick up--the bus would pick up the black students and we would fill maybe a half or a quarter of the bus, and then they would ride through this neighborhood and pick up the white students.  And so at the end of the day, the same thing happened, black students would get on the bus and white students would get on the bus.  And when the white students got on the bus, invariably there would be fistfights from the time they got on the bus until somebody was put off the bus, you know, and then we went home.  And so I remember, when I--you know, I mean, that's where I had to learn how to fight, in school.  And I remember as this eleven year-old just being so afraid when these seventh and eighth grade whites would get on the bus, because invariably they would start calling us names.  And there were only a few seventh and eighth graders who were black, and they were the ones who were charged with protecting the rest of us.  And man, they fought all the time, and so it was just horrifying.  And you know, when I look back in hindsight, I'm not sure what the role of the bus driver was (laughter), because--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --these fights took place with such regularity that--
Speaker 1: It would seem the school would have to know that this was going on.
Speaker 2: Right, and I, I don't--that part I never understood.
Speaker 1: But it was on a level of fistfights ba--basically.   Not--no--nobody brought weapons with them onboard--board, the bus?
Speaker 2: Not that I recall, but they some--you know, the fistfights got bloody sometimes.  And so in the sixth grade, well, what I would do was I'd get on--try to get on the bus early and get as far to the back as I could.  And I'll never forget, I had--gym class was my last class of the day.  And so you know when you take gym, generally you do the exercises, you change into your gym uniform, you do your exercises, you play your sports, you shower, and then you dress.  Well, I was so horrified and traumatized at the thought of possibly missing that bus that I would never do that.  I would never put on my gym clothes, because if you missed the bus, then there was the possibility that you had to walk through this hostile white neighborhood out to the main street and catch a bus.  And so as an eleven year-old, I didn't know how to negotiate that, and I just was not going to take any chances.  I thought they'd kill me if I missed the bus.  And so I--you know, I would just not take a shower at gym time or what, but I made sure that I caught that bus on time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so at this--now how long did this kind of hostility go on?  Did it--
Speaker 2: It went on until I was transferred out of the school.  I was--
Speaker 1: So it may have been still going on when you left.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, it was still going on.  Yeah, I--and so in all of my classes I was the only black, and so I was constantly harassed and you know, of course called nigger.  Ultimately, and so I just remember on the weekends feeling this sense of relief, and then on Sundays my stress level going up because I knew it would start over again.  And interestingly enough, I didn't talk with my parents [Lenora Alvin and Bonnie Alvin] about it.  I guess I just thought it was the norm.  I don't know.  It was--it was so traumatic.  I, I couldn't understand why they hated me so much.
Story_ID: 156194
Speaker 1: Now this is something that, that I heard in the other stories about this kind of thing, this kind of racial trauma in the schools.  The, the, the, the children--I mean, the students don't tell their parents.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They don't say anything about it, or they--they're afraid--like they're afraid that they're wrong or they're gonna get pun--punished if they said some--say something about it.
Speaker 2: Right, I don't know what my thinking was around that.  I, I think, you know, it was--I, I don't know.  I can't explain it, because I did not understand race dynamics.  I knew that there was something going on in the broader world in terms of protests and all of that, but I could not connect it with that experience number one; and number two, I was just so befuddled because it was the first time I had encountered hatred, that kind of hatred.  And so I remember walking down the hall [at Alford J. Mapp Junior High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] one day, and some white guys standing off to the side and calling me a name.   And one guy stuck his foot out and he tripped me.  And my books flew in the air everywhere, and I stumbled and I fell.  And I got up, and we began fighting, and you know, his friends jumped in.  And so, you know, the bell rang, and I sort of collected my things.  Another time I was in class, and someone was drawing a picture--one of the students--the teacher had left, and so one of my classmates drew a picture, colored it black and put my name on it.  And they were sort of passing it around the class and laughing.  And so when they passed it and it came near me at that point, and I got angry and I grabbed the picture.  I grabbed the piece of paper, and whoever I grabbed it from they either hit me or something, and we started fighting in the class, and everybody joined in.  And I was the only black in the class, and so when the teacher came into the class, I just remember my arms were flailing.  There was someone hanging on my back, and there were other students around punching.  And so the teacher came in and she said, "What's going here?  What's going on?"  And so all of the students pointed at me, and they said he started a fight.  He started a fight.  And so the teacher sent me to the office, and I think I was suspended from school and--for a time.  And that's when my parents [Lenora Alvin and Bonnie Alvin] sat me down and said, you know, "What's going on here?  What's the matter?"  And I, I think the other sign for them was that, that was the first time on my report card--my first report card--I think the first time I got either a C or a D because, as I told you, I was an honor roll student and I loved school, but at that school, I could not concentrate on academics at all.  It was focusing on survival.  And so I remember having this conversation where my mother sat me down and said, what's going on here?  And I simply broke down in tears and began crying, and then they knew that there was something really traumatic going on, and they met with officials at the school.  And they event--they eventually transferred me out of that school and enrolled me into a newly-built neighborhood school called W. E. Waters Junior High [sic, William E. Waters Middle School, Portsmouth, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Now was that in a predominantly African American community or--
Speaker 2: That was completely African American.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now was there--how did the--what did the--how did the teachers and administration treat you at, at Alford Mapp?
Speaker 2: With indifference.  I just--you know, it was the same kind of indifference that, you know, allowed the teacher to come in and assume that I had started a fight and you know, send me to the office.  I just--I, I just don't remember having a sense that I was protected or safe in that environment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so it was very--it was very traumatic.
Story_ID: 156195
Speaker 1: Now--okay, so you transferred to [William E.] Waters [Middle School, Portsmouth, Virginia].  Now you're still in the sixth grade?
Speaker 2: Still in the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: And you lived in a neighborhood called Cavalier Manor [Portsmouth, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was--can you describe the neighborhood--I mean the--it was a house, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: As, as you said, three-bedroom house?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And was it brick or what?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was brick, and the Cavalier Manor was a fairly newly-built neighborhood, and, and it has an interesting history.  As part of the resistant effort to integration in the city, a developer in the area built that neighborhood and marketed to black people with the hope that blacks would, instead of integrating into the white neighborhoods, would be attracted to this newly-built black neighborhood.  And so the developer's name was George T. McClean.  And so one of the things that they did was that they named all of the streets after famous black people.  So you had--we have Horne Avenue, after Lena Horne; we had Freedom Avenue; we had Leontyne Lane; Liston Lane, after [Charles L.] "Sonny" Liston, you know, streets like a Belafonte Drive [after HM Harry Belafonte], you know.  So, you know, the streets were named after blacks, and the neighborhood was marketed to blacks.  And so my parents [Lenora Alvin and Bonnie Alvin] heard about it through some [U.S.] Navy friends that they had.  And so we stayed with a family initially when we came there, and my parents saved up enough money to buy a house there.  And it was the first and only house that they ever owned.  They still live there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now with, with this intent to market it to black folks, why Cavalier--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know where the name came from, but it's interesting the, the plan sort of backfired, because he built a neighborhood that was so large that it became a political force.  Cavalier Manor is one of the largest black neighborhoods in the southeast.  It has a population of about 27,000 (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's impressive.
Speaker 2: Right, and I don't think that's what George T. McClean had in mind when he built it, but that's what--he kept--you know, they kept expanding the neighborhood and expanding it.  It was wooded area.  And so ultimately it--you know, it was (unclear)--it--you know, his marketing plan worked in the sense that many blacks moved in.  But, like I said, it became this huge bloat--voting bloc, and so to this day, elections in Portsmouth [Virginia] have to go through Cavalier Manor.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  It's funny how these things work--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 156196
Speaker 1: Okay, Waters Junior High School [sic, William E. Waters Middle School, Portsmouth, Virginia].  At, at W. E. Waters were there any special teachers or mentors?
Speaker 2: Yes, there was a Mr. Barkley [ph.] was my sixth grade teacher.  Probably the teacher who, who had the most impact was a very religious woman named [Annie] Odessa Maclin, O-D-E-S-S-A, last name, M-A-C-L-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was--she was very stern and very--very religious woman, and so every morning before we started class, she would have us stand and recite a Bible verse.  And you know--so, you know, with the thought that, you know, study the Bible the night before or the morning before and then come and recite that verse.  I'd never--I did not study the Bible the night before or the morning before.  And so, typically, I would listen to a verse that someone recited maybe five people ago, and then I would repeat their verse, but I never came to school prepared with a Bible verse.  But Ms. Maclin would--when you recite your Bible verse, she would nod her head, you know, and nod her approval.  But she was just very stern task masker--master--good teacher, and you knew that she cared about you as a person.
Speaker 1: Now wa--what did she teach?
Speaker 2: Well, she was my homeroom teacher, and I think she also taught history.  Because in the sixth grade we began changing classes, and so I think she taught--she did homeroom and taught history.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 156197
Speaker 1: Now were you still--were you getting opportunities to write, and, and were--what kind of material were you reading?  And I would guess a writer or, or someone who has that kind of personality would be attracted to movies and television and that sort of thing too in terms of storytelling.
Speaker 2: No, I--I mean I, you know, watched whatever my brothers were watching.  They were older and so they got, you know, to control the TV channels.  We only had a few channels in those days anyway so, you know, there, there were only a few shows on like, you know, 'Leave it to Beaver.'  And you'd come home 'Leave it to Beaver,' 'My Three Sons,' you know, some of--sort of the standard shows.  And so I would watch them and play checkers with my grandmother [Sadie Benton].  She was excellent at checkers.  In terms of my topics in school, Ms. [Annie Odessa] Maclin, she was very intense about the history.  I mean she--I will forget she had us memorize the--and recite the Gettysburg Address.  And she would have us recite, for some reason, all of the Chinese dynasties.  And so she was big on recitations.  In terms of English and literature, at that point, I don't--I remember having poetry exercises and being particularly, you know, skilled at writing rhymes and that sort of thing.  And I liked poetry, but I didn't make anything of it.
Speaker 1: Now this is--did you--Ms. Maclin introduce you to any African American poets or, or writers?
Speaker 2: Not that I recall, not that I recall.
Speaker 1: I know sometimes in, in the Sou--South--I know in my hometown, of course, Paul--Paul Laurence Dunbar was a big deal.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: A lot of the older teachers would talk--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, in that day we had--I think by then they were doing Black History Week.  And so, you know, we would hear--they fed us a lot of Booker T. Washington, interestingly enough, 'Up from Slavery.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, so--yeah, Negro History Week was going on then.
Speaker 2: Right, and Booker T. Washington was the man.
Speaker 1: You know, it's interesting, yeah, even in the late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 156198
Speaker 1: Okay--so--oh, tell us about your best friend, Shellshock.
Speaker 2: Shellshock I didn't meet--let's see.  I met Shellshock--I take it back.  I met, met Shellshock in the fifth or sixth grade, and we weren't best friends then.  We just sort of met and we were neighbors.  He lived a block or so from me.  We became best friends later in high school [Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay, so that is not his real name, right?
Speaker 2: No, his real name was Kenneth Davis [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, but everybody called him Shellshock.
Speaker 2: They called him Shellshock later.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We called him Kenny for a while, and then when he got to high school, we began calling him Shellshock.
Speaker 1: Now that's a name that--I mean that it's--makes you think about the term they used to describe people that have lost their mental capacities becau--due to war--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Post-traumatic stress disorder victims.  And in the old days, before they had PSD--
Speaker 2: PTSD.
Speaker 1: --PTSD, they, they just said you were shell-shocked.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: I had an uncle that was shell-shocked in World War I [WWI].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: There are other people that have uncles--it seems like it's always the uncles that's got this problem, but--
Speaker 2: Right, and I don't know who pinned that nickname on Kenny, but I think it had more to do with the fact that, you know, he was high all the time.  And (laughter) they called him Shellshock because of the way he acted when he was high.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: He, he used to love to smoke marijuana, and so you know, we called him Shellshock.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this being a [U.S.] Military community, you know and the you know, the whole--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --yeah--Tidewater area so--closely associated with the [U.S.] Navy and the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Military, I could see how that might--you know.  'Cause people who are shell-shocked do have--they don't know how to control their faculties.
Speaker 2: That's right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: And his father was a Military man.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 156199
Speaker 1: Now you were going to--wa--what high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I went to--so I went to Waters--William E. Waters [Middle School, Portsmouth, Virginia] from the sixth grade until the eighth grade.  And then in the ninth grade I went to Woodrow Wilson High School [Portsmouth, Virginia], which was integrated.
Speaker 1: Okay, was that in a different part of town?
Speaker 2: Yes, that was across town.
Speaker 1: Now when this decision was made--now this part, part of the choice--the Freedom of Choice or the--
Speaker 2: Yes, because my brothers--my, my brothers graduated from I. C. Norcom High School [Portsmouth, Virginia], which was the historically black--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --high school.  And so I went to Woodrow Wilson for three years.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any trepidation about going to Wood--Woodrow Wilson after your experiences at, at [Alford J.] Mapp [Junior High School, Portsmouth, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: No, probably just the opposite.  I--the, the--returning to--well, going to William E.--from the time I went to William E. Waters from the sixth grade to the eighth grade, I underwent a major transformation in terms of who I was, you know.  I went from being this sort of shy, timid person who liked school to becoming attracted to the streets and the older guys that I saw who were hanging out in the streets.  So that by the time--I think I began hanging out in the seventh grade maybe--and seventh and eighth grade, and so by then, I was attracted to the streets.  And by the ninth grade, I was really hanging on the streets.  And so when I went to Woodrow Wilson High School in the ninth grade, I was not, not only spending a lot of time hanging on the streets, I was running with, you know, what they call a crew today.  And these were basically guys who lived in my neighborhood [Cavalier Manor, Portsmouth, Virginia] who lived in my immediate area.  The neighborhood was so large that you had different crews within the neighborhood, and so we had a particular crew, and we hung together.
Story_ID: 156200
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Let me ask you this.  Now this is--well, they say the sixth grade is critical for young black males, especially in school--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --about whether they're gonna finish or not.  Sixth grade--if you can't get 'em by the sixth grade, they're, they're not gone make, make it.  That's what--that's what these educators say now.  And so what wasn't--I know you had the traumatic experience at [Alford J.] Mapp [Junior High School, Portsmouth, Virginia].  Did you make a smooth transition to [William E.] Waters [Middle School, Portsmouth, Virginia]?  And, and it seems like you didn't.  I mean, I, I don't know how your glad--did, did, did your grades ever come back up (unclear)--
Speaker 1: My grades immediately came back up--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because I was no longer in the hostile environment, and I could once again refocus on school.  I was--you know, having transferred in the middle of a school year, I was still a new kid in school, but within the context of my neighborhood [Cavalier Manor, Portsmouth, Virginia].  And so it was a matter of just sort connecting with people who were my neighbors.  And there were black teachers at Waters, and so you know, things calmed down for me dramatically.  At the same time, the dynamics at Waters were very different, the social dynamics.  I still had older seventh graders and eighth graders, instead of them being white, they were black.  And so these were, you know, more developed people, and they had reputations for being cool and that sort of thing.  And so that's when I began paying attention to those dynamics.
Speaker 2: As a--as role models.
Speaker 1: As role models.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: So was any particular in--individuals that, that, you know, took you under their wing and kind of showed you how to be cool or how to be--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, you would--I would sort of watch them at a distance, and you would hear, you know, us sixth graders.  I would hear the girls in my class who would talk about the guys that they admired, and then I would look at the guys that they admired to see what it was they admired about the guys.  And so it was the way the guys dressed, the way the guys carried themselves.  They would have what they called sock-hops in the gym, where you would pay maybe a dime after school.  And they would have music in the gym, and you would take your shoes off, and you would go and dance.  And so, you know, I was kind of shy.  I didn't know how to dance, but I'd go to the sock-hops and like hang on the walls and watch the older kids, you know, dancing at the sock-hops.  And so, you know, as a sixth grader that was like, wow.  That was really something I wanted to do and be a part of, but I was still socially awkward in the sixth grade.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 156201
Speaker 1: So now how did your crew develop?  Were you brought into one that already existed, or did you help form it or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We, we, we sort of came together between the sixth grade and the seventh grade.  We would play--we would get together and play baseball in some field or in somebody's backyard.  And we began solidifying relationships around sports.  We played--so we played baseball, and we'd play some football, and they had a basketball court in back of the junior high school.  And so we'd go up to the basketball court, and everybody from the neighborhood [Cavalier Manor, Portsmouth, Virginia] came to this basketball court.  And as I told you, it was a very large neighborhood.  And so on any given day, especially weekends, you'd have like literally hundreds of guys out there from all ages, and so you would see and hear everything.  And so that's where I learned a lot about what was happening on the streets, you know, what was important, you know, for young people and began to, like, pay attention to, you know, who was cool, who was most admired, who could fight.  It was a big deal to be able to fight.  And you know, so I paid attention to those things.  And my brother--my brother who was closest to me would come home from school, and he would talk about who was cool and who was admired.  And so those things became very important to my--to, to me and the guys who were my peers.  Most of them had older brothers as well that they were trying to pattern themselves after.  And so I think probably the summer of our seventh grade year, that's when we really came together and started hanging out, and got to the point where I'd get up in the morning and go out to a particular corner, you know, where the rest of--you know, the guys would meet.  And we'd just sort of figure out what we were gonna do that day.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is the summer of 1967 or so.
Speaker 2: Somewhere around then.  Sixty-six [1966] was [Alford J.] Mapp [Junior High School, Portsmouth, Virginia].  I went to Mapp in '66 [1966], so yeah, probably around '67 [1967].
Story_ID: 156202
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so summer of 1967, now how did you--what was the name of your crew?  Did it have a name or just, you know?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have a name.  We just--you know, it was sort of informal and we just sort of solidified as a group.
Speaker 1: About how many guys were involved?
Speaker 2: Maybe--it, it varied, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, people--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Between--right--ten and twenty, whoever would come by the block, but it was sort of a nucleus of tho--you know, guys who lived within several blocks of each other.  And you know, we played--like I said, we played football and sports regularly and you know, sort of hang--hung out around that--
Speaker 1: Was there--was there any territoriality in terms of the--I mean, you know, if somebody came through there you didn't like, I mean from another neighborhood or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, from another neighborhood, definitely.  If someone came through from across town, there was definitely hostilities, and even sometimes hostilities within the same neighborhood because there were various crews.  And interesting enough, so---sometimes we'd fight each other, you know, guys from another section of Cavalier Manor [Portsmouth, Virginia], but we were all united on--you know, if someone came--we called them downtown boys---if someone came from downtown, we would automatically all united and we would fight them. Same thing if we went downtown, you know, to see girls or that sort of thing, downtown boys would take us on.
Speaker 1: Now was there anything that could identify you as a--as a Cavalier man or boy rather than a downtown boy?  (Unclear) a downtown boy came through, how would you know he was--if you hadn't seen him before--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, or sometimes---I remember, you know, sometimes we'd, you know, be hanging on the corner, and would say there's a downtown, downtown boy who's going to see--we'll say Cynthia Davis [ph.]--at Cynthia Davis's house.  And we might go and wait on the corner near Cynthia Davis's house because the downtown boys would generally--they weren't old enough to have cars and so they would have to catch the bus to our neighborhood.  And so we knew if they were on the corner waiting for that bus, they didn't live in the neighborhood; they were catching the bus out of the neighborhood, and so we would catch them on the corner while they were waiting for the bus.  Same thing if we went downtown.  They knew the buses that led to Cavalier Manor, and so sometimes we would catch the bus, and suddenly, you know, downtown boys would stone the buses, and we'd all have to hit the floor until the bus, you know, got past the location.  And so the buses were like, you know, a real source of a lot of the, the tension that went--you know, black on black.
Speaker 1: Okay, but there, there weren't any real gangs when you were growing up in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, there were gangs, but they--not in the sense of Crips and Bloods, you know.  They were loosely organized gangs, and they were, you know, more--you know, I guess more social clubs, but--
Speaker 1: Oh, no initiations or names or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no initiation.
Speaker 1: --none of that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: No initiations or anything like that, but you-- you coalesced around the fighting.  Fighting, you know, was a big part of it.
Story_ID: 156203
Speaker 1: How, how did you dress in high school [at Manor High School, later, Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia]?  I mean, what, what, what was the--what was the u--uniform in high school?
Speaker 2: We didn't have uniforms.
Speaker 1: I mean--I mean the vernacular.  I mean, what did you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: --wear; that's what I mean.
Speaker 2: --how I would dress, yeah.  Well, I remember in junior high is when I began paying attention to fashions.  And so the big deal there was Converse All-Stars, the sneakers, you know.  And I could not wait to get a pair of Converse All-Stars.
Speaker 1: But what happened if you were wearing PF Flyers or something?
Speaker 2: If you were wearing PF Flyers you would--everybody knew you were--you, you were lame, you know.  And so I had--you know, I was one of the ones in sixth grade prob--you know, wearing PF Flyers, and my brothers had All-Stars.  And I would try on their All-Stars, but my feet were always too small.  And sometimes I'd take athletic socks and stuff them into the toes, and so I'd have on these big floppy All-Stars, you know, because it was so important, you know.  It was such an important fashion statement.  And I remember the guys who were really cool, who were much older than me, they were wearing pants; they called them Sharkskins--Sharkskin pants, you know.  And if you were really, really cool, you had a Sharkskin suit, and then they had the knit shirts, and the wide-brim hats, you know, but that's for the guys who were really cool.  It took me awhile to get (laughter) there--to get there.  My biggest ambition was to get a pair of All-Stars.
Speaker 1: Okay, those were like--I remember about ten dollars then--nine or ten dollars a pair.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know how much they cost, but I remember saving for them and you---you know, it's interesting, they didn't have--they didn't have the marketing sense to understand that, you know, you should sell All-Stars in all sizes, and so you couldn't get them unless you wore like a size seven or above.  And I stayed somewhere between a five and a six and so I was in trouble.  You know, it was like--and so, you know, now you see babies with All-Stars; you see babies with Air Jordans on.  So I guess marketers got wise and understood that, you know, you can market to children of all ages.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is cul--what was the music of the---record?
Speaker 2: Motown, Motown Sounds.  My brothers would have these parties, and like I said, they'd be listening to The Temptations and The Supremes and the Four Tops and all of that, so there was that.  And then my parents [Lenora Alvin and Bonnie Alvin] would party, and that's when I got turned on to people like Aretha [Franklin], Otis Redding, Wilson Pickett, Lou Rawls, you know, some of the older soul acts.  But you know, soul music was the thing--James Brown.
Speaker 1: Now but, but your grades during this period of time was--were okay?
Speaker 2: My grades were okay.  They dipped when I went to Alford J. Mapp [Junior High School, Portsmouth, Virginia], came back up when I went back to junior high school [William E. Waters Middle School, Portsmouth, Virginia], and probably dipped a bit by the time I got to the eighth grade because, as I said, I was becoming attract--more attracted to the streets.  And school began--you know, school for me became more of a place to socialize, you know.  I was still interested in the academics, but less so.
Story_ID: 156204
Speaker 1: Okay, now unlike a lot of people that we've interviewed, you actually have a book about your early life--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that picks up about, about the time period we're at right now.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: 'Makes Me Wanna Holler[: A Young Black Man in America].'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's the name of your book, and you wrote the book in 19--
Speaker 2: Ninety-four [1994].
Speaker 1: Five--four, all right.  Well, tell us about the book and, and--I don't know how we're gonna do this 'cause--sense a lot of what you are telling us about you've written about.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Just give us some of the reasons why you decided to go back over this period of your life and write a book about it and, and what chronology that take--you know, the book takes, takes us through.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the book sort of tells the story, but it tells it in the context of the direction that my life went in after junior high school [at William E. Waters Middle School, Portsmouth, Virginia] when I really became attracted to the streets and spent more and more time on the streets.  And as you know, when you're hanging on the streets there's a lot going on, and so I began to get involved in, not just fighting, but crime, you know.  I began breaking into homes and that sort of thing, breaking into homes, doing drugs.
Story_ID: 156205
Speaker 1: Now this seems like--now were your older brothers exhibiting any of this kind of behavior?
Speaker 2: My oldest [John McCall] brother, no.  He--you know, he graduated, went to college for a few years, majored in accounting, stopped for a while, then went back.  But he left and moved to New York, but--
Speaker 1: Okay so when you were starting high school [Manor High School, later, Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia], was he still around or--
Speaker 2: He was--he was gone by the time--probably by the time I was in the ninth or tenth grade.
Speaker 1: And your, your middle brother [Dwight McCall] was still--he was like two years ahead of you.
Speaker 2: He was two years ahead of me and so he sort of spent time on the streets.  But he went into the [U.S.] Military straight out of high school, and so I think that sort of saved him.
Speaker 1: So the last two years of high school you're basically--you don't have (unclear)--you're the oldest person--
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: --boy--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in the house.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, and your father [stepfather, Bonnie Alvin] is, is working, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And your mother [Lenora Alvin]--
Speaker 2: And most of the time he was working two, sometimes three jobs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, of course, we began to--we clashed because he was trying to exert, you know, the Military control and I resisted.
Story_ID: 156206
Speaker 1: Now could, could your mother [Lenora Alvin] keep up with you--what, what you were doing?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I mean, she had a sense--she saw me spending time on the streets.  Occasionally she would see me get--you know, getting involved in fights.  So she had a sense that I was beginning to spin out of control and she would say things to me about it.  I remember one time, you know, she found a gun in my coat pocket and she asked me about it.
Speaker 1: Did you know how it got there (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Did, did I know how it got there?  Yeah, it was-partly--it was the result of a fight that I got in.  A group of guys who--part of my crew, we jumped some other guys and then they came back and retaliated.  And they caught a few of us and beat us mercilessly, put me in the hospital.  I--you know, they had lead pipes.  They had the--in those days when you were gonna fight, we used to wear Rogans.  We called them "brogans" bra--you know, steel-toe shoes.  And so these guys caught me and they--you know, they broke the--they broke a few ribs, they busted my nose, they did some damage to my neck, and I still have problems with it.  I had my arm in a sling.  I was about sixteen or seventeen then, and these guys beat me so bad, I--you know.  I decided then that I was never gonna take a beating like that again, and so I started carrying a gun to school from the time I was a sophomore in high school [at Manor High School, later, Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] probably 'til the time I graduated.  And so my mother--
Speaker 1: She found this gun.
Speaker 2: --she found this gun, and so, you know, she confronted me about it.  And I told her it didn't belong to me.  It was a friend's gun.  And you know, she issued, you know, some warnings and saying boy, you know, you're gonna get into some trouble if you, you know, keep going the way you're going.  And by then I think, you know, I was--I was in it then; I was hostile.
Story_ID: 156207
Speaker 1: When I went back to school--when I went to [Manor] High School [later, Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia], when I first went as a freshman, I was so traumatized by that experience at the white school that one of the things that I did was that I would look for some of the faces of the guys who were at the white school, you know.  I would actively look for them when there were football games and that sort of thing.  You know I--you know, I would look to see if I recognized any of them because I was gonna retaliate.  I was no longer, you know, the shy, passive little guy who was afraid, but you know, I wanted to get revenge.
Speaker 2: Did you ever find any of them?
Speaker 1: Well, what we would do is--you know, if, if we--we would just find them, you know, indiscriminately like it was described in the book ['Makes Me Wanna Holler: A Young Black Man in America'].  The white guy--
Speaker 2: Yeah on here--
Speaker 1: --who happened to be--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --passing by and we caught him.
Speaker 2: It's a white guy's driv--it's--
Speaker 1: White guy.
Speaker 2: --this is a white teenager--
Speaker 1: Yeah, who's riding--
Speaker 2: --on a bicycle--
Speaker 1: --on a bicycle, and he was riding through--
Speaker 2: Through Cavalier [Manor, Portsmouth, Virginia]?
Speaker 1: --through--came through Cavalier Manor, and we were sitting on the corner just sort of killing time and talking.  And somebody said hey, look, you know.  The same thing would happen--there was a white neighborhood that was near Cavalier Manor, and so we were constantly at war with them as well.  So if you went--this, this white neighborhood was called Academy Park [Portsmouth, Virginia].  And so it was understood that if you went through Academy Park, walking or riding a bike, you could be injured or killed.  You would be attacked.  And so you had these neighborhoods that were--a black neighborhood and a white neighborhood that were in fairly close proximity and it was always constant warfare.
Speaker 2: Was there any natural barrier between the two?
Speaker 1: No, one street--one street separated the two neighborhoods, a long street called Victory Boulevard (laughter).  And so I, I remember early on when we moved into the neighborhood, there was a young black kid who was killed.  And they said someone from--some whites from Academy Park had come over into our neighborhood and shot into the house.  The boy was sitting at the piano I think taking piano lessons or something.  And I just remember that as a child listening to all of the parents talk about it.  So there were these hos--so you're in this town and there were these hostilities that flowed in different directions with us, you know, the blacks and the whites in Academy Park, and then the blacks and other blacks who were across town.  And so, you know, there was just a lot of violence.
Story_ID: 156208
Speaker 1: Now did you have a job in high school [at Manor High School, later, Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] or anything?
Speaker 2: No, toward--my, my, my stepfather [Bonnie Alvin] used to have--he worked at the shipyard after he retired from the [U.S.] Navy as a security guard; and then he also had a part-time job as a gardener.  And so he would take my brothers and me with him across town [Portsmouth, Virginia], and we would work in white people's gardens in the affluent neighborhoods on the weekends.  And so I always hated it.  I hated doing the gardening work, and I hated the fact that we were working in white people's yards.  You know, it was the '60s [1960s] and you know, they were talking black power and all of that.  And so I was gaining a sense of the racial tensions that were going on in the city and across the nation.  And so I did not like the idea of my stepfather taking me to this neighborhood to do work, you know, in, in white people's--and he would pay us; he paid us.  And that was his way of trying to instill a sense of values in us around work and you know, being paid for work.  But we didn't see it that way, you know.  When I look at it in hindsight, my stepfather was self-employed, you know.  And there was something that we could have learned about that, about being self-employed, and it went completely over our heads, you know.  For my brothers and me there was something humiliating about it, you know, again, going across town and mowing the lawns and---you know in, in the white part of--the affluent white neighborhoods.
Story_ID: 156209
Speaker 1: Now at some point--well, well, well, tell us about as you get towards your senior year in high school [at Manor High School, later, Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia], what, what was your counseling like in terms of school--I mean college--did they--
Speaker 2: Counseling?
Speaker 1: Yeah, did you get any counseling about college or--
Speaker 2: I--you know--
Speaker 1: --were your grades, you know, good enough to get you in school?
Speaker 2: My grades were--my grades were decent, good enough to get me in school, yes.  Counseling, I don't recall getting any serious counseling, but by my sophomore year most of the guys that I hung with dropped out.  I, I remember the day they dropped out.  We were--you know, we were going to school less and less anyway.  On Fridays it was almost a given we'd, you know, have a party at somebody's house while their parents weren't at home.  And so one day we're coming to school late.  We were going to school late, and one of my buddies said man, you know, I'm tired of this, and then the others said me too.  And they said well, let's quit.  And so one of the guys just took his books and threw them in the trash.  And so it was sort of a ritual so everybody began throwing their books in the trash.  Everybody threw their books in the trash but me.  I said no, man, I'm going to class.  And my primary reason-- number one--was that, you know, I was beginning to really like girls, and the girls were in school.  And it was like, why wouldn't I wanna be here?  And the second was that my stepfather [Bonnie Alvin]--I knew that if I quit school, my stepfather was going to require that I either get a job or that I go into the [U.S.] Military like my brothers.  And for some reason, I had--even though there were so many people in my family going into the Military, I always had an aversion to the Military.  I think I had some authoritarian issues or something.
Speaker 1: Well, this is also the age of the Vietnam War too.
Speaker 2: W--age of the Vietnam War--
Speaker 1: A lot of people coming back--
Speaker 2: Muhammad Ali, you know, who was one of my heroes, once he said, you know, he wasn't going to Vietnam that was it, you know, for me.  It was like not even an option.  I wasn't old enough to go at that point, but you know, I was seeing older guys in the neighborhood who were going off into the Military.
Story_ID: 156210
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's along this time you start becoming friends with Shellshock too, right?
Speaker 2: Right, and so I started hanging out, and you know, I ran into guys who were breaking into homes.  And so, you know, I was hooking school anyway.  And I remember this guy showed us how he broke into homes.  There was a guy who really specialized in it.  He knew how to kick the hinges off the doors.  And so he--you know, I went with him one day--the first couple of times--and we would go and we'd knock on the door, and if no one answered he'd stand back and he'd kick the hinges off.  And so, you know, he taught us that, you know, you got five, ten minutes max, to go in and get what you can get and then we're out of there.  And so I went with him on several occasions and kind of learned the art of doing that, of--you know.  And we'd stand back and let him kick the hinges off; we'd rush in; everybody would take a room; we would get what we could get.  And this guy had a, a fence, a guy who would buy the stuff that we took.  And of course, we only took, you know, things that we could carry and jewelry and that sort of thing.  And so that became sort of my introduction to, you know, trying--you know, living the, the street life and trying to hustle.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any trepidation about breaking into somebody's house?  I mean, this is people's homes in the community that you lived in [Cavalier Manor, Portsmouth, Virginia], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you think about--I mean, I know youth often don't think (unclear) thing, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, a couple of things: one, there was--I, I remember there was always this weird sense of going through other people's belongings, you know.  It was always a weird feeling for me, but it--you know, it wasn't weird enough to stop me, but there was something bizarre about it.  And we would do it mostly during the day when people were away.  And so it was weird that we were doing it in, in the daytime where we could be seen on the one hand.  On the other hand, there was a certain built-in kind of safety, maybe a false safety, this sense that, well, if it was daytime then you wouldn't be shot.  And so sometimes, though, we would do it at night, and sometimes we would be armed, sometimes we wouldn't.  And I remember one time in particular, it was myself and Shellshock, and this guy told us about this house where the people were apparently out of town.  And so Shellshock and I, you know, we scoped the house, and we couldn't get in the front door.  And so Shellshock lifted me up and I had to go in through the window, a side window.  And so I remember the house was dark, and I remember that--you know, having this extreme fear.  I got in and Shellshock handed me a shotgun; it was a sawed off shotgun, and I was supposed to go and open the door for him.  And he hands me the shotgun and leave to go around to the door.  And I turned around and I thought I saw something move, and it was the first time that I had anything close to an encounter.  I saw something in the corner, and I, I was certain that it moved, and so I pointed the shotgun and it--you know.  I remember having this fear because I thought there someone waiting to either blow me away and so I had to make a decision about whether to shoot first or not.  And so that was the first time I encountered that, and the fear was just--I mean, it, it was almost like it was forever, and I just froze.  And you know, I think if there had been movement, I probably would have pulled the trigger out of fear.  And I waited and then I heard Shellshock banging on the door, waiting for me to come and open the door.  And so I moved slowly, and whatever it was in the corner, there, there was no movement.  And I ran to the door and opened the door for Shellshock.  I hang--a while after that, I stopped doing--we called them B and Es, breaking and enterings, you know.  And there were guys who would go out in teams, but there was that fear that in any--there was another thing.  There's a guy in the neighborhood who was kind of a specialist in B and Es, and he went in somebody's house one night and was shot and killed.  And everybody, you know, in the neighborhood talked about it.  And I don't know if that's the thing that stopped me from doing it or not, because I went on--
Story_ID: 156211
Speaker 1: Shellshock and I, we went on and we started doing armed robberies.  And we found that, you know, we could get more money doing armed robberies than breaking and entering.
Speaker 2: Okay, now--yeah, I would think it's a--there would be a tremendous amount of fear breaking into somebody's home or, or into a store or something.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I mean, and I've talked to kids that have done it, you know, when they--I mean, that's why so many people get, get really hurt bad--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --a kid with a gun breaking into some place.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: They were really afraid, so--
Speaker 1: That's right.  And so we, we, we went from that to doing robberies, and we would rob mostly people, and mostly people in black neighborhoods.  Sometimes we'd go to Norfolk [Virginia], to Church Street, and you know, we'd see guys who were shooting craps on the corner.  Sometimes we would stick up crap guys, you know, take all the money.  We would take their coats, you know.  We'd park the car, you know, a few blocks from where they were--take everything.
Speaker 2: This seems pretty dangerous and bold too, to walk up to some guys shootin craps in, in a community.  And you would have like--what would you have?  The shot--is the shotgun--
Speaker 1: We'd have maybe a sawed off shotgun and a pistol, and we'd just make sure we caught them off guard so that nobody moved.  You know, when you're shooting craps, everybody's focused downward.  They're looking at the craps on the ground.  You might have a few guys that are standing and they'd be under a streetlamp or whatever.  And we'd, we'd park maybe a block or two away, and we, we'd come at them from opposite directions.  And once we pointed the guns and said nobody move, nobody would move.  And so they might have been armed or whatever, but we could disarm them.  We would take their coats; we would take their shoes; we would take their money, you know.  Sometimes we'd have a stack of leather coats, you know.  Leather coats were the big thing then.  We'd have a stack of leather coats.  Shellshock would sneak his mother's car.  We would--he'd put it in neutral or, or--and slide it out of the driveway while she was asleep.  So we'd take his mother's car and go and commit maybe three or four robberies, and then replace the car.  And you know, so--
Speaker 2: So did you ever have a close call with that?  I would imagine people didn't take that, you know, too easily--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: We had a--yeah, yeah.  Most of the time, though, it's--it's amazing, you know.  You point a gun at somebody, you know, the power dynamics are just different, you know; it's just different, and I would see it in terms of the fear in people's eyes.  And I think I, I would get a certain adrenaline rush from it, you know, as a teenager, a seventeen year-old.  And some of the people that we, we robbed--we robbed a lot of sailors, for example.  But I do remember one night in particular, there was a guy on Church Street.  We went to rob him and this guy wasn't afraid.  There was no fear in this guy's eyes.  And you know, we pointed the gun at him and it was like--you know, we said give me your money.  And he kind of looked back at us, you know, and stared us down, and he didn't move to give up his money, you know.  And you know, I could look at him and tell, you know, he had been around the block, and we slowly back off on this guy.  He was an older guy, and you know, there was something about him that made it clear that he was willing to go down, you know.  So that might have been as close--you know, as close as it got.
Story_ID: 156212
Speaker 1: Wow, so you're in a--you're in the middle of high school [at Manor High School, later, Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] doing all this and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --going to school--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --talking to girls--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and you know.  So did--I mean--so by this time I guess you're--you got girlfriends?
Speaker 2: Got girlfriends, hanging out, yeah.  And I sort of had this routine.  I--you know, there were a few classes that I liked enough to go on a regular basis.  One of 'em was English lit [literature], and so--
Speaker 1: Now this is interesting--(unclear)--going to English literature class--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, is a--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--high school and then, you know, robbing people.
Speaker 2: Right.  And so one was English lit, and I remember I had a teacher in one of my English lit classes who, who pulled me outside of class one day to talk to me.  In those days we were--the style was we were wearing earrings, and we didn't have the, the pants.  We weren't wearing them down low.  See, what we did, we kept our belt buckles un--unbuckled, and you know, we'd have the pants legs rolled up.  But the whole belt buckle thing was that you, you wear a big buckle then so if you got into a fight, you know, you'd snatch your belt off and you'd, you know, use the--you'd hit them with the buckle.  And so I was, you know, in class with my belt buckle loose, and this teacher pulled me out of class one day.  She said you know, you're really a, a good student.  She said you could--I really believe you could do some things if you would just take that earring out of your ear and buckle your (laughter) belt buckle, and I think you could make something of your life.  And I remember looking at her and just being a little confused, you know, not knowing what she was talking about.  Because at that point, I couldn't see a future for myself in the way that she could see a future for me.  I don't know what I saw, but I didn't see--I, I didn't share her vision, and so I was hanging out.  And so what I would do, I had a routine.  My buddies by then had ju--had dropped out of school.  And so we'd all hang on the street corners, and I'd hang out there with them until maybe ten or eleven o'clock.  And I'd go home and I'd put a piece of toast in the toaster, and I'd put on a little coffee.  And I'd have a cup of coffee, and I might read my English literature.  I wouldn't tell the guys that that's what I was going to do, you know, but you know, that's what I would.  And so one night I did that.  I went home and you know, say hey, man, I'm gone.  And we were fighting guys from downtown [Portsmouth, Virginia], and I guess maybe twenty minutes after I got home, I heard this screaming outside, and I got up.  And my stepfather [Bonnie Alvin] heard it too, and both of us went to the door.  And two of my buddies, two of the guys that I had left on the block, were in my front yard, and they had been shot.  So some guys from downtown had come by and done a drive-by and shot them.  And so we ended up loading them into and rushing them to the hospital.  And that was one of like many experiences that I had where there were these close calls, you know, and where if it's--you know, give or take fifteen minutes, you know, and a bullet could have had my name on it, you know.  And so there were always these crazy experiences that would give me pause and make me wonder why did I survive this and someone else didn't, you know?  Sometimes I'd be involved in shootouts.  I remember one in particular where it was just a fierce shootout.  We were downtown.  There was a dance, a party.  Downtown boys left early, and you know, they sort of ambushed us when we came out--big shootout, and everybody shooting from all directions.  And I'm standing there, and I'm seeing people go down, and there was just no sense of fear that I would get shot.  And it wasn't that I was courageous (laughter), you know.  I don't know I--to this day I can't explain it, but by then I was into the life in that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 156213
Speaker 1: Now there's a--there's a, excerpt in your book ['Makes Me Wanna Holler: A Young Black Man in America'] about 'Super Fly' and what that meant to your group.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So--and some ideas that came out of Su--'Super Fly.'  Now 'Super Fly' was out about '72 [1972], '73 [1973], I guess.
Speaker 2: Sev--yeah, I think 70 [1970]--I wanna-'72 [1972] or 73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I'm in high school [at Manor High School, later, Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] then.
Speaker 1: Ron O'Neal.
Speaker 2: Ron O'Neal.
Speaker 1: He was trained a Colwich Workshop [sic, Karamu House] in, in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's--this movie--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --about a--well, well, tell us about it, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, 'Super Fly,' that movie was a huge--had a huge cul--cultural influence for a number of reasons.  One, it was, you know, one among many blaxploitation films that came out in which, you know, black people, up to that point, we weren't accustomed to seeing ourselves on screen except I roles where we were servants or something like that.  And with the blacks--blaxploitation films, as you know, they depicted blacks as heroes.  You had 'Shaft,' you know, with Richard Roundtree.  And 'Super Fly,' interestingly enough, the guy was a drug dealer, and he wore these flashy clothes, and he had this fancy car and everything.  It's, it's interesting the amount of appeal that that movie had for people like me who had decided that we didn't want to go into the, "the system" or the "establishment," and so 'Super Fly' represented a kind of alternative.  You know, on the one hand, you know, there was drug dealing--we knew drug dealing was, was illegal, but it represented being self-employed and independent.  And by then my sense of--my options in life was that I either had a choice to go and work for the white man, which would entail some kind of humiliation, or try to be independent.  Now it's interesting because I don't think I thought in terms of the third option, which my stepfather [Bonnie Alvin] tried to introduce me to, which was starting your own legitimate business.
Story_ID: 156214
Speaker 1: But by then Shellshock had begun selling reefer, weed, marijuana in school.  And so when, when, when we went to see 'Super Fly,' and we saw this guy making all of this money, and he decided he was gonna try to make a million dollars, and then he was gonna go legit or whatever.  We came out of that movie, man, with some ideas, you know.  And so Shellshock, who had been selling--who had started selling weed, he took his enterprise to another level.  And by the end of maybe eleventh or twelfth grade, he had bought his own car.  We called it a deuce and a quarter, Electra 225.  He had his own car that he bought from selling drugs, and he was a pretty astute businessman.  I tried my hand at it, and I just wasn't good at it, you know.  You had to manage people; you had to keep up with money; you had to do your accounting; you had--you know, there were so many aspects of it that I just wasn't cut out for.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it makes you think about, you know, the drug dealers today and then, you know, being business people--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, with really--with real bit--business skills,
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --even though what they're doing is il--illegal.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They are skilled at what they do.  Those who are successful have to be good business peep--people.
Speaker 1: Right.  And what I ultimately came to understand that if you--if you took some of these guys, and they took the skills that they developed and they transferred them, you know, and use them in legitimate ways, many of them probably could have been very successful businesspeople.
Speaker 2: Yeah, with some le--legitimate commodity.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, at any rate, so you say you tried your hand--you, you didn't work with him in the beginning or did you?
Speaker 1: No, he sort of did his own thing, and I think I did work with him for a minute in terms of--we would call it breaking off a piece--breaking off a piece of the business.  Let's just say he gave me a quarter pound of weed to sell and you know, to get myself started.  And so I divvied it up, you know, and gave some to, to other guys that I'd put on the street, and they were supposed to sell it for me.  And so what happened was invariably these guys would come back with excuses.  They would either smoke it up, or sell it, or whatever.  And I remember one of my--you know, a guy that I was pretty close with came back with an excuse; he didn't have my money, all right.  And so the rule of the street dictated that I was supposed to do him in.  And I remember feeling this angst and this ambivalence about the fact that, okay, I'm not supposed to bash his head in, you know (laughter).  And you know, he told me, he said look, man, I--you know, I'm sorry.  You know, the lawman came down, and they were after me and I had to throw it away, and blah.  And I could look in his eyes and I knew he was lying to me, you know.  At the same time, I didn't wanna bash his head in.  This had been my boy since seventh grade.  And I think that was one of the experiences that let me know that I wasn't cut out for it, you know, because I didn't bash his head in, you know, and I took the loss instead.
Speaker 2: Now you didn't have any associates who with that kind of talent, that were good at bashing people's heads in?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, I had associates who were good at it, but I didn't--you know, no one that I wanted to put on him.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, I'm just pointing out that you didn't have to do it yourself, you know--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --'cause you did have some kind of organized--
Speaker 1: Right, yeah, someone would have done it, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 156215
Speaker 1: Now, now at the same time you, you did finish high school on time, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, and--but, but I'm confu- in our outline it says you come out of Manor High School [later, Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Manor High School--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: They, they built it--they completed the school just as I finished my eleventh grade--year in high school.
Speaker 1: Now you're at [Woodrow] Wilson [High School, Portsmouth, Virginia], an integrated--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: At Wilson, right, until junior high school--the end of junior high school.  And then they had this new school that they built, and so I went there as a senior.
Speaker 1: Now was Manor--what was the nature of Manor High School, in terms of the, the demographics?
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--the Manor, they had--up until then they had split the neighborhood, and so some of us went to Wilson, some of us went to Cradock [High School, later, Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia], some of us went to I.C. Norcom [High School, Portsmouth, Virginia].  Well, Manor, they reunited the neighborhoods, so all of Cavalier Manor [Portsmouth, Virginia] went to Manor High School.  And then they had some white kids from across town, but it was majority black.  And so this was my senior year.  And by that time I'd had a, a steady girlfriend, and so she got pregnant that year.  And so she pregnant by the time I was seventeen.  So I'm seventeen and a senior in high school, and I'm committing armed robberies, doing drugs, everything, don't have a sense of the future.
Speaker 1: So you never--you never--you haven't been caught for any of this yet?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't caught--
Story_ID: 156216
Speaker 1: I--you know, I was caught for stealing at an early age and you know, went to juvenile court and that sort of thing; got into trouble for fighting every now and then; of course, was stopped by police from time to time, but never caught for--I was caught--I take it back.  I was caught for--in the tenth or eleventh grade I was caught--I was arrested for possession of a sawed off shotgun.  A group of guys and myself were going to a party across town.  We had gotten word that one of our boys had been beaten up at a party.  And so my stepfather [Bonnie Alvin] had let me use his car that night, and so we all bailed into my stepfather's car.  We had guns and sawed off shotguns, and we were going to get this buddy.  And by the time we got there, the fight had already ended, and the police were on the scene.  And so I proceeded to try to pull off in time, and the police saw us and they pursued us.  And we threw all the guns out the windows.  They flashed the red lights, arrested us, took us downtown [Portsmouth, Virginia], found all the guns, and so yeah, I was charged with several charges, but one of 'em I know was possession of a sawed off shotgun or something.
Speaker 2: Okay, but it didn't result in any time or anything?
Speaker 1: No, I, I think I got--I'm, I'm pretty sure I got probation for that.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, now so you graduated [from Manor High School, later, Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] without incident in '73 [1973], right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 156217
Speaker 1: So what was your, your plan, to keep just--keep your street activity going on?
Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting 'cause I, I wanted to go to college primarily because I didn't know what else to do.  I knew I did not want to go into the [U.S.] Military, and everyone in that area was either going into the Military or going to college.  So I, I applied at a few colleges, Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia] being one of them.  I applied to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and was accepted.  But you know, no one in my family had, had ever been there.  My oldest brother [John McCall] went to college but hadn't graduated, and so I was in uncharted waters.  I didn't know just how to negotiate that process.  And so I remember at graduation [from Manor High School, later, Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia], you know, where they call out the scholarships and that sort of thing, that being one of the most frightening days of my life because, I know, I knew I was facing the future, and it was a very uncertain future.  And I had no idea what I was gonna do.  I knew I was gonna have a child; I was gonna be a father soon; and so it was just horrifying for me, and I was playing it by ear.
Speaker 1: Now, now to be accepted to Howard is not easy, so you had decent grades.
Speaker 2: I had decent grades, yes.
Speaker 1: And test scores too, I guess.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so was there any--was there anyone at that school that was like a mentor to you or, or help or guidance for you, or, or anybody that helped you, you know, apply to these schools and--
Speaker 2: I know that there were people who had the interest.  At that point, I--you know, they couldn't get close to me because I wasn't, you know--I wouldn't avail myself in that way.  You know, I would leave school at lunchtime and get high and you know.  So, you know, there were teachers I think--who tried to talk to me at various times, but by that time I was lost, and they couldn't hold my attention.
Speaker 1: I mean, some--I'm, I'm just wondering here 'cause--I mean, if you make those kind of grades, I mean, you're--you got to be focused to make decent enough grades to get to Howard or--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --probably even Virginia State [University, Petersburg, Virginia] or Norfolk State.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I know on some level you have to have some--those are state schools.  I guess they're obligated to take you on some level, but--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Howard's not, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Howard's not obligated to take you, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my grades were--yeah, I maintained--I mean, I think I had a certain pride about, you know, not wanting to make D's and F's.  And so I could do--I could do B and C work fairly easily, and you know, in English lit., A work, you know.  So I did enough to get by.
Story_ID: 156218
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: In, in, in, in high school [at Manor High School, later, Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] were you, you involved in any activities or--other than--
Speaker 1: Extracurricular--
Speaker 2: --school--yeah.
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: I couldn't imagine you had time to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I didn't--I didn't have the discipline to play organized ball, even though I like sports.  But I didn't like authority and so, you know, I just sort of focused on the girls and being cool and you know, doing my thing, you know.  A lot of people didn't know, that we were robbing people and that sort of thing.  And so I was sort of playing both sides of the fence, you know, doing school and you know, doing the street scene.
Speaker 2: Now your, your--in terms of your girlfriend, was she--was she--what was she about--I mean--
Speaker 1: She was--I think she was attracted to me because I was doing the street thing, and she was not street, you know.  And so she--you know, she had a good upbringing, you know, very, very well-mannered, you know.  But I think she was a little attracted to the craziness that she saw in me.  And so, you know, she would try to talk to me about not going too far.  And you know, I remember in her senior year her mother got her a car.  And so quite often I would borrow her car and use that to do my drug drop-offs or go and buy drugs or whatever, and she would have a job.  She had a part-time job, so I would have her car.  And sometimes I'd go and pick her up from work, and I might have three or four guys in the car, and she would have to squeeze in (laughter), you know.  And so, you know, it was--it was sort of that scene.  And her mother, you know, knew that I was trouble, and so her mother didn't like me very much, but couldn't stop her from seeing me.  And so, you know, there was that tension.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so she wasn't really a street person as such--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --herself.  Now that's just because it's u--usually the, the case that street guys really don't want a street woman (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: You know, they--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and so--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and you know, for us, you know, we called them house girls.  You know, it was--that was a different challenge to be able to get a house girl and you know--you know, to get them.  And so the girls on the streets, you know, they were easier, of course, but the house girl was a real challenge.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.  So, but, but she gets pregnant, though, and what--as you're graduating, is that--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and my--so my son was born--we graduated in June [1973] and he was born July 19th [1973].  And so she was very pregnant when we marched.
Speaker 2: So her mother must have really disliked you at this point?
Speaker 1: Oh yes.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So were there any plans to get married or anything, or anything like that?  I mean, what, what was the--
Speaker 1: There were--yeah, the--her mother understood that she was gonna have to bear the brunt of the responsibility because I wasn't working a steady job.  And you know, here I am seventeen, eighteen years old and you know, wasn't responsible.  So her mother was under no illusions about that, and so, you know, that was essentially the deal.  And you know, it's not like her mother met with my parents [Lenora Alvin and Bonnie Alvin] and they came up with, you know, some major game plan.  I was just kind of out there, and it was open-ended.
Story_ID: 156219
Speaker 1: Okay now, a, a couple of things happened that kind of just shake all this up.  And one of 'em is this--is a fellow named Plaz [ph.].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell us that story.  Now who--when did you first encounter him and why was there conflict between you and Plaz?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, on the streets there are guys that you get along with and there are guys that you don't, don't get along with for whatever reason.  And Plaz and I never got along.  He was an older guy.  And so when I was a young--younger teenager, he really, really intimidated me, and he got a thrill out of that, you know.  And you know, there was bullying.  There was a lot of bullying anyway, and you, you just had to deal with it.
Speaker 1: How much older was he than you?
Speaker 2: He was about three years older than me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So let's just say when I was fifteen, he was eighteen, so that was a major gap.  By the time I'm sixteen and he's nineteen, I'm getting older.  He's getting too, but I'm less afraid of him.
Speaker 1: You're actually growing too.
Speaker 2: I'm growing too.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: By the time I'm seventeen, you know, and he's older; I'm carrying a gun; I know how to use a gun now; I will use a gun now; I'm even less afraid of him.  And so at some point, he said something derogatory to my girlfriend, and she came and told me.  And you know, the code of the street is, you know, I gotta respond to that.  So I was with her one night.  By then my son was born.  I had--we had graduated [from Manor High School, later, Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia], and we had him in a stroller, and we were at a carnival.  And we ran into Plaz, and he was with a bunch of his boys.  And so in those days we used to carry--you know, sometimes you'd carry a pouch, and you might have your drugs in there, whatever, your gun, whatever.  And I had some drugs and my gun in the pouch.  And so I saw Plaz in--we saw Plaz.  And he walked up to my girlfriend, and he pointed a finger at her--he wagged a finger in face, because when he had said something to her she had sort of given him the middle finger.  And he wagged a finger in her face and started cursing at her and saying what he was gonna do to her.  I'm standing right there, and his boys are there.  And so I know number one, if I don't do something, he and his boys are gonna jump me anyway.  I'm armed though.  And so I said something to him.  I knew he was gonna say something back, and lo and behold he threatened me.  And so I told my girlfriend, you know, to take my son.  And she knew then what was gonna happen, so she took him.  She walked away, and Plaz and his boys started surrounding me.  And so he was a little--we were a little closer than you and I, and so I pulled the gun and I shot him.  And he fell and as he was going down, I, I ran up to him and I was gonna him--once he hit the ground I was gonna shoot him again.  And I heard someone call my name, and someone said, "No, Nate, don't do it."  And a guy from the neighborhood came and grabbed my hand so that I didn't shoot him again, and he grabbed the gun.  And so by then, you know, there was chaos at this carnival because of the gunshot, you know, and people started scattering.
Story_ID: 156220
Speaker 1: I got a ride home and went and told my stepfather [Bonnie Alvin].  I said you know, "I just shot someone."  And he got dressed and said you know, "Let's go downtown.  You're gone have to turn yourself in."  And so he took me downtown [Portsmouth, Virginia] and I turned myself in.  So we're sitting there in the police station for hours.  So a detective comes out and he says to my stepfather--says, "I'm sorry it's taking so long, but the guy that your son shot they think he's gonna die.  And so we're waiting to see if we're gonna charge your son with murder."  And so it was at that, that point it really dawned on me.  You know, I said, "Murder?  Murder?"  You know, it was interesting, the disconnect, as I think about it now as an adult.  I knew that I had shot this guy at point blank range, but somehow it didn't register in my mind that this guy would die until the police officer said what he said.  And then once he said murder, it registered and it occurred to me, I don't--I don't have the authority to take anybody's life.  And I started praying for Plaz to live.  And so I learned later, they said the bullet missed his heart by a fraction of an inch.  And that's another one of those experiences I had, you know, one of those inexplicable experiences were I feel like I was somehow spared, even though I shot him.  'Cause if this guy died, I would then be charged with murder.  I initially was charged with attempted murder, and it was downgraded.  I pleaded self-defense, and it was downgraded to a felonious assault.  And I went to court and the judge sentenced to me a year--serve a year in prison.  And I told them by then I had enrolled in Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia], and the judge said that he wanted to give me a second chance.  And so he let me do--he set it up so that I could serve my time on weekends.  And so I was supposed to go to school during the week and then on Fridays go and check into jail.  And so what I would do is on Fridays I'd take a hit of acid, you know, get high, go check into jail, and you know, sit in my jail cell and trip for about eight or nine hours, spend the rest of the time sleeping it off, and then my girlfriend would come and pick me up on Sundays.
Speaker 2: So that was an easy way to do the time?
Speaker 1: That was an easy way to do the time.
Story_ID: 156221
Speaker 1: So any rate, so you're trying to do this time e--easily--the easy way by getting high and going to jail.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, but something else happens, though, that, that makes this impossible at some point?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  I mean, I get--I get through that, and you, you know, at this point, I know I'm out of control.  My mother [Lenora Alvin] is trying to get people to talk with me.  I remember she would have the pastor come and talk to me.  And at this point, I'm just--you know, the, the, the-your stereotypical angry black man.  Because I know there's a world out there that I have to go into.  I know that there's something unfair about that world, but if you ask me to articulate it, I couldn't articulate it.  But I knew I did not want to go into the establishment, and I didn't have an alternative plan.  And so I'm leading a life that I know cannot possibly sustain itself, and you know, I don't how it's gonna end.  And so I reach a point where life begins to, you know, really, really lose value to me, and at the point where my life loses value to me, your life loses value to me.  And it becomes easier for me to do something like shoot someone and--you know, or rob some place.  And so I, you know, remember that sometimes we would rob some place and if it was a business, I would halfway expect to be surprised at some point.  I remember one day we robbed a store.  It was an A&P [The Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company].  We were waiting for the clor--store to close and most of the customers to leave, and we were gonna hit the cash registers.  So we hit the place.  We rob the place, and we had parked across a field.  And we were running with our guns across a field, and I'm running and I'm listening.  I, I don't know why that particular night, but I expected to hear a gunshot, and I fully expected to get shot in the back.  And I just sort of kind of knew that eventually it had to end because--I mean, just by the--you know, the numbers.  If you keep doing it--it's--you, you can't go on like that forever.
Story_ID: 156222
Speaker 1: And so I'm on probation for shooting this guy, and maybe six months after that--that was May [1973]--in December, I was finally arrested for armed robbery.  Myself and two other guys we robbed a McDonald's.  We were initially gonna rob a hotel--get there and the place was crowded.  There was some function going on, and so the McDonald's was plan B.
Speaker 2: Now this is interesting because, believe it or not, now this may seem off-beat, but I've interviewed black McDonald's owners and operators.  And part of the discussion is always about how, how McDonald's seems to be immune from robbery in the black community.  That's one of the few places where people feel safe, for some reason.  I don't know why, but why people don't rob McDonald?  But they usually don't.  They, they don't have plexiglass up at their counter.  Families come in there.  Old men come in the morning and sit and drink their coffee and talk.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Mc--McDonald's is an interesting place in that regard.  But, but you decided to rob a McDonald's?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was in a white area, and I don't know that made a difference.  It was--it was--one of the guys who was sort of the leader in our stickup crew, we called him Nutbrain, Nutbrain (laughter) okay.
Speaker 2: He was the leader.
Speaker 1: Right, he was the leader.  And so I'm following a guy we call Nutbrain.  Nutbrain was a--he was a great stickup man, and stickup mean go.  He knew how to scope a place; he knew how to figure out where to part, the whole thing.  And he knew the pickup times for this particular McDonald's.  And they had a side entrance to the McDonald's that was off the restaurant.  And so, you know, this particular night it was--we had only one gun among the three of us that night, a .32, and it was my night to hold the gun.  So we went in the side door and--we went in the side door and stuck up the McDonald's.  We went in the other side and stuck up the McDonald's, we got away--got a few blocks down and were caught.
Speaker 2: So, so the police--the squad cars blocked you off or something, or how did that--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they came from everywhere.  Squad cars came from everyplace.  And--
Speaker 2: This is in a white community?
Speaker 1: Yes, white community.  And I remember, I'm sitting in the back and the police jump out, and they're everywhere.  And my first thought was to just come out blazing, guns blazing.  And so I, I, I didn't and--I didn't and you know, I didn't go with that first instinct.  And I'm glad I didn't because I knew, you know, what would have happened.
Story_ID: 156223
Speaker 1: All right, so the McDonald's robbery, and you all are surrounded, you got a gun.  What did you decide to do with the gun?
Speaker 2: So, we're surrounded by these police and I--you know, they're just-- hopping out of the car, guns drawn, trying--you know, about to surround the car; and like I said, my first gut was to, you know, come out guns blazing and then run.  So I thought I'd shoot, create a distraction, and then run off into the darkness.  And then my second intuition came, almost like a voice, and it just said sit still, your busted.
Speaker 1: Now were you in a--you're in a white part of town--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'm in a white part of town.
Speaker 1: Of, of Portsmouth [Virginia], right?
Speaker 2: Of Norfolk [Virginia].
Speaker 1: Of Norfolk.
Speaker 2: We were in Norfolk.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Right, so quite often we would go to Norfolk, commit the robberies, and then run through the tunnel [Elizabeth River Tunnel] to Portsmouth, okay.  And so I was on Hampton Boulevard in Norfolk.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so when the police--you know, when I decided to sit still, I just sat there and the police came, took us all out of the car, loaded us up, you know, and you know, handcuffed up, loaded us up, and took us down to the jail.
Speaker 1: So I take it that was--everybody else was feeling the same way you were, ur--all our friends in the car?
Speaker 2: There were three of us--
Speaker 1: Three, okay.
Speaker 2: --a guy named, named Charlie Gregg, and Nutbrain was the lead man.  We were each taken in separate cars and so, you know, I remember the ride to the police station.  And my feeling was sort of like, oh, okay, this is how it's gonna end.  I didn't know.  You know, I knew I didn't have control over the ending, and so this is how it's going to end.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what happened when you got to the police station?
Speaker 2: We get to the police station, we got charged, we got thrown in this tank.
Story_ID: 156224
Speaker 1: So everybody--the, the three of you [McCall, Charlie Gregg, and Nutbrain] go, go separately to the police station [in Norfolk, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Right.  We--so we were all taken to the police station.  We were all thrown into what they call the tank.  And I remember that night just, you know, having no place to sleep and finding a piece of a roll of toilet paper and using that as a pillow, you know, making my one phone call.  I made my phone to my girlfriend instead of my parents [Lenora Alvin and Bonnie Alvin], let her know that I had been arrested, and that was the end of that.  I stayed in jail for maybe ten days before I got out on bail.  And within several months, I went back to court and when the judge looked at my record and saw that I was already on probation for a gun charge, that's when he laid it on me.  So he sentenced me to serve twelve years in prison.  Nutbrain and Charlie Gregg were each sentenced to serve eight years a piece in prison.  But again, the judge said because I had a prior gun charge, as well as because I was the gunman that night in the robbery, and the employees from the McDonald's fingered me, you know, during the trial, the judge gave me more time.
Speaker 1: Now did you have much of a defense.  I mean, did you mount any kind of a defense--
Speaker 2: No, they had me, you know.  They had caught us red-handed, and so there wasn't much--like I said, the people were able to finger me very clearly.  We had gotten caught just a few blocks away from the place rather quickly, so there wasn't much of a defense.  The most my attorney could do was, you know, plead mercy.  So I expected--I went expecting to do some time, and I expected to get maybe a five-year sentence.  That was the sentence I had in my head, and that, you know, maybe I'll do a year and a half before I went up for parole.
Speaker 1: So you're like twenty years old.
Speaker 2: Twenty years old.
Story_ID: 156225
Speaker 1: And had you actually--well, were you still in school [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] at this point?
Speaker 2: Yes and no.  I, I, I think I was--you know, on paper in school, but I hadn't been going.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But I had--I had gone long enough to meet a few instructors who saw some potential and were trying to take an interest in me.  One was--she was Algeania [Warren] Freeman, and I think she taught--I wanna say she taught English literature (laughter).  And the other was Reverend Elward Ellis, and he taught philosophy.  And he--we sort of hit it off because, you know, I bopped into his class one day, you know.  I just thought I'd take a philosophy class 'cause it sounded like something hip to do.  And he saw me walking in there and he saw my dress and my style, and so he looked at the class and he said, some of the greatest philosophers in the world hang on the street corners.  And then he had my attention, and so we, we sort of clicked, you know.  He took an interest in me and Algeania Freeman took an interest in me.  And Reverend Ellis as a matter of fact came to court on the day that I was sentence--sentenced.  And I remember after I was sentenced, looking out there and seeing him along with my family members and my girlfriend, all of them sitting there in shock when the judge sentenced me.
Story_ID: 156226
Speaker 1: What did your parents [Lenora Alvin and Bonnie Alvin] say?
Speaker 2: What did they say?
Speaker 1: Did they say anything that you remember about this?
Speaker 2: Everybod--I didn't get a chance to speak to them.  After they sentence you, your hand--I was handcuffed and led away.  And so I got one final glance at them before I was taken out of the courtroom.  And all I could see was they had their hands above--you know, up to their faces just in shock, you know.  And somebody I think cried out, but I couldn't--I didn't know who it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're facing--
Speaker 2: Twelve years.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so for me it felt like a life sentence.  I just couldn't imagine.  I'm thinking: twelve years; I'm twenty years old; I'll be old as hell; I'll be thirty-two when I get out of here (laughter).  And that felt like a life sentence, you know.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And so, you know, I knew that I was faced with this new reality.  It wasn't entirely knew.  I mean, I knew guys who had been in and out of the penitentiary.  I knew that was a--another world that I would have to contend with.  I knew a lot of the rules of the penitentiary because people I knew were going and coming, you know.  And so I knew that was just sort of the next chapter of my life.
