Story_ID: 82822
Speaker 1: [My name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer] and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  And I'd like you to start out by stating your name, including your middle name, and spelling it for us, and your date of birth.
Speaker 2: My name is Rufus McKinney, Rufus W. McKinney, Rufus William McKinney.  My, my birth date is August 6th, 1930.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Rufus, can you spell--
Speaker 2: R-U-F-U-S, William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, McKinney, M-C capital K-I-N-N-E-Y.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born August 6th, 1930.
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is Saturday, March 14th, isn't it?
Speaker 1: Is it the 14th--15th, I thought it was the 15th, okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, March 15th, 19--2003 (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay. And your location here?
Speaker 1: I live in Bethesda, Maryland.  This is in Montgomery County.
Speaker 2: Okay, the address though.
Speaker 1: 5832 Tanglewood, Drive, Bethesda.
Speaker 2: And I'd like to have your occupation.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm retired, but my profession is lawyer.
Speaker 2: And should we say lawyer/lobbyist?
Speaker 1: Lawyer/Business Executive.
Speaker 2: Okay, lawyer/business, okay, that's fine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 82823
Speaker 1: And then, I ask five question of everyone.  They're a little "People" magazine-ish, short answers.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: My favorite food is steak.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Well, Washington, it has to be spring and fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Nassau, Bahamas.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: If your money lasts, your luck will change.
Speaker 1: That's nice.  I haven't heard that one before.  That's a good one (laughter).
Story_ID: 82824
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we're gonna get started.  And I want you to give the name of your father, and if you could give his name and tell us what you know about his background and his, you know, his roots and growing up.
Speaker 2: My father's name was George Dallas McKinney.  He was born in 1895 in Western Tennessee, around Jackson I believe, over there near where the Haleys grew up.  But he grew up in Eastern Arkansas, in the Mississippi River Delta area around Marianna, Arkansas.  His profession was minister, but he was also a cobbler, a shoe repairman.  That was his trade, which he, he learned from his father, whose name was William--I'm sorry, his father's name was Rufus, and I'm named for my, both of my grandfathers.
Speaker 1: Now, did he talk at all, sir, about, you know, his family life and growing up or anything, you know?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, we really didn't have any kind of a written history of his youth.  I remember some of things he told me about growing up in Eastern Arkansas, but I had the advantage of talking with him about these things only towards the end of his life, which was in the early 1970s.  And during that, you know, last, his final three or four years, we did talk quite a bit about his, his youth and that sort of thing.  But I don't really know nearly as much about him as I would, would like to have known.
Speaker 1: Do you--what kind of person would you describe your father as?
Speaker 2: Stern, hardworking disciplinarian, but a good man.
Speaker 1: Do you know how he became a min--what led him to become a minister?
Speaker 2: No, I really don't know the story.  I do know that he became a minister in a fairly new denomination back in the early '20s [1920s] or late, late 19--late teens, 1918, somewhere along in there, when he was a very young man.  His family was AME [African Methodist Episcopal Church] And that was about the time this new denomination was being started called the Church of God and Christ Holiness church.  You've probably heard of them.  And they were converted to that faith, at least my father was, and became a minister in it.  And then he came to Jonesboro [Arkansas] where I was born to establish a church there for that denomination.  I do know that much, and I've talked about that a little bit in my, my memoirs.
Story_ID: 82825
Speaker 1: Now, let's go to your mother.  Can you tell me what her name was and what you know about her family?
Speaker 2: Well, I know a little bit more about her family than I do my father's family.  They did live near each other in that area.  But her was Rosa Anna Thompson, was her name.  She grew up in a little area called Marvell, Arkansas, right outside Marianna.  I think this is in what's called Lee County.  And her father, they were farmers, and I guess my father's father was a farmer as well.  But they owe--they owned their land, which was somewhat different I guess then.  And they had small farms.  And I do recall visiting my mother's folks in, in Marianna.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: You were saying that your mother's family owned their land.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And she grew up on this farm.  And I remember as a youngster, I'm talking about when I was, must have been five or six years old.  One of my earliest memories was of, of an automobile trip from Jonesboro down to visit my grandparents on my mother's side.  And that must have been the early 1930s.  And--
Speaker 2: Do you have any--what was memorable about that trip?
Speaker 1: Well, the most memorable thing about it to me-- and I must have been five or six years old because I think this was my first time riding in an automobile--and I never will forget, as I sat in the backseat of the car and watched the telephone poles go by, they seemed to be moving, and I couldn't understand that.  And that was my most memorable thing, trying to figure out--you know, as your car is moving and you're looking out the side, you see the poles go by, and it--you know, I had the sensation that it was the scenery moving instead of the car moving.
Speaker 2: You know, that's pretty fantastic imagery when you think about it.  So your mother, did she share any stories about her growing up on the farm or you know, about family life, or?
Speaker 1: Well, she talked--she had--she was from a very large family, and it was a kind of tragic family in a lot of ways, because she was the oldest child.  I think there were about ten or twelve children in her family.  But only four or five of them survived.  They, they, they lo--she lost a lot of her siblings while we were very young.  And that's one thing that I found kind of tragic, because it seemed to be always a funeral taking place down, down there that she had to go to.  But she lived a very, my mother lived a very long time.  She died at about the age of eighty-seven in 1984.  And she has a younger sister who still survives, living in Chicago [Illinois], Aunt Eliza, and she's in her mid-nineties now.
Story_ID: 82826
Speaker 1: Now when--what, what kind of person would you describe your mother [Rosa Ann Thompson] as?
Speaker 2: My mother was a housewife, never worked outside the home a day in her life but worked very hard.  She had lots of kids.  There were twelve of us all together.  We lost--she lost her oldest daughter in the flu epidemic in the late--early '20s [1920s].  I don't remember her.  She was not around when I came along.  But she was a hard worker.  She devoted her life to seeing that her kids got a better shot at life than she had.  That was the thing that she was most dedicated to, trying to ensure that we reached a stage where we could survive as contributing members of the society and do well.  That was her lifelong ambition and dream.  She had a dream for me of becoming a schoolteacher, and she always called me professor even when I was a kid.  And when I was in college, she always addressed me when she would write to me as professor, 'cause that's what she wanted me to be.  I'm sorry that I disappointed her by going into the law, but she never really stopped calling me professor.  But she, as I said, she was a hardworking person, but I think her life was her kids and supporting my father in his, in his work as a minister primarily.  The thing I remember about her most is that my father, when he would go away on these trips, which he had to do from time to time, he never packed his own bags.  My mother always did that.  And I tease my wife today because I say she, she's not performing the proper duties for a wife.  Because her job when I used to travel a lot (laughter) was to pack my bags, and she would always remind me: well, I'm your wife not your mother.  So I thought that was kind of funny.
Speaker 1: That's nice.
Story_ID: 82827
Speaker 1: Now, how did your parent, how did your parents meet, do you know that?
Speaker 2: I really don't know.  I think they, they, they were, they attended the same church I believe.  This is when they were youngsters.
Speaker 1: AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church?
Speaker 2: AME Church.  My, my father--my mother's father donated the land for the building of this little country church.  I think it was called Thompson's Chapel, which is her maiden name.  I've never been down there to visit, to, to, to verify that, but that was the story that went around.  And I think they met during the early part of the century as kids growing up in a similar, in the same area.
Story_ID: 82828
Speaker 1: Now you--can you tell me your siblings' name and where you fit in the birth order?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: And can you give their names (unclear) for me?
Speaker 2: Okay, in birth order, the oldest, as I said, who died very young, is Luvesta (ph.).  The second oldest, who still survives, is my sister Isora (ph.).  She's a retired schoolteacher now living in Hampton, Virginia.  My oldest brother, Robert, passed away in 1989.  He's followed by my sister, Esther, who lives here in Washington.  She's a retired secretary with the Federal Trade Commission.  And by the way, my oldest is eighty-four.  Esther is--I shouldn't say this.  I'd better not say that, but she's getting up there, but doing very well, does volunteer work at Howard Hospital now, taking music theory, and just very active.  I'm just hoping that I can be as active when I reach that stage, which isn't too far away.  After Esther there is Marvella (ph.).  She lives in San Diego; Ruth, she lives in La Jolla, California.  She's a retired schoolteacher.  Marvella's a nurse.  Naomi, my youngest sister, is a retired secretary, lives in Cleveland, Ohio.  I'm next in the line.  I'm the, I guess, seventh child.  I'm not sure which one that is--eighth, seventh amongst the survivors.  George, who's the most famous sibling of mine, he's a bishop in the Church of God in Christ over the Seventh District of California, lives in San Diego, and by the way, he was just in town last week.  He's being considered for the job of chaplain of the United State Senate.  So he's amongst three people being considered for that.  He's next to me in age; Jesse, who is a minister and social worker in San Bernardino, California; Charles is a retired college administrator, but unretired recently, lives in Fort Meyers, Florida.  He is an administrator at the new Florida Gulf Coast university of--down that was just recently opened in Fort Meyers.  I believe it's Gulf Coast, part of University of Florida system.  But he retired about eight or nine years ago from University of California, Santa Barbara as the dean of admissions at University of California at Santa Barbara.  Charles--Lorenzo is a dentist and minister here in Washington area and formerly a professor up at dental school at Howard University.  Let's see, Lorenzo, then there is Ernest.  Is that, is that the whole group?  I believe it is.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, Ernest is the baby.
Speaker 1: And what is that--
Speaker 2: And he's a lawyer in Fresno, California.  I think I got 'em all.  Did that--is that twelve?
Speaker 1: I think I, I have at least twelve (laughter)--(unclear)--if I mis-added (unclear).  I had thirteen, but I, I didn't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, you've got the one that, that died.
Speaker 1: Who died, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a right, that's--
Speaker 1: So, so I'm okay (laughter), okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, you're all right.
Speaker 1: What is amazing, everyone's done so well.
Story_ID: 82829
Speaker 1: Let's go to your, you know, your, your childhood, because I wanna know what family life was like.  Because you came into a family where, you know, your father was a minister.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So there were--so I just want you to sort of describe in--
Speaker 2: Well, family--the, the one word I would use to describe my family life was, is it's crowded; there were lots of us.  And it's interesting because I'm doing these memoirs, you know, and I've gone back over that period.  And it's really kind of fun to recall that because--and while you would think about the twelve of us, not, not more than five or six were at home at any one time because of the span that--one thing I say in the book is that my father did a good job of planning because there's at least two years between each one of, of the siblings, so that by the time my earliest memories, which would be in the, in the, I'd say the mid to late '30s [1930s], my oldest sister was about ready to go to college.  So I, I--my er--see, another thing that's about my family that's rather unique is that all of my sisters are older than I am, and I have five younger brothers.  And of course, growing up in a family like that, I remember mostly my brothers.  My sisters, you know, we got along, but they were older, and they were always kind of like surrogate mothers to me as I grew up.  But we lived in, in Jonesboro, where I was born, and most modest circumstances; everybody was poor.  And this is during the depths of the Depression that I can remember.  My childhood and--was from the '30's [1930s].  World War II came along and kind of changed the economic circumstances of a whole lot of people in this country, and it certainly was true in, in Jonesboro [Arkansas].  Things perked up a little bit then.  But I remember the Roosevelt programs to get food and money into the hands of people who were struggling to survive.  I remember going to what we used to call a commissary to pick up commodities, cheese and dried milk and stuff like that.  You're too young for that, but--
Story_ID: 82830
Speaker 1: Yeah, but that was kind of like the way it was. But my father, while he was a minister, and he pastored the little church in Jonesboro [Arkansas], which was never enough to support a family, but, but he had a shoe repair shop right there on the north side of Jonesboro.  Jonesboro [Arkansas] is an interesting little town.  It's in the Foothills of the Ozarks, not quite in the Delta, closer to, you know, Fayetteville, in that area, that-seventy miles northwest of Memphis [Tennessee] and up not too far from the Missouri border.  But we--it was not--we lived in town, but we farmed.  So my memories are my father had a shop, he was a minister, and he was a sharecropper who lived in the city, which meant that he had an arrangement with a person who owned forty acres of land not far from town, within walking distance of our house.  And he would provide the labor; the guy would provide the capital I guess you'd say, by the, the equipment and that sort of thing; and they would share the proceeds of the operation at the end of the year.  That's basically what he did during the mid '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: Did he ever talk about having issue with the proceeds that were gotten at the end, or was it a fair--
Speaker 1: No, it was a black guy who owned the land that--well, that didn't mean that we, we had (laughter) no problems.  But the guy who owned the land and with whom my father sharecropped, we never had that kind of problem.  What the problem we did occasionally was that when--during the--we, we grew cotton and corn.  And of course, corn is a very important crop for livestock as well as for making meal to carry over the winter.  But it's also used when it's fresh, you know, like fresh corn you get in the grocery store.  And we would have disputes with the owner because occasionally we would harvest some of the fresh corn to have with--for food during the growing season.  And there was always the claim, well, you, you took too much of it away so that we didn't have enough to share at the end of the year when you take the mature corn and take it to a meal to be ground and to, and to meal, which would be shared, that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 82831
Speaker 1: And sir, if you take yourself back to Jonesboro [Arkansas] in those, you know, early years, can you sort of think back and remember what sights, smell, and/or sounds, you know, or all three that remind you of your childhood of growing up?
Speaker 2: What sights now?
Speaker 1: No, no, then, what sights, like if you think back or think, you know, what sights or sounds or smells.
Speaker 2: Well, Jonesboro was a very clean, small town.  And the things--the sights that I think of when I think of Jonesboro would be the farmers coming into town on weekends to have fun.  It was a, it was a town that, you know, in Arkansas, in that time of year, they had local option.  Some counties were dry; some counties were, were wet; and Jonesboro had--was, was a, was a wet county, I believe, so people would come there to entertain themselves on the weekend.  And I, I remember a lot about that.  I, I shined shoes in a shoe shop while I was in high school, and even before that.  And I'd look forward to the weekend because the farmers would come to town that shoes were dirty, and they all wanted to really look spiffy so they would get their shoes shined.  And I remember that about the people who came in.  Even though they were most modest circumstances, I remember the care and the concern they had for their appearance and the shoes.  But insofar as the sights, it was, it was a city; it had paved streets; it had, you know, downtown areas.  Before the big malls and shopping centers came in, downtown as a big deal.  And it had all of the conveniences of a city, although it was very small.  I thought the town was no more than 10 or 12,000 people.  But we had taxi service.  We didn't have bus service.  And the thing I remembered most is that walking from my--we lived on the North Side.  The high school was on the East Side.  Between us and the high school was the downtown area, three or four miles, and we had to--I had to walk from, from the third grade on across town to go to school.  And I remember the thing that, that that I remember most deciding from one day to the next which route to take to go down to, to school.  That were just probably a dozen different ways you could go.  And it just depended lot on what the weather was like and who you happened to hook up with to, to walk to get over there and that sort of thing.  As far as sounds, I don't, I don't recall any industrial sounds, but there were some industrial facilities there, the cotton gin, the, the compress, where my father would work sometimes where they took the cotton to be processed for shipment and that sort of thing.  And I guess the most important sound I remember was that Jonesboro was a railroad town.  Two major railroad lines came through there, the Frisco and the Cotton Belt, and this was on the main line from St. Louis [Missouri].  And the Cotton Belt and the Frisco coming from Chicago [Illinois] and up that way, they would all come through Jonesboro.  And they had roundhouse there would they repair the railroad equipment, locomotive and stuff.  And I remember those sounds and when diesel engines came in, how, how that was different than the old steam locomotives coming through there.  That's what I remember about Jonesboro.
Story_ID: 82832
Speaker 1: [I'm] talking about my mother's [Rosa Ann Thompson] and my father's [George Dallas McKinney] --
Speaker 2: Side.
Speaker 1: --sides.  You know, they were--
Speaker 2: Your brothers--their brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1: Their brothers and sisters, and contra--in contrast to my, my wife now.  They--she grew up in Indianapolis [Indiana].  Her mother and father were born there.  Her sisters and brothers all live there, and their kids live there, and their kids live there, their grandkids.  So you know, they're just all over and close by.  We never had close relatives near us in Jonesboro [Arkansas] that I know about.  And it was, you know, it wasn't far away.  Marianna's only about a hundred miles from Jonesboro, but, you know, in the '30's [1930s] a hundred miles is a long ways.
Speaker 2: Now, with--let's--how--church was a very predominant part of your life, right, and was--
Speaker 1: Well, it certainly was.
Speaker 2: And what was the--I'm trying to get a sense of the community.  Which street did you live on?  Do you remember your address?
Speaker 1: Yes, well, my--the, the last address we had was 515 Third Street, Jonesboro.  I remember that.  That's the house I--we moved to in about 1940.  So I was about--
Speaker 2: So you were at--
Speaker 1: --eight or ten years old.  Before that we lived on Gordon Street.  That was only like two or three blocks away.  And I was born on Main Street in Jonesboro.  I don't remember the address of, of that house, but it was also within a block or two; all three of these houses were within a mile of each other.  And growing up in that kind of--this is a city now; these are streets with sidewalks, no pavement on the streets, but gravel and that sort of thing.  There were two black communities in Jonesboro, the North Side community and the East Side community.  The East Side community was the larger of the two.
Story_ID: 82833
Speaker 1: And they, they built a little one-room schoolhouse on the North Side [of Jonesboro, Arkansas] so that the black kids who were in first and second grade wouldn't have to go all the way over to the East Side until they were a little bit older.  And that's--
Speaker 2: So that's--
Speaker 1: --that's where I went to the first two grades, in a one-room schoolhouse.
Speaker 2: Do you remember that one-room schoolhouse--
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: --and your teacher?  Can you--
Speaker 1: Oh yes, I remember, but I don't remember the teacher's name.  There was one teacher who taught both first and second grade.  They sat on either side of this one room.  In the middle was a big potbellied stove, which provided--see, Jonesboro is kind of like north, and it got cold there in the wintertime.  Matter of fact, my high school team was called the Jonesboro Eskimos, and we were the northern most black high school in the state of Arkansas.  And--but we--I went to this one-room school first two grades.  I don't remember the teacher's name, but I do remember that there was a high school student who lived not across the street who came in to build the fire so that it would be warm when we came.  And we--I lived, when we lived--when we moved to 515 Third Street, the one-room school was on Second Street, which was only one block away--one and a half blocks away.  And I do remember going there for the first two years.
Speaker 2: Did you like school from the beginning?
Speaker 1: I loved school.  I enjoyed school because school was a relief for me.  As the oldest kid, son, pretty much, I had to work a lot, and this was in--when we were doing the farming business.  My father drafted me to be his helper.  And so during the spring planting season, I would help him on the farm by plowing and that sort of thing, and he would take me out of school to do that sometimes. Now, when, when were the, when was the planting season, what months and--
Speaker 2: The planting season was from I'd say late March, early April until mid-May.
Speaker 1: And what, what time would you have to get up with your father?
Speaker 2: Oh, we'd get up very early, like 5:30, 6:00 and try to be in the fields just after the sun comes up.
Story_ID: 82834
Speaker 1: Didn't you have one other brother, though?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, your--
Speaker 2: The older brother is Robert.  But my older brother left home to go to Chicago [Illinois] (laughter) at--I think I was about seven years old.  I remember this taking--this was a traumatic time for me because he was about sixteen, he was sixteen years old when he left, and he was born--this was about--he was born about 1920, '22' [1922], somewhere along in there.
Speaker 1: Was he trying to get out of the South and the--
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  I really think it was a more of an economic thing.  You know, at that time, sixteen-year-old boys, they were considered almost grown, although he did not finish high school.  He hadn't finished high school in Jonesboro [Arkansas], but his uncle had a shoe repair shop in Chicago.  And my father decided that his uncle needed--his uncle needed some help.  He decided to allow him to go to Chicago, finish his high school.  He graduated from Englewood High School in Chicago.  I don't know whether you know where that is, but I remember that very vividly.  He graduated and did I think his last two years in, at Englewood.  And--but that, that affected me, because he was not around much of my adolescence.  He never came back after he was in Chicago.  He must have come down to visit once or twice, but we--he wasn't around most of my teenage years.
Speaker 1: And why do you say it affected you?
Speaker 2: Well, I would have liked to have had an older brother.  See, I had all older sisters.  And I think having an older brother around may have taken a little bit of the weight off of me because I became a man at like age twelve.  I felt that I had responsibilities of an adult person at that early age, pretty much.  When my father would go away, 'cause he had a church down Southern part of the state.  He'd leave town on, say, on Friday and come back Monday.  If I had--if there was any work to be done on Monday on the farm, that was my job.  So, during that time, I was sort of the straw boss, and that was--that affected me a lot.
Story_ID: 82835
Speaker 1: So family life, what was it like then in many way?  So are you saying that you had definitely your chores and things to do?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Everyone had chores?
Speaker 2: Everybody had chores.  At that time, there was no central heating in any of these houses, no indoor plumbing in any of these houses that I lived in, none.  My first indoor plumbing was when I went away to college.
Speaker 1: So you had your outhouse?
Speaker 2: Outhouse and you had to cut wood--I mean log--we call 'em logs.  We would, we would have, you know, firewood.  And some of the firewood we would, we would pick up along the railroad tracks.  You know, when the men would work on the railroad replacing crossties, those old crossties became fuel for the poor people if they could go and pick it up, bring it--we'd have to bring it home and cut it up for firewood.  Now this was probably a very dangerous thing because those things were infused with creosote for preservation, and they--but they burn very warm and hot.  But the thing I remember was that, well, you asked me about school, I liked school, but because school was relief for me.  It was a way to kind of get away from the other responsibilities.  And I knew, and my mother instilled this I think more in us than anything else, that school was the way out of the kind of existence that most of my family and friends had.  My mother was a firm believer in education, so was my father, but she--he was not as (laughter) committed to it I guess as she was.  But she insisted that, that we, we do well in school.  All of my brothers and sisters finished high school, which was my--which was kind of unusual then.  My oldest sister, the one who's a retired teacher in Hampton [Institute] and went way to college, she preceded me at AM and N [Arkansas AM&N College] by ten years.  She went--she graduated there about 1941 or '42' [1942].
Story_ID: 82836
Speaker 1: So would you--so, now your father's [George Dallas McKinney] church, did he have a church in Jonesboro [Arkansas] or was his--
Speaker 2: He founded the church in Jonesboro, but he left there.  He, he gave up that church about 1942 or '43' [1943] and took a bigger church.  See, Jonesboro did not have a big black community.  So, but he went Down South, Pine Bluff [Arkansas], where the school is, but first to a place called Malvern [Arkansas].  He had a couple of churches down in, in, in an area of the state where the percentage of black population was much greater than Jonesboro.
Speaker 1: Now with--how large was the black population there?  You said the population--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In Jonesboro?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was about ten--you said the whole--
Speaker 2: The whole population was--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --about 10,000.  I would guess, I would guess the black population is probably around a thousand people, maybe less.
Speaker 1: And so when your, when your father was pasturing churches outside, where guys, were you attending the church in Jonesboro?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were attending--we, we remained--he never moved--we never moved from Jonesboro.
Speaker 1: Okay, now the Church of God in Christ, do you--does it speak tones to you?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was the Holiness church.
Speaker 1: It's a Holiness, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was what we would call Pentecostal, Evangelical, all of those things.
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: It was a very, very difficult religion to adhere to because they believed in living a clean life, no alcohol, no chasing girls.  When you chased a girl you'd better marry her, okay.  So that was a tough time.
Speaker 1: So how (laughter)--I know--that's what I'm say--so how--and you have the, you have, you, you think you're in a wet towel on top of it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, I, I've always--and this is--I've called myself the black sheep of the family.  I never really committed to the tenets of that church, and I told my parents that, but I was not strong enough then to say I will not.  I did not--I, I, I went through the motions.  We had to go to church two or three times a week, twice on Sunday, and it was, you know, that was the way you did it.  The Church of God in Christ was right around the corner from the St. John Baptist Church, which is where the, the good looking girls and the ones that you could fool around with went (laughter).  But the church that, that we attended probably never had more than twenty members, so you know, the flick--the pickings were very slim.  In high school, my--the girl I liked were--was a member--her family was AME [African Methodist Episcopal].  The other one, the second girl I liked, her fam--her father was the CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal] pastor in the city.  Those were the only two girls that I, I really paid any attention to.
Speaker 1: So there was an AME church, CME church, and the Pentecostal church?
Speaker 2: And the Baptist.
Speaker 1: And a Baptist church?
Speaker 2: Oh, there was more, there was more than, there, there were even more than that.  Now the Baptist church and the Church of God in Christ were the only two churches on the North Side.  On the East Side, that's where the AMA, the CME, and there may have been others.  I know there was a Baptist over there too.
Speaker 1: Now when I grew up, there were pretty strong, you know, divisions between the churches.  You were either a--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: And, and so wa--did--is that the same--
Speaker 2: That created very--see, the fact that, that my family was Church of God in Christ, and you know, one of their tenets is that everybody else is going to hell if they don't become a member of the Church of God in Christ, okay.  That didn't put me in good stead with the Baptist kids and the Methodist (laughter) kids and all of those because they resented that.  That was a tough thing, and, and I talk about this a little bit in, in my memoirs.  But no, being a member of the Church of God in Christ set you really apart.  The girls didn't wear lipstick, makeup; we couldn't go to the movies; we couldn't go to dances, any of that stuff.
Story_ID: 82837
Speaker 1: Did you ever speak in tongue yourself?
Speaker 2: No, I'll tell you what, they put you on the mourners' bench.  They did this in all, all--the Baptist churches too.  You know, if--when you become converted or when, you know, when you join, they have to say what you you've got the Holy Ghost.  And you get on the mourners' bench, and you carry on there.  The old people would stand around and look at your funny, and they'd say yeah, I guess he's ready.  So, that's how you got inducted.  Well, I went through all of that, but I never really believed it.  And--but as a minister's son, you had to go along with the program.  And, and when I went to college I began to assert my own autonomy as an individual insofar as what its--why my religious, my real religious beliefs were.  Then, then my father and my family still belongs to that church.  My, my brother here, the bishop, as I told you, out in California does very well.  They're all college graduates.  They engaged in wonderful pursuits insofar as social activity is concerned, but the theology I never bought.  Now, of course, my idea of it perhaps was distorted.  As a youngster you, you saw and read much into it that probably went beyond what was necessary.  I never will forget one time.  See, the Church of God in Christ--you know, the Assemblies of God church, which is now The White Church, was founded essentially by the same--by the black guys who created the Church of God in Christ.  They split off because of, you know, during the segregation era you just couldn't have black men and women leading the con--leading a denomination like that, so they split off, created the Assemblies of God, same basic tenets.  But I never will forget when I was in kid these itinerant preachers would come through.  And there was once this white guy came through, and of course my father or the pastor would invite them to come and speak at the church.  And they'd always raise 'em some money, 'cause they were kind of moving.  Like, I don't call 'em hobos, but, whatever, they were kind of itinerant preachers.  And I never will forget this time this guy came to the church and you know, he was fire and brim, white guy, fire and brimstone preacher.  We raised--they raised him some money and of course, he left.  The next day, I'm walking to school through town this time, and I see this guy smoking a cigarette.  And I said Jesus Christ, how can that be?  Because smoking was a sin, you know, you couldn't do that and be saved.  And that just affected me a great deal.  I'm just a kid then, but I say, I said that was my first really saying, well, you know, maybe there is some hypocrisy going on here.  So you have to be a little bit skeptical about a lot of this because a lot of the teachings just kind of went against human nature, in my view.  Just was just my personal view.
Speaker 1: Did you ever discuss that with your, your brothers and sisters, or did they buy in more than you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think my brother, certainly sisters all brought--bought into it.  They, they--my sister here now, the one who's eighty years old, when talk with her about these attitudes I have, oh, she says, "I gotta pray for you because you're going to hell if you don't stop that kind of talk.  You just can't talk that way."  Now, now, then, and, and one of my younger brothers, who is a minister and a dentist here, he's also very fundamental.  He's, he believes a literal Bible, even though he graduated from AM and N [Arkansas AM&N College], went to dental school, practiced his dentistry.  He's got a good education, but he believes that.  And we have these interesting discussions whenever we get together as family here, especially when my brothers from Cal-California here.  These theologic--we have some very, very difficult and some interesting talks, and we still do.
Story_ID: 82838
Speaker 1: So, you, as a child, let me just understand.  Were you a very, were you introspective and you know, a thinking child or questioning?  Were you rambunctious?  Were you--I'm just trying to--everyone in your family had to sort of be mannerly I would assume.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, but I think I was the more--I said I was a black sheep.  That's not the right term.  I was a more rebellious type, although I never got too far outside the traces.  But I was the questioning type.  And you know, drinking and that sort of thing never was really appealing to me.  I didn't really wanna smoke.  I just, that was--you know, remember the, the images of the sophisticated person and that sort of thing, you smoked and you had a cocktail and that sort of thing, but these images, we--I couldn't go to the movie, but sometimes they'd show movies at, at school we could show--we could see the movies.  But no, I wouldn't say that I was unruly.  I do remember rebelling against some of the--as, as I got, I got a little older and I was a young teenager, I remember when I was like fourteen, fifteen years old, biggest fight I had with my father was about participation in athletics in high school.  See, the church kind of frowned on athletic type activities, football, basketball, all that stuff.  But I said I wanna play basketball and football.  And even though my father wasn't too keen on it, I said I'm going to play.  And they finally relented and said that's okay.  So I did play football, played basketball, not very good at it 'cause I was too small and too short.  I never weighed more than 120 pounds when I was in high school.  But I decided that that was something that most boys wanted to do at that age, and that's what I did.  And it was kind of funny because I'd went out for the team when I was at the end of my--well, in 1945.  I was fifteen years old.  And at that time, veterans were returning to high school from World War II in, in our, in our community.  So I played against World War II veterans in high school when, when they came back.
Story_ID: 82839
Speaker 1: Now when you--did your--I just wanna understand the project, projection--I mean progression through school.  Your elementary you attended to, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I attended--see, it was only--there was--Booker T. Washington school was first through twelfth.
Speaker 1: Okay, but, but they had an--but--
Speaker 2: The, the one-room schoolhouse was on the other side--was on our side of town.
Speaker 1: Was that Booker T. Washington--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, that was just the North Side school--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: --for the youngst--
Speaker 1: --(unclear) the name?
Speaker 2: Then--I don't remember a name, just the North Side school.
Speaker 1: And the that's when, starting in third grade, you--
Speaker 2: Third grade, I went to--
Speaker 1: You went over to the Booker T.
Speaker 2: --Booker T.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then Booker T. took--wait, Booker T. took you up to the twelfth grade?
Speaker 2: Right, that's my class picture, from Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 1: So that's, so you--how many students were in Booker T.'s school?
Speaker 2: The whole school was probably 300, 350--
Speaker 1: For, from, from--
Speaker 2: --from, for first through twelfth.  You see, it was a small black community, understand.  We had commuter students.  You see, the most of the kids in--most of the blacks in that part of the state, the little towns around Jonesboro, only provided secondary schools for blacks up to the eighth grade so that if a kid, say, from Marked Tree, which is like forty miles east of Jonesboro, wanted to go to high school, he'd have to come to Jonesboro and make an arrangement with somebody to stay while he went in high school, that sort of thing.  Otherwise, you just graduated at eighth grade and went to work somewhere.
Speaker 1: And Jonesboro had, had the school because it was in this, it was essentially the city, and that was the place the people could come.
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: So, everyone else was more out in the farm--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --farming area.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Story_ID: 82840
Speaker 1: Now, were there teachers, you know, at the school that, you know, influenced you, you know, once you got to Booker T.?  And I'm sure it's the same thing where you had, you got the--did you get books that were not--
Speaker 2: We got the hand-me-down books from the white high school, at Jonesboro High School.  We got their books with, you know, kids write in 'em and that--when, when you get 'em when they wore out over there we got them at Jones--at Booker T.  And there were--probably the best teachers, and motivators, and inspirers of all the teachers I've had were at Booker T. Washington High School.  There were great teachers there, but they were not necessarily the best trained teachers.  We had teachers who were just, some of 'em were, you know, recently out of college.  But the, but at the elementary level, that is first through seventh grade, the same teachers were there throughout my time.  And I remember their names.
Speaker 1: Can you give some of them?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Mrs. E. Boone Watson was the third grade teacher from the very beginning.  Mrs. Green taught second grade at, at--on, on--at the main school.  Mrs. Murphy, who lived not far from us on the North Side, taught fourth grade.  She was probably the most influential teacher I ever had, fourth grade teacher, really dedicated woman.  The fifth and sixth grade, let me see who were those?  But fifth and sixth grade were in a kind of an auditorium; they kind of shared a big space.  And I can't remember who that teacher was right now, but Mrs. Murphy, Mrs. Watson, Mrs. Green.  And in high school, Mrs. Tyler taught literature and English, didn't have good math teachers.  We had no laboratories at the school, no--the teacher that was most influential at the high school level was the principal, Mr., Mr. Smith.  And he was a guy who got me interested in the New Farmers of America, which is my first adventure in high school.  He had me compete for the public speaking contest when I was in the eighth grade.  He picked me because he knew that I could memorize speeches.  You had to, you had to memorize and recite about a twelve or fourteen-minute speech in this contest.  So he entered me.  This was a Smith-Hughes program.  This is, this is during the '40's [1940s], supported by the Department of Agriculture and the farming communities.  They would provide money for farming training type stuff.  While we were a city school, we, we had those programs.  Mr. Smith came as principal and got me involved as this, and that took me on my first adventures around the country.  I, I, I won the contest at the local level, and that sent me to the state contest, which was held at the, at, at [Arkansas] AM&N College in Pine Bluff.  That was my first trip down there, age fifteen.  Well, I was not quite fifteen then; it was 1945.  And Mr. Smith got my parents' permission to drive me down to Pine Bluff to participate in the state New Farmers of America Public Speaking Contest.  That pitted me against similar contestants from other black schools in the state of Arkansas.  I won that contest, which sent me to the regional, which was held at Grambling College in Ruston, Louisiana.  I'm, I'm fifteen years old.  I'm traveling all over.  This is the first time I'd ever been more than fifty miles away from home.  But we went down there, and I competed against the contestants from the other Southeastern, or the Southern states, and I won that.  So, I had to go to the national, which was held at Tennessee State in, in Nashville.  This was all during the spring and summer of 1945.  And that was, of course, against the contestants from all of the other regions of the country.  I came in third, and that was really a great time for me.
Story_ID: 82841
Speaker 1: Yes.  Well, first I should tell you what the prize was.  Third place--first place prize was a scholarship to a college, first and second.  Third was a Bulova watch, gold Bulova watch, and I, I really thought that was great.  But my speech, which--and this is the first time I remember ever telling a lie, that I know about.  One of the rules of the contest was that the student should write his own speech.  Now my professor--I mean Professor Smith, Herbert Smith, wrote the speech.  I guess he wrote it.  Well, he brought it to me and said you learn this, you, you memorize this.  Okay, so I didn't write it.  I may have talked with him about some phrases and stuff like that.  But he said if anybody asks you whether you wrote this speech, you gotta tell 'em yes.  And I--nobody ever asked me, but I had to commit to do that.  But the speech was about the importance of crop rotation in order to prevent the land from becoming depleted and unfertile, that something similar to that.  That was not--that's my recollection.  You know, in farming--I don't know how you know about farming--land gets tired if it's planted with the same kind of crop year after year.  So, one of the principles of, of good farming practice at that time was if you planted this acreage with, with cotton for two or three years, maybe at the third year you ought to switch it to soy beans or something or a different type of crop; that's called crop rotation.  And that had to do with--and then there are certain crops that, that produce nitrogen and other chemicals for the soil that, you know, are supportive, and they can restore the productivity of the land.  But that's what the speech was about.
Speaker 2: Now, so it was a fourteen-minute speech?
Speaker 1: About twelve or fourteen minutes.
Speaker 2: And this organization, was it somewhere--we interviewed an agriculturalist in, in Fort Valley, Georgia, that had, was head of something called the Ham and Egg Show.  Was this--it wasn't--
Speaker 1: I've never heard of that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But this was the black counterpart to the Futures Farmers of America.  The Future Farmers of America was the white organization that did the same thing.  The New Farmers of America was the black organization.  They were all supported; these were programs that were federally, were supported by federal dollars in farming areas throughout the country then.
Speaker 2: And this was a youth-oriented program too.
Speaker 1: Yes, it was a young people (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Now, would people be encouraged to actually go into agriculture at all or not--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, that the, the agriculture was the dominant industry in that part of the country then, they're dominant by far.  Everything was about farm, even, even in the city of Jonesboro [Arkansas], which was the city, the big employers, with the cotton gin, the compress, the cotton compress, and things associated with farmers bringing their crops and their activities, even the financial part of farming, you know the--you had to borrow money to buy seeds and fertilizers.  And that sort of thing took place in, in Jonesboro.
Story_ID: 82842
Speaker 1: And do you remember how you felt when you first stood in front, you know, when you were first competing?
Speaker 2: Well, I have very little memory of the first stage of this contest.  As it got more and more significant, as--you know, when I got to, to Pine Bluff [Arkansas], I remembered that very much so, because this was my first chance being at the, at the state college for blacks.  And the person who was in charge of the New Farmers of America program at that time in, at, at AM and N [Arkansas AM&N College], and the head of the Department of Agriculture, which was the largest department of the school, was Professor [Simon] Haley, who is the father of George Haley and the father of Alex Haley.  See, I met Professor Haley when I was fifteen years old.  He was the head of the Department of Agriculture, and they were the people who put this contest on.  And he was a great guy, very mild mannered type of a person, and a good singer, good tenor voice.  And I, I remember when we went down it was after school was out, so we stayed in the dormitories with the other contestants.  And that was quite an exciting experience for me.  But Professor Haley was guy.  And all the contestants were there together, and the, and the judges were the faculty members from the department of--from the agricultural, the school of agriculture down there.
Speaker 1: So were you completely surprised when you heard your name being--
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I thought I'd done, 'cause I, I had really memorized (laughter) that speech.  And I always had some presence, at least at that time I thought.  One thing my father and mother always taught me then, and all of their kids, was that you're as what--as good as anybody;  You are not inferior to anyone, that poverty is a state of mind, not a condition of being without things.  They taught me that from the very beginning.  They taught all of us that.  I still believe that.  I don't think there is any such thing as poverty except in the mind, that one has all kinds of riches if he believes in himself and the capacities that God has given him in his mind.
Speaker 1: So now when you came back from Grambling, right, from Louisiana?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause that was that lat--where you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, Reston yes.
Speaker 1: When you came back, so did you come back to a hero's--'cause your family wasn't traveling around--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, they weren't traveling with me.  They, my family was proud.  They, they were, you know, they were very glad and they were elated that, that, that, that I had won.  I think they probably didn't expect it, but nevertheless, the fact that I was gonna be at the national in, in this big city of Nashville, Tennessee, which you know is--that little--good distance away from, from Jonesboro, they were happy about it.  But there was no hero's welcome or anything like that.  The one thing: when I came in third at the national, there was a story in the Jonesboro paper about it.  And that was, that was quite something, to see your name.  This is the white paper now, not the black paper; that was the daily paper.  I forget--I'm gonna try to get that if I can find somewhere in the archives.  I don't have it, but I'm sure Professor Smith gave them the story, and they wrote it up.  But it was secondary to the big story that day.  That was the day they dropped the atomic bomb on Hiroshima, August 6th, 1945.  That was what made it memorable to me, that my story was overshadowed by, by that story.  But no, it was a big thing that, that the paper would, would run a story about this fifteen-year-old.  And you got to remember, I was, I was at eighth grade.  I was completing eighth grade.
Story_ID: 82843
Speaker 1: I went to ninth grade in the fall of 1946.  I didn't tell you the story.  See, my life has been a year behind from the beginning, in that when I was scheduled to start school at age six, the day before school--this was in September of '36' [1936]--we were playing in the yard with some of my friends.  And I jumped off the back porch onto a broken Coca Cola bottle and almost severed my right foot, so my mother held me out of school for a whole year.  So I didn't start school until I was seven years old, so I'm kind of out of phase with, with my contemporaries in that regard, and have been.
Speaker 2: Now, in high school, so, Mr. Jone--he had you sort of pegged, Mr. Jones, right, prin-
Speaker 1: You mean Mr. Smith.
Speaker 2: Smith, I'm sorry, Mr. Smith.
Speaker 1: Herbert Smith, right.
Speaker 2: Right, he had you pegged for, for moving forward?
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so, you came back, you said you were in ninth grade, right?  So you had--
Speaker 1: Well, I was coming up into the ninth grade.
Speaker 2: Ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So you came back after winning third place, and entered ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 82844
Speaker 1: And so when you--what were those other three years of school like?  Were--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --you were playing sports at that time.
Speaker 2: I started playing football after ninth grade.  Well, see, they considered ninth grade high school I guess.
Speaker 1: Right, (unclear) football.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't play football the whole time because I figured out that I was not really cut out to be a star, although I stayed at it for one to two years.  But when those returning veterans who were outweighing me by fifty pounds, I figured that I had better start trying to figure out something else to do besides play football.  I did play basketball.  But high school was rather uneventful.  It was the same thing.  We were farming during most of that time.  And it was still a struggle for me to maintain my grades, although I finished first in the class, that big class of seven that (laughter) you saw.  But you know, in, in the spring I'd stay out maybe three or four weeks to help get the planting done and come back.  But the teachers were good, some of them.  They would send--now my sisters and some of the others, they didn't have to stay out as much as I did, but they would send me homework to do, and you'd catch up when you could.  When it rained you'd go to school, that sort of thing, but it was an interesting time.  High school in Jonesboro for blacks was a major thing.  The black community supported kids who completed high school.  It was, it was a major celebration for a kid to finish high school--I'm serious--almost equivalent of finishing college here.  Because the class of seven that graduated, started out in '45' [1945] probably a class of thirty, thirty-five, you see.  But that, that's the kind of attrition rate you had.  The girls got pregnant; the boys decided they weren't gonna take the discipline of--see, at that time, the faculty insisted on corporal punishment if you broke any rules, you know.  One of the tragic stories that I remember was one of these young men that I thought was a good guy in high school--what was his name?  I'm trying to think of his name.  But his, he was a son, only child, single parent, worked real hard after school, helped to support his mother.  But I never will forget we were, we were raising chickens at school for the Father/Son Banquet.  We would buy at--in early in the year, we would buy baby chicks, and as a project for the boys, we'd set up--we'd build these chicken coops; keep 'em in the basement of the school, and raise these chicks from infants to the point where they could bevide--provide--the entree for the Father/Son Banquet in May.  And of course, you have to take care of these chicks, you know, changing the newspaper under the coop and feeding 'em and watering them, that's, that was part of your project.  Well, this boy was assigned to do one of the dirty chores that he thought he shouldn't have been asked to do.  And the professor insisted.  And he said I'm not gonna do it.  And he says, if you're not gonna do it, we--I'll have to spank you or something like.  And he said, I'm not gonna take any punishment, and so he had to leave.  That was his--and he was, you know, like a junior in high school, didn't finish because of that.  But there were all kinds of reasons boys would leave, go to the Army or go to take a job somewhere, get married.  The girls got married or pregnant, one or the other.  So, if you started out with thirty kids in the class, five, four years later it was likely to be less than ten.
Speaker 1: Then that explains the small class that graduated.
Story_ID: 82845
Speaker 1: Now did you know where you wanted to go to college?  Was it assumed that you would--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was assumed that I would go to [Arkansas] AM and N [College], but I went there because they offered a scholarship.  At that time, the person who finished first in the class, every black high school in the state got a full scholarship to AM and N.
Speaker 1: And this was state funded?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's AM and--no, this was--I'm--
Speaker 1: And this--I know it's black--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but I'm saying that, that it--
Speaker 2: I understand that's--well, of course, I'm don't--I'm not sure about the white side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that was the only black college--
Speaker 1: Right, I understand.
Speaker 2: --state funded.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now there were several black--I mean white colleges.  There was a white college in, in Jonesboro.  Arkansas State College was there right across the street from our high school, but that was only for the white kids.
Speaker 1: So what, what is the history of Arkansas AM and N, and what does AM and--
Speaker 2: Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal, AM and N: Agricultural School; Mechanical, that's where you went to learn various trades; and Normal was the teaching, teaching profession that they taught.  So those were the three basic emphases on education back in those days.
Speaker 1: So did you go into Normal?
Speaker 2: No, I took--my major was business administration.  Now they had other, other areas you could major in, but those were the principal areas that got most of the funding from the state coffers.  But they had school at (unclear).  They had a major school of education of course, but they had a business school.  I shouldn't say business school.  They had a--they offered a major in business; you could, you could major in English or literature; you could major in economics.
Speaker 1: What made you choose business?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I didn't wanna be a teacher.  I didn't wanna be a preacher.  I didn't think I could qualify for that.  There were very limited options, and I really am not sure.  I guess probably the professors in that school had some influence on me.  Butler T. Henderson--I don't know whether you've ever heard of him--was the head of that department.  He was, I guess, an economist of sorts.  He wound up as the (unclear) of Sigma Pi Phi fraternity, the Boule, of which I'm a member.  But Butler was very interested in--and he came from what you'd call the other side of the tracks.  See, I--we came from the poor side.  There were some blacks who were well, well off, or better off than we were.  Not every black growing up in Arkansas grew up the way I did - Burnett Young, who went on to do great things in Atlanta [Georgia], Guy Darnell.  These were dedicated teachers who saw that there was some potential here I guess, and that's just kind of where I gravitated to.
Speaker 1: Now what--when you got there, I mean besides the fact that you are living in a, you're living on campus, right, in the dorm?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And it has--and what did you--did you realize it was gonna have indoor plumbing?  Had you--you had had exposure to--
Speaker 2: Oh, I'd been down there for--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --when I was fifteen.
Speaker 1: Fifteen, right.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I, I knew that there were places where you could--
Speaker 1: Go indoors.
Speaker 2: --(laughter) go into with indoor plumbing.  I knew that even in Jonesboro [Arkansas], but we just didn't have it.
Speaker 1: Right, but the other thing was that you had, there were people from all over.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So this was--not to say that you hadn't met students before during your competition--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but, but what as--how did you grow up, you know and you know, 'cause college is in many ways a, a maturing process.
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.  Well, as I said, my major emphasis has always been on suc--being successful academically in college, and that was one of my biggest motivators.  I wanted to demonstrate that I could lead my class at [Arkansas] AM and N as I had done in high school.  And I did wind up graduating number two in my class, number one for those who spent four years there.  There was a girl from Little Rock [Arkansas] who came in a senior from transfer, and she had higher grades, but I've kind of discounted that.  But any case, that was my big motivator.
Story_ID: 82846
Speaker 1: I got into the debate program in my freshmen year.  That was the extracurricular activity I chose to get involved with, and that kind of set me on the course I think to becoming a lawyer, because of the skills that I had to develop to be successful as a college debater.  Arkansas AM&N [College] had a reputation amongst all black colleges in the country as one of the best debate programs in, in the country at that time, and a very historic people had, had, had gone through that program.
Speaker 2: Can you tell who some of them are?
Speaker 1: I think Branton was one of them.
Speaker 2: Branton Wiley.
Speaker 1: --Wiley; a couple of judges.
Speaker 2: You mean Wiley Branton.
Speaker 1: Wiley Branton; Leo May--no, I don't think Leo was there; Frank Hollis; one of the pioneers who integrated the University of Arkansas Law School had been there, Silas Hunt.  The school had debated Oxford College when they were on tour of the U.S.  We--and, and while I was in college, we debated Washington University in St. Louis; we debated St. Louis University; we debated Southern Methodist University; we debated schools outside the gambit of normal competition for that, that area; of course, we also debated all of the black schools down there, Texas Southern.  That was when Texas Southern was fairly young school; Wiley College; Bishop College; Jarvis Christian College; Southern University; Xavier University in New Orleans; the schools in Mississippi.  Every year we would take a tour, a kind of a home and home tour.  We would take a tour through all of these schools in, in the spring, and they would come to Arkansas.
Speaker 2: So was your--so, so did you keep in the tradition of the debate team, you know, for AM and N, A, AMN?
Speaker 1: I think so.  We, we won most of our debates, no matter what the competition, and, and, and I became one of the, the sort of the captain of the team, I guess you'd say.  That's where I met my first wife.  We got married while I was in college.  And it was, it was great for me, debating was.  I enjoyed it, and I, I learned the skills that attracted me and also confirmed my idea to become a lawyer.  Because, you know, it meant doing research, writing, making arguments, thinking on your feet.  That sort of thing was emphasized in the program.  And you know, debaters in Arkansas were like rock stars.  You know, they were as well known and as, and as idolized as the star of the basketball team and of the football team but, you know, amongst probably a, a different set of the student body.  But it--we, we would debate in an auditorium and attract four or five hundred students.  That's how important debating was at that time.  Now the program is not nearly what it was then, but that was the kind of thing--that's the way debating was looked at down there.
Speaker 2: So it was looked at almost like it was a spectator sport in many ways.
Speaker 1: Oh yes, indeed.
Speaker 2: The school would come and, and listen.  And how would you choose the subject?
Speaker 1: Oh, it's a national thing.  See, there is a national program; one subject is chosen nationally; all schools in the country debate the same subject every year, one, one top a year; and once that--I forget--I still don't know, and I, I've been trying to figure out who chooses it.  Now it's either the Congress chooses it, or it's a national organization that chooses the subject that's gonna be debated.  I remember one of the subjects was debated during my time: Should the non-communist nations set up an alternative to the UN [United Nations]?  You gotta remember, this was the beginning of the Cold War period when the Russians were not playing along with the Americans' view of how the world ought to be run, and that's when NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] was created.  And that was one of the topics at that time.  Another topic had to do with the Taft-Hartley law, the labor law.  So these are the kinds of subjects that, that were debated, and they were, it was a national topic, so that wherever you traveled everybody's gonna be debating the same.  So you either--you, you, you had the negative and the, and the affirmative of the issue, and each team had to be capable of, of taking either side.
Story_ID: 82847
Speaker 1: And do you remember what you learned about being a good debater at the time?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the most important thing was the ability to anticipate the other person's argument and be prepared to articulate a response even though you may not have planned it out.  See, everybody can make a good speech.  You're debating--there's a format to debating, as you know.  You have, each side has an opening statement.  That's a canned speech, as we call it.  You write that out and memorize it in advance, or you, you have that outline, what you're gonna say to lay out your, your proposition on the issue, whether it's for or against.  But then after your opening speech, the other side presents its opening speech, then you have rebuttals.  That's when the debating really takes place, when you have to respond to the arguments that have been advanced by the opponent and when you have to have the surrebuttal if you, you know, when you're having this kind of back and forth and that sort of thing.  And that's the part about debating that I found to be the most exciting, but also the, the preparing cogent arguments and finding credible and reputable authorities to support what you're opposing or saying.  And that's kind of the legal research part that comes into play, if you are engaged in the practice of law.  That's, that's a skill that I found put me in good stead in that regard.
Story_ID: 83784
Speaker 1: You, well, your--in your--you meet your first, first wife, right, and get married by your junior year, right?
Speaker 2: Right--well, we got married in the summer of ma--at the, leading up to my junior year, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and so both of you--does she stay in school or not--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We both stayed in school.
Speaker 1: So your--
Speaker 2: We both graduated together.
Speaker 1: That's--so you decide, you have-you're, you're both in school and managing--
Speaker 2: That's right.  That was, that was kind of unusual, not being a World War II veteran.  There were a whole lot of World War II veterans down there then who had, were married school students, but not too many twenty one-year-olds who were married at that time.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: So.
Speaker 1: --so how did that work?  So you, you--and that's--a lot of times the woman would, would drop out and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, she dropped out for only about a semester or so.  She was a year ahead of me, but we graduated together.
Speaker 1: And her name?
Speaker 2: Dorothy, Dorothy Davis.  She was a very bright and beautiful woman, very bright, beautiful lady.  Don't say that too loud.  But her father was a Baptist minister in Pine Bluff [Arkansas].  She was a city girl.  She didn't live on the campus; she lived at home.  And we got married.
Speaker 1: And he approved of you?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess he did.  He didn't have much choice (laughter) in the matter.
Speaker 1: So (unclear) minister's son marrying minister's--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --daughter.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I think they saw that there was--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --some potential there.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, and we had a kid--right, we had an oldest kid, the one who's a lawyer, we had--he was born while we were still in college, and grew up partly when I was in law school.  There was--I was one of the married students at IU [Indiana University].
Story_ID: 83785
Speaker 1: And it was tough in the sense--oh, I shouldn't say it was tough.  It was interesting in college because I had a job.  I took a job on--not on the campus, but at a commercial place at a grocery store.  One of the private, non-chain local chains, a guy hired me when I told him I was getting married and needed somewhere to work, could walk there from school.  We arranged a schedule so that I could go there and work in the evenings from about four until seven and all day Saturday.  Forty dollars a week, that's what I was paid, which was about as much as some of the professors were making (laughter) at that time, which I thought was pretty good.  But Hesston was a good place for me.  I became the first black person to work on the cash register at a gro--at a grocery store in Pine Bluff [Arkansas].  And you know, it was kind of fun.  We had a our little place.  There were a lot of married--there, there were a lot of these Quonset huts where the married students could have an apartment.  We lived amongst faculty in the Quonset huts.
Speaker 2: Well, what was challenging about it?
Speaker 1: Well, the challenge was to maintain your academic standing while working and taking care of a family.  My wife worked in the summer.  She was a nurse's aide at the hospital there.  And it was kind of fun because I think I started a trend.  Shortly after I got married, some of my friends got married.  One of my friends got married and stayed with us for the first month or two (laughter) while they found a place.  It was kind of fun.  And--but it was, it kind of truncated my childhood, you see, although I didn't ever think I had much of a childhood, as I said, because I, I was kind of a breadwinner at twelve or thirteen years.  So it wasn't all that different for me.
Speaker 2: It just put you into married life--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, in, in an earlier time.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 83786
Speaker 1: So, how do--so, is the decision--does your wife know, or have you decided or, about going to law school?
Speaker 2: I decided to go to law school in I supposed end of my junior year in college.  Harold Flowers practiced law in Pine Bluff [Arkansas].  He was related to my first wife, and distantly; they weren't close.  His brother was a physician in the city.  He delivered Rudy, my oldest kid, at home, in the Quonset huts.  And I just decided then my heroes at that time were the black lawyers who were brave and courageous enough to go into hostile communities to defend black men and women charged with crimes.  And to me that was the epitome of the height of courage.  Because what people--some people don't understand is that in the South at that time, blacks essentially had no rights, no rights.  And if you happen to be unlucky enough to be accused of a crime in a place, any place in Arkansas, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, especially a crime involving a white victim, you had very little chance.  But you were, nevertheless, entitled to representation.  And the lawyers who traveled to these kinds of situations--and you gotta remember that in those days, it was not just the prosecutor that you were fighting; you were fighting the whole system.  You had the judge, the jury, the prosecutor, or all your opponents, because the already knew what they were gonna do.  And that was really kind of what inspired me.  Now I never did practice that kind of law, although I--except on the periphery.  I, I never did go into private practice, and that's one of the disappointments in my life, that I didn't try my hand at being another Wiley Branton or Harold Flowers in the South.
Speaker 1: Now why do you say that?
Speaker 2: Well, I feel that in some ways my life has been unfulfilled because that was really what I dreamed about at that time.  And being married, having a kid, when I got out of law school, there were other priorities.  You know, starting, it was not a question of, you know, going into a law firm and, and drawing down what Chelsea Clinton is drawing (laughter) down as a freshman hot right out of college.  There were no law firms hiring black lawyers, so you would either--if you were going into private practice, you had to go in, put your shingle out and see what happens.  And with a family and obligations of that and all of that, I just said well, I don't know that I can afford that, that kind of a risk, which I probably should have taken, but I didn't.  I chose the safe route of taking the government legal job.  In that sense--but I started not--I started to leave the government at one time.  I was negotiating for hooking up with a guy in Indiana, where, where I finished law school and passed the bar initially.
Speaker 1: Well, what you're essentially saying is that, that was your vision of law and the importance, and you went in to really make a mark and sort of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Make a difference.
Speaker 1: Make a difference.
Speaker 2: Make a difference in the community that I grew up in--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and the kind of circumstances that many blacks found themselves in.  I felt that the law was the way--there, there were two really professions, or two professions that I think really made a, could make a difference: the legal profession and the teaching profession, especially in the secondary schools.  To me those--that's where attitudes and, and, are formed in a lot of ways.
Story_ID: 83787
Speaker 1: Now, was this--also I wanna understand in terms of--would white lawyers ever represent black people during that time?  Did they ever, were there ever--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure there would, there were some.  You mean in criminal cases?
Speaker 1: In cases period, criminal or--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm, I'm sure there were white lawyers who would represent black clients who had commercial interests.  But I'm not familiar enough with the general practice at that time to deter--to say where there were white lawyers who would go into those kinds of situations that I would, I described.  I'm sure there were, there were places where people would be assigned to represent a person, because, see, there weren't that many black lawyers.  That's the reason why they would kind of, they would travel around, you see.  There weren't probably but more than three, three or four black lawyers in the whole state of Arkansas and, and maybe even fewer in, in a state like Mississippi, which had a lot more black people.
Story_ID: 83788
Speaker 1: You know, I wanna ask one other question.  Did you, you didn't have much dealings with I wanna say Professor [Simon] Haley at the--when you got back to--
Speaker 2: When I was in college?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: I did.  I took, I took a course under him.  I took conservation.  He taught conservation.  And that was when we did talk a little bit.  He told us--told me then.  I didn't know about his sons when we first met in '45' [1945].  He didn't discuss that with these young kids.  But when I came back in [1949] in that--that was one of the freshman courses I took I believe, conservation, that he taught.  Now I was not in the agricultural department, so I didn't have as much interaction with him as I might have had otherwise, but he was the professor in that course.  And during the course of it, I do recall him talking about his son, [HM] George, who was a, who also is a lawyer, as you know, and Alex, who was away then in the Coast Guard.
Speaker 1: Now George went to law school.  Was he, is he a--
Speaker 2: He went to Arkansas, Arkansas University.
Speaker 1: Right, that he was--what are--what's the difference in your age, just--
Speaker 2: George is a little older than me, not much.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he--okay.
Speaker 2: He may be three or--two or three years older.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was on a path, sort of--I mean just ahead of you, just a little.
Speaker 2: But he did not go to AM and N [Arkansas AM&N College]
Speaker 1: No, I know he didn't.
Speaker 2: He went to Morehouse [College].
Speaker 1: He went to Morehouse and then he went to--
Speaker 2: But, yes.
Speaker 1: --Arkansas.
Speaker 2: Right, but he was not there.  See, Mr. Hay--Professor Haley's family I think lived in Tennessee.  I don't--I think, and I think, (unclear) I think George said that he--his grandparents kind of raised him I believe.  But he was not around down in AM and N when I was there.
Story_ID: 83789
Speaker 1: There are two other things I just want.  I would like you to spell Quonset house and then the other is the, the grocery store you worked at.
Speaker 2: Okay, Quonset, Q-U-O-N-S-E-T, H-U-T.  It's a type of building.  Quonset hut is corrugated metal structure, oval in shape, that's anchored to a concrete pad.  And it, it is, it is, it usually is about forty or fifty feet in length and probably 20 feet in width from one side to the other.  And they would divide these in half.  On either end was an apartment.  In my apartment there were two bedrooms, a kitchen, and a sitting area.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't a bad setup (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was beautiful.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It was better than I had at, at IU [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], 'cause we lived in a trailer there, and that was much smaller.
Speaker 1: And the grocery store you worked at?
Speaker 2: The grocery store was Hesston's Grocery.  Hesston was a, was a white guy who owned--it was a well-to-do guy who owned the grocery store on, not far from the campus that basically catered to the black community.  And on the other side of town in Pine Bluff you had another store about the same size that basically catered to the white community on that side of town.
Speaker 1: So he found you pretty trustworthy then?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Well, I don't know whether he knew--he didn't know me.  I just, I made a good impression when I went into talk to him about a job.  And he had--he was in an astute person.  He was an older guy.  He must have been close to seventy, sixty-five at that time, but he was one of the most prominent men in the city of Pine Bluff in terms of his influence.  He was well-to-do; he was involved in livestock shows and stuff like that, in addition to having these grocery stores; and he had political ambitions.  And I found out he ran for mayor at about the time that he was gonna hire me.  And I think he had in mind that having this young black man working for him in the kind of capacity I was working, in a place where blacks from the college and all around were in and out--that's where, that was their main grocery store--so I think he figured that was an advantage politically for him.  This is subsequent.  Now I didn't figure all this out until later.  But it was something in it for him as well as for me.
Story_ID: 83790
Speaker 1: Now when you--so you say you decide to go, you wanna go to law school at the end of your junior year.  Is there a lot of discussion with your wife, or your wife's family, or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --your family, or--none of that.
Speaker 2: Well, there was a discussion with my wife because--
Speaker 1: Right, (unclear) through, 'cause her, her family was related to--well, because she was gonna help in the decision.  She was gonna participate.
Speaker 2: Well, that's, that's kind of the way things operated back in those days.  It, it wasn't a question of may I go to law school.  It was a question of what am I gonna do to make a living after this stage?  You gotta understand, what were the options for a young black man in Jonesboro [Arkansas]--in, in Arkansas coming out of college in 1953?  The options were really basically three: you either went to graduate school somewhere and learned a, a profession; or you took a job as a public schoolteacher; or you went to work in a commercial establishment somewhere or set up your own commercial establishment.  That was about it.  It--there weren't a lot of other ways to, to make it.  Law school to me was the most attractive.  I had no skills that I thought qualified me for any of the healing arts or professions.  I had no, no, no inclination or connection to anybody involved in medicine.  A lot of blacks went into medicine.  I had no musical ability, couldn't sing, couldn't play no guitar or nothing.  So, I mean, that was, that was it, plus I was a good debater, and I--so I--I sent away, I, I applied at a number of different places.  IU [Indiana University] came back with the best package as far as I could see.  You know, they said there were places that I could live as a family on the campus.  They would find a job for my wife, which they did.  She worked for a very famous man there, Dr. [Joseph] Muhler, who, at that time was studying fluoride in toothpaste.  Dr. Muhler was a professor at the dental school.  And they were, in addition to IU being the place for Dr. [Alfred] Kinsey, the sex man--he was there too--but she worked for Dr. Muhler, who was then--what are you doing--doing research on fluoride in toothpaste.  We got all the toothpaste we wanted for free while I was there.  And it came out about two years after I graduated that Crest toothpaste came out with this endorsement from the dental profession, and it just went through the roof.  But that's what she did.
Story_ID: 83791
Speaker 1: So now, but this is a new experience for both of you.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Because this is more North than you've been.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, and probably more--even though you said you had exposure, more white than you've been black--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, this is the first chance that I'd really gone to school with white kids.  And but I'd, one of the things I say in my memoirs that you will find interesting is that I described the trip.  We took the bus from Pine Bluff [Arkansas] to Bloomington.  IU's [Indiana University] at Bloomington, Indiana, South Central Indiana.  And that's when I discovered that Indiana is not that much different than Arkansas, insofar as the position, social position of the races is concerned.  We--I called ahead to Bloomington.  There was one hotel in the downtown.  We had made arrangements to come to Bloomington on Sunday, go to this university on Monday to get our housing and all of the arrangements, but to stay overnight at a hotel downtown Bloomington on Sunday.  When I--we arrived at the hotel, they said that's got to be some mistake.  And that's, that's kind of interesting little story.  And I said no, there's mistake.  We called, got a reservation.  I'm sure you'll find it on your books.  And he goes back, let me talk to my manager, and then I knew what was going on.  They had not anticipated a black couple coming in.  They had never served a black couple at this hotel.  They would serve blacks if they're in the company of whites; if you're there with some kind of a group, they will do it.  But if you're coming in alone [shaking head], and I found that to be true throughout most of my experience in Bloomington during the, you know, the early 1950s.  Restaurants, hotels, bars, you come in alone, you may never get served.  They won't tell you to leave.  They just won't serve you.  You come in, in the company of two or three whites, you can have beer, have fun just like everybody else.  That was the, the way it worked. 04:24:05:04
Speaker 1: Did you find that surprising or sort of mysterious that you had--
Speaker 2: Not really, because, see, I've never--I, I've still believe that this idea that the South and the North are that much different.  I've never believed that.  I think people are pretty much the same wherever you are.  I, I still don't buy this notion that there is a marked difference socially in the way--and attitudes between the races as between North and South, I don't find that to be true.  Wherever I've been, when I've lived in California, and I'm talking about in, in the, in the late '60's [1960s] and early '70's [1970s], you run into the same kinds of problems, different emphasis maybe, but attitudes maybe--it's hard to say that they are no different.  But their--you--attitudes aren't that much different between sections of the country.  And I think what differences may exist can be largely attributed to the, the size of the black population, the frequency with which you come in contact with, or you are required to be thrown into situations.  So, I, I just never, never was much into that.  Certainly there are some differences, you know.  My wife, my present wife grew up in, in Indiana.  She went to Crispus Attucks High School.  She was a cheerleader when, when Oscar Robertson was playing for them.  But Crispus Attucks was a black high school in Indianapolis [Indiana].  I'm sure there are black high schools in--now the thing about, about Chicago [Illinois] that I found interesting, and I talk about this in my memoirs a little bit, is when my, my brother graduated from high school at Englewood, he sent us a yearbook.  And I never will forget we gathered around that yearbook, and looked at this integrated high school, blacks and whites, you know, all together, and whites by far the dominant group at that time at Englewood.  I understand Englewood now is pretty much a black school, but it was then probably eighty-five, ninety percent white.  And I found that to be interesting that black kids were going to school with white kids then in Chicago, and that was different.
Story_ID: 83792
Speaker 1: Now did you end up staying in the hotel?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You did?  Oh, so they got it together sort of?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.  Well, I don't know why, but maybe we were just looked so innocent, the two of us.  But when, when he confronted me about there being some mistake, I said well, I made the reservation.  My name is there.  By phone I made the reservation, that I'd planned to stay here tonight and go out to the university where I will be enrolling in law school tomorrow.  And that's when he said let me go talk to my manager.  I don't know whether he viewed my statement as a threat of some kind or not, but, you know, it was ambiguous.  But, in any event, he said well, we found it; no problem, we went on upstairs, had a good night's sleep, left the next day to go out to the college, the university.
Speaker 1: Now was your, your son with you?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He, oh--
Speaker 2: He stayed in Pine Bluff with my wife's parents and her family for that first semester--no, actually until Christmas.  We brought him back with us when we returned for the holidays.
Story_ID: 83793
Speaker 1: So how was your first year?
Speaker 2: First year was interesting, 'course, getting adjusted to the environment of being around a lot of white people.  There're not that many black people.  There were two blacks--three blacks in my class, a freshmen.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, Doris Keys was one of them.  There was one black guy--I don't remember his name--from Florida.  This was in, in the fall of '53' [1953].  Doris and I were, she was from Marion, Indiana, I believe.  The guy from Florida had come up.  He was being--his schooling was being paid by the state of Florida at the time.  And I did well, finished--there was a class of about 105 freshmen.  I finished fifth in that class, and did well academically, got chosen for the law review, which was the first.
Speaker 1: Which is unheard of.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know.
Speaker 1: It was--right.
Speaker 2: It was, it was a first then, and I think I, I opened a few eyes about what could be done there at, at that time.  I competed well with people who had probably a much better quality of instruction at the college level maybe than I had, but I did okay.
Speaker 1: Do you think it was your innate intelligence, or do you think it was also that you worked real hard, or both?
Speaker 2: Well, I had to work hard in law school.  I never had to work hard in college or high school to do well, but in law school I had to because it was much more competitive and the standards were higher, there was no question about that.  Law school is no easy, especially the first year.  The first year of law school is the toughest, as you know.  You're a lawyer; you know that.  And you know, I discovered pretty early on, and this is from college, you get your bluff in on your teachers early, they give you the benefit of the doubt later on.  So it's very important to do well early.  If you don't do well early, the presumption is against you thereafter.  But if you do well early, the presumption is in your favor, and that's important to know.  That's hard for some kids to understand today, I think.
Story_ID: 82858
Speaker 1: Now, let's go back to your first year of law school.  I mean I just, I wanna get you to the--but I'd just like to, just, just take you back and say what was that whole experience like?
Speaker 2: Well, at first I thought it's probably gonna be just like everything else I had done.  I, I didn't apply myself until we had our first midterm, a kind of a spontaneous exams in a few courses about the middle of October or early November.  And I discovered that I'm gonna have to give up some of this playing canasta with the, with the neighbors in the, in the, in the trailer courts and start studying a little bit more.  That's when I decided that, you know, it's not the same.  But the professors were very good.  And what I found interesting about law school, it's all about examinations.  It's not so much--it's no--nothing is on the basis of what you say in class, although you, you, I think you make an impression on the, on the professors by your participation and involvement in the Socratic, Socratic method of discussion.  But I decided after that first little encounter with an exam and how it goes that I, that you gotta really apply yourself a lot more.  But I enjoyed the coursework and the methods.  The case method of study was new to me.  And the materials, it was so voluminous, so much you had to read in such a little time, and how you understood, how you had to try to come to understand, try to get to the, the heart of whatever it is that's being discussed, because the, the case method means you've got to read.  These were mostly all, you know, appellate decisions, and so you've got to read through a lot of material before you can figure out what the, the key points are.  That was the difficulty at first, and understanding that law is as much about facts and about logic and understanding human nature as it is about codes and rules; all that's certainly important procedurally.  And I found that, that the philosophy of legal subjects--the first year, of course, you take property, contracts, what else--torts--
Speaker 1: Civil procedure.
Speaker 2: --civil procedure.  My best subject was contracts, and I guess that had to do with my kind of business background and understanding, because contracts is predicated upon logic and reasoning.  I mean, that's basically what it's all about, people agreeing to thing, in which you could under--you can, you can, you can really relate to that.  And I enjoyed that.  That was my best--I got the "A" in contracts the first day.  But the most difficult first year course to me was the property course, you know, real property.  Of course you had legal writing and that sort of thing I think in the first year.  Torts was, was like private crimes I guess, and that was--you had to do a lot of memorizing things in torts.  But I think the contracts course was to me the most fun.  Now it was taught by a guy that I didn't think was the greatest guy, but we hit it off okay.  The guy who the smartest one was the guy who taught, who taught property, a young man who'd only graduated from IU Law School two or three years before.  His name was Val Nolan.  And by the way, I was honored by the law school last October.  Did you hear about that?  They voted me into the sort of Hall of Fame out there last summer, and I had to go back and accept the award October 11th, being inducted in the IU Law School--what do you call it--Hall of Fame.  They didn't call it that.  I got the brochure in there.  I'll show it to you.
Story_ID: 82859
Speaker 1: So now with--then--did--were you surprised that you finished fifth in your class?
Speaker 2: In the first year?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't surprised.  I thought I should have finished first.  I, I found out that there are no supermen, superwomen in terms of academic abilities.  There are people who apply themselves and think, and those who don't.  They may have the capacity to do it, but they don't.  They find it boring or tiresome or whatever.  But I have never been awed by other people in terms of being more capable.  I've, I admire bright people, but the distinction to me is more about how you apply yourself than about innate ability.  I don't think I have innate ability.  I think really when it comes down to it, I'm very ordinary mind.  But, you know, it depends on what kind of efforts you want to put into anything you undertake.  I think you can be successful or, or, or excel at it.  I think it's a question of how much work you're willing to put into it.  I was not awed by that.  I was pleased, especially about being selected.  You see, they pick the law review from the top of the class the freshmen year for the next year.  The ma--the members they make them note editors I guess you--not note editors, but the writers, law review writers.  So in my second year I wrote two articles for the law review.  And in the third year I was made a note editor, which meant I was the first note editor, a black, black editor of the law review.
Story_ID: 82860
Speaker 1: Sir, did you find that the teachers--did you--were they all okay with this, or were the other students okay, or was it a mixed bag type of experience?
Speaker 2: I never--I had a--I'd never had a really bad experience in terms of race relations on the campus during my law school.  The only--there was only one professor, and he was an adjunct professor, that I felt gave me an unfair grade, and that occurred I believe in my sophomore year.  This was a--
Speaker 1: In your second year.
Speaker 2: Second year.  This guy was teaching business law or something like that, and he was a law--he was in practice in Bloomington [Indiana], and he taught this course.  And I--he gave me a "C", which I felt was wrong.  And this was the only professor I challenged on his grade.  I asked for an appointment to see him to talk about my blue book, and he did agree to see me.  We discussed my responses on the exam.  I later found out that he had expressed the view that there are no blacks that he'd ever confronted who was of more than average intelligence, and nobody therefore could get more than a "C" in any class that he took.  But that was the only ca--case that I had.  The dean was a great guy, Leon Wallace.  The other professors were very fair.  Criminal law was one of the first.  They had a guy by the name of Jerome Hall who taught that.  And I found the professors quite fair, and they, they, they were concerned about other matters.  I--you know, we knew that Indiana was, was not a flaming hotbed of liberalism at that time.  But I think we had a university president then by the name of Herman B. Wells.  I don't know whether he--I believe he's still living.  He must be close to a hundred years old.  But he was what you would call a liberal person.  He was at one time on the board of Howard University, which kind of tells you a little bit about where his, he was coming from.  And Herman B. Wells was trying to bring the university--he was over the whole university--into the 20th century.  Of course the university was a well-grounded and well respected Big Ten school.  It was not equal to [University of] Michigan in terms of its reputation, but it was not the worse, probably superior to Ohio State [University] and maybe even some of the others.  [University of] Illinois and Michigan were kind of the top, and then IU I think came along about that, that level.  So I think they were--at that time the professors tended to be some people who were in tuned with what Wells was trying to do at the university.
Speaker 1: And as we had said I think before that the university had a, had a history going back.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean overall university history--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --going back to you said--
Speaker 2: Back to the 1800s.  And they had been--see, there's a black alumni group called the Neo-Marshall.  That's a name for a woman and a black guy that preceded me at the, at the law school, Neo-Marshall Alumni Group, and they still are an active group that I'm not as active in as I should be.  But they have a place on campus there, right, and we visited that place when we were out there for this induction into the alumni, Law Alumni Fellows Group.
Speaker 1: Not to belabor, but are you saying the whole university or the law school went back to the 1800s?  Was it the--
Speaker 2: Oh, the, the, the university goes back to the, earlier.
Speaker 1: But the black, black--
Speaker 2: But the, but the blacks in the law school go back--the first black law school graduate I believe was in the early part of the century.  Yeah, so they go back a long ways.
Story_ID: 82861
Speaker 1: When you--you were there at some really heavy times for, for black, for the black race--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --meaning that in 1954, which would have been the year that you--was your second year, started your--was--
Speaker 2: I started my second year--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in the fall of '54' [1954], yes.
Speaker 1: Right and that, and the ruling of "Brown" had come out just earlier.
Speaker 2: In the spring.
Speaker 1: In the spring.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, was there--and this is the time--see, (unclear)--you know, you're the first to, you know, to, to qualify and be admitted to the law review and, and I'm just wondering what as that--you know, that you're a lawy-- you're in the law school, so I mean--so what was that whole ex--was there a lot of discussion on campus about "Brown v. Board of Education?"  Was there--
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think so.  You got to remember that, while it was certainly a major case for me and for black community in '54' [1954], when that case came out, that was the second--that was the follow-on ruling you got to remember I think, wasn't it, when they finally--that was the main case came down in '54' [1954].
Speaker 1: It was '54' [1954].
Speaker 2: Yes.  This was at the end of the academic year.  See, the court was just about to go into recess when the case came out.  So, it, it occurred at a time when there would not have been much opportunity, except in social circumstances, not in class work, that, that--but I didn't--I took constitutional law that following year.  And I don't recall the "Brown" case being, you know, a critical one in that course.
Speaker 1: Well, I bet it wouldn't have been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Not at that time; it was too early.
Speaker 1: Right, too early (unclear).
Speaker 2: And they were still trying to sort out what it really means.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: And I'm sure five, six years later, it would have been a more prominent part of any such course, but--
Story_ID: 82862
Speaker 1: Then, the thing about constitutional law then that I, I was con--I was wrestling with was concepts like liberty and freedom and justice, and reconciling my notions of those terms with notions commonly held by white students, and I found that very interesting.  See, when, when I had been brought up to, to think about justice, for example, that to me meant fashioning a remedy to be commensurate or appropriate to the circumstances of the case.  In other words, you tempered--justice has a good deal of an element of mercy and compassion and empathy in it.  Whereas, I think my counterparts were not looking at justice.  They looked at justice more as getting what you deserve for violating a rule.  It was a harsher kind of an attitude.  Freedom, for example, for me meant relief from the oppression of segregation and second class status.  Freedom for me meant being able to go where I wanted to go, but for others, freedom I thought had a different connotation.  Liberty is a term they seem to latch onto more than freedom, liberty that is to be unconstrained in their capacity to dominate others, that, that to the majority people seek to be their concept of liberty, you see.  Don't tread on me.  And reconciling the ideals of our founding fathers, if you will, with the realities that I knew growing up, very difficult, very difficult, I'm still having some troubles with that.  And I guess that's one reason why some people say I'm kind of a militant even today.
Speaker 2: Did that make you cynical at any time or sort of questioning?
Speaker 1: I've become more cynical here in the last five or ten years than I ever was in my life, because I always believed that the thing that made this country different in the world and in the history of the world was this experiment with, with democracy, and freedom, and the capacities to govern yourselves, and to kind of be inclusive in the whole body politic of everybody.  I have less belief in that now, because I have seen here leat--lately especially, I think, that America is really different than other great powers.  They want to control; they want to dominant; they have trouble accepting people and systems that are different.  And my ideal of America was that, that, that they could understand, live, and let live.  We didn't want to export our values necessarily on somebody else.  That's why I oppose globalization now.  I oppose that whole notion that this is the only path.  It kind of reminds me of attitudes that I encountered in the Church of God in Christ, that if you don't join up with us, your soul is damned to hell.  And that's kind of the attitude we as a nation have adopted now, you know.  Those Muslims have gotta be converted; they've got to adopt what we call democracy in cultures that, where this concept is foreign.  I don't think ours is necessarily the best.  It's different, and maybe it's best suited for us, but it may not be best suited for people who come up in a different culture.  I still believe that, but I, I think that now our, our attitude is different as a nation, and that troubles me a great deal.
Story_ID: 82863
Speaker 1: Now what things, what other significant things happened to you in law school?  You were, were--what, what was the commu--your family life like?  Were you associated--did you find the black church or I mean--
Speaker 2: That was the interesting part, trying to hook up with a church in, in Indiana.  We found a little black church.  There were some people there, a guy--a Baptist church, who--my, my moth--my wife, my wife's family was Baptist, as I mentioned.  And we would attend church, but we didn't--I, I kind of backslid, if you will, (laughter) during that time.  Church was certainly a part of my life all of my life, but it was not as intense a part of it then as it was earlier, and I was exploring.  But the family, you know, when my, when my kid got--came back with us after Christmas in the first year, and then we moved to a better situation in the second year--we moved to Hoosier Courts, which was an apartment building for married students--the diversity of the people around me, a lot of Middle Easterners, I then began to understand the difference between the Pakistanis and the Indians.  They all looked the same to me, they sounded the same, but they were different and intensely antagonistic towards one another, and it was a terrible faux pas to mistake a Pakistani for an Indian--those kinds of changes.  The kids that my youngest--my youngest kid played with around the apartment was, was a Middle Eastern kid.  And I never will forget when we put him in nursery school right there nearby, and at the end of this--this was during the end of this year and beginning of the summer school.  He came running home one day, "Mommy, daddy, the niggeroes (ph.) are here."  And he was like four years old.  And we say, what do you mean?  "The niggeroes, there was another niggeroe in my class!"  This is the first kid he had seen that was black at the school.  And 'course, you know, what had happened was that the black college teachers from the South would come to IU [Indiana University] in the summer to get their--continue their graduate studies.  They'd bring their families, and so this was his first--'cause up until then, he didn't have too many young black kids around.  But he found these other people that looked a lot like him, that he found that so appealing, it was so funny.  But family life was different.  We were working hard.  I got my first TV when we moved into Hoosier Courts, thought that was really big stuff then, 1955 I guess it was.  So it was a normal thing.  We got--you know, we made friends.  There was another black couple who babysat for us, Mr. and Mrs. Abner.  They had a kid, and she was kind of babysitting while my wife worked at the dental school.  We had our second child, and that was tough.  The second year I went back to school alone.  My, my wife had the second child at home in Arkansas, so I lived in a rooming house, which was tough for me.  You know IU was a school where the Kappas were founded, and I'm a member of Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity.  And I'd been, of course, made a fraternity man, man down in Arkansas.  And that was good because, you know, Kappas were very strong on the campus of IU.  But I didn't fraternize too much with the undergraduates, you see, because my life was not the carefree life of a, of an undergraduate student.  I'm a married man with two kids and you know, working all the time.  The biggest problem I had at IU was finding a place to get a haircut.  They had barbershop in the Student Union Building, but they only had white barbers in there, and I wasn't sure that a white barber could cut my hair.  And the kids, the students that were there all said you shouldn't go in there because, you know, they might just mess up your hair because they don't really wanna cut black hair in there.  So you have to either find a black barbershop in town, or they kind of formed a little self-service club where the guys would cut each other's hair on Saturday.  And that's kind of how we dealt with that problem in, in Bloomington.  But insofar as church, we would go occasionally.  I got introduced to the Presbyterian Church there by a friend of ours, and that's how we finally, ultimately became Presbyterians.  We joined the Presbyterian Church when, shortly after we came to Washington [D.C.].
Story_ID: 82864
Speaker 1: And you, you said that you also--well, let me just ask, you said that also--who did you meet there?  You had met one of your class--Hamilton--
Speaker 2: Lee Hamilton.
Speaker 1: --Lee Hamilton.  When did you him?  Was--
Speaker 2: He was a freshman with me, and of course we went, we went through all of the classes together.  His father was a Methodist minister I believe in Evansville [Indiana].  And he was a very tall, handsome, you know, articulate young man.  There were others, and by the way, about five of my classmates came back to see me get inducted when, when I went out there in October, Chuck Teadie (ph.), Bob Miller, Vern Sheldon, the guys that were on the law review with me that were the top students in the class.  We kind of stay in touch with each other, or have, but we, we, we would--most of them were married at the time, some of 'em had been in the [U.S.] Army, and we studied together; we just had a normal relationship.  It was not difficult for me to deal with white people.  It was just different for me at first, but, you know, I found out that people are just people, essentially.
Story_ID: 82865
Speaker 1: The thing that was troublesome to me was when I finished, or was about to finish, and all of my colleagues on the law review were getting these offers from the law firms and jobs and so forth, and nobody was answering my letters.  You see, those are the kinds of realities that you get brought back to at critical points.  Nobody was interested in interviewing a black top student of the law school and on the law review, because that was kind of, you know, we don't have any place for that kind of a person in Indianapolis [Indiana], or in Gary [Indiana], or Fort Wayne [Indiana].  So that's, that's--and I knew no one of Indiana in terms of--this is another thing that was a disappointment.  I've told you that I, I feel now that had I to do it all over again, I may have made a different choice.  What I think I probably should have done, was after graduating, I should have gone back to Pine Bluff [Arkansas], opened a practice, took my chance.  And I confronted that situation later in my life, when I was at the Labor Department as a lawyer.  We convinced the solicitor, the, the general counsel--this is back during the days of the executive order program for affirmative action and bringing blacks into the government, into, you know, the mainstream economic life in the country.  Jim Jones, a friend of mine, retired as a professor at University of Wisconsin in Madison, also from Arkansas by the way, black guy, we came to work at the ca--at the government at the same time.  We convinced the solicitor that we ought to practice what we preach in terms of affirmative action.  We were preaching affirmative action to private employers all around the country.  We said what kind of recruiting are we doing at the black law schools in the country?  This was about 1967, '68 [1968].  And we, we aren't--do we go to the Harvards, the Yales, and the big schools, but we don't go outside?  So we convinced him to put together a program for sending a team of his black lawyers out to the black law schools around the country, and there were about five or six of those.
Story_ID: 82866
Speaker 1: Well, we, we put a team together.  I was one of the team, and I was assigned to go to Florida A and M [University in Tallahassee, Florida] to, and to Southern University [and A&M College in Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  There were law schools in those places.  And then others were sent to Texas Southern [University in Houston, Texas], and others went to--there was a law school at North Carolina College in Durham and one in South Carolina, and we went recruiting.  We had authority to make employment commitments--this was in 1968--I believe it was, about four of us, Frank Hollis, myself, a young man by the name of Thad Ware.  And we brought in--we, we, we recruited, and we were--the idea was to establish a relationship with these faculty of these schools for future flow of black law students and to the federal workforce as lawyers.  Well, I encountered in Florida, when I went to M and N--at that time, you see, there was a black law school at Florida AM and N--A and M--and the law school at Florida State University, both in Tallahassee.  And they were about--the state was about to close the Florida A and M law school because of the integration push.  And when I went there, there's about, must have been about their last class, because I ran into two or three people whom I was interested in trying to convince to come to work for the government, and I ran into this kind of resistance.  The black young men at that time said, no, we think our best advantage would be to remain in Florida.  That was very an attitude that I ran into in Florida.  Nobody from that school wanted to come to Washington [D.C.] at that time because, you know, it was at the height of the civil rights struggle, and a lot of stuff was going on.  And I said I wish I'd had that kind of courage then, to decide to stay home or go back home after law school.
Story_ID: 82867
Speaker 1: Well, so let's, let's talk about this.  So, you're not getting the offers your counterparts are getting, and so what happens?  How do you get your first job?
Speaker 2: I came to Washington [D.C.] on the spring break.  My sister lives here.  She said you can come and stay with me.  And I went looking--almost cold, but the dean, Dean Wallace, said he had some acquaintances in Washington that he would, you know, make contract for me, you know, on my behalf, and try to get me introduced through that means in a few places.  He had someone he knew at the Federal Trade Commission, someone he knew at the justice department and someone he knew up on Capitol Hill at one of the committees up there.  So he did send letters to some people and introduced me in that means, but all, all the others, I just was on my own.  And the way you did it then, you came in, you went to the agency, went to the law department, said my name is Rufus McKinney.  I'm looking for a job.  I came cold calling to the Labor Department, to the Justice Department, to the Federal Trade Commission, to the Federal Communications Commission.  Oh, that must have been eight or ten agencies I just called on.  Can you imagine that, 1956, coming here and just walking into a government building, asking where the law department is, and saying I wanna go and talk to somebody about a job?  That's what I did, and that's how I got the job at the Labor Department.
Speaker 1: Now did you like that--but see, at the time that you were at the Labor Department, you were there for--
Speaker 2: I was there for thirteen years.
Speaker 1: Thirteen years, okay.
Story_ID: 82868
Speaker 1: So--oh, I see, so you moved--you were--I had attorney advisor and then attorney counsel, right?  That's--
Speaker 2: Well, titles, I don't know about that, but--
Speaker 1: But--so this is the thing, during that time, these are times--what were--was your work rudimentary?  Did you find--
Speaker 2: Oh, I had some very interesting work.  See, at that time, the labor--
Speaker 1: So, a lot of a things happened?
Speaker 2: A lot of things were happening.  The Labor Department was the central agency for the making of domestic policy in the United States at that time, I think.  They were more critical on most everything.  See, that was when they were talking about manpower training and development; that was a new thing.  They were the agency enforcing minimal labor standards legislation.  It was at a time when we were just on the throes of laws to regulate democracy in labor unions.  The Landrum-Griffin law was being formed in the minds of people like John McClellan from Arkansas when they were doing the [Jimmy] Hoffa hearings and all of this, all of this stuff about corruption in labor organizations.  That was--I, I monitored those hearings while I was a lawyer for the Labor Department.  I was assigned to the task force to write the regulations when that law was passed in the late, in 1959.  I'm, I'm still not thirty years old.  I was on the task force to, to, to do that under--the Secretary then was, I guess it was George Shultz--no, it wasn't George Shultz.  What am I thinking about--George Mitchell.  See, I came in during the Eisenhower Administration, and that was an exciting time.  I mean we were involved in some things.  The Labor Department then, later on I came to realize, anything that we did domestically that involved a major import of goods or equipment, they had to clear it at the White House to see what impact it might have on domestic employment, that sort of thing.  So we were kind of in the middle of a lot of different things that people just don't think about.  Foreign trade, for example, that was at a time when you had unrest in public sector unions, a lot of teachers at strikes and stuff like that, interventions, railroad strikes, coal mine strikes.  The Labor Department was involved in trying to get the government to, to, to end those kinds of disruptions of our economy, so it was an exciting time to be at the (unclear).  It's not nearly that now, because, you know, we don't really have much in the way of a domestic program anymore.  You know, [President Ronald] Reagan killed all of that.  But at that time, labor was critical, and, and I enjoyed that work, although it was a lot of routine stuff.  I became an employment specialist in the sense of deciding--and one of the programs that goes back to the Depression was the Fair Labor Standards Act, which, you know, prescribes minimal wages and time and a half overtime work in all of the interstate commerce.  So there you got to see the practical effects of the constitutional law stuff you'd done.  I worked on the program--see, [President Dwight] Eisenhower started the interstate highway program.  The Labor Department administers the law that, that prescribes prevailing wages on construction projects of that character.  And of course, one of the issues at that time was what, whether that program should, should be subject to that prevailing wage statute.  And I'll, I'd have one of the interpretations division that I was in--we dealt with those issues.  When the construction of the Dallas Fort Worth Airport took place during that period, you know, the big airport down there, biggest in the country at the time.  Prevailing wage statutes apply to those kind of major federal projects.
Story_ID: 82869
Speaker 1: How large was law department of the Department of Labor?  How--
Speaker 2: Oh, it probably had 120 lawyers.
Speaker 1: And how many--were there other--how many other blacks were there?
Speaker 2: Well, there were three, three or four blacks when I started.
Speaker 1: Would you know any of their names?
Speaker 2: Well, Jim, Jim Jones and I came to work at the same time.  He was, he was from Illinois.  I think he'd gone to IU [Indiana University], but he was a little older and had been working for a union beforehand; Howard Jenkins.
Speaker 1: I thought--I'm sorry.  You had mentioned him earlier about going around and doing this recruiting.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But I thought that was when you were special assistant to the solicitor general, no?
Speaker 2: Oh, Solicitor of Labor.  No, that was--
Speaker 1: So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that was just before I became a special assistant.
Speaker 1: I, see, okay, okay, okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, I became special assistant I think it was either, early '70--'68 [1968] I believe.  This was probably '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: No, see, well, what I have was that till '67 [1967] is when you were gonna--'67 [1967] to '69 [1969] that you were the specialist--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I came at the end of '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: I, I got you, okay.
Speaker 2: If, if it was--in either end of '67 [1967], early '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this--tell me what other--'cause I had recognized the name before.  So you, what you're saying is that this--there three of you, three of you?
Speaker 2: Three of us went on the recruiting trip.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Jim was the, Jim was the highest ranking--well, there was another high-ranking black.  Howard Jenkins, I think he'd probably left by that time, but Howard Jenkins, when I came there, Howard Jenkins, Jim Jones, and myself were the black lawyers.
Speaker 1: And were you--what, what was there background?  Had they also finished high in their class and--
Speaker 2: Well, Jim was a very bright guy.  Howard Jenkins was an older guy.  Howard Jenkins is probably ten or twelve years older.  He's still living, by the way, here.  And he went on to become the first black, that I know of, who was a member of the National Labor Relations Board.  That's from what--he retired from there.  But the--Howard was older, and he was not one of the people on the recruiting trip.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But Jim Jones was the guy who put it together.  Jim had become assistant solicitor then.  He was the highest ranking black in the law department, and he was the one who largely convinced Charlie Donahue to do this.  And he--I was kind of a confidant of Jim's.  He had a higher ranking job.  We helped to develop concepts like affirmative action and the Philadelphia Plan, that sort of stuff.
Speaker 1: During that time.
Speaker 2: During that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So was--where was Art Fletcher in this?
Speaker 2: Art Fletcher came at the end.  See, Fletcher came just at, at the end of--well, at the, the beginning of the, of the Nixon Administration.
Speaker 1: You know the only reason I'm asking this is that, you know, when you read about Art Fletcher, you read about the Philadelphia Plan.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, we were the ones that put that on Art Fletcher's desk.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, see, I mean it's good to know that.
Speaker 2: See, we, we had the brain power to come up with the idea, Jim Jones and I, basically.  And we had to sell it to the new Republican solicitor, a flavor who was a political guy.  'Cause I, I was in a Schedule C job as his special assistant, which meant that I termed over when the administration changed.  That's why I left the government.
Story_ID: 82870
Speaker 1: But, no, the concept of affirmative action really kind of started there.
Speaker 2: Can you talk about that then?
Speaker 1: That was about--and it came out of the use of the government's procurement power.  That's where the idea of affirmative action and the Philadelphia Plan can up.  And it had, it really kind of paralleled the, the executive order program that [President John F.] Kennedy and [President Lyndon] Johnson had put together about, you know, doing the right thing about bringing blacks into employment.  But the affirmative action concept developed as a consequence of the de--of the effort to bring blacks into the construction trades on these big projects in large urban areas that were federally assisted housing construction, hospital construction, or whatever.  You see, at that time, the construction trades were the high-paying jobs, and ironworkers, steel, steelworkers, and the very, what you call, craft professions in the labor field.  But they were predicated on referrals from families and that sort of thing.  So, blacks were having very hard time breaking into employment in anything more than menial jobs on these projects.  And so, the idea was to break down that system amongst the, both the Associated General Contractors, which was the employer side, and the AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations] and their unions on the, on the employment side--on the, on the labor side.  They were sort of had a little cabal going, you know.  You had union halls, and if you didn't belong to the union, you couldn't get referred, and you couldn't get referred unless you belonged to the union, and you couldn't get into the union unless you're brother or your uncle, and that sort of thing.  So that was what this was all about.  So we came up with the idea, well, we aren't gonna stand for that.  If you're gonna get this government money and support on this project, you have got to take steps to bring blacks into these activities on more than a token basis.  And you're gonna--we're gonna measure your progress towards meeting these goals by these kinds of things.
Speaker 2: So why was it called the Philadelphia Plan?
Speaker 1: Because it started in the construction trades in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Philadelphia, I see.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: In what year?
Speaker 1: This was like about '60--well, they started, we started thinking about it in '66 [1966], '67 [1976], in that period.
Speaker 2: Did you come across in your dealing C. L. Dellums at all--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: C. L. Dellums?
Speaker 2: --that was--
Speaker 1: Talking about--
Speaker 2: --he was active in the AFL-CIO.
Speaker 1: No, un-um.
Speaker 2: Okay, now--
Story_ID: 82871
Speaker 1: So you--so at the same time, as part of this was not only one piece was this, the Philadelphia Plan, but what you're saying, the other piece was trying to recruit blacks from law school--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to become--to come to the, to the Department of Labor?
Speaker 2: To come to the Department of Labor.
Speaker 1: And so what result--how much progress were you able to make in the period of time that you were there, in terms of--'cause you're saying there were three out of 120.
Speaker 2: Well, now you gotta remember that we're talking about different timeframes here.
Speaker 1: No, I know we're talking about a thirteen-year, right--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --period.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's--I'm trying--
Speaker 2: When I came there were three, but there were more than three by the time I left.
Speaker 1: No, I know, but wasn't that part of some of the recruitment efforts?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think a lot it had to do with, you know, my being there, had to do with Howard Jenkins being there.  Jenkins was, had been a professor at the law school at Howard [University in Washington, D.C.], and they hired him.  He made more money coming in as a GS-13 at the Labor Department than he would get, could get as a professor at, at the law school.  So, you know, it was that kind of thing--Jenis (ph.) Parks and some others in town who were the professors.  See, Howard had a lot of, lot of black students at Howard, so we, we had other access.  What we were trying to do was to extend the universe beyond.  But, no, by the time I left the Labor Department, we probably had a dozen black lawyers, maybe more.  And, matter of fact, you remember the congressman from Detroit [Michigan] by the name of Diggs?  Well, he's dead now, but his, his first wife, one of--I guess his first wife--was a, was a law--lawyer--with us at the Labor Department, Anna.  She became a federal judge out in Detroit.  I think she's still a federal judge.  John Powell, I don't know whether you remember that name.  John Powell went on to become chairman of the EEOC under the repub--he was a Republican from New York, went to Harvard [University].  He never got over it (laughter).  And John and I became very good friends, but he, he was picked--I helped to get him confirmed for that job at a time when he thought his Harvard degree immunized him from the need to, to have the support of the civil rights community, when he took the--when he was appointed to the chairmanship of EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission].  That really, it really hurt him.  He never was a successful chairman because of that.  But I had a little party at my house once, and I said, John, if you--this was when he was being considered and about to be--trying to be confirmed.  And there were people opposing his nomination in the black community, kind of like what's happening on this Hispanic guy right now.  They weren't that vociferous in opposition to him as they are now to this fellow, Estrada, who is being looked at for the court of appeals.  But John was, he was struck by his Harvard legal training and thought that that was all that he needed to brandish to get confirmed.  And Wilkins and--and what's the guy who died from the Urban League--and others, you know, felt--you know, when the--this is kind of our job, you know.  The guy who's in there needs to, needs to be in tune with what these civil rights leaders are about.  And if he's not willing to make those calls and to see what, you know, their interests and so forth are, then there's a little problem.  And John had a little trouble with that, but he got confirmed on the very last night of the Senate being in session.
Story_ID: 82872
Speaker 1: Was there anything else you worked on during those thirteen years that you're proud of?
Speaker 2: Oh, there are a lot of things.  You mean during that thirteen years at the Labor Department?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I was very proud of my work on the Landrum-Griffin law.  I became kind of the expert on, on union democracy, interesting.  I did some interesting work too as a lawyer once, involving the--what you call AGVA [American Guild of Variety Artists].  It was union for performers in the theater, I guess.
Speaker 1: AFTRA.
Speaker 2: AF--was it AFTRA?
Speaker 1: No, no, AFTRA-SAG.  It's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, but this was for the people who, who were in burlesque and that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--okay, I don't know about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, we had, we had--you know, at this time, unions were notoriously undemocratic.  And so we, we had some cases that I got involved in there to try to help give members of the union more say in what goes on and to kind of protect the money.  Union of Operating Engineers in New York, I had to--we were involved in a couple of cases up there, where they--that's, that's a big union up there where you got the big construction projects and heavy equipment and that sort of thing--involving those things.  It was interesting too, the Labor Department, even though it was central insofar as bringing cases, the justice department is the government's lawyer, as you know.  And so, there was always this tension between the lawyers at the Labor Department, whether we needed to get clearance, or can we do these things ourselves in the courts, or do we have to go through the attorney general's operation?
Story_ID: 82873
Speaker 1: But the part that I found most interesting was involvement with getting the, the program going after Landrum-Griffin Act passed, getting the regulations written, and also after the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act was (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Can you talk about the importance of both Landrum-Griffin and the pension employment--pension--
Speaker 1: Welfare and Pension Plans.  Well, those are two kind of landmark laws in, affecting labor and the interest of working people.  Let's take the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act first.  That had to do with issues relating to employees' security after working a long time.  There were no real national standards that applied to the operation of pension programs, and pension programs, those that were union sponsored or union--or negotiated, or some of 'em were just the employers had their own programs.  But there was ish--there were issues about funding that secured the payment of what was promised when you retired, the security of that, and also the question of ethics and fiduciary ob--observance of fiduciary responsibilities on the part of the administrators of these plans.  And the government came up with the idea, well, one way to protect that is to give people information about what it is the plan provides and what the financial underpinning of that might be, file these documents about the financial conditions and so forth with the government.  At the Labor Department, they had this big room over there where everybody had to file these things.  What you get now when you (unclear), you get a little two or three-page statement saying what your plan says and does.  That's all a result of that kind of legislation.  And the issues also had to do with the portability of the benefits - if you worked for a company for so long and you left, what happens to what you paid into that pension, or can you transfer that to a new employer, that sort of thing.  We--one of the most interesting things was trying to develop a statute.  I worked with some people trying to write a law to deal the portability issue.  We never were able to get it through the Congress, but nevertheless, those were the kinds of issues that, that I worked on when I was in this program.
Story_ID: 82874
Speaker 1: Landrum-Griffin was a little different.  You're dealing with a various aspect of union management, first of all a question of whether the employ--the union members have the right to participate in the selection of their leadership; secondly, to protect the treasury of the union from being used as a personal preserve of the leaders; third, the discipline that management of unions could impose upon member or constituent locals, and units, and trusteeships and stuff like that.  All of this grew out of the Hoffa situation with the teamsters.  And that was kind of basic stuff that we pioneered the creation, some controls or some protections for working people; that was what the Labor Department did.  See, a lot of people didn't understand.  Labor Department did not deal with labor relationships.  That was NLRB, the National Labor Relations Board, as you know, that dealt with collective bargaining, you know, union contracts with employers and that sort.  That was the Labor Department--not, not--NLRB--Labor Department is more about labor standards.  That's where labor, labor minimum wage and that sort--that was a big distinction.  But most people think of labor law as labor relations law instead of labor standards.  But that was the big area that I worked in, labor standards more than anything else.  Those two programs I thought were, were very critical.  But the backbone program, was 'course, the labor standard, the minimum wage, and, and hourly, the issues that come up there about avoiding obligations to pay what's required.  Now we don't think much about that these days because everybody's paid a whole lot more than what the minimum is.  But when the minimum wage was enacted, you know what it was?  Twenty-five cents an hour, 1938, and employers resisted strongly and were still resisting twenty years later, in 1958, to the notion that they were engaged in interstate commerce or the production of goods for interstate commerce.  That was the standard that decided whether you were covered or not.  And there are a lot of things that go on in small, rural communities especially in the South - saw mills, little mom and pop kinds of operations.  This was long before the civil rights struggles over whether you're gonna have, you know, the rooming house on the corner covered by public accommodations.  These same kinds of fights took place over whether the people who worked in those places were entitled to being paid the minimum wage or whether they were exempt or if you were not exempt, whether you were an independent contractor, home workers.  That was a whole lot of our work, where people were seamstresses and people making things at home and on a piecework basis and being paid; whether those people were really employees of the people for whom they were doing this work or whether they were so-called independent contractors, that was the big issue.  And people went through all kinds of machinations to avoid being, you know, subject to minimum wage and overtime requirements, they were strenuous things.
Story_ID: 82875
Speaker 1: I don't know whether you know about government pay.
Speaker 2: I know that there's a lot of emphasis on GS here, so GS fif--
Speaker 1: Yes, GS-15 was about the highest civil service rung before you got into what they now call the executive service, which was sort of the policy people beyond regular service.  I was GS-15 and GS-15 then paid about sixteen, seventeen thousand dollars a year.  That was, that was big money.  I can remember, at the time I took the job in the company, in '69 [1969], I was offered a little over thirty thousand dollars in '69 [1969] to take that job.  And that was equal to the pay of the solicitor of labor, and I just--that was just mind-boggling, you know.  It's almost a hundred percent pay increase for me.
Speaker 2: That was a lot of money back then.
Speaker 1: Well, it seemed like a lot of money (laughter), (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I know, but it was--I came up 1980, and we were making $28,000.  We're the highest paid asso--I'm not--we were--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --associate, but that was--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I'm just saying, you're talking that was eleven years--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --earlier.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But let me, let me, so, let me just understand though.  In the two years that you were special assist--assistant to the Secretary of Labor--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that wasn't when you were out politically.  You were still, right?  It wasn't the change of administration.
Speaker 1: No, see, the change of administration took place January of '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: And that's when Nix--no.
Speaker 1: That's when Nixon was--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --took office for the first time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was elected of course in '68 [1968].  And, and when, when he was elected, I, I was not--I was in the position where I'm a confidential assistant--special assistant to a political officer.
Speaker 2: So you're not in a protected position?
Speaker 1: I'm not in a protected position.
Speaker 2: Okay, but--
Speaker 1: I had an opportunity to, you know, retreat to the protected service, which is what everybody wanted me to do, and offered for me to do.  And I said no, I have tasted the nectar of the gods, and I don't think I wanna go back to (laughter), to the old system.
Story_ID: 82876
Speaker 1: Now what things did you like about being special assistant, 'cause you were very--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, I liked the being in the middle of everything.  I was the solicitor's alter ego.  I was the boss, even the people who were superior to me in terms of pay and rank.  I was the gatekeeper for the solicitor.  If you wanted the solicitor to sign off on this brief, you had to convince me that he should, okay, and I was not always easy (laughter) to convince.  And so it kind of gave you a sense of power and control that, you know, I hadn't experienced before as a lawyer.  And I was--when the solicitor needed something done--one of the things, for example, that occurred while I was in there, you had the riots.  You remember the riots in '68 [1968]?  And (unclear) the Congress being very upset about the riots passed a law saying no money can be paid to anyone convicted of involvement in any social unrest, okay.  One of our big programs was the Manpower Program.  That's how you got these kind of community action agencies and various other things that's taking place at the local level.  And there were a whole lot of people caught up in these webs of arrests around the country in these riots.  So the question was: who's eligible, who's not eligible to get paid?  Okay, if you're in one of these programs and get, get arrested and involved in something going on, you--under the law you can't get paid out of government money.  So one of the jobs I had as special assistant was sort of over, overseeing a team of young assistants or young clerks that come in from big places like Harvard [University] and Yale [University] to work for the summer, to look at arrest records from around the country, and try to match up people from these police blotters with manning charts of the outfits like [HM] Marion Barry's here in Washington called Pride Incorporated or you know, groups like that in Chicago or other places so, to determine whether or not these folks had run afoul of this restriction that Congress had put in the appropriations for the manpower department--for the Labor Department or for whatever, who was ever funding these activities and to--in that job now, you got these militant kids, bright kids from Harvard and Yale and others who oppose the idea of what this is all about, and having a pretty much revolt on my hands about really doing it.  That was interesting, and I don't even remember how it all came out.  I do know that that was very, it was--I'd, I'd did that during one summer, and it was kind of dra--drudgery, but it was to confront these militant kids, I call 'em.  These were law students basically who had attitudes and views about whether what the government was doing here was right.  Another thing at that time is a lot of the lawyers then, coming out of Harvard and Yale, their first option was to come to work for the government, because that's where the real action was in terms of doing something significant.  The people who had the boring jobs were the guys who got the big money and went to the law firm to be, you know, second fiddle to some guy who's drafting a, a bond issue for somebody, you know, that has no relevance to what's going on in the country right now.  So in that sense, it was one of the most rewarding periods of my life.
Story_ID: 82877
Speaker 1: You know things haven't changed.  People like going into government 'cause it's better, more exciting, and in the heat of the action.  So, but that's--so, but what happened is that [President Richard] Nixon comes in and you find yourself out.
Speaker 2: Well, I opted out.
Speaker 1: You opted out.
Speaker 2: It wasn't that I, that I was forced out.  The guy who succeeded Nixon, you will probably recognize the name.  He's a young man, a young lawyer from Kentucky by the name of Larry [Laurence] Silbermam.  Larry came in to succeed Charlie Donahue, who had been a plumber's lawyer.  Larry was thirty-four years old in 1969.  I am thirty-nine years old.  I'm older than he is.  And he comes into the job of solicitor of labor about end of March I guess, or maybe first of April.  I'm still there, although I'd already got in motion this process of hooking up with a private firm after my talk with Lee Hamilton, and that, that came to fruition about the end of May.  Well, Larry comes in.  I'm there.  He doesn't know anything about being solicitor of labor, and I'm to teach him because I'm in the job, sitting right there next to his office.  And he likes me.  He wants me to stay, and I said no, I gotta leave.  And you know, he says, okay, but I want you to stay, you know, until I can get the hang of what this is.  And so I said I'll do that, but as soon as this thing comes through, I'm gone.  And I stayed until, you know, the offer came in about the first of June I guess it was, may have been a little before that time.  And I told him I'm leaving, but then at that time he'd really become attached, and we were working well together.  He became quite famous.  He was court of appeals judge here in D.C.--he's retired now--and he was Ambassador of Yugoslavia; he was the deputy attorney general; he became very famous as one of the people considered for the Supreme Court when the woman was picked.  But we stayed on, and I left on good terms with him.  He tried to get me to switch parties, switch my political affiliation so that we could hook up.  I said I would have been the Clarence Thomas of his (laughter), of that time, because that's really what he had in mind for me.  He said, you know, Rufus, I think, I think there's a lot you can, you can do for us, you know.  I said, well, I know, but I just don't think I'm ready for that yet.
Story_ID: 82878
Speaker 1: So then you leave.  You had contacted--and so this whole thing, you are actually leaving [Washington] D.C. and going to California, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And--but you, you, so you're going into the human relations and in corporate America, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Which you--it's a utility, but still is corporate America.  And are you--I mean, and this is a lot of money for someone to be--I'm just saying that thirty thousand was a lot of money at that time.
Speaker 2: Well, it seemed like a lot, but it, it really wasn't.
Speaker 1: It wasn't?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Not with--
Speaker 2: But it was a lot better than what I was--
Speaker 1: It was a lot better than government.
Speaker 2: And you see, at that time, you gotta understand that the government was begin, beginning to move up its pay scales too to comparability.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And they, they were--the moved a lot--they moved pretty fast after six--after seventy, when the, when the, when the business people came in.  They weren't gonna stand for the kind of pay scales that the Democrats had, had excepted, you understand.
Speaker 1: I see.  So, so you get there, and you also go--you know, the whole family goes, even though--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --your son is, is--
Speaker 2: He didn't wanna go, but we--he did.  And we, we got started out there, drove across country.  It was a great trip, but I committed to start work out there I think it was September 16th of '69' [1969].  And we, we left here about ten days before that--not 10, no, we, we had four nights on the road.
Speaker 1: But, and just to give perspective, there are opportunities hap--happening for African Americans on the--
Speaker 2: All over.
Speaker 1: --business side--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, in the late '60s [1960s], early '60s [1970s]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you'll find a lot of people sort of going into corporate America--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --around that time.
Story_ID: 82879
Speaker 1: Now, the--you're, you're in the law department though, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what kind of work are you--
Speaker 2: My first assignments with the gas company--first of all, I had to understand--I didn't really talk about this with them when we were negotiating, but you had to become a member of the California Bar.  I'm out of law school thirteen years.  Fortunately, they do have a one-day attorney's bar in California, but there's an examination.  And I had to figure out a way to do that after all these years, and I did.  Fortunately, I took a bar review course out there.  Two of the teachers were people I knew.  One was from the law school at IU [Indiana University] who was a teacher there when I was there.  And another guy was here at UPO, had been involved at some controversies I had been involved with here for the NAA [NAACP].  And I didn't talk about that while I was at the government.  I did a lot of NAA--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I want--
Speaker 2: --CP work.
Speaker 1: --I just--you know, we'll come back to that.  Okay, I just saw that, okay.
Speaker 2: But I passed the bar on the first shot out there, and then I became a full-fledged lawyer.  And my first assignment was to assist in the first General Rate Case that the company was gonna try before the California Public Service Commission--Public Utilities Commissions it's called out there.  So I was a regulatory lawyer.  And the law department there was very small.  We had about seven lawyers, and a general counsel, an associate general counsel, and about seven lawyers.  And it's a big utility.  There's a lot of things going on.  And interesting concept, this company--I went to work for a company called Pacific Lighting Service Company.  That was the service company in which the functions--the legal department was in there; the economists were in there, those organizations that provide services to the utilities.  This is the, part of a holding company setup.  Pacific Lighting Corporation was the holding company, an exempt holding company under the Public Utilities Holding Company Act.  Its major subsidiaries were Southern California Gas Company, a wholly owned subsidiary, and Southern Counties Gas Company; those were the two operating companies, the largest utility system in the country--largest natural gas utility system in the country, not the largest.  Electric was--there was some much larger electric companies.  And so, we were highly regulated by the state insofar as our rates and terms and conditions of service.  And so one of my first assignments was to assist the guy who hired me, who was their principal regulatory lawyer in preparing and trying this case, which I don't know what you know about utility law or not, but a rate case is a major--it's kind of like an antitrust case from a business side.  You know, it, it takes about two years to put together and compile all of the economic data, the, the financial data, the preparing your witnesses.  And the difference between a rate case and a regular court case is that all of the evidence is assembled in advance in writing.  All of the witnesses' testimony is written out in question and answer form.  It is compiled in these big documents and filed with the commission and with all the other parties who have access to it.  And so they exchange these cases.  We do our case as a moving party.  Then the interveners can do their case.  The state public service--I mean utilities commission's staff does its case all directed to the question: should the rates of this company be modified or should there service terms and conditions change as they propose?  And that's a function of a lot of things.  And so that's, that's what writing that case and what the--the key, the key players are not the lawyers.  The key players are the economists, the rate specialists, the policy people in the company who are telling you that cost of money has changed in such a way that we need, you know, we need to do these kinds of adjustments.
Story_ID: 82880
Speaker 1: And this is different because previously you'd been in a national regulatory base office.  Here you are at, at a utility which is controlled, you know, has it's controls, but it's, you know, the--your main entity is really the state commission that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That's, but that's insofar as its, its basic economic--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --controls what its income is predicated on.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: But it's much more than that, you know.  It's a big company; we had probably 10,000 employees, and they were scattered all over the state--I mean over the Southern part of the state of California.  You have--you know, you get, as a utility, you get automobile accidents by its employees; you have issues that come up with respect to other things that lawyer--that companies get, you know, involved with from a legal point of view; you have questions about whether you turned off the service to somebody unfairly or improperly; you, you confront a lot of different kinds of lawsuits.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what was happening in terms of utility law back then?  Was it--was this a time--'cause, you know, now most recently there's been a, well, there was a big move.  That's how--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, it's all deregulation now.
Speaker 1: Right, but there wasn't befo--
Speaker 2: Not then.
Speaker 1: --it wasn't--it was all totally regulated.
Speaker 2: Well, that, that's exactly right.  It--I said pretty totally regulated, yes.  We hadn't yet come to that point in our development where everybody was agitating for privatization and, and an easing of regulatory oversight and controls.
Speaker 1: And was this the time before there was any municipal ownership of, of--
Speaker 2: Oh no, the biggest utility--one of the biggest utilities in the country is a municipally owned utility in Los Angeles.  The Los Angeles Department of Water and Power supplies electricity to the city of Los Angeles [California], it's a municipal; city of Pasadena has its own electric system; Glendale [California], they have their own electric systems.  We supplied the gas as a private company, but they--Long Beach [California], has its own gas and electric operations.  So, no, municipal union--municipal ownership of utility services is a traditional part of our system as well.
Story_ID: 82881
Speaker 1: Well, was there any way--you know, 'cause California is usually viewed, especially in that period of time before the proposition, you know, propositions.  It was always legally sort of on the leading edge, and I guess I'm wondering if any of that as happening within the--
Speaker 2: Well, California, yeah, has always been on the leading edge.  They would--some of their earliest reforms, if you will, in regulation, occurred there for utilities.  I was involved one of the cases where we, we tried to introduce a new concept, and it, it didn't fly at that time, but it eventually did, I think, at least that version of it.  Our management--I didn't come up with it, but the one of the first cas--cases I had on my own was a case where we were proposing--see, gas is a temperature sensitive service.  You know, you use it for space heating, and when the weather is cold, you use more of it to space heat than you do when it's warm, when you don't need gas to heat your home.  Well, in California, you get big swings between seasons in certain elevations and areas between winter, and summer, spring, and so naturally when, when it's cold, bills go high up; when it's warm, they come down because people are using less gas.  Well, we proposed a system.  So that means that the, the revenue of the company varied significantly, depending up on the number of degree days in a, in a given billing period, so that--so this is not good from a company point of view.  You'd really like to have a rather level flow of revenue so that, you know, you aren't confronted with these drought and flood type situations, so what--I mean in terms of the, this, the amount, the amount of your income, or revenue I should say.  So we proposed a rate structure that would level out the payments for the customer, so it wouldn't be that big difference between what their winter bills were as opposed to their summer bills.  We thought this was a pro-consumer idea, but the public saw it, they were trying to charge me more for using less gas.  See, they wanted to look at it from that point of view instead of, they were charging me less for using more gas in the wintertime.  And the public relations part of it, they, they won that battle, and so that idea went down in flames before this politically sensitive body called the public utilities commission.  But that was one of the difficult cases I had that they had to bring in extra security when we were trying the case because there were some people that were very, very upset about what we were proposing to do.
Story_ID: 82882
Speaker 1: Now you, you get involved in Cal--did--what happens with you there that you end up--
Speaker 2: Coming back here?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --'cause I know that--
Speaker 2: --this was at the time when the energy crisis began.  You remember the energy crisis kind of reached its peak in the early 1970s.  That was--and it was perceived by some as a shortage.  It was not really a shortage, but it was an economic problem basically stemming from misconceived government policy of one kind or another in terms of the pricing regime that applied to both oil and gas.  See, gas, natural gas, historically had been regulated insofar as the prices that could be charged by producers were concerned.  The producers never accepted that decision that the Supreme Court made back in the '30s [1930s] that basically said that the Natural Gas Act authorized the Federal Power Commission at that time to regulate the price, the sales price, of natural gas being produced in the field.  The law didn't say it that way, but the court said that's what the law meant.  And there has been a--there had been a running fight in the Congress between--with being led by the producer elements, Exxons, Mobile, Chevrons, those kinds of people opposed--these were the guys that produce the oil--I mean the gas.  They didn't like the price controls; they fought it, but they had not been able, successfully, to overcome that.  They almost did it when [Dwight] Eisenhower was president, you might remember.  They'd come very close to getting it down, and somebody discovered that somebody had paid some money.  And there was a scandal, so Ike backed off.  And that had never been resolved.  But in any case, in the '60--in the '70s [1970s] what happened as a consequence of that, gas being produced for sale in interstate commerce, that is produced in Texas, put in a pipeline, moved to California, moved to Chicago [Illinois], moved to New England, moved to the East Coast.  The gas produced for those sales were subject to price regulation.  And the, and the, and the federal authorities setting those prices was the Federal Power Commission, and they, they kept the prices too low.  So as a consequence, whenever a producer had an opportunity to do so, he, instead of selling in interstate--making an interstate sale--he would try to sell it in such a way it would not be subject to price controls, that is to a person who would use it in the state where the gas is produced.  And as a consequence of this dual market, the gas began to flow more and more into those unregulated areas, dried up in the interstate areas, and we were beginning to have trouble fulfilling our requirements.  So we were agitate-and that's why they decided to strengthen their Washington [D.C.] presence by sending Rufus McKinney here to help agitate for some reforms in the pricing regime for gas and for--to support some projects that, that our management had developed for alternative sources of gas, one of them being, to import it in large quantities in liquefied form from Indonesia, one from liquefying gas produced in elect--in Alaska, shipping it down by a cryogenic tanker to Los Angeles programmed to gasify coal, which is an abundant resource, and convert it to synthetic gas at very great cost.  We had developed programs of this kind.  All of these required either some form of government support in the form of loan guarantees in the case of the coal gasification or, in the case of the LNG, we wanted the--these tankers, we were gonna require eight or ten of them that cost a half a billion dollars each.  And there's programmed under the Maritime Administration for support for ship construction and that sort of thing.  So, and then you had to get state department clearance on these big import projects and that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 82883
Speaker 1: See, until then, they had no off--they had an office that was manned essentially by a secretary from a law firm that did tax work for us here.  And they decided we, we want to set up a, a regular Washington [D.C.] presence, and we needed a gas company person in that function.  So they said looks like you're the one that best fits the bill.
Speaker 2: Were you enjoying California at this point?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't like California, and I was very pleased for this opportunity because California was just not my cup of tea.  I didn't like the weather (laughter); I didn't particularly like the people; the black people I met out there, they tended to be a different breed altogether.
Speaker 2: Not as sophisticated.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, somewhat yes.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: They talk about cars, money, and women, that's about it.  They didn't talk much about public policy, issues of significance, and I just have a little trouble with me.
Speaker 2: So you came back.  So your--you, you come back, but this is in a new role.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, and are you happy with, with the whole--
Speaker 1: Oh, I was very pleased.  I think I had the best job in the company when I came back here.  It was probably the job that was almost most envied because, and it was largely because of the glamour of being in Washington, and people had the same notions you expressed about lobbyist and how they were just throwing money away on wild entertainment and that sort of thing.  It really wasn't that way, at least in our case.  But I was here for four years as a lone person.  I had a secretary and just me from 1972 until I hired my first person in there in 1976.  And basically then what we were doing was trying to figure out really what, what is it I'm supposed to do.  What am I gonna do here?  I knew there was the Congress, and everybody was every year proposing some legislation to deal with the energy crisis.  And California being the largest state in the union, has the largest congressional delegation of state, we had over forty members of the House and two senators.  One of my jobs was to try to get to know the right people in that group of people basically, to see if we can't enlist them in the efforts that we are trying to do to protect the people of the state of California.  That was my job, to get them to help me secure the rights and the economic stability of this great state of ours and the people of California.  And that was not a hard job.  That was a good job.
Story_ID: 82884
Speaker 1: So you spent a lot of time with whom, talking?  You spent a lot of time with the state--the congressmen--I'm sorry--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, well, basically, you deal with congressman, but you deal mostly with staff people.  The people who really run things up there, or the people who know, and people whose ear the members listen to are the ones you want to have on your side.  And you know, that's a constantly changing thing, depends on what the issue is, how you can show how it affects people, and, and how it benefits them in terms of their careers and their hopes and aspirations.
Speaker 1: So when you came back, how many blacks were in a position like you, where they were representing--
Speaker 2: Nobody, that I know of.
Speaker 1: So who were you able to sort of help guide you, 'cause this is a, it's a new office and a new--
Speaker 2: Well, in terms--I didn't have any person from--I, I befriended the people I thought I could get to best in the delegation.
Speaker 1: So who, who--
Speaker 2: And that was Yvonne Burke was one of the first people, Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.  I knew her in California.  She was a kind of a hot, new congresswoman from California then.  She was succeeded by a guy who was a very good friend of mine, Julian Dixon, who died about two years ago.  But Julian was an excellent friend; Merv Dymally.  I didn't know to--see, we were from the South.  I didn't hang out with the, with [HM Ron] Dellums too much.  I didn't know him too well.  But I, I befriended the people from the South, Cranston, Allen Cranston; Senator Hayakawa, the Japanese guy, we got to know pretty good; Pete Wilson, when he was a senator.  The best friend we had was a guy from the North, who was the ranking member of the House, House public works committee, a guy by the name of Biz Johnson, white guy from up Northern California, who was a very good friend of some people we had on retainer.  Now I didn't come back here totally cold.  We probably had, we had three or four different outsiders as consultants to us back here.  So part of my job, first of all, was to calm them down a little bit, because they all felt threatened when I came back, they all did, the older guys.  A guy by the name of Ed Falk, he'd been working for our company back here since the '40's.  And he didn't--he was, he was about my age then, not quite.  But when I came back here he was well into his sixties.  And he as--it was--ours was one of his biggest retainers, and so he wanted to make sure that he didn't offend me, but (laughter) at the same time, he wanted to make sure that I didn't let him go.  'Cause I think they were all given to understand that eventually they would be working for me.
Speaker 1: And was that the case eventually?
Speaker 2: Yes, most of them.  A couple of 'em, they didn't really work for me, but--
Speaker 1: They reported to you.
Speaker 2: They reported to me.  And--
Speaker 1: So were they at the beginning trying to go around, back to corporate--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --not really.  Well, you shouldn't--yes, they did; of course they did.  I mean these were people who had known our senior officers very well when they came back here.  I mean they would pick 'em up at the airport and take 'em to their homes, and entertain them, and drive them around if they felt the need to, that sort of thing.  Well, you know, when you come back and you kind of threaten to interrupt that kind of relationship, that's unsettling.  But, we managed.  I think that's one reason why they picked me to come back here, because it--excuse me--they figured I could negotiate that, and I did.
Story_ID: 82885
Speaker 1: Now the office--I mean you--it grew.  Now why did it grow?
Speaker 2: Because of the issues--
Speaker 1: That were come--
Speaker 2: --be, became more complex.  I couldn't deal with it alone.  And it was a kind of thing that you, you just don't do well just using independent contractors.  You needed to have a much more coordinated and you had--needed more control over what it--what's going on.  And I think the way we wound up, I--when they finally--my boss finally gave me the go-ahead to hire some people to help and we kind of designed and office in which I wanted to hire a person to, whose beat would be the executive agencies, another person whose beat would be Capitol Hill, and a person whose beat would be regulatory activities.  And these were people who were--I wanted to be--I wanted my Capitol Hill person to be a real good lobbyist and somebody with experience working on Capitol Hill problems, and we, we did that, we beginning in '76' [1976].
Speaker 1: And the company, you had a decent budget (unclear) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: We had a budget to cover whatever I really wanted to do, basically.  I never saw the budget first.  I'd finally had to develop budgets, but at the beginning, it was ad hoc.  And it was--we, we kind of invented this as we went along.  They had never had this kind of an operation.  I had never done it.  And it was interesting because you talk about the politics and the PACs [Political Action Committee].  We had a PAC, and it was managed by a guy in Los Angeles [California], and it was basically operated for the benefit of the state legislature and the local government officials out there.  Nobody had really factored in too much the fed side of it.  We had this guy on retainer for us who lived in Newport Beach, a guy by the name of John O'Malley, a good guy.  He and I got off on good foot together, you know, good terms.  But John was kind of the guy they would send back here with the money if he wanted to con--you know, contribute to a federal officer.  Well, we eventually regularized that, the federal side, and put Rufus McKinney in charge of deciding--not deciding, but making the critical recommendations about what we would do in federal elections, both at the presidential level as well as with the congressional people.
Story_ID: 82886
Speaker 1: Now, Sir, in the time that you were there, which was basically you had that position for about seventeen years, am I right?
Speaker 2: No, I came here in '72 [1972], and left in '92 [1992].
Speaker 1: Ninety-two [1992], so twenty years, okay, that's right.  But you went from--okay, assistant special counsel to vice president, national public--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --affairs, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So in that twenty-year period, what are the things that you would look back and say were sort of important building blocks along the line and things that you grew and learned too, you know, personally?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the most--I shouldn't say the most--one of the important things was my transition from legal work to non-legal work.  That was a hard thing to do, and it didn't happen suddenly, but it came to a head when I was made vice president of the company.  Until that time, I had reported through the law department.  That's why they called me a special counsel.  My boss remained the same in the law department from 1972 until 1975.  In '75 [1975], new set of managers came in out there and decided to create this more or less formal lies public affairs function that had been there in terms of having people doing these kinds of things, but not organized in this way.  And so that's how that came to be.  That was kind of traumatic for me, but it happened and it was tough for me to, to go on inactive status with the California bar instead of active.  But that was the sensible thing to do, since it was a lot cheaper, and I didn't anticipate going back to California to practice law.  But I maintained my status as an inactive member of the bar, which they still do.  Now that I'm such an age they don't charge me anymore.  I just get to be on the rolls.
Story_ID: 82887
Speaker 1: But the most significant things for me was the kind of the pioneering of the effort for a person of my ethnic background and situation to--I wouldn't say encroach upon, but sort of crash into this area of operation that had not been, you know, one of the common ones, and--
Speaker 2: It was, it was like being part of a private club, in some respects.
Speaker 1: Well, in a way maybe, but not really.  I don't think it was a private club so much as that it, it had been populated by a different set of people.  They came into it from a different angle.
Speaker 2: And who were--what kind of angle had they come--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, a lot of 'em were lawyers, and--but many of them had come up through their connections with senior people at headquarters.  One of the things that I found interesting was my ability to convince my senior management that in order for me to be effective as their representative in Washington, I had to have officer status in the company, that is I, I didn't--I don't think I could have been as effective if I did not, if I were not considered an officer of the company.  A lot of my counterparts reported to the chairman of the board at headquarters.  And while I, I did report to the chairman on, on some, for a while, it was important for me to have that status, and that was not difficult for them to do.  The other thing, of course, was the kind of understanding we came to about the philosophy we would adopt in operating.  I'm a very highly ethical person.  I would not do anything that I thought would be offensive to my status as an attorney.  I felt very strongly about that, and so we came to an understanding.  And I say this in my memoirs, that we were not gonna use money as our means of influence.  We would use money to assist us I doing our work, and I--what did I mean by that?  I, I wanted to have the capacity to entertain in an official way, which meant that if the other top lobbyists in this town were members of a country club, I needed to be a member of a country club too.  So, I became a member of congressional, had some, some problems with that, their first black member.  I needed to have strong support from the headquarters' experts and individuals who knew what it was we were trying to do, so it couldn't be a competitive situation.  So that mean frequent trips back to headquarters; it meant I had the ability to call upon them when I needed somebody to accompany me to a critical meeting with an executive or an official.  Rufus McKinney, the lawyer, is not the manager of the Pacific Indonesia Gas project.  But if we are coming back--if we're trying to convince some people that we want to convince in Congress, or at the state department, or at the commerce department, or at mari--Maritime Administration, I wanted the person there with me who, who knew that project inside out, you know, not just going over there and repeating something somebody had told me about.  So it was that kind of relationship that I insisted that we have and which we did have.  I wanted to be a part of the executive group.  Their perks were my perks, and, and I wanted to be treated with respect as a part of the senior management team of the company, and that's what we had.  That's not the case now.  We still have a Washington office, but it's changed.
Story_ID: 82888
Speaker 1: But that was a te--at a period when decisions made in Washington [D.C.] were critical to the success, at least the perception of our success, with what we do and that is provide natural gas service to one of the largest populations in the state--in the country.  We had upwards of twelve million people that we served, and we had close to five million customers.  The average gas company in the country has less than a million customers.  So it was a significant economic engine for the Southern part of the state of California.  We took very seriously the issue of what happens if we should not be able to supply gas to this population.  We did studies that indicated that the economy of that area could be made to suffer tremendously, and we developed that information.  I didn't do it, but our experts did, and that's how that was one of the tools.  Information is a tool that the lobbyist has, much more important than money, information.
Speaker 2: Did you--so you were essentially successful, is what I'm saying.  If sounds like you put a lot of--
Speaker 1: It depends on what you mean by success.  If by success you mean these projects came to fruition, and they are own--online and operating now, no, we were not successful.  But we were successful to some degree.  We were successful in the sense that we got some changes we did help to bring about.  I, I didn't do this.  This was an industry-wide concern, not just us.  But we helped to bring about some changes in government policy with reference to the pricing of natural gas.
Story_ID: 82889
Speaker 1: Now, did, you know, you came in under a Republic administration.  Did you find--and Republicans were in up until--
Speaker 2: No, I came--you mean when I came to Washington [D.C.]?
Speaker 1: No, I'm talking about when you were--when you--
Speaker 2: Oh, in the government--
Speaker 1: In the--when you came back to be, serve as a lobbyist, who was in, in as--
Speaker 2: This was in 1972.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: So that was during the [President Richard] Nixon Administration.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I'm saying, right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you--I think I say here how you had gone to the inaug--inauguration, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, did you find that on the issue of energy was there much difference, 'cause the only Democratic president would have served during your time would have been Carter.
Speaker 2: Jimmy Carter.
Speaker 1: Right, so did you find that there was much difference or you know?  I mean, and you're at this point having really to deal in a lot of Republican circles.
Speaker 2: Indeed, I did, but, but Congress was controlled by the Democrats most of that time.  You gotta remember, the policy in Washington, at least during that period, was as much influenced by what went on on Capitol Hill as at the White House in many respects.  That has changed a lot since that time I think.  But Congress was basically controlled by Democrats on both the House and the Senate side through most of that time.  And they were at odds with the White House over a lot of the issues on, on energy.  And they were trying to, themselves, develop their own posture with reference to how best to deal with the problems that the country was facing.  So the, the politics was important of the administration.  They were still--they were not organized well to deal with the problem.  And Nixon did ultimately begin to reshape the bureaucracy to, to try to take account more of how--what you had to do.  But it was left to the Democrats to finally bring some order out of that by creating the Department of Energy.  See, the Department of Energy was created during the time I was here under Carter.  But the, the foundation for the creation was laid by Nixon, by his creating the Federal Energy Administration, and the Energy Research and Development Agency, and a couple of other of these kind of ad hoc groups that came up that they finally brought together and put the whole department together in 19--in 19--what was that--1970--1978, '79' [1979] I guess it was.
Story_ID: 82890
Speaker 1: And did you ever have--were you ever close to any scandal during the time?
Speaker 2: You mean personally?
Speaker 1: No, no, I'm--not personally.  I'm talking about within the context of your job as a lobbyist.
Speaker 2: Well, my office was at the Watergate 600, and I moved to the Watergate when I--that was--we were in the Madison Hotel building here when I came in the summer of 1972.  The break-in at the Watergate occurred in 1972.  We moved our offices to the Watergate in 1972.  And of course, we were right there in the middle of that notorious place, but that's as close as I ever came to any scandal.  The only scan--there was one scandal that touched us briefly, not, not seriously.  I had a woman lobbyist working for me.  I'd had--I went to her sixtieth, sixtieth birthday party this week.  She's retired now, a white woman, the girl on that picture you saw with me at the Capitol Dome.  There was a senator from one of the New England states.  I think was New Hampshire, Democrat.  And I believe one of the "Washington Post" gossip columnist wrote something that indicated that there was a sexual relationship or something going on between Gay, who worked for me, and this senator.  Now it was not true, but you know, once it gets in the "Washington Post," it may as well be true.  And that was a kind of a delicate situation where we, we had to do some threatening and that sort of thing.  But I suppose that's the only thing that I can remember.  There was one other case where a member of the House Ways and Means Committee, I think the chairperson at the time, not Wilbur Mills, after Wilbur Mills's time.
Speaker 1: Rostenkowski?
Speaker 2: I'm not gonna name any name.  But there was an issue we had before that committee, which was very important money-wise for us, tax issue.  And there was some suggestion that the problem we had might be made to go away if we retain a certain lobbyist to work on that issue for us, that kind of thing, which, you know, would have been just disastrous.  But, you know, that's, those are kinds of things that you confront that you have to deal with sometime.
Story_ID: 82891
Speaker 1: But you enjoyed--did you enjoy this twenty year career?
Speaker 2: Oh, I thought I said I think that was the best job I ever had, the most fun.  And the thing about it is, I'm, I've, now, as I look back on it, I feel I've missed my chance because I didn't really cash in on it, financially I did not.  Money was the furthest thing from my mind then.  I thought I was being well paid.  I--you know and because when you're on a job like that where your salary is fine, but your expense accounts--I had to--I was the highest paid vice president in the company for years.  And when you add it in, the--my expenses were second only to that of the chairman and the president of the company.  That's because, you know, you did a lot of entertaining.  If we wanted to, if we wanted to--see, I had a congressional dinner here every two years in which we honored the members of the California Congressional Delegation at a black tie, spouses include dinner for the entire delegation and their wives.  For that dinner we would bring in fif--ten or twelve of our senior officers and their wives from California.  It was held at the finest hotel.  And no lobbying took place, but I saw one of the members of the Congress--ex-members of Congress from California at this thing for Gay the other night.  And he--his wife, who was fresh--he was a freshman congressman--this was 1979--and his wife was still talking about her first black tie dinner that the gas company gave.  She thinks that was the finest thing that she'd ever been to, and this has been thirty years ago.  But that was the kind of entertainment we did.
Story_ID: 82892
Speaker 1: Did you retire early?
Speaker 2: Well, sixty-two is, is not early, but it's, you know, it's about the time.  Most of our people leave about that age.  Our company, you can't stay after sixty-five, nobody.  You can, you can consult and do stuff like that, but--
Speaker 1: So what have you been doing in those years?  Well--
Speaker 2: In the, in the years from nine--when I left them, they said, Rufus, we want you to maintain your lifestyle with us until you're, you're sixty-five.  And whatever it takes to do that, we will do, in terms of you will not suffer any diminution in your income during that time because you retired.  So any combination of what we pay you as a consultant and retirement benefits will at least equal your salary when you're retired.  And that's kind of the deal I had, plus they said, Rufus, we're gonna give you a quarter of a million dollars in cash, which, you know, I look back on it, it should have been a half a million or a million; really it should have been, but it wasn't.
Speaker 1: For the work that you had done?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that's, you know, I'd never heard of a quarter of a million dollars.  It--which isn't a lot of money when you really think about it, but it was a whole lot more than I had.  And you know, so that kind of tided me over till now.  I'm getting full retirement and pension.  I just hope things keep going.  But I'll tell you one thing, it was a disadvantage.  I got my first pension increase last year, after eleven years.  So that mean that my in, my, my income went down considerably in that length of time since you didn't have raises, no cost of living, nothing like that.  But, you know, that's the way it goes.
Story_ID: 82893
Speaker 1: Now, you're still, you know, rela--so what have you been doing also and--
Speaker 2: Well, when I said the consulting--and it was an interesting--it was just not some vehicle for paying me.  They wanted me to give them monthly reports on the political climate and situation in Washington [D.C.], whatever is going in, which--and they paid me for trips and covered my participation in organizations and stuff like that for that time.  Then in--when I fully retired in the late summer of '95' [1995], I, I still held a shingle out as Rufus McKinney and Associates, but nobody came.  And I didn't really expect anybody, not anybody significant.  I did a few things, but it wasn't what I wanted.  I wanted to play golf every day if I could, but I also wanted to continue doing something of social significance, which is always been a very important thing in my life.  So, one of the things I did was to help Parris Glendening get himself elected governor of the state of Maryland.  He became governor in '94' [1994] I believe it was.  And in '90--when I retired in '96' [1996], I said I'd like to have a membership on some kind of commission or something where it's doing something in the state of Maryland.  And eventually they put me as--on a member--as a member of the Maryland Commission on Human Relations, which enforces the civil rights laws for the state of Maryland, you know, sex discrimination, employment discrimination, public and private, access to the handicaps to places of public accommodation.  So for the last seven years I've been one of members of--one of the nine members of that commission.  We meet every month in Baltimore, and maybe more often when we have an investigation that we want to look into some issue of human relations problems in the state of Maryland.  For example, a couple of years ago we had a big investigation about housing conditions in the state and access to affordable housing, nondiscrimination and that sort of thing, in the financing of housing opportunities in the state.  And a few years earlier, we did a study on some educational issues in the state.  But mainly the commission does the routine work of hearing these complaints from individuals about discrimination of one kind or another.  And commission members sit in appeals from decisions by administrative law judges on those kinds of matters.
Story_ID: 82894
Speaker 1: What do you wanna do that you haven't done yet?  I know you've, you've been writing your memoirs, you're finished with it.  It just needs to be edited, but you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the one thing that my--that's, you know, my agenda now that I want to get done.  The question is what should I do with it, or what can be done with it?  Isn't gonna be of any interest to anybody except my immediate family?  And I'm not sure, because it's, it's basically what I'm talking to you about now that's what's in these memoirs.  A few things may be an addition, but mostly that, a lot of little incidents that happened to me that I thought were kind of interesting.  But what I want to do now is to live out my life in peace and relative security, and to enjoy two passions that I have.  One of them is playing golf.  The other one is playing poker.  I enjoy those two things very much, and to enjoy the--see my grandkids kind of develop, hopefully to make some mark for themselves in life.  Those are what, those are the things that I'd to see done.
Story_ID: 82895
Speaker 1: I wanna go back and ask one thing, and that was your involvement with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the work that you did.  You know, I had promised I--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --was gonna do that before--
Speaker 2: Yes, that was probably one, the, the one of the most rewarding activities in terms personally satisfying things, because this was all done as a volunteer while I was a government employee.  Late in the '50s [1950s] somebody recommended me to the person who headed up the [Washington] D.C. branch of the NAACP, which was probably one of the largest branches of the organization outside of Chicago [Illinois]--outside Detroit [Michigan], at that time.  We probably had twenty, thirty thousand members of the NAA--or maybe not that man, probably close to eight or ten thousand members in NAA in the D.C. branch.  And it was a major activity then, but there were two or three thing that I did during that period from the late '50's [1950s] till I left to go to California: I became a vice president of the branch, and I became chairman of its employment committee in the early--late '50's [1950s], early '60's [1960s].  And as chairman of the employment committee, that was at the critical stage of the conversion of Washington [D.C.] from a segregated city in terms of most everything to one in which, you know, which kind of like today, where things are opened up.  But at that time in Washington, there were no blacks in front office jobs in any of the hotels.  The only jobs a black could have in a hotel in Washington was as a maid or as a--they didn't even have the waiters' jobs; they didn't have those.  They had just few jobs, mostly behind the scenes.  So one of the, one of the things we undertook, as a the chairman of that committee, and along with CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], Urban League.  We had a coalition we established to challenge the Washington hotel association to open up that system to black employment.  And we successfully did that over the course of a year or two, and it occurred at a time when it was not easy to do that, the, the hotel associ--we attacked the association, which is the trade group for all of the hotels.  And we convinced them to eventually report to us on a monthly basis all of their hiring activities on, on behalf of their members and what the profile of the new hires was for the whole city of Washington.  Sterling Tucker, myself, Julius Hopson--I don't know whether you heard that name.  He was with CORE then, and I was the NAA guy.  And that was a major accomplishment for us.  A matter of fact, an incident happened then.
Speaker 1: We should say the NAA--(laughter) AACP.  Is it (unclear), right?
Speaker 2: NAACP.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right (laughter), right.  Just--
Speaker 2: Yes, what did I say?
Speaker 1: You've been saying N double--NAA.  And so, just as a course--
Speaker 2: NAACP--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: So I'm just saying for the purposes of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 82896
Speaker 1: But that, that was done, and one of the critical periods of that was at the [President Lyndon B.] Johnson inaugural, after the [President John F.] Kennedy assassination.  This was taking place during that period.  Johnson was inaugurated president in--at the--after the--in '65' [1965], January of '65' [1965].  We were in negotiations to, very intense negotiations at that time with one of the hotels; it was the Mayflower Hotel.  That was the site of the main ball, the inaugural ball, and we were threatening the hotel with pickets if they didn't come around to what we were looking at.  And Johnson said I'm not gonna have my inaugural ball married by the presence of this protest.  We were in negotiations over at the How--at this, at the district building with the people from the hotel association.  So he said y'all settle that thing and make sure it's done before the 20th of (laughter) of January, and we did, but that was interesting.  But I thought the fact that we got this very powerful trade association to, to, in effect, report to us about this, and promise to do certain things to change that situation.  It was very significant.  But there were also individual cases.  See, the NAA [NAACP] then was very active.  Our offices were down at U Street and 14th, right at 14th in U Streets, in the heart of the city.  This committee, we would sit in sort of on bunk I guess on Saturdays sometimes, and we invited people to come in.  This was at a time when most of our complaints came from employees against federal agencies.  I'm an employee of a federal (laughter) agency, and we're taking these complaints, filing cases against the agency under their administrative procedures to deal with claims of racial discrimination.  Some of these cases went to hearing before agency officials.  I take leave from my job, and represent the individual complainant against--I had one case involving NIH out here, a woman; another case involving the very tragic case of a man with the Department of Agriculture who was fired at, at about age sixty for incompetence of one kind or another.  We were able to prove that--I was able to prove that, that he should have been retired on disability, and which they did.  And those were the kind of cases that I found most rewarding to me personally, to see somebody's life kind of restored to them as a consequence of something like this.  That was, that was what I liked a lot.  Then, to, I was, as the NAA's guy, we had to promote the idea of equal employment in the federal service.  So I was a frequent speaker act--asked--to speak frequently to assemblies of federal managers about what it means to implement the Johnson--Kennedy/Johnson program for equal employment opportunity in the federal service, and that was kind of rewarding too.  Because you gotta remember, during that time, sort of like the Congress, the federal service was dominated by the people who kind of came kicking and screaming into this era of that kind of thing.  So it was kind of fun to do that.
Speaker 2: And that's essentially what you had gone to law school to do in many ways--
Speaker 1: Right, that--
Speaker 2: --when you think about it.
Speaker 1: --and that's very much so, and I think that was my substitute.  That was really what happened to me.  And we had some good people.  Ed Hales, I don't know if you knew him--some good people at the NAA [NAACP] then.  Of course, the [Washington] D.C. branch is deteriorated significant.  The, the main branch in this area now is the Montgomery County branch, very active and very influential politically in the state of Maryland, at least in Montgomery County.  And I'm not nearly as active in that area now.  I go to that stuff, but I'm kind of retired from that now.
Story_ID: 82897
Speaker 1: What did your, what did your parents [George Dallas McKinney and Rosa Ann Thompson] think of your success?  That saw--your father you said died in the, in the 1970s.
Speaker 2: He did in 1972, my father did.
Speaker 1: And your mother died in 19--
Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984].
Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984].
Speaker 2: No, no--
Speaker 1: Eight-seven [1987]?
Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984], eighty-four [1984].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was eighty-seven years old I believe--[cough]--excuse me.  I think they were proud of what I was doing, although I'm not sure they knew a lot of what was going on.
Speaker 1: They didn't understand.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I think they--my mother understood because, see, she died in San Diego [California].  When my father died, she moved to San Diego where my brother, George, and some of my other sisters lived in that area to be with, near them.  And at that time, I was on frequent travel to California from here during that period from the--throughout the '70's [1970s] and into the '80's [1980s].  And on many of my trips there I would detour and go to San Diego, spend a few hours with her, and we had a lot of fun talking.  My mother was a great talker, and she remembered everything.  Things that I couldn't remember, she remembered.  And it would be a little bit frustrating to me when she'd say you remember so and so.  I, I, and I would say sometimes yes, I, I kind of vaguely--I didn't know what the hell she was talking about.  But, you know, she thought I should remember.  And we, my mother and I got along well, got along very well.
Speaker 1: And did she call you the professor till--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, from the, till the very end, yes.  I still have her letters (laughter) addressed that way, some of 'em, if I can find 'em.  But my father and I, it, it was almost like an employee/employer relationship between the two of us rather than father and son.  And I guess part of was it because--part of it was because of his profession and I guess, in part, his basic view of things in terms of the role that, that one should have in this life, and, and the concern about the hereafter.  Certainly, I, I guess I am a Christian; I'm a churchgoing person; I profess Christianity; and I guess I profess belief in the hereafter.  It's more pro forma though right now.  I guess as I get older, it'll probably become much more central.  I had a heart attack a few years ago, back in 1989, and that was a very sobering thing.  It was a very minor and mild attack, obviously, because I survived twelve, fourteen years later, but at that time I was not sure about that.
Story_ID: 82898
Speaker 1: Now, what--you, you have--your, your children and grandchildren are doing very well.  Does that give you a lot of pride in terms of--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I am proud of them, and when you say they're doing very well, compared to what I say.  They are doing well, in that they are still not in jail, not addicted to any controlled substances that I know about, and they are pursuing their education one way or another.  And my son and who's a lawyer, he's done.  He's not been a perfect son.  I'd, I had hoped that he would go into a different profession than I did.  I'd hoped that he would pursue a life that did not try to replicate what his father did (laughter).  He did the may--he say--he made the same mistake I did in the sense that he got married too soon.  And he, he has had a good--he called me today to say that he's enjoying--he's a public defender.  He's not one of these, you know, rich lawyers.  He's a guy who makes his living defending indigent criminals.  That's his job, working through the D.C. superior court system, fundamentally, and he sees the dregs of society, and he sees the imperfections in our system of justice every day.  I couldn't do that, but that's what he likes to do, and he really gets great satisfaction from it.  So, I've given up on any other thing.  He should have been a writer.  He should have been a journalist, but that's water--he's, he's almost my age now (laughter).  The second son I'm, I'm, I'm very proud of.  I think he's done quite well.  He finished UCLA [University of California - Los Angeles] and finished Yale [University], doctorate in Yale in economics, and he became a professor, University of Connecticut.  But he--I wanted him to become the first black head of the Council of Economic Advisors or something like that, you know, like the Secretary of Treasury and that sort of thing.  He came down, and while he was in, in graduate school and worked for a year during the [President Jimmy] Carter term as a staff member at the Council of Economic Advisors.  He's a very bright young man.  But he went into business, and he's been very successful, as he's now the executive director of a program up in Connecticut that's designed--he kind of parallels my career in a sense that minority procurement programs up there, he's fostering the--you know, bringing business into the minority business community.  And he's doing good, good job of it, but he still teaches at the university.  His kids, as I said, they're getting older.  And my two daughters--the one whose picture you saw there is, she's a schoolteacher in Montgomery County.  Her son is getting pretty close to finishing high school, and her daughter is just a little older than this one.  Then my youngest daughter, mother of this, my grand--the youngest grandchild is married to a lawyer.  My oldest daughter is married to a Ghanaian.  He's an American citizen now, but he's a, you know, from Ghana, comes from a tribe of chiefs over there.  They, their family went back to Ghana for Christmas holidays, and they had a great time and reunion with his family over there, so he still maintains ties to his homeland.  He's in the travel business here in Washington [D.C.], doing okay.  But nobody is a millionaire, nobody's a Ken Chenault or a Richardson or anything like that, so you know, but they're doing okay.  I mean they are doing fine, and I'm proud of them.  And I think this generation of grandsons, they're gonna be the ones that make the--they say it skips a generation, that's what they say.  Maybe that's true.
Story_ID: 82899
Speaker 1: Well, what do you want your legacy to be--
Speaker 2: Well, what do I--I think I've already pretty much made my legacy.  And if I'm not satisfied with it as it stands, it's too late to do much about it.  I am--I'll be seventy-three years old, and everybody knows black men don't usually last much longer than that.  Even though my health is pretty good, I'm, I'm a realist.  And I don't dread that.  I, I feel my life has been pretty good.  And I think the thing that is most impressive to me is, and we haven't really talked about it, is this work that I did in creating this organization called the American Association of Blacks in Energy [AABE].  This was--this is the organization grew out of the energy crisis, which you know took place during that early part of the '60's [1960s] and '70's [1970s].  We created AABE--we call it AABE--in 1977 in my office, basically, at Southern California Gas Company on Connecticut Avenue.  This was when a bunch of us got together, led by this fellow, Clark Watson, whose picture you might have seen, who lived in Denver, who said that the Carter energy program, as it was being proposed, was not good for black people because it was predicated on the idea that we were running out of energy in this country and that the government's gonna have to step in and allocate the supply.  And we said that whenever the government is the--controlling that, that black people, given their position in the pecking order of economic interests, are not gonna be at the top of the list.  So we said we've gotta change that.  We've gotta develop a policy predicated more on the notion of more aggressive development of domestic energy resources and changing in policies that will bring that about.  'Cause we felt the best chance for blacks to advance in our society was if we are expanding economically and prospering.  If we ever have to hunker down and go into a kind of a holding pattern of economic development, it's not good for people who are struggling and striving to, to reach this, the good life.  That was our philosophy, and that's how ABE came into being.  And we started with about eight or ten guys--well, people.  There were a couple of women in there.  And the group has survived close to thirty years now.  Was it '77' [1977] to now, what is that, twenty-five years?  Clark was the first chairman; I was the second chairman, and it's grown from that core of eight or ten people to probably a thousand people around the country.  And they are having their annual conference in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in April.  And they have prospered significantly beyond those humble beginnings.  So I, I think the creation of ABE, and to see it do what it has done, and to have the impact that it has had in the black community, to see the emergence of so many young, bright professional blacks coming into the energy industry, one of the purposes of the organization was to encourage blacks to go into engineering and other fields in demand in the energy business and to promote black advancement within the energy industry itself.  So, I think in that respect--when I came in I was the highest ranking black person in any energy company that I knew of here.  Now, we have blacks who are presidents of univer--of energy companies.  You've, you've got some guys in Chicago [Illinois] that were with us, Cordell, Cordell Reed, you know him--good friend, at least we are, we're acquaintances in this effort.  He did--was never as active in it as I would have liked for him to be.  But there were a couple of other guys in Chicago who were very--with a couple of utilities out there.
Speaker 1: Frank Clark is just--
Speaker 2: Frank Clark, yes, I knew him.  Who else do you know in the utility business?
Speaker 1: That's, that's all I know now (unclear)--
Speaker 2: There was a guy at Northern Illinois Gas who was involved.  We were--but, that, that was to me some of the most rewarding things that we did.
Story_ID: 82900
Speaker 1: Oh, that's about nineteen, nineteen seventy-three [1973] or four [1974] at the old executive office building.  That's myself receiving an energy efficiency award from an official of the [Richard] Nixon Administration.  I don't recall his name.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's great sir. Next one.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's myself with the late Senator Barry Goldwater from Arizona at a reception on Capitol Hill during the early 1970s.  You can tell, I'm very young there.
Speaker 2: And what was the occasion you said--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It was, it was a political reception.
Speaker 2: Here is a reception taking place in Los Angeles [California].  That's Rufus McKinney on the right, the little short guy in the light colored suit, Clark Watson on my right.  He was one of the founders of the American Association of Blacks in Energy.  The woman in the background over, over, over Clark's shoulder is Maxine Waters.  She was then a person I believe in the California General Assembly.  And the fellow behind me in the dark glasses is Al Wicks, who at the time was an official in the--in Southern California Gas Company out in Compton.
Speaker 1: That's Rufus McKinney shortly after we moved from the Watergate to our location in Downtown Washington at 1150 Connecticut Avenue.  That's me at, in my office.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  So that would be '73' [1973]--'72' [1972]?
Speaker 1: Late '72' [1972], early '73' [1973].
Speaker 2: Here, again, this is at the same time as that earlier picture with the--in California.  But this, this was at a reception at the, I believe it was the Bonaventure Hotel during the course of the National Urban League Conference in Los Angeles that, of that year.  I believe this must have been about 1978, '79' [1979].  That gentleman on my right--I mean on the right, I don't recall his name.  The fellow in the light-colored suit, the white guy, is the president of Southern California Gas Company, Robert McIntyre, who was my boss at the time.  That's me standing next to McIntyre.  To my right is Vernon Jordan in that loud colored jacket that was the--he was in the executive director of the National Urban League.  And to his right is Clarence Pendleton, who headed the National Urban League in San Diego at that time.
Speaker 1: Reception I believe on Capitol Hill.  The, the center left person there is Senator Bennett Johnston from Louisiana, Democratic senator from Louisiana, Bennett Johnston.  And he was a very powerful senator from an oil producing--oil and gas producing state, very active in the--on the issue back in this period.  You can tell from my age there, this must have been about the mid 1970s period, 1976, '77' [1977], somewhere along in there.
Speaker 2: --House Transportation Committee.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Say his name one more time.
Speaker 2: Glenn Anderson.  Glenn Anderson had been lieutenant governor of the state of California I believe under, under Brown, under the father Brown.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Then he--is he one "n" or two "n's"
Speaker 2: Glen, two, two "n's" I believe.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Oh, it's on there, and you got the year on that?
Speaker 2: No, that's on there--oh, '79', 1979.
Speaker 1: This picture was made by someone I don't know, I, and I'm guessing here because that's--it was made I believe in 1945 at the nationals of the public speaking contest sponsored by the New Farmers of America at Tennessee State University in Nashville, Tennessee.  These are the contestants, the black young men.  I'm on the far right, as we look at that picture, the short one with the white belt (laughter).  The other guys are the contestants and the--and there sponsors.  And the guys kneeling in front I believe are either federal officials involved in administering the Smith-Hughes program, which provided assistance, financial support, for these, for the New Farmers of America and their activities and--
Speaker 2: As you can see from the sign here, this is a picture that was taken in front of my little Presbyterian church in Northwest Washington, Taber Presbyterian Church.  I forget the year.  It must be on that banner somewhere.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Yes, 1967.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-seven [1967].  I'm the shortest person in the picture in the center I believe.  And it's on the occasion of our Men's Day celebration, where we had the famous minister, Proctor, who went on to be the pastor Abyssinia Baptist Church in New York, and who had been time--I believe at this time was the head of Virginia Union College down in Virginia.
Speaker 1: --an interesting picture.  That's Dr. Jackson, who was the president of the Washington branch of the NAACP in about 1960.  And that's me on the right.  I'm, I'm a vice president of the Washington branch of the National Association for the Advance of Colored People.  And this was at some kind of an awards banquet given at his church.  I believe this was the Metropolitan Baptist Church.
Speaker 2: This is at a Washington reception taking place in the late 1970s.  I'm here being congratulated.  We're just talking with a guy who was then head of the media project in Washington called Lynn Theiberg (ph.).  Theiberg was on the board of an organization I was also a member of at the time.
Speaker 1: Oh, boy, I need my glasses.  But this is Congressman Bill Richardson, a member of Congress from the state of New Mexico.  And this was also at a fundraising dinner of some kind of his I believe.  I was a big supporter of Bill Richardson at that time.  He was a fairly young member of Congress.  Bill Richardson went on to much greater things.  He left the Congress and became secretary of the Department of Trans--of the Department of Energy under Bill Clinton, and he became also a--the government's representative to the United Nations, and became sort of a volunteer ambassador, if you will, dealing with hotspot issues.
Speaker 2: Well, that's Rufus McKinney in his office at the Watergate 600 building.  This was during, I would say, probably 1973 or '74' [1974].  We had moved into the Watergate in 1972 in the--
Speaker 1: That's Rufus McKinney in my capacity as a lawyer with the Department of Labor with my boss George Avery on my left.  And on Avery's left is the Secretary of Labor, Willard Wirtz, who had--this must have been during the Kennedy years--not the Kennedy years, well, subse--the Johnson years, I'm sorry--the, the Johnson years at the labor department probably around 1964 or '65 [1965].  And the fellow on the right--no, on the, the secretary's left is Phil Yonner (ph.), who was also a lawyer in the Department of Labor.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Sir, could you just spell Avery Wirtz and Yonner for them?
Speaker 1: Avery, A-V-E-R-Y, George, Wirtz, W-I-R-T-Z; Yonner, I don't recall how to spell his name.  He was a that went to Penn State, and very big Penn State booster.
Speaker 2: That's a photo of a meeting of the advisory board that was created under the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act.  This advisory board is comprised of representatives of labor unions, and of companies, and of state and local governments, as well as administrators of various kinds of pension programs--that you see on the left in the background as part of the staff of this presidential advisory board.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  And what year do you suppose this would have been?
Speaker 2: This would have been about 19--about 1962.
Speaker 1: This is sort of the, another photo of the men's council at Taber Presbyterian Church.  And this would have been about 1958, '57' [1957], '58' [1958].  And that's, I believe that picture was taken in the basement of the church, which is located at 2nd and S Streets, Northwest.
Speaker 2: This was an occasion in Los Angeles sponsored by the American Association of Blacks in Energy at one of its conferences, where we had invited and had as our principal speaker the Reverend Jesse Jackson, who is, as you recognize there.  And along with the other gentleman on the right side of that photograph is the head of the National Urban League chapter in Los Angeles; John Mack is his name.  The other, the other two persons, the ladies in the middle are two officials of the, of the American Association of Blacks in Energy in the Los Angeles chapter.
Speaker 1: Oh, this is a picture that goes back.  This is taken in front of my brother's house in San Diego, my brother, George, Bishop George McKinney.  This was the occasion of our first--not our first, really our second family reunion.  And in that picture are all of the children and grandchildren of my mother and father.  And that's my mother sitting in the middle with the--holding the youngster.  I can't identify all of those people, but they are all McKinneys of one kind or another.
Speaker 2: Graduating class in high school, 1949, Jonesboro, Arkansas.  That's a class of seven graduates.  Included on the picture, of course, is the faculty and the principal.  The faculty sponsor was Mrs. F. C. Turner, who taught home economics in the school and whose granddaughter became Mrs. America.  Debbie Turner is the granddaughter of Mrs. F. C. Turner.
Speaker 1: This is a picture that was made on the occasion of my retirement.  This is a kind of a official photograph that the company asked me to make with my, my bride.  This was in, in the spring of 1992, Glendonia Smith McKinney.
Speaker 2: Can you spell it?
Speaker 1: G-L-E-N-D-O-N-I-A, but everybody who is their friend calls her Doni, but she insists on being called Glendonia by those who do not know her.
Speaker 2: Oh, that goes back.  This picture was taken while I was I believe in law school.  It was about 1955 at the University of Indiana in Bloomington.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my grandfather on my father's side.  This is Rufus McKinney.  I guess you'd say he's the first Rufus McKinney.  And I can't tell you when that picture was made, but he looks like he would have been about the age I am now.  And my father, who was born in 19--1895, this must have been probably about 1875.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's my mother and father, the Reverend George Dallas McKinney and my mother, Mrs. Rosie McKinney.  This was taken on the steps of the student union building I believe at Arkansas AM and N College in Pine Bluff in--and during the occasion I believe of our first family reunion in about 1968.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's, that's in my office at Southern California Gas Company at 1150 Connecticut Avenue, about 1973, shortly after we moved into that, that location.
Speaker 2: That's, that's me with my congressional lobbyist, Ms. Gay Friedman.  We were making calls on Capitol Hill.  In the background there I believe is, is one of the, oh, historic buildings on Capitol Hill.  I can't quite make out which one it is.  Oh, that's the Library of Congress, that's what that is.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's Rufus McKinney standing in the background with Troop 24--Pack 24, I'm sorry, the Cub Scouts.  This would have been about 1962 in Northwest Washington at the Northminster Presbyterian Church, which sponsored that pack for us.  And included in the--amongst those kid are my, my two sons, Rufus, Jr. and Fred, and their friends.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay, which one is Rufus, Jr.?
Speaker 1: Rufus, Jr. is the fourth from the left.  That's Rufus Jr.  And Fred is the one standing in front of me that--not (unclear)--that one, that's Fred.
Speaker 2: This is a photo that somebody supplied me with not too long ago, showing the Arkansas AM and N College Debate Team in about 1950.  That's Rufus McKinney on the left.  The guy in the center there is Samuel Kountz, K-O-U-N-T-Z.  He's a deceased pioneer in the art of kidney and lung transplants.  He went on from there to become one of the pioneers in transplant surgery.  That's my first wife, Dorothy, and--Miller is his name.  I forget--what is his first name?  I can't remember his name.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's, that's taken in front of Taber Church I believe on Easter Sunday.  Those were my three young kids, Rudy, Fred, and Ann, my oldest daughter, together with my first wife and her sister.  My first wife, Dorothy, and her sister, Gail.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay, that would been about 1959, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, it's 1959, right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay.
