Story_ID: 654366
Speaker 1: My name is [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Today is December 2nd, 2016.  We are at Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP] at 4 Times Square, New York City [New York, New York], and would you please say and spell your name, tell me your birthdate and what you do.
Speaker 2: Sure.  I'm [HistoryMaker] Anthony McGill.  Do you want me to spell it as well?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  A-N-T-H-O-N-Y; McGill, M-C-G-I-L-L.  I'm the principal clarinetist of the New York Philharmonic.
Speaker 1: And your birthdate?
Speaker 2: My birthdate is 07/17/79 [July 17, 1979].
Story_ID: 654367
Speaker 1: So, we start with what we call People magazine type questions, easy questions (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Food?
Speaker 2: Oh, favorite food, let's see.  I don't know if I have a favorite food.  Maybe Thai.  No, that's too generic.  I don't have a favorite food.
Speaker 1: Okay, season?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  Summer.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Costa Rica.
Speaker 1: A favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: Hm (pause). I don't know if I have a favorite saying or phrase.
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 654368
Speaker 1: Now, we'd like to talk about your family.  We'll go both sides.  Let's start with your mother.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me her name, when and where she was born, and about her and her family, please (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  My mom is Ira McGill [Ira Lake McGill], and, Ira Carol McGill is her maiden name, Carol, and actually, no--that's not true (laughter), this is all going to be edited, right?
Speaker 1: No (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, it's not (laughter)?
Speaker 1: What's your mother, you started to tell me-
Speaker 2: Wait, seriously?
Speaker 1: We're not going to edit it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter) but those parts are, are edited out, no?
Speaker 1: So start over, tell me.
Speaker 2: I should have found that out first (laughter).
Speaker 1: We don't edit.  It's archive, so it doesn't get edited.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: It's the whole, the whole story.
Speaker 2: The whole thing?  Okay.  My mom's name is Ira McGill, and, where she was born?  She was born in Chicago [Illinois] in 1949.
Speaker 1: Excellent, and what does she do?
Speaker 2: My mom is retired currently, but she was an art teacher, she was a modern dancer, she was a dance movement therapist, she was an actress, and she still acts sometimes now and sings as well.  And, yeah, so she's a Renaissance woman.
Speaker 1: Tell me about her family, her parents.
Speaker 2: I didn't know.  I never met my grandfather on either side of my parents' families, but her mom and grandma, I knew quite well and I'm not sure what their professions were, actually.
Speaker 1: What are their names, your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother's name was Eccorena Lake.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Good question.  E-C-C-O-R-E-N-A, something like that.
Speaker 1: Eccorena-
Speaker 2: Lake.
Speaker 1: --Lake?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And your great-grandmother?
Speaker 2: My great-grandmother was, all I knew her as was Grandma Edwards [ph.] (laughter).  I didn't really know her name.
Speaker 1: And do you know if they worked?
Speaker 2: I don't know, actually.
Speaker 1: And where were they from?
Speaker 2: As far as I know, they were from Chicago.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you, can you trace your family back before Chicago?
Speaker 2: Only on my dad's [Demarre McGill] side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I'm not really sure about where my mom's side came from.
Story_ID: 654369
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father.
Speaker 2: My father's name is Demarre McGill and--
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: D-E-M-A-R-R-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was born in 1950.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Where?
Speaker 2: And he was born in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Do you know what part?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Mound Bayou, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And what's that near?
Speaker 2: Oh, good question.  No idea.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a really small town.
Speaker 1: Right, small town.  What, a farming town?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: And what's your father's work?
Speaker 2: My father is a retired firefighter.  He was the deputy commissioner of the Chicago Fire Department when he retired and before that, when my parents met, he was an art teacher.
Speaker 1: Wow. And what about his family?
Speaker 2: You mean, like--
Speaker 1: His parents, where are they from, what do you know about them (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right. His mom, when they, well, he was born in Mississippi and they moved to Memphis [Tennessee] when he was young and then to Chicago [Illinois] when he was still fairly young, about eight years old, and his mom worked.  She was, she used to work in a hospital, not when I knew her.  When I knew her she was living in Memphis, moved back down to Memphis, and--
Speaker 1: From Chicago, she had left Chicago and moved back?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you didn't know your grandfather, but do you know what he did?
Speaker 2: I don't know what he did.
Speaker 1: And how far back can you trace his family?
Speaker 2: I think we can go, maybe, not very far.  We've tried; I think, probably to great-great-great-great-parents, maybe great-great-great, not very far.
Speaker 1: Can you trace back to slavery?
Speaker 2: No, we can't.  There's a gap.
Speaker 1: And what, in, in Mississippi and in Memphis, do you know what work they did?
Speaker 2: Good question; no, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 654370
Speaker 1: Did your parents [Ira Lake McGill and Demarre McGill] or the grands that you knew ever talk about, especially ones from the South, talk about growing up in the South and any of the challenges they had?
Speaker 2: Not with my, not the grandparents, no.  My dad did, because he grew up with still, with Jim Crow, like while he was there, Jim Crow was there.  So, he would talk occasionally about that. But--
Speaker 1: What do you remember him telling you?
Speaker 2: Well, just, you know, stories about the movie theaters and having to sit in the balconies and stuff like that.  Just the usual stuff and, you know, we would just talk about how things were, which was really bad (laughter).  You know, when I was growing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And did he have encounters--?
Speaker 2: Probably.  He never really went too much into detail, but there were enough examples and they taught us history, in a (unclear), you know, and all of that stuff, so we had, we had the history and we would travel down to Memphis [Tennessee] every year, so they might have mentioned it a lot, you know, but when you're young you just, you don't really know what's going on.  It wasn't, I just knew what was up (laughter), you know, but I don't know about specific stories and anecdotes, I can't remember any of those, you know.
Story_ID: 654371
Speaker 1: How did your parents meet?
Speaker 2: They met in art teachers college.  They were both studying to become art teachers and started dating and--
Speaker 1: Where, art teachers college?
Speaker 2: In Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: In Chicago.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois], I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah,
Speaker 1: And, they got married while they were in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, or a little bit thereafter or when they started working.
Speaker 1: And you said that your father originally was an art teacher, but how did he get into firefighting?
Speaker 2: The Chicago Public Schools went on strike, and it was because my mom [Ira Lake McGill] was an art teacher as well, it was like we have to feed the family, you know, we have to work.  So he was done with that.  They had gone on strike quite a bit and so I think a friend of his suggested, "You know, Demarre [Demarre McGill], there's a test for the fire department.  You should join.  You know, it's a decent salary, blah, blah, blah."  So, he was like all right.  He went for it and he started off at the bottom, you know, and worked his way up.
Speaker 1: So, where in Chicago was he a fireman?
Speaker 2: All over Chicago, I think: South Side, North Side, West Side.  He'd have different stations that you can be affiliated with.  In the early years, that I don't remember, when he was like actually fighting fires, you know, I'm not sure where his station was.  In the later years, his main station was downtown on Dearborn Avenue [sic. Dearborn Street] and you know, he stopped fighting fires many years before that, and so then after that he was in an office somewhere so, but he was, you know, battalion chief, which is at a station that he was a commissioner, or fire prevention.  He was doing that from a station downtown, but for many years, because he was taking tests, and at a certain point you just get appointed to things, political appointments, and that's the last step, basically.  And so, he was like number two in all of the Chicago Fire Department before his retirement.  But early on, I think they bounce around from different stations.  I'm not sure exactly how it works.
Speaker 1: And so, in Chicago--well, anywhere in the U.S.A., firefighters are often Irish Catholics.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, that's like what 99 percent are.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, your father became a firefighter.  Do you know what, when?
Speaker 2: Ah, what year, I was born in '79 [1979].  It was probably around in the '80s [1980s], early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Yes, so I'm assuming that the composition was fairly--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was a challenge, I should say (laughter). Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so how, did you talk about how he was welcomed or not?
Speaker 2: Not, not so much, but I know that there were black firefighter associations that he was a member of, if not, you know, running some of the associations, probably just one (laughter) association.  And I know he was very strongly affiliated with that, for sure, and actually in a way probably (unclear) because I think he knew everybody in that community.  So, but he never really talked about the challenges, specifically, even though they were there and he would talk about being black in the fire department often.  I don't remember any specific stories, but I just know that that was not easy, but my father is a very tough, tough guy; a very smart and tough person, and he taught us mainly about strength.  So, he didn't come home, you know, complaining about things.  He, I think he, we saw him studying for the next test.  We saw him achieving, telling stories of what he did and how he did it, and we basically saw it by him doing it.  He was kind of quiet about all that, but by example, he worked really, really hard.  I do know that, and he did things by the book and taught us about success in that way.  That, he wasn't around the house complaining a lot about stuff, he was doing a lot of things.
Story_ID: 654372
Speaker 1: How many children are in your family?
Speaker 2: Two, just the two of--
Speaker 1: And wh- what's the birth order?
Speaker 2: I'm the youngest, four years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's your brother--by four years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What's your brother's name?
Speaker 2: Demarre [Demarre McGill].
Speaker 1: So, for--named, number two (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.  Not a junior, though (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. Is he--?
Speaker 2: It's very specific--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because my dad [Demarre McGill] doesn't have a middle name and so he named my brother with a middle name so he wouldn't be a junior, but he has the same name.  But we don't call him by that name, anyway, so.
Speaker 1: What do you call him?
Speaker 2: Well I don't want to say, just in case--publicly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We won't say that publicly. That's, that's the family secret.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 654373
Speaker 1: So, when you were growing up, go--think back to the beginning.  What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I'm the worst person to ask this question to (laughter), about my earliest childhood memory.  But (pause)--no idea (laughter).
Speaker 1: No? What comes to mind?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the, it's not super early--
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: --but, I do remember starting the clarinet (laughter), and I do remember--
Speaker 1: When was that?
Speaker 2: I was nine years old and I remember, like going and looking at the instruments on the table and trying to figure out what instrument I was going to play and that process.  That's kind of an early one.  You know, there are probably some other little ones too, but most of them are musical, like I remember playing the recorder in school [at Edgar Allan Poe Classical School, Chicago, Illinois] and--
Speaker 1: That was before nine.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and before nine, and oh, I do remember my brother [Demarre McGill] practicing before I played the clarinet.  I remember some of those memories, like listening to my brother.  He was also, while he was playing the flute he was also into rapping and so the time I grew up, around the time I grew up, like De La Soul was a, a--I don't know if I was super young or we could do the math; anyway, so he would do these kind of like mixtapes, we would these like little homemade tapes of us like doing skits and stuff like that.  I do remember that.  That was fun.
Speaker 1: Between De La Soul, and the flute, and the clarinet (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Um-hm. This is probably, De La Soul is probably before the clarinet, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But your brother was playing the flute (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he was playing the flute and I remember--those are, some of my earliest memories are, are of, of him doing that.
Story_ID: 654374
Speaker 1: Where did you grow up?  What neighborhood?
Speaker 2: I grew up in Chatham, like 90th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue], specifically.
Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: In Chicago.
Speaker 1: And, again, going back to the early days what are the sights, sounds, and smells that you remember of your youth?
Speaker 2: (Pause) That's a very interesting question.  You guys didn't prepare me for this (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's okay, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No it's actually, I think it's wonderful because I never think about any of this.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: But I remember the sounds of the train behind our house.  We had a train, and there was a little viaduct like around the corner and I remember the sound of trains, I remember playing basketball in the backyard because my dad [Demarre McGill], my dad built just a, he built a court out of this patio right in front of a small little, we didn't have a large backyard (laughter) but what was there was like a patio of concrete and he put up a basketball hoop in the backyard in front of the garage, and so the, the, the playing in the backyard with my family and my cousins and things like that; those are some of the greatest memories, I think, and the sounds of--oh, the smells of cooking around Thanksgiving and Christmas, a lot of the holidays were spent, some were spent in Chicago but a lot of them were spent down in Memphis  [Tennessee] with my extended relatives and family and some of them were spent at my aunt's house in Iowa, in Des Moines, Iowa.  She moved out there; and that was, those were some of my early memories.
Story_ID: 654375
Speaker 1: You grew up in a house in Chatham [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was your neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: The neighborhood is basically the same.  It looked, it looks the same, bungalows, small bungalow houses, you know, two, three, maybe four bedroom bungalow houses fairly close together, small lawn in front, and I always thought, described my neighborhood as being very clean and nice, nice looking, and, you know, from all visual aspects I thought it was a great neighborhood growing up because it wasn't quite, it wasn't like a block where there were like abandoned buildings on our block or there wasn't, you know, but it was still the South Side, so we had working class people.  We had, we had good neighbors and yet, you also had gangs everywhere (laughter).
Speaker 1: And you saw them.  You knew they were there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew they were there.  I mean, it was a part of going to school.  You know, it was kind of learning gang handshakes just from people who knew people in gangs and such.  This was like that was very normal.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have any run ins with gangs?
Speaker 2: I never had any, well, yeah, I mean gangs were everywhere so you had run ins, meaning that people were talking about them all the time.  You knew people that were in them, and I never got jumped or anything like that specifically, because my parents [Ira Lake McGill and Demarre McGill] were very careful about how I travelled around the city, which was very helpful (laughter) I think.  Once, I remember going to like a summer science institute at an ITT Tech [ITT Technical Institute]. On its campus, like some kid came up to my friend and I, and asked us, like who we were affiliated with basically.  This is a little eight year old kid (laughter) and, you know, so that sort of thing were my run ins, but fortunately, fortunately I didn't have any, no one approached me about, you know, like jumping me in or anything like that, so I didn't have any, like, it was a choice like I could have found my way into a gang very, quite easily, but I didn't have anyone forcing it onto me, and, like I said, it was probably helpful to my parents who kind of knew where we were at all times, knew where I was, knew who my friends were, generally, and steered me in the right direction.
Speaker 1: So, was it common for an eight year old to have an affiliation?
Speaker 2: It could have been, yeah, I mean, it was very, yeah gangs that were very common--
Speaker 1: Starting at a very young age.
Speaker 2: Very young age, yeah.  I mean--we knew about, I probably knew about gangs in fourth grade, third or fourth grade [at St. Thomas the Apostle School, Chicago, Illinois], maybe, definitely in sixth, seventh, eighth [at Whitney Young Academic Center, Chicago, Illinois], and ninth grade.
Speaker 1: And, did your friends ever do gangs, or--
Speaker 2: I had, I guess I would call it associates, yeah.  Not my friends.  Definitely not my friends that my parents knew of.  There were a lot of people at school and stuff like, somehow everybody just knew about all the handshakes and all of that other stuff and like, blah, blah, blah, so it was there, it was all the time, you know, people, and when you're young you don't know what that means really, but you know what all the signs are, signals, colors, all of this stuff, and it kind of permeated, you know, school (laughter), I guess.
Speaker 1: You say your parents knew where you were at all times and they gave you roots, but they weren't physically with you, so how were they mapping that out so that you young boys are following your parents' directions, which is not necessarily common--
Speaker 2: That's not necessarily true, though.  I mean, basically when we weren't at home we were in school, and so my parents knew where I was after school, because either they'd pick me up or I was on a bus home.  So, it was only during school that I had any kind of interaction like that, and as far as playing outside, they, my parents didn't let me just play in the street with anybody at any time, like, oh yeah, leave the house and go.  That wasn't, that didn't really happen in our house as far as I know.  You know, we took classes; you know, I remember we took tennis lessons, we took karate lessons.  My parents kept us busy so they knew where we were, you know, after school and so those were the only times.  We weren't out hanging out, like really.  And, they knew who my friends were so if I was hanging out, I was with a cousin or (air quotes) friend cousin at their house playing basketball or outside, you know, with them hanging out but they, that's how that worked.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: We weren't just like anywhere (laughter).
Story_ID: 654376
Speaker 1: Where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: I went to, the first school I went to was Poe Classical School [Edgar Allan Poe Classical School], also on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Poe Classical?
Speaker 2: Poe Classical.
Speaker 1: That was an elementary school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was a grade school--elementary school.
Speaker 1: And that name suggests, what does classical mean there?
Speaker 2: Well, there, one of my biggest influences was the music teacher there, and my brother's [Demarre McGill] influences.  Dr. Barry, Mr. Barry Elmore, so I think it was that you got an arts, like an education, well rounded education, where you studied language.  I know there were language classes.  We took Spanish, so I was there from like one through, first through third grade.
Speaker 1: And this was in elementary school in, on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] that, what year is he talking about now?  Early '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: And they still had a music program, and a language program?
Speaker 2: They did, they did.  This school did, yeah.
Speaker 1: And it's a public school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think so, and because of the strikes that were still going on and continuing at this point, I think my parents [Ira Lake McGill and Demarre McGill] put me in a Catholic school and they, you know, one of my friends says it was third grade, but I'm pretty sure it was fourth grade, so I went to St. Thomas the Apostle [St. Thomas the Apostle School], in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: And Hyde Park is about how far away from you were living?
Speaker 2: Probably twenty to thirty minutes.
Speaker 1: But that's a significant neighborhood change, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, definitely different neighborhood.
Speaker 1: What is Hyde Park like?
Speaker 2: Hyde Park is just, was basically just fancier, you know, than my neighborhood [Chatham, Chicago, Illinois].  It was kind of like a little bit more upscale.  You had fancier restaurants and stores and obviously the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], so it was just a different environment.
Speaker 1: Where you grew up, was that a primarily black neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Hyde Park is integrated then?
Speaker 2: Hyde Park is integrated, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, as a, this is high school now or before high school?
Speaker 2: This is before high school, um-hm.  This is still elementary.
Speaker 1: And so, as you are going from your neighborhood schools, a special school, there--where, where you are getting special training, but then you go into an integrated neighborhood, different environment, further away, how is your entry into that school?
Speaker 2: Oh, into, St. Thomas wasn't like super integrated.  I mean, it was like, it was still predominantly black, I think, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, it just happened to be a Catholic school so it was private, so you did have to spend a little bit of money to send your kids there.  There's always some of the same kids, basically, from the neighborhood so I think we're there, but I think it was, you know, it was definitely a better school than the school in my neighborhood, and, not than Poe.  Poe is a little, still on the South Side but some far, somewhere away.  Never the local, never the local school.  They never, they never sent me there.
Speaker 1: And, and were you, you're wearing uniforms, it's a traditional Catholic school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And are, is your family Catholic?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 654377
Speaker 1: What is your faith?
Speaker 2: Chris- we grew up in the Christian church, and the A- we went to A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church and then went to Methodist church, so.
Speaker 1: And were you active in your church?
Speaker 2: I think we were, yeah (laughter). It's a long time ago (laughter).
Speaker 1: For like Sunday school, was that part of your life?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I did do Sunday school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so then going to the Catholic school, were you also taking religion classes along with everything else?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so, yeah.
Speaker 1: What stands out for you from your Catholic school experience?
Speaker 2: Those are the first years where I think I really enjoyed St. Thomas [St. Thomas the Apostle School, Chicago, Illinois], and I had like a best friend that went to the school and, you know, so it was kind of like a time when you're coming because I actually, it was very interesting important time because I was developing these kind of social relationships, even though I was pretty nerdy and so I think I really enjoyed school, but I had a cool friend who, kind of helped me like navigate a little bit, and this was in fourth grade, you know, but at the same time that was happening so my development socially was happening for better or worse.  (Laughter) I was introduced to the clarinet this same year because they started with band (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fourth grade?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they started a band at the school; and so that was a very interesting, interesting time.
Story_ID: 654378
Speaker 1: There was a band, you said that was forming at your school [St. Thomas the Apostle School, Chicago, Illinois].  What instrument were you planning to play?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. I wanted to play the saxophone, and I think the story was I might have picked it up and it was like way too big, so I put it down and the clarinet was there and the teacher, at the time, was like just play the clarinet.  "It's close to the saxophone.  You can always play that later," and so you know, I was fine with that.  I didn't really care.  I just wanted to play an instrument because my brother [Demarre McGill] had already been playing for quite a few years.
Speaker 1: And he was playing what?
Speaker 2: Playing the flute.
Speaker 1: From the beginning.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, is it because of your brother that the choice was a wind instrument?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I think, at this point, even though flutes and clarinets weren't, in today's time weren't super expensive but to our family it was like, "Paying how many hundreds of dollars for an instrument?"  So, that's why I, we took, we had taken some piano lessons but we didn't have a piano at home because we couldn't afford one, and we had been playing on an electronic keyboard, so it wasn't going to be piano at this time, and it wasn't, you know, maybe my parents [Ira Lake McGill and Demarre McGill] didn't know about string instruments or that they were probably expensive too; I'm not exactly sure how that came about, but I just wanted to, I basically wanted to copy my brother and, you know, play a wind instrument, I think.
Speaker 1: How many years, again, between you and your brother?
Speaker 2: Four years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's it.  They seem, you were close from the beginning.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: There's enough space for you and not to have so much competition.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: But you really looked up to your brother.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, was he at the same school as you?
Speaker 2: No, no.  My brother and I, did we go to the, was he at Poe [Edgar Allan Poe Classical School, Chicago, Illinois] when I was at Poe in first grade?  He might have been.  He went to Poe.  He graduated from Poe, so he graduated from eighth grade at Poe, so I might have been at Poe, we might have overlapped once at school; but later on, we were never at the same school.
Speaker 1: Because of that four year difference (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 654379
Speaker 1: So, you pick up the clarinet [at St. Thomas the Apostle School, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and that's, that works for you; and who starts teaching you? Who are your early teachers?
Speaker 2: Well, whoever was doing the band, and I think the band is a loose term because I think they were probably only a few people playing instruments in a room, but one of my earliest teachers was Ernest Dawkins, who was a sax [saxophone] player in Chicago [Illinois].  I think he's actually still in Chicago.  A jazz sax player, and he would come over to the house and I would play in the living room for him.  I don't even know if he knows, I was talking to somebody else recently, and they're like, "Oh, yeah, he's still in Chicago and playing."  I just saw him at this clarinet, reed company that has a studio there.  I was like, he probably doesn't know that I am still, that I'm that little kid that he was teaching, or doesn't remember it at all.  But anyway.
Speaker 1: I bet he remembers you.
Speaker 2: He might, I'm not sure.  You'd be surprised, but, so he was like one of my first teachers, maybe just for a couple months.
Speaker 1: So when he was coming to your house, this means, how did you all find him to try to teach you?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I have no idea.  My parents [Ira Lake McGill and Demarre McGill] are very resourceful, they talked, my mom gets on the phone and she calls everybody she knows and she's like, "My kid is doing this, who do you all--," and she will find a way.  Maybe Mr. Elmore [Barry Elmore] at Poe Classical [Edgar Allan Poe Classical School, Chicago, Illinois], probably, you know, just like--
Speaker 1: Because you said he introduced you to music.
Speaker 2: Well, he was the music teacher at Poe, so yeah, he introduced every kid there to music, I would think, as far as taking music class as a class, you know, but Mr. Elmore comes back later in the story.  I could talk about him now if you want (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. No, no.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You tell me in, in, in time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, but I remember you said he was important so it's at, at a later point.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah.
Story_ID: 654380
Speaker 1: So, while you're at your elementary school, the Catholic school, and you're learning music, you also take lessons at the Merit School of Music [Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is that during elementary school or is that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that's during elementary school and right after, so I went there from fourth through--and then I left for seventh grade to Whitney Young [Whitney Young Academic Center, Chicago, Illinois], and so I was at Merit basically from fourth or fifth through ninth grade.  But, yes, so I was studying at the Merit School of Music.  There were some other teachers in there too.  Went through the (unclear) music program and studied with Stanley Davis, who was in the Lyric Opera [Lyric Opera of Chicago], and then went to Merit and studied with David Tuttle, who is a teacher there, and that's kind of when a lot of things started happening so, but I was still very young.  I was still like, maybe I was nine, nine and a half, ten.
Speaker 1: And you're--the Merit School, you have music at your elementary school, you have music at the Merit School.  Was it just your interest, you and your brother [Demarre McGill], or who's recognizing that it's important for you to stay on this track?
Speaker 2: I think my parents [Ira Lake McGill and Demarre McGill] for sure.  They believed in, my parents were educators so they just believed in arts education.  And, my brother was super talented, I think, right away and I think I followed his footsteps and the same thing kind of happened where I don't even know, even if we hadn't had some gift for the instruments, I think we would have been doing music anyway.  We would have been in music.
Speaker 1: Because that was just part of it?
Speaker 2: Because I think they just thought it was really important.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And, so Merit was a Saturday program.  We went there Saturdays to study music and it was the right kind of environment.  My parents were very, like I said, they were very particular about what we did and who we hung out with, and the environment of, you know, of music parents and it is a certain type of environment; a very positive one so I think they were definitely going to steer us in that way.  They probably couldn't have expected that we become professional musicians, but Merit was a very special place where I did feel accepted.  I did feel like I was a part of a community.
Speaker 1: And what style were you learning?
Speaker 2: I was learning classical.
Speaker 1: From the beginning?
Speaker 2: From the beginning, yeah.  You know, because like, if you start off with band, it is obviously the band music, or whatever, and if you start off just playing an instrument, learning an instrument.  You're learning, I mean, there are, when you're learning an instrument there aren't necessarily genres you know, when you're a kid.  You're just playing the notes.  You're like trying to learn what a G is--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --you know, so people always ask me why I picked classical.  I didn't really pick classical.  It just, that happened to be the music that was put in front of me you know--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --generally, and who, what my teachers played except for that saxophone player [Ernest Hawkins] at the beginning.  Maybe if I had studied with him longer, he would have taught me how to play.
Speaker 1: And were the performances at your school?  You said there was a little bit--
Speaker 2: At St. Thomas [St. Thomas the Apostle School, Chicago, Illinois]?  I don't, I can't remember a performance there.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: I don't know if there were performances (laughter).
Speaker 1: What about through Merit?
Speaker 2: At Merit, yes, there were performances very early on.
Speaker 1: And so, what are these, solos?  Were you part of a group?
Speaker 2: These were group concerts, like with the clarinet class, I believe, and there were, there were the solo recitals, too.  Played my first solo piece, piece at Merit, I'm pretty sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How old were you?
Speaker 2: Probably ten, nine and a half, something like that.
Story_ID: 654381
Speaker 1: So, there's--there's a certain poise and presence that you gain from learning to play an instrument, and then there's the performing of the instrument before an audience.  At nine or ten, how would you describe your level of comfort in front of an audience?
Speaker 2: That's a very good question.  I, I don't remember what I felt like when I was that young and playing, but I did see a video recently and I was proud.  Maybe I was a little older, maybe like ten or eleven, but yeah, I was definitely performing in public by eleven or twelve, but I look at myself doing it and I think, that's really interesting.  I look comfortable (laughter) but I think I was probably scared out of my mind.  That's why I didn't move or anything, you know.  But my brother [Demarre McGill] always said, he's like, you know, I remember, he remembers part of my performances better than I do, but he said I remember you were playing this piece and you were missing all kinds of notes and squeaking and like, you didn't flinch.  It's like you didn't know what was going on, and I think maybe that was good.  Maybe I was just oblivious because I was concentrating and I was having fun, so--
Speaker 1: Well, to that end, controlling a wind instrument is not an easy thing to do.  There's, control your breath--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --moving through an instrument, positioning of the notes, I mean there are lots of parts to making the whole work smoothly, and it takes time.  As a young boy learning, what, what was the hardest for you in terms of mastering the instrument?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the biggest challenges for me playing the instrument were--a few different things.  There's trying to develop a tone on the instrument; it's really hard, and so one of my earlier teachers always talked about my embouchure, which is the mouth, the mouth structure around--
Speaker 1: What's it called?
Speaker 2: The embouchure.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: E-M-B-O-U-C-H-U-R-E, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is that?
Speaker 2: That is the formation of the mouth around the mouthpiece, and if you have a bad embouchure, it's, the reed can't vibrate properly, and the sound can't be good, so this was one of my early challenges.  Also, learning scales, so I had a very strict teacher at Merit [Merit School of Music, Chicago, Illinois], who would yell at me to play my scales and practice my scales.  Just to learn the notes.  You have to learn the basic fundamental things; so, those are the two things that are really important, and then beyond that, of course, there's the musicality interpretation and all of these other difficult things, but when you're starting off getting the notes, getting the sound is what you're focused on and it can be really, really challenging.
Speaker 1: And at what point have you mastered reading music, because that's a whole other part.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  That takes a while, but, you know if you have the right training and you are, and you practice in the right way, you can basically learn anything, any piece of music, so I started off not really being aware of which pieces were really hard, somehow, because the teachers that had, kind of, your teachers see where you're at, then they provide the music that's appropriate for your level, and so, at a very young age, I had them, especially just a year or two after starting to play, I was playing some pieces now that I look back on that were pretty advanced for the instrument, so, but that doesn't happen with everyone.  Some people, you start and you have to master your pieces, the more simple pieces and then you move up later on, and so, growth can be very different.  It's hard to identify what makes one person be able to play one piece and another person be able to play a different piece; but that didn't, I wasn't really aware of all that stuff when I was young.
Story_ID: 654382
Speaker 1: As you're growing up, the, what is the music that you're listening to outside of your classroom?
Speaker 2: At home, I was listening to, basically I guess, R and B, soul, oldies but goodies, this sort of thing, and that pretty much was my dose.  I mean, my mom [Ira Lake McGill] was the one who, I think, kind of knew classical music a little bit more just because she was a choreographer.  She knew how to choreograph dance, modern dance, and she loved listening to musicals at home too, so we were exposed to classical musical in that way as well, early on, and my mom always likes to say she played classical music for us in the womb.  She could put her belly next to the speaker, and so we definitely, she definitely knew what it was and knew and I think loved it, actually, but around the house, yeah it was always on whatever station was playing, because like I said, R and B, soul, you name it.
Speaker 1: Were there ever times when you attempted to play that type of music on the clarinet?
Speaker 2: That's a very good question.  Not, I never thought about it, actually, because what I was doing was kind of very, very specific and I really liked that, so, (laughter) I, I always kind of, I guess I compartmentalized a little bit in my life just because, but not on purpose; not because I didn't want to play that music or like different types of music.  It just never, never came to me.  It never struck me as something that I needed to do.  The instrument I had, I played the music that I was taught and so I did that, but I also loved listening to other types of music.  You know, now I'm like, oh, that would be great to be able to play that, or be able to play that, which is amazing, but when I was a kid it never really crossed my mind.  I didn't, I don't think I separated music, like I said, into genre, and so if I'm going to play a piece, I would play a piece like if somebody put a piece that was transcribed of a, you know, a Marvin Gaye song or something in front of me, I would have played it, but, or any works by someone, you know, like--
Story_ID: 654383
Speaker 1: Actually for instance in this one little group I played in, called the Chicago Teen Ensemble that Barry Elmore was the director of, it was all African American kids.
Speaker 2: When was that?
Speaker 1: This was right around the time when I was like ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen or fourteen--until I left Chicago [Illinois].  I was playing in this group--with my brother [Demarre McGill] and with others.
Speaker 2: The Chi- is that different from the Chicago Youth Symphony [Chicago Youth Symphony Orchestras]?
Speaker 1: Yes, very different.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It sounds different.  So was that before that?
Speaker 1: That was around the same time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So tell me, Chicago Teen Ensemble.  What were you doing there?
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.  But that was my first, that was probably my earliest group that I ever played in, was Chicago Teen Ensemble, and we were going around the churches on the South Side of Chicago playing concerts and we, because of this group, I was getting back to Duke Ellington.  One of the pieces we used to play was a piece, were pieces by Duke Ellington.  We also played 'Tenderly,' which is the famous, well I guess Nat King Cole sings it.  You know, it's the famous, a famous song, and we used to play 'Tenderly' all the time and we used to play a piece called 'Harlem' ['Harlem Nocturne'] which was kind of a jazzy piece and this piece was for solo clarinet, I think.  I think that might have been by Duke Ellington, I'm not sure about the fact checking, checking on that one, but, so I could and did play pieces that were outside of the classical genre, but I didn't, like I said, I didn't recognize anything as being that much different, you know, because he loves to play clarinet.
Speaker 2: Because those surely are not classical.
Speaker 1: No, not really, no.  But I didn't, we had classical instruments (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But they're contemporary music--that you, right.
Speaker 1: You know, and so they definitely weren't, I mean these were the early days of, of hip hop and stuff, so they weren't, obviously weren't those things.
Speaker 2: It was more your parents' music. Or even before (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I suppose so, but it's for me, for me growing, like I said I grew up with certain, with my parents' music.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's the music I grew up with.  So, and besides, you know, my brother and I, my brother being a few years older, so getting a tape of, a cassette tape of somebody else that my parents [Ira Lake McGill and Demarre McGill] didn't want us to listen to, (laughter) or whatever, they weren't against any kind of music, but if it had profanity, they weren't really for that because we were kids.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, you know, yeah, just, I was playing the music that was in front of me, you know.
Story_ID: 654384
Speaker 1: You also joined the Chicago Youth Symphony Orchestra [Chicago Youth Symphony Orchestras].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well tell me about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I joined the Chicago Youth Symphony when I was maybe eleven or twelve?  And I was, I think I was too young to be a member of the orchestra, but they let me in anyway, by about a year I think.  My brother [Demarre McGill], at the time, was in it and this was, I mean this was really great.  I got to go on my first international tour.  I went to Japan--
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: --when I was like eleven years old, and then couple years later I went to Italy with the Chicago Youth Symphony.  Chicago Youth was a really great orchestra, and a lot of the big cities and some medium sized cities around the country, they have youth orchestra, youth symphonies that are really, really, really very good, and they are generally made up of white kids, Asian kids from affluent neighborhoods, and this is a generalization and so my brother got into this youth orchestra years before and then I got into this youth orchestra.  We had rehearsal downtown and that really was kind of like a different world, but one that, you know, because of talent and my hard work and my parents' [Ira Lake McGill and Demarre McGill] direction and knowing, and Merit School [Merit School of Music, Chicago, Illinois] and, like, kind of having the connection into that world, I ended up in this group and it was a really great time.  People treated me well and I felt, I felt welcome to be there, and because I liked making music and, at the time, maybe this helpe-I'm thinking about this kind of from a distance.  I'm sure it probably helped that the number one role model in that group, which is the music director, the leader, the conductor of the group, was African American.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: His name was Michael Morgan, and I never really thought about that, because I don't really talk about it that much, but I think for sure that's how comfort--that's how it made me feel even more comfortable, because the guy that's the boss (laughter) happens to look like me, and he was very supportive.
Story_ID: 654385
Speaker 1: I remember one, one story is that when I was maybe a little bit older, still in the youth orchestra [Chicago Youth Symphony Orchestras], or--maybe when I just joined.  It maybe, it was through, I know the audition was a Merit [Merit School of Music, Chicago, Illinois].  It might have been for a concerto competition or something, an audition, and then I had a memory slip.  I missed a bunch of notes, forgot where I was, which happens when you're not using the music, and I was really sad and--
Speaker 2: Because you knew what had happened.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because when you mess up, you know you mess up.  It doesn't matter what age you are.
Speaker 2: Even if you're in a group and it might not show.
Speaker 1: No, this was a solo competition.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: I'm up there, I have to be playing a piece with the piano from memory.  Those were the rules.  Can't use the music, you know, and I don't know if I was thirteen, fourteen, twelve, eleven, ten, you know, but I just know that I was really sad, really sad.  Because, you practice for this stuff, and you know, he [Michael Morgan] came back and said, "Look, you play really musically, you're one of the best players out there.  You didn't win but, you know--." I do remember this particular moment as being very important for me as a young musician, as a young person, because I was kind of devastated, but you know, I didn't, so I learned how to fail like really miserably.
Speaker 2: Gracefully.
Speaker 1: Not gracefully, I was crying (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: But I knew it wasn't the end of the world and that somehow I still liked it and I still liked music.  I felt like I could still do it, even if it didn't go exactly how I wanted it to.
Story_ID: 654386
Speaker 1: Were you the only African American in the orchestra at the time?
Speaker 2: No. Well, my brother [Demarre McGill]--
Speaker 1: Was he still in there?
Speaker 2: At--oh, at the time of this competition?  I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: No, I don't mean the competition, but when you--
Speaker 2: When I was in the youth orchestra [Chicago Youth Symphony Orchestras] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was still there?
Speaker 2: He was like one of the older kids in the youth orchestra.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We might have overlapped just one or two years.
Speaker 1: Right. Yeah, that's what, prior, you weren't together.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: Other than the two of you, were there any other African Americans in the orchestra?
Speaker 2: There might have been one or two.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Always one or two.
Speaker 1: And was that, has that been common through your experience?
Speaker 2: Yes, through my entire career, I think, certainly. In, at summer camp, there are probably, probably more.  You know, Interl- I went to summer camp at Interlochen [Interlochen Center for the Arts, Interlochen, Michigan], and some other places there probably, you know, but always usually a handful.
Story_ID: 654387
Speaker 1: Tell me about Interlochen [Interlochen Center for the Arts, Interlochen, Michigan].  You, this was when you were fourteen, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you received a scholarship from your music school, from Merit [Merit School of Music, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to, I went to Interlochen for the first time when I was eleven.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then another time when I was thirteen, fourteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: First time was eleven or twelve, and the second time I was thirteen, fourteen, for camp, not for the school, which I went to later.  And, I did get a scholarship from Merit to go there, because Interlochen costs a few thousand dollars or something to go there during the summer, which was like really challenging for my family.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And, so yeah, I got a Merit scholarship to go to Interlochen, that changed my life, and that was a really different environment for me, northern Michigan was, but I'd actually gone up to Michigan with my brother [Demarre McGill] because he went to Interlochen before me for summer camp, so I did know that environment.
Speaker 1: You'd seen it.
Speaker 2: I'd seen it, yeah, so it wasn't completely new, but, I mean, it was great.  I knew I loved music by that point, by eleven, twelve, something like that.
Speaker 1: Were you and your brother considered prodigies?
Speaker 2: Possibly, yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, was that said to you when you were young?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: You started out very, very young.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't, it might have been but I'm not sure.  I don't think my parents [Ira Lake McGill and Demarre McGill] probably ever used that word.  I was in a small youth orchestra called the Prodigy Philharmonic [ph.] (laughter); you know, even before Chicago Youth [Chicago Youth Symphony Orchestras] I was in a couple of different small youth orchestras, like Suburban Youth Symphony [Suburban Youth Symphony Orchestra], Prodigy Philharmonic, some other ones where we had concerts and stuff, so yeah, I started off playing in orchestras from the time I was like, had just started playing basically, and--
Speaker 1: Around (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, like around nine, nine and a half, ten, you know, so I might have known that I had some talent, just because my parents and my brother had experienced some things already, you know, in the field of classical music and he was already winning competitions so, yes, I suppose, but I don't know if I had a real recognition of it from a young age or not.  Maybe, I think when I went to Interlochen and, you know, I was auditioning for things and I was, I was like first chair of the intermediate orchestra for eight weeks and you can challenge, people can challenge you, and try to--
Speaker 1: Explain what first chair means.
Speaker 2: First chair of the orchestra means that out of like, you know, four people, or whatever, you're the first one and you get to play the solos, you get to play the best part in the orchestra for clarinet, and there are these things, they used to have it at Interlochen where the people who weren't in first chair--you audition for it, you know, by merit, and then you can, they can try to basically take that chair from you.
Speaker 1: Unseat you.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, and so most of my summers at Interlochen, I held first chair.  This was amongst all the kids around the country and the world, you know, for this music camp and, you know--
Speaker 1: So, for your tenure there you had first chair?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well when I was like eleven and thirteen, you know, but so I think when I went to Interlochen, I realized oh, okay. You know I, I do have, you know, I definitely knew I had skill at the instrument.  I don't know how much I thought about it, but.
Story_ID: 654388
Speaker 1: What is your practice schedule like?  Your rehearsal schedule, in order to keep--you know, th- you have the chair and you know they can take it away from you, so--
Speaker 2: When I was young, you mean (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You know, as an eleven year old, twelve year old, often you want to go play.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Right, yeah.  What was I practicing then--I was probably practicing an hour, a couple hours a day.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it wasn't like a four or five hour--
Speaker 2: No. At that time?  No, not at eleven years old, no.  Maybe two hours.  But at Interlochen [Interlochen Center for the Arts, Interlochen, Michigan] during the summers, we have supervised practice, so it was like forty-five minutes of scheduled practice every day, but before that I'm not sure how much I was practicing, but I was practicing regularly, you know, probably an hour, an hour or two.
Speaker 1: I read that you often, you and your brother [Demarre McGill] were often practicing in the morning before going to school, and you said that your homes are very close [in Chicago, Illinois].  Did you ever have issues with the neighbors because you were playing so early in the morning?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't think so, I don't think so.  They were brick houses so, you know, (laughter).  We don't, our neighbors loved us, I think, you know.  Mrs. Clark [ph.] was one of our next door neighbors, the one we knew very well.  I wonder what she thought about us playing (unclear).
Speaker 1: What time were you up and playing?
Speaker 2: Well, see that was the early days when my brother was up before high school playing, I think, and he was probably up at six--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --five or six o'clock, something like that. But that was, like I said, I grew up with it so it was like very normal for me, like late night, early morning kind of music playing stuff.
Story_ID: 654389
Speaker 1: --Telling me about Interlochen [Interlochen Center for the Arts, Interlochen, Michigan].  I'd just like to hear a little bit more about Interlochen and the importance of it for children who are interested in music, because you say there's a global community of children who come.  What does it take to get in and what's the curriculum like?  Who's there?
Speaker 2: Interlochen was a very interesting place because it's kind of like you have to wear uniforms.  It was started, it was founded in like 1920 or something, and the idea or the concept behind it was that, especially because of the uniforms and the kind of strict schedule was that you were all equal at this institution and you didn't want clothing or how rich or poor you were to distract from, like your study of your art.  So, it wasn't just the music.  It has dance, art, creative writing now, songwriting now, you know, but back then we just had all arts and it was a place where I did, I did feel like, because there were quite a few different types of kids, you know, from different backgrounds and you met a lot of people.  You don't always get along with everybody, but everyone is different and you were put in these cabins where you also had kind of like a system of like equity, where everybody had to clean up their cabin and it's kind of like the military.  That's kind of what I think it was modeled on a little bit, you know, where you're all participating in this together, you know, and so yes, it may be too strict for some, but I really like that.  You have to wake up super early and do exercises and stuff and it was a wonderful, wonderful place.
Speaker 1: Highly disciplined, did it include any fun?
Speaker 2: Yeah, forced fun, it was called (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) It was?
Speaker 2: Literally, the exercise, literally, we had these hours where you would, you know, sports or whatever sport you wanted (laughter).  We called it forced fun (laughter), but they probably don't call it that anymore.  But, yeah, you had all kinds of social gatherings and it was like a camp, camp.  You were in the middle of these two beautiful lakes in northern Michigan.
Speaker 1: So you had swimming?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you had swimming, and you had, and it was very rustic back then.  It's less rustic now, but still awesome, and old buildings and so much history and your typical, like, camp, sleep away camp only you were also doing your art form, you know, so it was pretty great for a kid like me who liked music.
Speaker 1: And, how do you feel that your experience there formed your growth as a musician?
Speaker 2: I learned so much at Interlochen, and a lot of the growth happened because of the relationships I had there, the friendships I developed there and how closely that related to my experience as a musician, meaning that I loved not just being there but I loved the people who I had met there, and the orchestra concerts were amazing, a super high level.  I met kids from other places in the country, you know.  I grew up in Chicago [Illinois] where, you know, it's obviously the Chicago (unclear) but I met people from New Jersey, I met people from China, Africa, California, you know, some of the places I had been before, we traveled a little bit as a kid but not that much, not overseas really at this point, except for that, (laughter) that tour right before I went to Interlochen, to Japan, but anyway, it was just a very diverse place where, you know, I was, I excelled because of the effort I put into my clarinet playing, so I got to see, like cause and effect, or I got to see the fruits of my labor, so to speak, in an environment that was international, similar to what it's like in the real world of music and auditioning and competing, which is--
Speaker 1: Because you were auditioning there. For different--
Speaker 2: You had to audition there.
Speaker 1: For what?
Speaker 2: For the orchestra, your orchestra seat; or band.  There was also a band there.  So--
Speaker 1: So were there students who didn't end up in an orchestra?
Speaker 2: Yes, and there are a couple different levels of orchestras and a couple different bands, levels of bands, and, but you were in one of those groups.
Speaker 1: So everybody was placed somewhere.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But it was obvious that there were the people who were on the fast track, and?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 654390
Speaker 1: When you go to high school, you're, you, you attend Whitney M. Young Magnet High School.  This is in Chicago [Illinois] again, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, being that it's a magnet school, this means that these are students who are excelling are going to this school, correct?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: Where is this school?
Speaker 2: Whitney Young is on the West Side of Chicago, and very far from where I lived.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What did that mean in terms of your travel on a daily basis?
Speaker 2: How long did it take to get there?  It might have taken like an hour, I don't, you know, it's Chicago, you know, people are like, oh, you drive an hour easily in Chicago and you're just in a different neighborhood, but maybe forty-five minutes.
Speaker 1: How are you getting to school?
Speaker 2: I think I took the bus, because I was in the seventh and eighth, the seventh and eighth grade program [Whitney Young Academic Center, Chicago, Illinois] was definitely like a kind of advanced program you have to test in and so I went to seventh, eighth, and ninth grade there at Whitney Young, so I was taking the bus there, so.
Speaker 1: What years?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety--yeah, 1992 or '91 [1991] to '93 [1993] or '94 [1994], so it's three years.
Speaker 1: Okay. And--
Speaker 2: So three years.
Speaker 1: At what point do you decide I don't just like playing music but I think that I can make this my life's work?
Speaker 2: I think, so before I left Chicago I was, and Merit [Merit School of Music, Chicago, Illinois] introduced me to this person, I was studying up at DePaul University [DePaul University School of Music, Chicago, Illinois] with Larry Combs, who was the principal clarinetist of the Chicago Symphony [Chicago Symphony Orchestra], and so he was basically the person doing my job that I'm doing now with the New York Philharmonic.  He was that person with the Chicago Symphony, and, which is, you know, for that field, it's like princessing with the CEO of a company if you're going into business, or partner at a law firm.  This is that guy (laughter), and so he taught me and I was twelve or something, after studying at Merit.  Merit introduced me to him and brought me up to have a lesson, because he didn't teach young kids, knowing you don't teach, you rarely find a teacher that's in a principal position that's teaching an eleven or twelve year old, just because of logistics too, like they're busy and you're teaching at universities.  He's teaching at DePaul University.  He has, you know, old students that are going into music and so he didn't know if he wants me to take lessons from him, and there's another lady that kind of taught the same students, Julie DeRoche, at DePaul University, so I went up and played for Larry and I played, I think I was maybe thirteen or something, just before I went to Interlochen [Interlochen Center for the Arts, Interlochen, Michigan], I played the Copland [Aaron Copland] 'Clarinet Concerto,' which is a very famous clarinet solo piece for clarinet solo and orchestra and I played that for him and he took me on as a student, which I know now is, it's kind of ridiculous that a kid is playing that piece, or the pieces that I was playing, at such a young age because these were the pieces that you audition for in college playing, this one in particular.  So--
Speaker 1: And you, this occurred before going to Interlochen?
Speaker 2: Yeah, before going to Interlochen.
Speaker 1: For the second time.
Speaker 2: Going to Interlochen, the school.  Because, there's the academy, yeah, the high school.  Yeah, so this probably was right in between the first Interlochen camp and the second Interlochen camp.  The second Interlochen camp was probably '93 [1993], it was '93 [1993], for sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you're, just for a sense of time, Whitney Young Magnet School you went to for two years, is that right?
Speaker 2: Three years.
Speaker 1: Three years.
Speaker 2: Seventh, eighth, and ninth grades.
Speaker 1: So it's more like middle school.
Speaker 2: What, Whitney Young?  No.  Well, Whitney Young is high school, ninth through twelfth grade.  The seventh and eighth grade program is like the academic program.  They call them ackies, because they're like the smart little nerdy young kids that were like going to middle school.  It doesn't really exist; I mean, it exists, but it's for like, so, the high school was hard to get into, but this part of the program is very geared towards young kids that can test into that program.  So, we took freshman classes in eighth grade.  It's that kind of school.
Speaker 1: I'm confused because it's a little confusing.  You go in there early.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Essentially.
Speaker 2: Yes, you go to Whitney Young early.  It's a high school but they have a seventh and eighth grade program.
Speaker 1: Right. All right, and the Interlochen Arts Academy [Interlochen, Michigan]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --is the high school that you end up going to.
Speaker 2: That I end up graduating from, yes.
Speaker 1: Graduating from.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And when you go there, then you've moved. You're, you're in Michigan (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  I'm in Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm clear.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: It's a little--well, it's confusing because--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --of how it's advanced, an accelerated program attached to Whitney--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --Young School, got it.
Story_ID: 654391
Speaker 1: And then you go to college at the Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Th- now, there are many music schools. Why does this become your choice?
Speaker 2: My brother [Demarre McGill] went there (laughter), just like every other choice in my life.  No, it's one of the best music schools in the world.  It is a, it's also a great music school that parents often want their kids to audition for if they're talented enough because it's a tuition free college.
Speaker 1: Tuition free, for everyone? Wow.
Speaker 2: Tuition free, yes.  But, it, so it has a really low acceptance rate, in other words, and it only has 160 students, approximately.
Speaker 1: Per grade, per class.
Speaker 2: No.  Per, at the school (laughter). Yeah, approximately (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) One hundred sixty students and yet it's a four year college?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Very small.
Speaker 2: Yes, really small.  It used to fit in one building, which was an old mansion on Rittenhouse Square in Philadelphia that looks just like an old mansion on the square, and go in and it has like old brilliant Oriental carpets and it looks like an old mansion still, and yet in these rooms, people are getting music study and you take regular classes too, so they can be accredited, of course, but anyway, my brother got into this school and that's one main reason I wanted to go there and so I--
Speaker 1: So, given that your brother all along the way is excelling these four years ahead of you, you can see what's happening.  He's not playing the same instrument, so following him is not mimicking him necessarily, but what are you seeing in his experiences that lead you to want to go to the places where he's gone?
Speaker 2: Well his, I mean, he's getting so many accolades and recognition and scholarships and he auditioned at one of the big conservatories and schools and he could have gotten scholarships to go to any university in the country and, you know, he got into Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York] and he got into Curtis and, like, and even before that he was winning competitions and playing with the Chicago Symphony [Chicago Symphony Orchestra].  He was soloist with the Chicago Symphony when he was fifteen years old in front of the orchestra and I was like, he's amazing, and you know, you win prizes and money and you get in magazines and newspapers and all of this stuff and I was like, whoa, this is, for a younger brother, it's like this is like growing up with your brother as a famous basketball player in high school, you know.  That's what it was for me, is that I wanted to do that (laughter), and so he was an amazing inspiration.
Speaker 1: And then when you're in school and he's been in these classes before you, are you feeling pressure to live up to your brother's achievements?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  So, what I find, when I got to Curtis, it was great, because he had such success at the institution.  It was kind of like, you know, going into this dynasty that my brother had created, kind of like this is one person but he had this reputation and it was actually easier because I felt like oh, I know what's going on here.  I visited him here and he was telling all the teachers about me and stuff, but yes, to live up to his reputation was challenging but I knew I had to work.  I knew I had to practice and I had an idea of how much I needed to practice to achieve the things that he was already doing.  Because of that, I knew what drive meant.  I knew what dedication was.  I knew what being, basically I knew what being good at music took from a very young age. And I th- because of my brother.
Speaker 1: And when did you graduate?
Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000].
Story_ID: 654392
Speaker 1: Upon graduation [from the Curtis Institute of Music, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you, you moved into a significant role in the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra, correct?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was that?
Speaker 2: I, my last year at school, I auditioned for Cincinnati Symphony and won the associate principal clarinet job, which is basically like a solo position.  I get to play first parts when the principal is not playing those parts, and I get to play a solo E flat clarinet, which is a very small high pitched clarinet as well, so, but basically the Cincinnati Symphony is like one of the best, one of the bigger orchestras in the country, you know, the mid-tier city sizes, and it was like that was a dream come true, so when you go into a conservatory to get one of these orchestra jobs, it's so difficult that winning one at a very young age like that was very unusual and--
Speaker 1: You were twenty?
Speaker 2: I was twenty when I won the job; I was twenty-one when I started.
Speaker 1: And, for perspective purposes, when a musician typically moves into a position at an orchestra, what's the entry level position?
Speaker 2: Basically, as a young player, there (laughter), there's no entry level.  It's like the entry level for a musician is not having a job at all.  (Laughter) For a classical musician, it's like after school freelancing, like, you know, you can make a career out of that too, but basically getting an orchestra job that young is like, I could stay in that job for the rest of my career and have been one of the lucky ones.  So--
Speaker 1: So, what's common is freelancing for however many years until you get an opportunity.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you have 50 or 100 auditions that you take.  That's very common.  So, and then you get an orchestra job as the second clarinetist, the bass clarinet.  There are only four clarinets in each orchestra around the whole country, or in the world.
Speaker 1: So it's not like a string ensemble?
Speaker 2: No, it's like being, you know, getting into a string section.  It's, that's it.  So (laughter) if you happen to grab one of those, you hang onto it, because it's, these are great jobs and it's a real shock to be a wind player, especially, and get a job out of school, right out of school.
Speaker 1: And what was your brother's [Demarre McGill] first job out of school?
Speaker 2: My brother's was with the Florida Orchestra.
Speaker 1: So, he got a job immediately as well.
Speaker 2: No.  Not as immediate.
Speaker 1: No? Okay. All right, so--
Speaker 2: He got a job after going, he went to Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York].  So, what a lot of musicians do is very common.  You get advanced degrees, if you want to do that.  Not every classical musician wants to be in an orchestra.  There are many different routes to success, but he did and so he went to Juilliard and got his master's [degree] and then was auditioning as well at different orchestras; and yeah I think, I think I started in Cincinnati before he started in Florida.
Story_ID: 654393
Speaker 1: So, you're twenty-one year old college graduate.  You join the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra.  Describe that first day when you walk in.  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) The first day?  Oh, god.  I remember the moment I won that job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I almost passed out.  I almost passed out because it's like, it's ridiculous because, you know, I was twenty, twenty-one years old and they tell you you're going to be a member of this orchestra, where, you know, you're getting salary that your parents would be very, very proud of (laughter) you know, and it's kind of my--
Speaker 1: What is the starting salary at that point?
Speaker 2: Oh, in Cincinnati?  I don't know if I can reveal that or not, but you know, I think it was like eighty-five thousand dollars or something?  And, and this is in Cincinnati [Ohio], you know, in 2000.
Speaker 1: That's a lot of money.
Speaker 2: And, so it was, for my parents [Ira Lake McGill and Demarre McGill] who were teachers and in the fire department [Chicago Fire Department].  My dad, like, rose up to the ranks and was doing really well and has a great pension and everything, but for them to see that, for me to be able to call them and tell them, because we didn't have any money in college.  We went to a tuition free (laughter) conservatory [Curtis Institute of Music, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and we didn't have any money, you know?
Speaker 1: You had scholarships all the way through, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we, but we didn't have excess cash laying around.  I had debt from high school, from Interlochen [Interlochen Arts Academy, Interlochen, Michigan].  You know, my parents, by the way to go back a little bit, my parents took out a couple mortgages on their house just to send me to that boarding school.  It was a private boarding school.  It costs twenty-three grand [twenty-three thousand dollars] a year, and you know, we didn't have that, that was not what kind of money we came from.  So, to do that and then to like, get out of college and then have, like, some sort of like security as a musician was really mind blowing, so I almost passed out, (unclear) back to that part of the story.  It, it's unbelievable.
Story_ID: 654394
Speaker 1: You'd grown accustomed to the discipline of regular practice, rehearsals.  What was challenging moving into a professional orchestra?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.  I think the pressure to perform is more than people can, more than you can imagine.  There are three performances a week in that orchestra, and four in most, a lot of other big orchestras and you, it's not like you make mistakes a lot in a professional orchestra.  You kind of can't, it's not like baseball where you can kind of go up and miss a couple balls and then get another shot.  You have to, like, hit every ball (laughter) and then you maybe can miss one ball every ten games (laughter) or something like that.  It's kind of like the percentages are like ridiculous as far as like what people expect of you in that ensemble, so the pressure of that is probably the most, the most difficult thing.  But you obviously don't think about that.  I never think about that.  I never think about that.  You think about the music, you think about expressing yourself and expressing your love of the art form so you can communicate the piece to the audience.  But, (laughter) when you're young, I think when you're younger, it may be easier, because you're not thinking so much about all of that.  You know, you're just going in and you're just performing like you've been doing since you were eleven or ten, so like ten years later, you're performing in front of, you know, thousands of people so that hall [Music Hall] was like four thousand people in Cincinnati [Ohio], so you just practice.  You just practice and you focus on the right things.  You don't focus on the quote, unquote, stability of your job, or what you're making or anything like that.  You focus on the music making and it's the basic form of learning to do a thing and then doing it, which is that you have to zone out and put out everything in your head and zone in.  Now, I, in Cincinnati, I was the second black member of that orchestra and Norm Johns [Norman E. Johns] was still there in the Cincinnati Symphony [Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra] in the cello section, he joined that orchestra in the '70s [1970s], early '70s [1970s], maybe late '60s [1960s], and his experience was very tough.  It was not acceptable to be black in many fields in this country at that time.  It just didn't happen.  It wasn't accepted, it wasn't commonplace and you, but especially in orchestras, which are really homogenous, and so he, he went through it and when I got there, you know, lots of people were very happy for me.  The principal clarinetist, who I knew from a different music festival I go to, he was very supportive, you know.  He was friendly with me and everybody was generally very happy I was there.
Speaker 1: And was Johns a mentor to you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a mentor to me.  I mean, he didn't even have to do anything to be a mentor to me.
Speaker 1: He was present.
Speaker 2: He was just, he was present.  That's what you have to be to be a mentor in classical music.  You have to be there and say a couple words of support to the young player coming up; you know, say, "I know you're here," and that's proud, he's proud of me.  That's enough.  I get to play music with him as a professional musician.  I mean, it's just, it's, it's amazing when I think about it.
Story_ID: 654395
Speaker 1: Apart from being African American, you are also young.  Did you ever encounter any ageism [at the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra], any, any conflict from other players like, "Aw, here's this young buck, coming in here."
Speaker 2: Yeah, that happens a lot.  That happens, happened a lot.  I think, even at that audition definitely somebody had to speak up and be like, you know, this, "I can vouch for this person," because the auditions are done behind a screen before you get to the finals.
Speaker 1: Meaning you can't see the judges?
Speaker 2: They can't see you.
Speaker 1: Ah.
Speaker 2: That started to happen maybe in the '70s [1970s] or '80s [1980s], maybe in the '80s [1980s], the late '70s [1970s] or '80s [1980s], or something like that.  It used to be that the conductor could just hire you in their hotel room, just like any other job.  You don't even need an interview.  You play for them and they just hire you.  That's how it used to be, being in an orchestra.  Yeah, yeah, basically.
Speaker 1: So it's a blind inter- which is--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a blind audition.  So, they try to eliminate bias, and prejudice.  You can't eliminate it all because in orchestras they're allowed to take down the screen for the final round, so they had your resume there finally, now this is after everyone is eliminated, hundreds of people are gone and it's just you on a stage and you play the same thing that everyone else plays.  That's the same, basically, and--
Speaker 1: And do you get to hear each other?
Speaker 2: No, not generally.  And then they decide.  So, there has to be somebody to like, you know, look at this person's work and see what he's done, or I know him, you know, and my first job as principal clarinetist [in the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra], he knew me.  He knew my playing, he knew me.  And, I think that a lot of times, you know, when you're young you don't have any experience in an orchestra where I said you have to hit every ball and like perform week after week--yeah you, you got to get lucky too.
Story_ID: 654396
Speaker 1: That same year, it looks like, when you joined the orchestra [Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra], you also received the Avery Fisher Career Grant.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Avery Fisher Career Grant, I mean that was amazing and that happened at the end of my last year in college [Curtis Institute of Music, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and you just get a phone call.  It's one of these kind of things where you get a secret committee somewhere and they pick you and they call you and they give you money and this great award and you perform and I got to come to New York [New York] and perform here at Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts], and they--
Speaker 1: So you don't know about it, the--
Speaker 2: You don't know about it ahead of time, no.  You just get a call out of the blue.
Speaker 1: And this is a twenty-five thousand dollar grant.
Speaker 2: No, not back then (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh no? Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Not back then it wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now maybe (unclear) (laughter).  See, every time I get an award it's too early.  I need to get these awards later.
Speaker 1: But it is a financial award.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes it was and, like I said, this was before I started my first job, so, I didn't have any money and I was really happy but more importantly is such, it was one of the highest honors in classical music, you know, for like young artists, young musicians coming up and it's only been given to like two, like one or two clarinetists in the history of the award; and so, you know, this was like rare, a very special thing.
Story_ID: 654397
Speaker 1: So, you, you received this grant [Avery Fisher Career Grant]. This is, this was, you said this was right before you started at Cincinnati [Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra].
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Right.
Speaker 1: And you also mentioned that had you gone to Cincinnati and that had been your lifetime career, that could be a beautiful and successful experience.
Speaker 2: It was a great job.
Speaker 1: But that's not what happened.  In 2004, you moved to Metropolitan Opera [Metropolitan Opera Orchestra]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --as principal clarinetist.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And this is still, you're twenty-four years old.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: How did this come about (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when you get an orchestra job of any sort and you're ambitious, you, depending on the size of that orchestra, what you feel about living there or moving on to different things and kind of moving up in your career, there are only a certain few things you can do.  You can go to an orchestra that's of like the same kind of tier orchestra or same city level, or you can audition at what they call like the big five or big six orchestras, just which happen to be in New York [New York], or Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or whatever; anyway, the Metropolitan Orchestra isn't a symphony orchestra.  It plays at the opera, but it's big time.  It's like one of the biggest orchestras in the biggest cities--
Speaker 1: In the world.
Speaker 2: --in the world and is one of the greater, famous for being one of the greatest orchestras in the world, so, anyway, I was in Cincinnati as associate principal.  I always wanted a principal job, so the union paper [International Musician] comes out with auditions and musicians will be looking at this thing and say oh, you know, they're auditioning for people, so you send in your stuff and get invited to an audition and--
Speaker 1: And what are you sending in?  Tapes?
Speaker 2: You send in, if you already have a job, you usually don't have to send in the tape, so you just send in your resume biography and most people are just, you're just allowed to audition no matter really at what level.  They can't reject resumes for some orchestras too, but, so, anyway, I sent in my resume for an audition.  The first time, I auditioned for a one year position, which is just for one year.  That's it.  And then you have to re-audition, and I didn't--I auditioned.  I didn't get the job.  They picked somebody else for that, but that one year opportunity and so I was still in Cincinnati [Ohio], but I knew the repertoire from the list.  They sent out a list of excerpts, like two minute excerpts, maybe fifteen of those, twenty from big orchestras, you have to play twenty-five, thirty, and you may play for six, seven, eight minutes.  You have to fly wherever it is, go to the city, show up, play behind the screen, play your excerpts, and you're a number, and they don't know your name either, and they call your number.  So, the first time I auditioned there, I made it to the finals and for that one year position I didn't get that, but I was still in Cincinnati, but I still had a great job.  It didn't matter, and--
Speaker 1: And, is the protocol that Cincinnati has to know that you're auditioning? Or is this--
Speaker 2: No. They don't, they don't have to know, you know.  You--people probably find out, your colleagues find out, but you don't have to ask your employer for permission to audition somewhere else.  But then, the next year auditioned again, and my number was the number they called; and I was able to join that orchestra the following fall (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, and what--
Story_ID: 654398
Speaker 1: Over what period of time does this occur?  So, and, and how does it work? How many people are coming to audition?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How are the fin- how does, how is the process?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the auditions are over a span of maybe four or five days, depending on how many people audition, so sometimes they get hundreds of resumes.  They might whittle that down to 150 or 100 or around there, and then they break the groups up into five or six or seven people at a time, all with different numbers Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, maybe prelims; then, maybe Wednesday evening are semifinals.  This can be different for different orchestras, but the semifinals might have five people, six people.  There are no rules.  There are no rules this far, but they might have ten people in the semifinals out of that hundred, and then the finals could be that night or on Thursday, and then you play for maybe thirty minutes or forty minutes or fifty minutes, or fifteen minutes, depending on what the orchestra committee wants to hear and you're still a number at this point at the Met [Metropolitan Opera Orchestra], because they do every round behind a screen and then they call your number.
Speaker 1: They never see you?
Speaker 2: No, no.  At the Met, you come out and the committee sees you for the first time.
Speaker 1: After they've hired you.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. After they've offered you the job.
Speaker 1: True equal opportunity.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.  That doesn't mean you get tenure (laughter), because that's a two year process (unclear) and that's the other stuff, but it does mean up until that point, it's been, there are discrepancies in how people listen and blah, blah, blah, but it's pretty fair, pretty anonymous.
Speaker 1: And, when you auditioned, about how many other people were part of that experience?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  Probably, probably more than 100, because some of the bigger jobs, they don't come open that often, so you find, you find that there is more competition for those jobs, and you know, because they're tenured positions the person before you can be there for sixty years, like my predecessor at the New York Philharmonic.  He was there for six, zero years (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, when you are behind the screen and this audition process is going on, who is evaluating the candidates?
Speaker 2: And different orchestras have different systems.  In the Met, I think it's probably about ten or twelve of different people in the orchestra at a table behind a screen.
Speaker 1: They're members of the orchestra?
Speaker 2: Members of the orchestra, and only members of the orchestra and the music director and the music director sometimes comes--the conductor comes for the final round at a lot of auditions, but before that it is only members of the orchestra that hire members of the orchestra.
Speaker 1: And during this audition process, are multiple instruments being auditioned or is it just for--
Speaker 2: Just--yeah, just one instrument at a time, basically.  So, you have multiple players that play different instruments on that committee, though, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, they make up the whole, they represent the orchestra in its breadth.
Speaker 2: They represent the orchestra in its decision, yeah, yeah.  It's, it's kind of complicated, but.
Speaker 1: Have you ever participated in the, in--
Speaker 2: Yeah. Quite a few auditions (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in the judging process?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 654399
Speaker 1: So what, especially if you are not listening to a clarinetist, what are you listening for?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah. I me- you're listening for fundamentals of music making, rhythm, sound, musicianship, phrasing, how much they communicate the music, because they're all playing the same thing, so it's very difficult.  Especially early on, you're listening for these fundamental things like, obviously, do they hit the notes that are written in the right place, the right time, with the right, not the right sound, because different people have different interpretations of what that is, but with a good sound that you think is a good sound and expressing music beautifully, in the right style of each particular excerpt, which are from different pieces that can be from different time periods and different, with different interpretations and styles.  So, there are a lot of things, but those are the, that's basically what happens.
Speaker 1: And if any of these people sounds really good, but misses something?  Is that an automatic exclusion?
Speaker 2: No, it is not.  Not for me, at least, but early on in the rounds, because you might be listening to fifty people in a day, if you miss more than a few things or you're missing notes all over the place, you know, just as a technical aspect, that can be difficult for a committee.  You know, some people might be like okay, they miss one note they're gone, but we can't.  We can't force someone to vote for someone, generally.  So, and many people listen for musicality.  They listen for who's the most musical player, so if they miss something it's not that bad.  They have a beautiful tone, you're seduced by that, it sounds so beautiful, you know, so that can be interpreted in different ways, so it's really everybody gets an individual vote, so, and then you have to get like a majority of that committee, whatever sized committee it is and different orchestras make their own rules for what that is, too.  So, you can have somebody come in and play so beautifully and musically, and miss a couple things and it's fine or really be very accurate and do very well in the audition because everyone else was missing some notes or sloppy in certain aspects of their technique, tonguing and rhythm or whatever, so, and the different orchestras had different styles, too, so they all looked for different things.  You could be too loud, too soft.
Speaker 1: Is there a way to hear whether someone in an audition is, can be a team player or not?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.
Speaker 1: Because an orchestra essentially has to make one cohesive unit.
Speaker 2: Right. Yeah, so this is where it comes down to a couple of those little details.  The reason why, so if you listen to classical music and tap your foot, sometimes it sounds like you're tapping your foot at an even level all the time; moreso than some other types of music, necessarily, but to listen to a great performance you need to be able to move that time, move time, right?  But in an orchestra audition, classical orchestra audition, they often want you to play with more steady rhythm, even at different tempi for different pieces, but it's a steady rhythm, because you can tell that I will be able to play with you at that tempo.  So, they often sound a little bit stricter than they would normally be if you have a conductor up there trying to change the pace of things.  So, you have to learn how to kind of fit into a box and still be expressive around, at least this is what I tell my students, to be expressive and be able to shape a phrase with flexibility while still having a sense of discipline in your pulse, the individual pulse.
Story_ID: 654400
Speaker 1: As you're listening and, and performing in an audition, in either role (pause), there's, there must be a certain sense of nervousness because everything is on the line.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.
Speaker 1: And so, for you as, as the musician going into an audition like this where you really want the job and all of these layers of detail are important in terms of skill and fluidity and creativity and discipline, and then the nerves are there as well, how do you ground yourself?
Speaker 2: You have to prepare like crazy, basically, and you have to breathe.  So, there are many different breathing exercises you can do.  You have to be able to learn how to get into the zone, which for some people requires listening to music, certain pieces of music.  Each excerpt from each different composer has to have a certain kind of meaning or a certain kind of emotional character attached to it, so you focus on the right things and not the wrong things, which are missing notes.  You have to develop, you have to practice mental preparation.  You have to prepare mentally.  You have to do mock auditions where you play for other people, where you simulate the audition ahead of time.  There are so many different techniques.
Speaker 1: And you did all of this--
Speaker 2: Yes, I do all of this and, and more, basically.  You just, you have to find a way to be able to perform under pressure.
Story_ID: 654401
Speaker 1: So after you're accepted, do you, you win this audition with the Met, Metropolitan Opera [Metropolitan Opera Orchestra].  Moving from Cincinnati [Ohio] to New York [New York] is a big leap; as you described it, you're now with one of the fine- finest orchestras in the world.  How are you welcomed into this environment and how is it different?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Met was great.  I mean, the colleagues there are really, really very nice.  I mean, it's an orchestra in the pit of the big opera house [Metropolitan Opera House, New York, New York] and so you have the best players in the world and we're kind of playing in the dark down there, making the best music ever, though, and so it was a nice, a nice fit, I think, and very different than playing in a symphony, a specific symphony orchestra in Cincinnati because the sound was a little bit more direct in a symphony orchestra.  You're able to project your sound a lot more, because when you play it's like a solo.  It has to be pinpointed and at the Met, it, especially, with the music director at the time, James Levine, and the sound of the orchestra is much more rounded, much more dark colored and textured to blend with the sound of the singers and the color of the voices that you hear, so every orchestra has a different texture in a way.  The sound of that orchestra has different timbre and texture.  So, that was really a big difference and having to blend and play together with singers on the stage as the tempo, we're talking about tempo moving, as the tempo moves a lot when singers sing, a very natural way of communicating, singing, like speaking.  You know, the tempo of your voice and what you're saying can shift.  So, when they're singing lines they may be written like this (gesture), very exact, but they may sing them like this (gesture); so, the orchestra has to shift with that and be sensitive to that sort of thing, which you don't have to do as much of in a symphony orchestra.  You go together with the orchestra and the music director, but that's it, and--
Speaker 1: Well, this is almost too like the blind audition in a sense that you hear the singers, but you can't see them, can you? Aren't you in the pit?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can't see them.  Yeah, the string players can see them because in the pit, the clarinets are looking out to the audience so, yeah, I was totally blind, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, obviously the conductor is responsible for keeping, keeping the musicians in, in the flow with the singers.
Speaker 2: That is one of their responsibilities, yeah, and they often, some do it better than others (laughter), let's just say that, so, you have to do a really good job because your colleagues are the ones that you really, you really want to make sure to impress or to keep up to the level.  So--
Speaker 1: So how, how do you, again, you are a cohesive unit and yet you're made up of, now how many instruments are--
Speaker 2: About 100 are in an orchestra.
Speaker 1: So there are 100 instruments in an orchestra.
Speaker 2: Yeah, makes a pretty decent orchestra, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, at any given time how many people are on stage singing?
Speaker 2: Well, there's the chorus and that's probably like forty or fifty, there might be different people, extras on stage singing, but in the main roles there are just a handful of the core cast, all right, so maybe ten people, something like that.
Speaker 1: So forty plus ten--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --plus a hundred.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is a lot of people who are working as one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a lot of people working together, yes.
Speaker 1: Wi- make, with that intention.
Speaker 2: Yeah, making an art piece, a musical work, come to life, yeah.
Story_ID: 654402
Speaker 1: In rehearsals, are you rehearsing the orchestra with the singers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so in, in the Met [Metropolitan Opera Orchestra] we have orchestra rehearsals separate, then days later or a week later we have orchestra rehearsal with, in the orchestra room, not in the pit, not in the hall yet, but with the singers behind us so we might have separate chorus rehearsals, but then with the soloists behind us on the same level, and then we get to have another rehearsal, more rehearsals in the hall where, in the opera house [Metropolitan Opera House, New York, New York], where we have this, you know, staged rehearsals, and then we have a dress rehearsal, so yeah, it's a lot, a few different steps, and the singers rehearse long before they get to play with the orchestra.  They're doing, you know, like in the theater, I mean they're doing set rehearsals and staging rehearsals and piano rehearsals separate from the orchestra with the conductor.  I mean, it's a big operation.
Speaker 1: Well, because the singers are also acting and they are--and there's choreography.
Speaker 2: And acting rehearsals.
Speaker 1: And they have to meet their mark before they start singing particular lines.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, and they're human beings, so, as you were talking about this fluidity, there's also, if they get to their mark a second before or after, you have to be responsive.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Blindly responsive.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they could go--sometimes the orchestra notices before the conductor does, that a singer has come in wrong and sometimes vice versa.  Sometimes you're playing along and the conductor, and the orchestra has to jump back or go forward, or, you know, whatever, so yeah, I mean it's--
Speaker 1: So, if someone notices before the conductor, how is that communicated?
Speaker 2: The orchestra jumps, meaning that, the orchestra knows the music, like, hopefully, and so what happens is for a split second you're in no man's land (laughter).  You're not all playing the same music, and then a split second later, you are.  So, how that happens, it's very complicated; 100 people, sixty people have to jump a measure ahead or behind.  It doesn't happen that often because these are like at the highest level of operatic performances, but it does happen occasionally and, so, and then the concert master's in the place and hopefully just leads and shows where it is.  But, yeah, it's all silence.  It's all done with your instruments, basically.  You know, you rarely just--so the conductor would have to yell out, "Nu- number sixty," or you know, it doesn't happen.
Story_ID: 654403
Speaker 1: Typically, how long is an opera?
Speaker 2: Three and a half, four hours.
Speaker 1: With how many breaks?
Speaker 2: One or two.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, everyone is holding that energy for the entire time, essentially.
Speaker 2: Essentially, um-hm.
Speaker 1: How many of these, how many different operas were you performing in the course of a season?
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh.  Probably twenty-five different operas.
Speaker 1: And how long is a season?
Speaker 2: Nine months, and there are seven, at the Met [Metropolitan Opera House, New York, New York] there are seven performances a week, and as principal in the orchestra [Metropolitan Opera Orchestra], you're generally required to play four performances a week, and--yeah, it's a lot of--
Speaker 1: So you're, the four performances a week, is that less than the people who were--
Speaker 2: No, nope.  In the old days they used to have to play seven performances a week, everybody.
Speaker 1: Everybody.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That was hard.  It's like, I mean, that's difficult to realize, that's like, that's a Broadway schedule.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Like, when you're, you know, when you're doing Broadway, it's every, every day.  You know, those aren't four hours, you know, Broadway shows, but they can be quite long, so it's grueling work, grueling work, and so because orchestra musicians are getting injured so much you just can't function like that and keep your organization sounding good.  You, you, they finally got it to be required that you had to play four performances a week, and it's a little bit more manageable.
Speaker 1: You say that orchestra musicians get injured so much; what kinds of injuries?
Speaker 2: Oh, repetitive stress injuries.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, most common, yeah, which can ruin your career.
Speaker 1: For, for a clarinetist, it's the fingers, the arms?
Speaker 2: The fingers, the arms, the tendons, here mainly (indicates), yeah, and we shouldn't forget about hearing damage and what can take place from hearing eighty plus decibels constantly for over a career.  So (laughter)--
Speaker 1: So, a lot of musicians end up with hearing damage.
Speaker 2: Well, I would say yeah.  Most of us in our old age, yeah, because most normal people that aren't musicians end up with hearing loss, so yeah, you're a musician, it's pretty intense over the years for sure.  So, you try to protect yourself and you can wear your earplugs sometimes.
Speaker 1: For one who plays a wind instrument, what do you do when you don't feel well and you have to play?  How do you keep your ability to perform?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I mean, especially as when you're a principal player, especially a principal wind player and just generally, musicians don't really take, you don't really take that many sick days.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you don't, you just play and unless I'm really, really ill and I have a fever and I think I'm gonna get other people sick, which doesn't happen that often, even then, if it's a mild fever, I probably go to work.  Yeah, you just learn to play sick.  The show must always go on.
Speaker 1: But again--
Speaker 2: How do you do that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, like what, or maybe a different question would be, what is your discipline for staying healthy, for keeping your instrument clear?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know.  I wash my hands a lot, try to wash my hands a lot, and singers are notorious for that.  They don't want to shake hands, you know, it's like you have to, because their voice is their instrument.  Me?  I cannot talk and still play clarinet, you know.  I can take some decongestant and still play clarinet, so basically I try to stay, I try to stay mildly healthy, you know, but there's also musicians that don't care about that at all.  You just always go, the show always goes on.  You know, you don't care about your health, the show goes on.  So, I'm not like abnormally healthy or athletic in any other way, really, so I try to eat well, I try to get some sleep, but when I was younger I didn't get very much sleep (laughter).
Story_ID: 654404
Speaker 1: What was a challenge for you in, in your early years, because you were so young, having to be extremely disciplined every day in, in high pressure situations; you know, a lot of young people goof off.  They don't go to work; even the smart, dedicated people, but it's often part of being young.  What was your story?
Speaker 2: I guess it depends on how young.  But, I was a serious kid, you know.  I liked to have fun and goof around and when I was in college [Curtis Institute of Music, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I liked to party and I liked to have parties and throw parties and everything, and even you know, I liked to stay up late sometimes and go out and eat and drink and everything, but when I was, when I was in school I knew that, I think I got this from my parents [Ira Lake McGill and Demarre McGill], but I knew that when you needed to get something done you needed to just do it, and if you wanted to be the best at something and you wanted to be excellent at something, you had to just do it.  That doesn't mean you can't do other stuff, it just means that when you have a goal you have to work at it.  That's it.  So, there was never really, and I was never like a bad kid about going to class and trying to get good grades and stuff, so that wasn't an issue, but yeah, like knowing that at the end of working hard, as my brother [Demarre McGill] told me, he was like, "Look--."  He taught me it was like, he said this, and maybe my parents taught him.  I'm not sure.  But, he said, "If you play right now, you're gonna have to work really hard later in life, really hard, maybe doing stuff you don't wanna do.  If you work really hard now, you might be able to have fun later," you know.  And, being a musician I can work hard and have fun, too, at the same time, which is nice, but sometimes it is just hard work and when you're younger it is just hard work, but knowing that you, you get better after all those hours of working, that it gets better, even if it's a struggle, is something that is very satisfying and, but I also enjoy, I enjoy the work when it comes, when it comes to clarinet, and that's because it's the love of my life, music, that I love working at clarinet, you know, generally.  There are some times when I'm tired or sick or, but that's the, that's the issue.  You have to love it so much that you're willing to, to do anything, anything, you know, for it.
Story_ID: 654405
Speaker 1: As a professional musician, given that you are auditioning for, when, when these transitions occur, is there a need for manager or agent to be a part of your professional experience?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Not in my orchestral career, but in my solo career and chamber music career.  I didn't have one always, but I started to have so many obligations and invitations that I needed somebody that was better at responding to email than me, and helping with that, with that sort of thing.  Not, they don't really get involved in my focusing on work and how I do things, but really on the logistical side of things it does help to have that now, but it's still kind of all overwhelming and encompassing, you know, doing so many different things.  So, yes, but it's very helpful.
