Story_ID: 332998
Speaker 1: My name is Evelyn Pounds and I am the interviewer. Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Please state and spell your- (laughter) Scott, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Please state and spell your full name, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: My full name is [HistoryMaker] James Hiram Malone, J-A-M-E-S, H-I-R-A-M, M-A-L-O-N-E.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: March the 24th, 1930.
Speaker 1: And location of birth.
Speaker 2: Wintersville [sic. Winterville], Georgia, Clarke County.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is December the 7th, 2005, Wednesday (laughter).
Speaker 1: The location of this interview.
Speaker 2: 1796 North Avenue Northwest, Atlanta, Georgia, 30318-6441, Fulton County.
Story_ID: 332999
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you a couple or a few People magazine-ish type questions, just bear with me.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is barbeque chicken (laughter).
Speaker 1: Time of year.
Speaker 2: When you get as old as I am, all times of year is good.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color.
Speaker 2: Whatever color I'm wearing.  What color am I wearing (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Green.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Atlanta, Georgia, right where I am--Atlanta.
Story_ID: 333000
Speaker 1: Please tell me about your mother.
Speaker 2: My mother was a wonderful person.  She would tell me stories, and that's what inspired me.  Not only would she tell me stories, she would try to illustrate the stories, and she would say simple stories like, "Let's go down to the store and, and--," you know, "do this or do that."  And then she would have maybe a sketch of her, and then maybe a sketch of a little child which would be me, and she was always- whenever she tells me things, she always used a, a linear drawing lines, you know, whenever she--you know, most times, and she would kind of go through that way, and it was very interesting.  And she was always inspiring me because she didn't tell me anything negative, you know, she didn't tell me--some things she didn't tell me.  She didn't tell me a lot, lots of stuff was positive, but she didn't tell me anything negative, and I think that works just as well. And my mom was very--how should I say it--accommodating.  Whenever I say I would--when I was a small child, whenever I say I would--wasn't feeling well, she would say, "I don't feel well either, and I used to have this," you know.  And I would say, you know, sometimes fight, you know, or feeling--had a cold or something, she said, "Well, you know, I, I, I have had colds and I, I know how you feel."  So she was very sympathetic and--person, and she was creative, too.  Like I said, she liked to tell stories, and she used to write articles, she sent it to Journal-Constitution [Atlanta Journal-Constitution], and we didn't have a typewriter, she used to do it by handwriting and, and, you know, naturally, you know, they never--you know, she didn't make a sale, but she always shared this with me that she liked to tell these little stories, and then--so--and she shared those things and, and so she was, you know, very--she liked to communicate with, with me and my brother [Ralph Malone, Jr.].
Speaker 1: What was your mother's name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Sarah Lena [Sarah Echols Malone], and her maiden name was Echols, and naturally she took on my dad's [Ralph Malone, Sr.] last name, Malone.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was named after her mom, her mom, my grandmother, was named Sarah Lena [Sarah Echols], too, and so she, she was named after my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you know about her background?
Speaker 2: Well, not too much.  I know she got married when she was seventeen. I think she was unhappy like a lot of young ladies were back then, and she just wanted to get out the house, so she got married that early and, you know, that what happened to her, and I don't, I don't know too much about her background accept that she didn't go far in school. I think about third grade, and that's just about it.  She had four, four sisters and one brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born, let's see, was--what was that--geez, tip of my tongue here, September the 4th, I think.  No, no, wait a minute.  I know it was 1908.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1908 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) September the 4th, 1908.
Speaker 1: All right.  And where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: In, in the area of, in the area of Athens, Georgia in that Clarke County area there.
Speaker 1: All right.  How would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: She was a quiet and subdue and, and very sensitive person, and she loved to laugh, and when she laughed, she'd laugh--you can hear her, you know?  She just--some people don't laugh loud, she laughed loud, and that's what I like about--you know, she really--she--when she's (laughter)--she was happy, she said, "Ha, ha, ha," you know.  I can't imitate her, though--
Story_ID: 333001
Speaker 1: Please tell me about your father.  What was his name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he was kind of subdued. He was--how should I say it?  His--to, to, to explain the situation, his dad didn't believe in his going to school, you know.  They worked in the--they did farm work, and so that handicapped him a lot, and so he, he--his background was very--like a farmworker and so forth, you know, when he--back in the early days, so--I don't know how far up you want me to talk about him, you know, in the earlier days, or I can talk to you, talk to you about his later days, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Ralph, Ralph Malone [Ralph Malone, Sr.], and he didn't have a middle name, by the way.
Speaker 1: All right.  And when was he born?
Speaker 2: Nineteen o'three [1903]. January 18th, 1903.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: In the same area, back in Winterville [Georgia], in that area of Georgia there in Clarke County.
Speaker 1: All right.  And Winterville is not far from Athens [Georgia], is it?
Speaker 2: It's about, about eight, eight miles from Athens.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember any stories that he might have told you about--
Speaker 2: Not too much. He, he didn't--he wasn't too much of a storyteller, he was very--a recluse as far as that goes.
Story_ID: 333002
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about your ancestors--your grandparents on your mother's [Sarah Echols Malone] side?
Speaker 2: Not too much.  I--no, I don't know too much about that--uh-uh, no.
Speaker 1: On your father's [Ralph Malone, Sr.] side?
Speaker 2: Well, father's side--think my great-grand--my great-grandfather, when he was about eight years old, he was sold as a slave, and so forth, and I mean I, I heard something about that.
Speaker 1: And that was in the Athens [Georgia] and Winterville, Georgia area (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, in that area. They, they all lived in that area and, and in Georgia, here.
Story_ID: 333003
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of growing up in the 1930s?  We talked about when you were born, March the 24th, 1930?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Well--
Speaker 1: Tell us something about when you were actually born, that you remember.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I--well, I have to recap what I heard, that my, my dad [Ralph Malone, Sr.] said that when--after I was born, and he couldn't--he didn't--couldn't get a good night's sleep for two or three weeks, and then he protested to my mom [Sarah Echols Malone] and said, "Sarah, honey, we got a crybaby on our hands."  So--but what they didn't understand was that I'm--I was, you know, going to be an artist and I'm sensitive.  And then later on, what happens is that I become Atlanta's [Atlanta, Georgia] eldest living native son of contemporary visual arts, which they didn't--never did live, live to see.
Speaker 1: Okay. What are some of your other earlier memories?
Speaker 2: Well, what, what, what happened was that after--when I was two years old, for a better life, my dad, you know, he--it, it was--what is it, Depression back--those days?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was the Great Depression (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, so what he did, he wanted to have a better life so he, you know, took the family from Winterville, Georgia, and they went to Atlanta, Georgia and to a area we call Buttermilk Bottom [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia], and there would, there my family moved in with my cousin, his name was Son Huff [William Huff].  They all, they all have these names of (laughter) Son, and Junior, and all that stuff, but anyway--
Speaker 1: These were family nicknames?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: These were family nicknames?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), but some of 'em--I don't even know what the real name was, tell you the truth, because we called him Son Huff.  So, anyway, we moved in with them in Buttermilk Bottom, and they had three, three children, too, and so it, it was Charlene [ph.], William Howard [ph.], and Georgia [ph.].  And like I say, it was the Depression during that time, and my dad and Son Huff, they worked for the WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration], you know, digging ditches, and then my, my mom and his wife--Son Huff's wife, they did domestic work and, you know, to make ends meet.  And what we did, we had the government-issued dried beans, you know, flour and lard and butter and rice or whatever--you know, those type of, of foods, and that's what we had to have--that's what we ate during the, during those '30s [1930s], during those times when, you know, when the--and during that Depression.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember what the WPA stood for during those days when Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] was--
Speaker 2: It must be work, work something--I don't know, welfare, welfare (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous Projects, it was the Works (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Welfare (laughter), they didn't have that word welfare back then, did they?  (Laughter)  No, well, let me see, let me guess, let me see.  Work--Work Projects Association, or what (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Admins- Administration.
Speaker 2: What was that?
Speaker 1: Administration.  Works Projects Administration [sic. Work Projects Administration].
Speaker 2: Yeah?
Speaker 1: All right, and that was under Roosevelt during the Depression. Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he invented that, didn't he?
Speaker 1: He did, yes.
Story_ID: 333004
Speaker 1: Now, life was hard, and things were kind of tight, but in living with this relative [William Huff], your family was able to--your father [Ralph Malone, Sr.] was able to, and your mother [Sarah Echols Malone] were able to dig out a living so that they could support you.  Were you the only child at that particular time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I was the--Ralph, Jr. [Ralph Malone, Jr.] is my, my brother. I had a--I had a brother, he's a couple a years older than I am, so it was two of us--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: You know, so, and I wanted, you know, tell you about the Buttermilk Bottom [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia], yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, tell us a little bit about Buttermilk Bottom.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, what it is that when we settled here in Atlanta [Georgia] and then when this--in this neighborhood we called Buttermilk Bottom, that area is--was what they call a African American ghetto area. It was farms and, after Sherman [William Tecumseh Sherman] marched, you know, through Atlanta to the sea, and what he did, he, he brought with him thousands of homeless slaves, which I did not know about, you know, and they all formed tent cities, and they settled in that area--around what they call Buttermilk Bottom, around Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] area, and Summerhill [Atlanta, Georgia] and Albion Avenue.  And what we, what we term now as Fourth Ward, the Fourth Ward district and, and, and then--see, during that time the, the land developers they bought up, you know, properties, and the cheapest property they could find, and those properties was around what they call in the watershed areas where nobody wants to live, in other words, those, those--that land area was, you know--they had swamps type of, of land, and it wasn't feasible for, you know, for, for good use, so they, they used that to--they built some--what you call shotgun houses?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And shacks, and sold 'em to my, you know, my relatives and, and the, and the Afro-American people there and, and, and sold them as low-income housing, and so that's what, that's what happened there.  And like I said, that's how it got, got its name and, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you said first--
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Go on, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: That's how it got its name called the Bottoms 'cause of--'cause it was in low, low-grade area, bad area, water-infested area, swamp areas (laughter), so--but, but we, we were glad to get those houses so everybody that moved into those--in that district, so that's what happened there.
Speaker 1: And you said first they lived in tents? So these were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was in tents, tents, you know, yeah, and then so I--
Speaker 1: Were these makeshift tents?  Could you describe what those tents probably looked like?
Speaker 2: Well, they probably was like--you know what?  You've seen these Geograph- National Geographic scenes where they have people overseas in tents and when their, when their--when the houses are gone, it be the same--similar--same thing, like in a warzone, or some of the same--okay, we have what you call Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] here in Atlanta and, and--recently, and the people had to--you know, they moved out, and they had the intermediate area they went to, and they went to tents, too, so that, that probably the same type of situations where they have refugees and, and evacuees (laughter), and all that--it's not funny.  So that probably same--it's just history repeating itself, you know?  And it's still just like a on-going thing that, that's the type a situation where--you know, no running water, no nothing, so--but, I mean that's the kind of situation probably was--I'm just speculating here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And a shotgun house--could you explain what a shotgun house is (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A shot- well, well, a shotgun house is a house where--that the rooms--it is constructed where you could look in the front door and look straight out the back door. In other words, it's one a those houses that, that, that constructed, where there's a hallway between the front door and back door.  You can walk in the front door or back door, you know, and run right straight through the house, and so they talking--when they say shotgun, you can shoot right through the house, and so that's the way that works.  And they're small houses and maybe have one room on this side of the hallway and one room on that side of the hallway, and I, I don't know how, you know--and so that's just--the, the minimum size you can have, to call a house.
Speaker 1: So, this shotgun house that your family ended up living in, what did it look like?
Speaker 2: Well, it--well, just like that, but it had upstairs and downstairs.
Speaker 1: So, how many rooms were on the first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, about two or three--it's the same, you know--same standard fare--
Speaker 1: --and two--
Speaker 2: --and they--what's that, please?
Speaker 1: And how many upstairs?
Speaker 2: Well, no, no, no, no--when I say upstairs, downstairs, I'm just saying that they--some people were living downstairs and there was upstairs, there was, there was two, two floors--I mean two (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, so your family--
Speaker 2: Two, two--my family lived upstairs, and there was another family downstairs.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right.  So you--
Speaker 2: But most shotgun houses, they're on one floor.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 333005
Speaker 1: What are some of the other memories that you have of living in Buttermilk Bottom [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Well, well, what happens in, in Buttermilk Bottom, we had our own schools, we had our own stores and, and own--you know, little places--juke joints, so-to-speak, to go to.  And so my mom [Sarah Echols Malone] went to the Church of God in Christ church  [Cathedral of Faith Church of God In Christ, Atlanta, Georgia] at--it was a Sanctified church, and she--I remember she taking us along, and they had the longest services there--it, it, it was (laughter) something. I, I never will forget that.  I, I--that was, that was--it was a ongoing thing and they just--like to me they just--you know, kids--we just--kids get bored, so, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What--okay, explain what a Sanctified church is.
Speaker 2: Well, Sanctified church is what they call a holy church--a church that, that unbridle--how should I say it--their, their expression of, of, of, of, of, of celebrating being, you know, in this house of the Lord, so-to-speak.  So they just--they do--their singing is, is, is, is--how should I say it?  They express themselves by movement, jumping, dancing and, and, and, and, and, and, and very vigorous in, in what some people might call loud, when they, when they express themselves.  And they just unbridled, you know?  And then they just, they just go berserk, and it's, it's completely opposite from Catholic.  And in fact, I done a--I did a painting called 'Segregated Sundays' [ph.], and I showed on the, on the right side, you know, people was celebrating in church, you know, the, the Afro, and then on the left is a Catholic church, and the Catholic church they was sitting stiff--straight up like this (gesture), and rela- you know, like, you know, very stern like that, and then there, on the other side I showed the church, and people were just doing a jungle dance, they're just doing--they're just jumping up and down, and a woman that was holding a baby, she was still jumping up and down.  So, that's what's a--that's, that's what the Sanctified church--they, they believe in really expressing themselves and, you know, with no, no inhibitions.
Speaker 1: And how long do you think the services (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And in fact, you could hear the--you could hear the services maybe three or four blocks down the street, and they didn't have loudspeakers, they just, you know, they just (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you said that you were there a long time, so how long did you think the services lasted?
Speaker 2: Well, they, they really lasted--like this is--they really--they had Sunday school but most times that my mom would take--put us in the, in the regular, you know, pew--I mean regular church area, and so when we got there, we--oh, it would last maybe three hours, and like they just get there and just go and go and go.  Everybody had to, had to--have to say things, and then they--you know, but we, we young kids, we (laughter), we just endured it and, and it was, it was, you know--I, I don't regret it.
Story_ID: 333006
Speaker 1: And you stated that there were juke joints.  Okay, what is a juke (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, there, there were, there were small places, they was--how should I say it?  Used to be houses, see?  And they just went there and they just made a, a place for, for recreational purposes, and they put a jukebox in there, that's why they call it a juke joint, and then they just had a--really, like I said, the bare necessities for a, a recreation area.  They just had a few chairs there and, and a couple a tables, and somebody--you know, they had a stove or something there, and they would, you know, serve food and all that kind of stuff, and at--and Saturday night they would, you know, dance and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: So the, the box, the jukebox provided the music?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's why they call it juke--juke joint, see?  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Was there a money needed to put in the box?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  What, what they do--then it varies, it varies how it goes, and what happen is they would--either that way by donations, you know, like when you come in the door, or you--or if you're going to do a thing, you know, serve any refreshment, you just pay, you know, when you purchase a sandwich or, or get a drink or something.  They--it's--there's two ways they do that, see, two ways to do that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's how they paid for it, okay.  And what are some of the other memories of Buttermilk Bottom [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Well, what happens with, with, with that area is that they--I'll put it like this.  Everybody lived right down the street from each other, see, that, that, that's the interesting thing about it.  Like for instance, segregation--segregation--well, I'll put it like that.  It grew us closer together, and we were closer together than now.  In other words, now, we, we, we, we--it's integration, so people move all across the city, so I don't see, you know, relatives like now.  I mean, I don't--you know, like, like--and like I did then, so what happened is, the good thing about that was that the, the relatives lived right next door or down the street or (unclear) around the side or front, or whatever may be, and even though the, the--you know, it was one of the things where that everything was convenient, and another thing, too, you didn't have to have a--not only were they close, but you didn't have to have a phone 'cause you can just yell out the door or yell out the window, "Hey, So- and--hey, hey, come over here," you know, and all that kind of stuff, so they had all that kind of communication going where you didn't have to have a, a, a--you know, had that short-distance connection.  And then too, a lot of us back then didn't have phones anyway, and so that was kind of a--it was, you know, not a necessity anyway, too.  And, and it, it, it, it, it was good. I mean we had--in fact, like I said, we were poor but we was not handicapped, we didn't think about that, especially when you're young like that, see?  The, the, the parents probably always, you know, moaned about money and all that, but we kids--you talking about earliest memories was--it, it was, you know, compatible.  I mean it was, it was all right, you know?  No, no compunctions.
Story_ID: 333007
Speaker 1: What were some of the smells of growing up in Buttermilk Bottom [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened is this.  Everybody--see, that's another thing, everybody was close, and they had--always had these, these foods that were spicy, so whenever you, you, you, you walk around the neighborhood, you smell like barbeque, you know, chicken, and you hear--and all--and on Fridays, that fish, you hear--you smell fish going on, all that kind of stuff.  So, what it is is that, that you know what's on the menu 'cause everybody--most of 'em have the same menu but yet it, it still was--it, it, it just comes out, you know, you could, you could hear all the--the aroma just, you know, fills the neighborhood, so you know, know you're in, you know, you're in Buttermilk Bottom.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But another thing what happen, too, that--on another area, is that we had a--the neighborhood--we had vendors come through, and they had, like ice man come through, they, they sold the wares, and then there was the other, other vendors like vendors who would sharpen your knives.  See, they, they don't do all that stuff now because I think buying knives is so cheap now that people don't need knife-sharpeners and all that--these vendors who, who, you know, used to do things like that.  And then also, they had people selling vegetables and stuff like that, and--like I say, ice man, coal man, and like people sharpening knives and, you know, vege- you know.  But, we had some other (laughter), other visitors, too, come through.
Speaker 1: Now, what kind of visitors were these?
Speaker 2: Well, anyway, these visitors were unwelcome visitors, but we took it in stride.  When I was a child, the--we would--there was a group of guys come through the area honking their horns and, you know, yelling and carrying on, and I noticed that, that, that our parents [Sarah Echols Malone and Ralph Malone, Sr.] would take--turn down the lamps.  They had lamps, they didn't have light--they didn't have electric lights then, they had lamps.  They turn down the lamp when they hear this noise at night--people coming through, and hear the cars backfiring and all that kind of stuff, and then they just--and when it's--after, you know, half-an-hour, when the noise died down, you know, you--the, the parents were relieved.  And I found out after that it was the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] coming through, you know, doing that area, during that time that we had--when I was a child.  But I didn't, I didn't--you know, it didn't faze me because I didn't, I didn't know the--you know--how--you know, deadly it was.  I, I didn't, I didn't, didn't give it that much thought.
Story_ID: 360572
Speaker 1: Tell us more about the Ku Klux Klan's [KKK] nightly visits, or the visits that they made.
Speaker 2: Well, they would come in with these T-Model Fords [Ford Model T]--they was backfiring. That was even more, you know, disturbing--hearing all that, you know, pow, pow, pow.  You know?  And, and, and, and, and they would be shouting and, and what it is, sounded like they--like they was drunk or something of that nature, and what--and, and what happened is, the interesting part about this is that we had--an insurance man used to come by, believe it or not, and sometimes he would--I've heard somebody say that he had mentioned to them, you know, "Don't go out tonight."  So, apparently, the fellow that--the insurance man who was selling us the five cents insurance a, a month, whatever it is, he was part of the, the group who were coming in, he was alerting us that he was coming by that night to, to, to, you know, to, to, to shake us up, so apparently, that, that, that was another interesting thing that I found out (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That is.
Speaker 2: And, and what happens is that--I noticed the parents--my parents [Sarah Echols Malone and Ralph Malone, Sr.] didn't, didn't, you know, they didn't--wasn't too shook up about this in the first place.
Story_ID: 360573
Speaker 1: And--but another thing about Buttermilk Bottom [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia] was that the vendors--more, more about the vendors--you know, the ice man, he had a truck, he had all these, all these--it was interesting, not, not demeaning 'em--all these vendors, like the trucks was pretty, you know, dilapidated, and they would have--the, the ice man would have a, a croker sack or, or whatever you want to call it--a, a burlap bag like, like, you know, like you put potatoes in, he used that, and he put it over his shoulder, and he would carry the ice to the house, you know, for everybody--whoever can afford the ice anyway.  And then the--
Speaker 2: So did he bring it in a block, or how did he put it in his sack (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was in a block, it was in a block and he--like I say, he put it on his shoulder and carried it--
Speaker 2: From?
Speaker 1: You know, he had that burlap bag to soften the blow on his shoulder.  And also the, the-let me see, the, the knife--the guy who would sharpen knives, all he had was like a little pushcart, and like, like a little--not necessarily like a wheelbarrow or whatever, but anyway, it's kind of like a pushcart with a couple a wheels on it, and very, very--how should I say it, minimum of equipment, and he would have a little thing where he would kind of grind--a, a, a grinder thing sitting on--in other words, it was kind of like a two-let me see, about eighteen inch by eighteen inch, and maybe 'bout a thirty-six inch high square box thing with two wheels on it, and then I said on a top, like a little table top, it was a grinder on there, and he would, you know, he'd do the repairs right there. He'd go and ask, you know, the, the--come through the, through the neighborhood, "Knives be grind," you know, "Knife man," you know (laughter).  And people would, you know, yell out the window, "Okay, come over here."  And he'd go over there and he, he'd get the knife and he would go, and he would turn--it wasn't anything electrical, every, every--it was mechanical--I mean it was, you know--it was (laughter) not mechanical, it was, it was a human type of thing.  So, he would take and, and put a knife there and, and turn the wheel and grind it, and then he would, you know, give it back to the person.
Speaker 2: Do you know how much he charged?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Do you know how much he charged?
Speaker 1: Oh, it probably wasn't that much probably, I don't, I don't know exactly.  Anyway--and then the--let me see, the ice man--and the coal man--oh, man, that guy, he had--his truck was dilapidated, too, and he would have these things--he would have this coal on his, you know, on the back, and he would take and put it in a basket, in a one of these fruit baskets, you know, with the two, two handles on it?  You seen one of these (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like a wicker light?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: A wicker light fruit basket?  The bushel baskets (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, kind of--yeah, bushel basket like, and he would take and put the coal over in there and, and have the two handles, and he would, you know, sell it to the people like that, and--but like I said, his facilities were very--his, his, his--it was in need of repair, you know, and--but no, we, we, we welcomed these people though, I mean coming through, 'cause they, they, they aided us and, you know, 'cause they kept us supplied, you know?  And also we had to--like I said, the, the, the vegetable guy, he came through and he was selling all these leftover--what he would do--see, leftover--see, speaking of leftovers--the, the vegetable guy, he would go to farms, see?  And, and, and, and when he go to these farms, he would pick up leftover lettuce or tomatoes--whatever it may be--and put it in his truck, and come and sell to us, in other words, the stuff that, that, that--second-grade stuff, but we didn't care though, you know.  You know, he would pick up stuff that, that--okay, he'd go to these farmlands, I'll put it like that.  They have stripped all the fruits and vegetables from, from that crop and they've taken it to the major markets to sell, you know--I mean that farmers have--okay, the farmers take it to the major markets to sell, and then he--when he does that, he leaves a residue, maybe the corn laying out there, and the tomatoes, or whatever it is, laying on the ground, and then so these--our--you know, so-called vendors that come to our area, they come there and pick up the scraps that's left over from, from the, the major sale.  So--but, but some of the items are bruised or, or rotten, or maybe they might be bug-infested and all that, but they--you know--so everybody thrived.  So he got it free, see (laughter), he goes and he picks up the stuff free and he brings it to us (laughter).
Speaker 2: And then brings it to you, okay.
Story_ID: 360574
Speaker 1: --But one thing though, speaking of free, the--what happened is--in, in Buttermilk Bottom [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia], too, is they had--they didn't believe in, they didn't believe--they didn't think that anybody was gonna, you know, take anything from them because they didn't have anything to take, so lot of Buttermilk Bottom people either didn't lock their doors, or they had a skeleton key, and everybody had a skeleton key, so what happens there is that they thought that they didn't have anything to steal, so why lock it up?  So that's what happened there, and we didn't, we didn't--we, we wasn't--how should I say it--nervous about burglars because it, it, it didn't matter 'cause we--they, they, they'd come out empty-handed if they did go in (laughter), and waste their time.
Speaker 2: And what is it (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Everybody knew in Buttermilk Bottom we didn't have anything, so (laughter) what--
Speaker 2: Now, explain what a skeleton key looks like.
Speaker 1: A skeleton key is a key that--it's a, it's, it's a long metal and, and it's round, and really it's a key that--I'll have to illustrate it 'cause it's really not something you can visualize--I mean can't--you really can't--how should I say it--you can't vocalize it.  It's, it's a key that look like that (draws and displays photo).  See that?
Speaker 2: Can you get that, Scott [Scott Stearns]?  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I mean it's well documented.
Speaker 2: Okay--the, what a skeleton key looks like.  Okay.  And what type of stoves did they cook on?  You said that you used coal. Was that for heating or was that for cooking (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was, it was, it was wood and coal stoves, it was kind of like a potbelly stove, and it, and it was always smoking (laughter), and it was very--how should I say it?  They hard to get started, I mean when you try to, you know, start a fire, you know, you have to work at it and work at it, make it work, and then it was a lot of headache about the wood and, you know, sometime the wood would, would be wet or something, or--and also you had to keep all that stuff on hand, otherwise, it didn't work.  And sometimes you didn't have matches and--it, it was, it was, it was trouble.  But also the wood stove also have the heat, too.
Speaker 2: Okay, so when you and your brother [Ralph Malone, Jr.] were given chores of getting wood together before the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, all that stuff, yeah, that, that was part of the family tradition.  You have to, you know--chores to do all that kind of good stuff.
Speaker 2: So, what happened to Buttermilk Bottom?
Speaker 1: Well, what happened is this.  Well, they had what they call urban renewal, see?  The, the, the, the government of the city--city planners in Atlanta [Georgia], they decided they want to make changes in the area, so what they've done, they--some of the developers came to the, to the council people and said, "We want to make--we want to bring in some new business--new development."  So, what they success--what they done, what they said they didn't want to put up supermarkets, and they wanted to do some, some business (unclear), you know, they wanted some--do some--make up some--you know, do some business ventures, so what happens is they say that they want to use the land where Buttermilk Bottom is, and also there was a highway coming through, so they wanted to also utilize that area also.  So they're saying that since they thought that, you know, we wouldn't protest and that, you know, that area was viable to Atlanta, and they were closer downtown, they decide to bulldoze Buttermilk Bottom and revitalize it and put the Civic Center [Boisfeuillet Jones Atlanta Civic Center, Atlanta, Georgia] and Georgia Power [Georgia Power Company, Atlanta, Georgia], and apartments in that area--Sidetrack [ph.] and so forth, and Sidetrack is gone now because it's 2005, but that's the area where--that used to be Buttermilk Bottom.  In fact, it was Civic Center and a parking lot, my house is where the parking lot was, and--anyway, that, that's where, you know, they wanted to put a civic center there and they did, and so that's what happened.  That was the 1960s of, of--when they re- redid--you know, redesigned the area.
Story_ID: 360575
Speaker 1: Now, what are your--what elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: David T. Howard [David T. Howard Elementary School; David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia], David T. Howard, I went there and, and then I went to E.A. Ware School [Edmond Asa Ware Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia].  I went to David T. Howard until I was about the seventh grade--sixth or seventh grade, and it was interesting there.  But when I went there though--it, it was interesting, but what happens is, is when I went to school, they had a, a thing going where if you certain age, that if you, if you was six years old, seven and six years old, during certain time of year, you couldn't go to school that time, so I, I lost a, a whole year because my birthday was March 24th, and so, you know, school system, you know, rotates and, and I, I wasn't able to--but anyway, I got a late start, so I didn't start school 'til I was seven years old.  And, and--but that, that was just one thing that, that--
Speaker 1: What are some of your earliest memories of elementary school?  Were there any teachers that influenced you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my early memory was when I was in first grade, Miss Bonnett [ph.], she was a interesting lady.  I remember she wore button--high-top button-up shoes (laughter), I never will forget that 'cause especially when you're a little boy you see all these little--you, you, you, you looking low, see?  Anyway, that was kind of interesting--I, I remember that.  Anyway, she was very--how should I--inspirational.  When I went there, I had to--you know how, how it is when you're first grade, you always do some drawings.  So I did some drawings of a--from a, a book called 'Three Little Bears,' and I had to draw a chair, and it was, it was terrible. I couldn't get the wrong--the chair to, to work right, and she--and Miss Bonnett said to me, "My, my, that's nice, you know, that's a nice drawing," you know?  And so kind of pepped me up, but I still know it, it was, it was bad, it was bad--bad news.  And so that was my--you know, after my mom [Sarah Echols Malone], she was my other inspiration.
Speaker 1: She kind of reminded you of your mom, being a positive asset to you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, she takes up the baton.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, this was around 1937, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1937, yeah, that's what the year was.
Story_ID: 360576
Speaker 1: But another thing I remember, too, you know, we--well, like I say, it was during poverty during that time, and I remember walking by the lunch room and smelling that, that wonderful food, you know, in the--coming outta doorway of the, of the lunch room in David T. Howard [David T. Howard Elementary School; David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia]--that's the school, yeah, I went to.  Anyway, I would--the food smelled so good, the hot food, and I always, you know, listen to the sounds of my classmates in there when they, you know, eating and, and laughing and, and tinkling of the, of the trays and so forth, and--but what happened was that I--it, it, it was a--I never did have a--I never did have a lunch. I never did go--I never could--I'll put it like this, I didn't go there, I did not have a, a lunch to take there.
Speaker 2: Okay, so did the school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So I didn't, I didn't--what, huh?
Speaker 2: Did the school supply lunches, or did you have to take your lunch from home?
Speaker 1: Well, what, what it was, it was, it was both ways, you could, you could either bring it from home, or, or, or, you know, get it there.  But still, I didn't even bring it from home, I don't remember, so, so I must of really been well--I, I mean, you know, pretty destitute, 'cause I didn't have either way.  And then, one day, I remember that one of the teachers, they had something what you call free lunch tickets, and she was holding 'em up, and, and her kids were grabbing at 'em, grabbing at 'em, and then I just--she, she saw my hand go up, so she gave me a lunch ticket, and I went in there and I went through the line and golly, gee.  My goodness.  I, I, I--that, that smell of the food really got me then, and I, I went in--I went down the line of the--of, of the cafeteria line, and I just--I just had to stop, you know, and close my eyes there.  And what happened with that, I--after I got the food and I put it on the table, I was very--I just had to, you know, kind of timidly eat the food, and then when I finished the food, I almost got sick 'cause what happened was that I--it, it, it's just that it's too much, it was over-powering.  I had never had--never had lunch before, and it was just, it was just, it was just overwhelming.
Speaker 2: What, what kind--do you remember what you were served--what foods you had?  Was it--
Speaker 1: It was, it was--I do remember (laughter) the, the, the, the, the, the corn muffin with the butter on it, and that was there--but that smell, you know?  And I don't, I don't, I don't remember what the other foods were, but I do remember that I--
Speaker 2: But it was a full course, and it wasn't a sandwich or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was full-course, you know, yeah, and you had like, you know, like the milk and the--you know, you had the--you know, it was child-size meal, but--but anyway, I do remember it was--that I hadn't ever eaten during that time and--but anyway, that, that--you know--so anyway, everything worked out okay.
Story_ID: 360577
Speaker 1: You said that you went to other elementary schools also?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was E.A. Ware [Edmond Asa Ware Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] and the David Street School [Atlanta, Georgia].  See, what happens, that was during--I don't know what happened in--during that economy--during that time, but they, they had different things--I mean schools look like they had these, what you call, satellite schools where they, they was always rebuilding and all that kind of stuff, so we went to these so-called makeshift schools where they, they was temporary, so that what that--that what happened there, too.
Speaker 1: Now, all these schools, these elementary schools, were in Buttermilk Bottom [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: No, they, they were kind of in that district, but I, I, I had moved to, to another location. I had moved to another street and, you know, when--some of these--when I was going to some of those, you know, some of the elementary schools.
Story_ID: 360578
Speaker 1: What junior high school did you go to?  Or what school did you go to after elementary school?
Speaker 2: Well, well, what elementary school I went to about the eighth or ninth grade, but what happened after that, I went to Washington High--Booker T. Washington High [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: All right, so elementary school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was--that was no--I, I don't remember any intermediate--I don't remember how that--what school it was there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, elementary school went all the way up to like the eighth grade--it wasn't separated (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, that was David T. Howard School [David T. Howard Elementary School; David T. Howard High School], yeah, in Atlanta [Georgia] here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, do you have any memories that you can share with us about the later years of elementary school, like when you were in the sixth or the seventh or eighth grade (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh well, yeah, I remember getting in a couple a fights (laughter), and the teacher had to--told me that, you know, I would--you know, like kids wanted to, you know, fight, and I said I didn't want to fight.  So what happened, I remember going to the teacher and she says, "No, you have to go out there and you do your own battles."  So, tell you the truth that inspired me.  So I went out there (laughter), and I got--I started fighting this little ol' boy, and, and we went all, all around the classroom, and people was up on the lockers and everywhere, they was saying, "Go, Malone [HistoryMaker James Hiram Malone]."  You know, started calling me.  By the way, in school they always call you by your last name back then, always call you--I don't know why. I guess 'cause it have too many names of the first name was the same, so the--the very few last names was the same, so they always called me Malone, Malone, Malone.  So, anyway, they say, "Go, Malone."  And anyway, so I learned to, you know, fend for myself, and that--I remember in that, in that age, age-level in that school, you know, during middle school.  That's about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You said that one of the teachers, Miss Bonnett [ph.], complimented you when you drew the chair--not to your liking, but she still complimented you.  Would you say that this was the beginning of your career in graphic arts, or--
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I would say that because when, when somebody inspires you and compliments you, you just--you, you, you do more, you, you keep doing it, and so I'm thinking that she did do that.  It was a, a, a starting point to, to, you know, catapult me into that direction, and so it was something I liked to do anyway, and I was, you know--wanted--I like to express myself, see?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Back then--so that's the only way I could express myself at that time.  But, you know--but we'll get into later days as--well, that's another story.
Story_ID: 360579
Speaker 1: You said that you moved from one place to another when you were changing elementary schools.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Where did you move to when you left Buttermilk Bottom [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I moved on what was called Hilliard--Hilliard Street, Highland Avenue, and St. George Street [ph.].  All these streets were streets that was ended--how should I say it?  They were backstreets, you know, behind the other folks' houses, so-to-speak, the rear of High--the rear of Highland, you know, and Hilliard Street, then in the bottom of Hilliard Street (laughter).  And on St. George was, was a dirt street going around, you know, cross the street, you know, so it was one a those--all these streets were, you know--that's where I, I, I remember moving.  Also, one innocent thing about, too, moving, is that we must not had much furniture or anything because I don't even remember using, you know, a U-Haul, which wasn't in existence then. I mean any kind of truck--trucking of our furniture--'cause I--at that part, I don't remember anything about--I do remember moving, but I don't remember taking anything, you know, physically--moving chairs and tables and stuff, I don't remember any of that.  But apparently--yeah, apparently one or two things--either we didn't have much furniture and no furniture or, or it was just one a those things where that--it's just one a those things where that it just didn't ex- the furniture just--it was there, you know, like I said, when we moved in, and all that kind of good stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when you say it was the rear of Highland, is Highland a neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Highland--no, no, Highland is a street.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: See, Highland Avenue is, is, is, is, it's, it's a street where the big houses are--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --the nice houses.  Then, in the rear of Highland are other streets, it's the alley behind these big houses, and I lived in the rear of Highland--rear, rear alley, more-or-less what you want to call it, and that's where--it's, it's, it's, it's a street, you know, it was--
Speaker 1: So, what did the house look like, compared to the shotgun houses in Buttermilk Bottom?
Speaker 2: It wasn't that much different, it was just a little (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was just still shotgun houses?
Speaker 2: Just 'bout--yeah, typical, but not necessary shotgun, it was--you couldn't just see right through the front door through the back--no.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you would say you moved into a larger house, but--
Speaker 2: No, a better neighborhood, say I'll put it like that, maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not necessarily a larger house, just a little bit better neighborhood.
Story_ID: 360580
Speaker 1: Can you share some more memories of when you were, seventh grade or eighth grade?  You were what, around fourteen years old then, or--
Speaker 2: Well, what happened is, is that when, when I was a young boy, I loved the movies, see?  And we used to go there and, and that way was, was, was way we could go and, you know, Saturday afternoon and go to the movies and all that, and it was just a, a way out.  And then, too, what happens this way, is that we--these movies, even though they were--how should I say it?  They were second rate, they was black and white movies, they were jumpy--I mean they wasn't focused, they were scratchy, they, they would, they would break, and then, and then after the, the, the man have to set it up again, and sometimes they even burn, you know, it was crazy.  Sometimes we be up there and you see, see the movie, see the film, like it's burning, and--but the kids we didn't care (laughter), and anyway--and, and, and we thought it was funny, you know.  And so--but another thing about this, too, it was kind of like a escape, and this was for all Buttermilk Bottom [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia], not necessary for the kids.  Going to the movies in the summertime, even though the air condition wasn't that great, it was a escape from, from the hot, humid weather in the, in the summertime, and then also in the wintertime was escape from the cold weather, so it was, it was two different things.  So that was another reason--another thing I remember, you know, growing up.  And like I say, it's not only kids, you know, it's adult.  And what happened is that I--my mom [Sarah Echols Malone]--my dad [Ralph Malone, Sr.] didn't have much money so I had--sometime, I borrowed my, my--you know, somebody's--my friend's shoeshine box, and I would go out and, you know, accumulate--get money for a--you know, for movie money, and movie money wasn't but a dime back then, and it, it, it was a challenge, it was a challenge, you know?  I didn't get an allowance or anything like that, and--
Speaker 1: All right.  Did you--how was the movie house constructed?  Did you sit on the first floor or the second floor in the movie houses, or were they just all one level?
Speaker 2: No, no, they was upstairs.  What happened is we had to go--and like, like Fox Theatre here in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That was part of it, too.  And that was a, that was thriving back then.  It was, you know, have to go a step from the outside of the building, we went--we had to walk up the, the, the long--it's--what it is, it's the fire escape, that's what it was--on the side of the Fox building that down--
Story_ID: 360581
Speaker 1: At the Fox Theatre [Atlanta, Georgia], you said that you entered up the fire escape, and those were--that was the entrance for people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, what happened is that--see, since the segregation, they had on--the entrance for the other folks was on the--you had to come in from the side, and that was the fire escape, and those things were kind of precarious 'cause you go way up and, you know, you could fall down, so it was way up high and, and it, it was kind of scary going up those things, But, but some of the kids they just ran up (laughter), you know, they didn't care about it--and, and did that.  But not only Fox Theatre but, but some of the other theaters who had--that had, you know, second floors, they, they the same difference that they--either they didn't have the outside steps like the Fox, but they had other kind of, you know, situations where you had to go up, up the stairs and stuff and-- or in the back a the room and all that kind of thing so--but, I don't know, it's, it's just one a those things that happened.
Speaker 1: What movies did you see?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, it was kind of like a--it was a kids' fare type a thing where that they had movies that--like comics, comics type a things, and mainly like 'Frankenstein'--serial stuff like 'Frankenstein' or, or 'Wolf Man Meets the' [sic. 'Frankenstein Meets the Wolf Man']--you know, 'Comet' [ph.] or something of that nature.  It was kind of a, a science, science, science fiction or, you know, kind of adventure stuff, or mainly cowboy stuff, too. They had, you know, shoot-'em-ups and stuff like that, but all the other folks didn't have any--didn't have any blacks on that, everybody was, you know, other folks, so it was--but we--you know, it was interesting and it was--like Bob Steele and Johnny [ph.]--you know, Hopalong Cassidy (laughter), all that kind of, all those, those guys, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So what did y'all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, that was even before John Wayne (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  So, what did y'all do after y'all left the movies?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we went--you know--how should I say it--hopped and skipped down the street, and sometimes we'd stop in a store.  And one time I remember stopping in this store, and I had about seven pennies on me and I laid the pennies up there, you know, mistakenly laid seven pennies up there, and the clerk gave me a, a five cents candy bar, and I was too timid to really protest. I just, you know, let it happen, and I think about that.  I say--well, geez, you know, he was, you know, older clerk, too and he knew better.  And I just say to myself that's the thing that been, you know, like see--clerks probably been doing to little kids and, and other people, you know, who're not thinking, you know--been taking advantage of 'em maybe for years and, you know, not--you know, that bothered me for some--couple years or something like that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause two pennies went a long way back then, didn't they?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but--no, no, he just--well, it's not just the, the amount how, how, you know, strong the pennies were, it was just that they're taking advantage, you know, being a--it's thievery, it's taking, you know, even if it's one cents, you know--that's what I'm saying.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--it was robbery, I'll put it that way.
Story_ID: 360582
Speaker 1: I know that you lived in other places, but where did you actually settle for the longest after you moved from Buttermilk Bottom [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia]?  Where did your family settle?
Speaker 2: Settled longest was at 48 Larkin Street and University Homes [Atlanta, Georgia]. I--that was a place where that we got subsidized housing, and it was a, it was a kind of project, it was a--we--I think we was the first one who, who moved into that, that--into those apartments, and it was a few doors down.  They called it University Homes because it was 'cross the street from Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  Larkin Street runs right into Lawshe [Street], and Lawshe is where the University Homes were and--I mean where University--Atlanta University was.  So, we stayed there, you know, for--I think from '41 [1941] to '49 [1949], which is about five years, you know, a few years down to--eight years, rather.  So, that's my longest stint.  And there, I went to--that's where I was when I went to Washington High School [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and also when I went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] for a while--I was staying there--that's where I stayed the longest.  And also in that area, too, was my teachers.  I, I didn't know it 'til later, that some of the teachers lived in that area who, you know, who taught school at Booker T. Washington High?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So, apparently, they wasn't getting much money as far as salaries, so they were living in subsidized housing projects like we were.  And also, some of the people--I learned that some of the people who, who, who worked for Atlanta Life [Atlanta Life Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group], which is a institution here in Atlanta [Georgia], they worked--they, they lived there in that, in that complex, too, where I lived.  I lived in what you call a horseshoe court.  You go up and you had to go around. It doesn't have a back entrance--you know, back way to get into it.  It was what you call a horseshoe court.
Speaker 1: Okay, describe what the, what the University Homes actually looked like?  Was it brick, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--well, yeah, it was brick, it was brick and, and it was simply made, it was just like--it didn't have any, didn't have any front porches.  I mean--no, they had just a little bit of--something you could put a chair in with that, with that--what you might call a porch, and one chair, or maybe two chairs side-by-side, but it may be about three feet from the building--that was the porch, so-to-speak, and it was--and the rooms were, you know, they, they had two bedrooms mostly, and a kitchen and a living room--that was it.  And, and also I remember the apartment didn't have a back door, now, now, now you mentioned that, that, that was a fact--I forgot about that, it didn't have a back door.  And so if there was--if we were--if fire department or, or the emergency, we couldn't get out.  We had one way to go out, and it wouldn't, it wouldn't work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have upstairs for the neighbors? Were neighbors upstairs (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no, we had--it was upstairs but it was in another--people--other people living upstairs--other families but, but one--it was two floors with one downstairs and one upstairs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you and your brother [Ralph Malone, Jr.] share a room, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, definitely, yeah, that's the way it had to be--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Story_ID: 360583
Speaker 1: Now, you went to Booker T. Washington High School [Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --tell us about your experience at Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 2: It was interesting.  I had a, a teacher who was inspiring, Miss Beatrice Stafford, and what, what, what she did, she was, you know, she got involved in, you know, like promoting the students and all that and, and I--what she would--did was that she would, she would find out information about what's going on, and she knew about this scholastic art awards [Scholastic Art and Writing Awards], and what she did she intr- she, you know, introduced me to it, and we were going to participate in it, but what happened was that there was no regional exhibition for, for, for the artists here in Atlanta [Georgia] for black students, so what we had to do--so I had to, you know, ask her to send, send the work for the scholastic art awards to the main headquarters in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.  So she did it, and lo and behold, I won an award, and I was the first black student, in 1949, to win an award, you know, in, in scholastic art award, and so I, I was quite pleased on that.  And before then, I was--I had exhibited--even though while, I was still going at Washington High, I exhibited on my own to Atlanta University art show [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], and that was a national juried show there that I participated in, and it was, it was fulfilling, too.  And I was the youngest, youngest participant on that one, too.
Speaker 1: About how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was eighteen years old then.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But when did you start actually--what age were you when you started exhibiting your art into the shows?  What's the earliest age you can remember?
Speaker 2: It, it was seventeen, eighteen years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. So it was--it, it was a challenge, but I think I, I, I loved, you know--what it was doing.
Story_ID: 360584
Speaker 1: Now, at Booker T. Washington High School [Atlanta, Georgia], what--did you participate in any extracurricular activities?  Were you on any clubs or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was, I was a--well, not necessary--not sports, no. I didn't--no, I was too involved with the arts which I, I'm sorry I did, I--what happened is I had a chance to do things like that, but I didn't.  I, I--somehow or another I got involved with, with just that subject alone, and I--and also I, I kick myself for not taking up typing or, or business math and, and so forth and so on--and shop.  We had some electives, you know, we could have taken, but I didn't, I didn't take them and so I didn't get into not only, you know, sports or other activities, I didn't--I, I, I regret that.  But--so, I'm trying to inspire anybody that sees this--younger person, get involved and take more than, you know, one type of class.  But also, I have to defend myself in this way, too.  In Washington High, we didn't have--our counsellors--I made my own lesson plan. I, I went--every year I select my own classes, and the counsellors didn't give me any reference or any, any kind of motivation, they, they were not active at the--when I went to school.  I'm not knocking 'em, I'm just saying that that's the way it was, and so I just chose art, art, art, and I could've, you know, branched out further, but I didn't do it, and--but still it's, it's, it's one a those things that happened back then.  They--I don't think it was the workload, it's just, you know, a lot of things.  When we went to school, it wasn't as, as, as efficient as it is now.  And another thing that happened, too, is that as far as black history, all we had was like 'Up from Slavery,' from Booker T. Washington--his book, which is interesting but, you know, it, it, it, it--there's more to it than that, and so--but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, was this intro--was Booker T. Washington's book introduced in the class, or, or--in your class, or was it introduced in--outside the classroom?
Speaker 2: It was, it was, it was introduced in the class, but it was during English, it wasn't any particular class or whole class of black history which, which, which--how should I say it--determined the whole class load, you know, on that one subject, you know, a hour subject on black history, it was just, it was just incidentally, you know, placed, you know, into the curriculum of English curriculum, you know, that way.
Speaker 1: All right.  You did work on--did you work on the newspaper--the school newspaper or did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I did, I worked on the school newspaper, and also the yearbook. I did work on those.
Speaker 1: And what did you, what was--
Speaker 2: I was drawing some, you know, cartoons and stuff--some illustrations for those two.
Story_ID: 360585
Speaker 1: You graduated from high school, and where did you go after high school--after you left Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Well, after I, I left Booker T. Washington--well, there's another story in-between there.  I had heard about other schools in, you know, like at--I had heard about High school of art [Atlanta College of Art and High Museum of Art, Atlanta, Georgia], you know, through the grapevine, and--but I went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] because I had a grant and aid from, from, from the Red Cross--Junior Red Cross [American Red Cross], and--because they had, you know, seen some a my work, you know, in high school 'cause I had a--you know, they had some--I did a poster, and they, they appreciate it.  So, what happened there is kind of--goes back and forth.  When I left Booker T. Washington, I got--the, the Red Cross gave me a part-time job, and like I said, they gave me a--you know, granted aid for Morehouse.  So I, I went to Morehouse for a while, and what happened there was that, like I say, I had heard about a commercial art school, it's on Peachtree Street [Atlanta Art Institute, Atlanta, Georgia] so I wanted to go there, and so I--you know--what, what inspired--I knew I couldn't go there at that time 'cause, 'cause I had--you know, I knew that, you know, segregation.  So I wasn't--so I, I got a little disenchanted, you know, I, I--as I went to Morehouse, and so I just, you know, didn't stay there.  But, back up--backing up--I, I want to make this comment.  What I did just before then, I, I went to--when I got that part-time job with the Red Cross--this sticks in my mind.  When I went there, I was introduced to everybody in the--on the staff, but one staff member would not shake my hand, and that kind of--that bothered me some, in that, you know--it bothered me but, but it didn't stay with me, so I just want to say that--how--you know, how things developed--how I learned about how, how things were going to be later on in life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is this--at this point, is this the first time that you realize or recognize that you're being discriminated against because of color, or were there other incidences in high school, or right after high school, that you experienced, you know, discrimination against you as a person?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  When I was fifteen, you know, still in school, I was--had a part-time job in the summertime?  At Reed's [Reed Drug Company] cut rate drugstore, downtown Atlanta [Georgia].  Anyway, what happened, I was kind of like a handyman, and--but I was hired there, but I couldn't go to the restroom there. It was, it was off-limits to me, so I had to go down the street to the restroom, and so that, that was, that hit me but, but it didn't--but tell you the truth, you know, believe it or not, it didn't, it, it, it, it bothered me and not bothered me, it didn't, it didn't restrict me.  I said I'm going to make a inroad, I'm going to do good, I'm going to, you know, go forward. I'm not gonna let stuff like that stop me, so I did.  I just, you know, rolled with the punches, and went to the--and, and kept the job and went to the restroom down the street.  And then, and then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you the only person of color employed there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I'm the only person on color--in color.  And then, also, I did--the, the, the, the employer found out that I could do--I did artwork--you know, this, this drugstore owner, and he said, you know, "Do me some signs," you know, some sale signs?  So, I did him, you know, some signs, to make a long story short, and he didn't pay me extra for it.  So that was kind of, to me, also discrimination--that he didn't--he was using me kind of like a laborer, or like slave work or whatever it may be, and not paying me for it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how long did you stay with--
Speaker 2: Oh, I was just there for about--like during the summertime--that, that three months, or whatever.
Story_ID: 360586
Speaker 1: And with the Junior Red Cross [American Red Cross], when were you first introduced to the Junior Red Cross?
Speaker 2: When I was in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia], I did a poster, you know, they always want--well, also--no, it was even before then, what happened is I--the Junior Red Cross was having a project where they wanted students, you know, art students, to do some drawings for a international touring show for exchange--exchange touring show for foreign students?  So I did some paintings and drawings, and they used those in that, in that show, and so they, they was introduced--I was introduced to them that way, and then also I did a poster for them, and so they--when I finished high school, you know, they gave me a--they wanted to give me a grant in aid, which wasn't that much.  I'm not knocking it, it wasn't that much-maybe thirty-five dollars or something like that, which is, you know--well, back then it was a lot of money, but a lot--you know, a lot more, but anyway, that's what they call granting aid.  So, anyway, they meant well, but I, I, I was more--like I say, I wanted to go far.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you worked for them, and then you attended Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], but your intentions were actually to enter the high grant--the High school of art [Atlanta College of Art and High Museum of Art, Atlanta, Georgia], but you did not.  So, when you got disenchanted with Morehouse--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you went to--you joined the service--you joined the [U.S.] military?
Speaker 2: Yeah--well, well, see, when I, when I left Morehouse, I thought about the job market and I said, "Well, geez, can I get a job?"  You know?  And then I kind of found out it--market wasn't open for my style of work--I mean for my--for me it wasn't, and so I--you know, like I say, I got frus- really frustrated, so I went and joined the [U.S.] Army.
Story_ID: 360587
Speaker 1: Tell us about life at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] for the length of time that you were there.  What classes did you take, what--you know, who do you--
Speaker 2: Well, what, what I took, I took art, see, I was majored in art, and I went to--see, Morehouse didn't--really didn't have art classes at, at--on their premises, you had to go to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  So I had went to Spelman, and that was a good thing, too 'cause I had classes there, and it was--you know, it was a all-girls school there, so I--when I went there, it was kind of fun, you know. I was the only guy--well, maybe a couple a guys more in the class, but mostly women--girls--and so it was interesting, and so that was a fun thing.  And, and I worked also on the, the yearbook and the newspaper that was there, and also they--you know, I got the--you know, I got some rapport, and they wanted me, you know, to maybe later to join their--in the--come into the fraternity, you know, but I didn't stay there that long, I was gonna, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what fraternity would that have been?
Speaker 2: I, I don't, I don't know. I--they just--you know, they just--
Speaker 1: They just wanted you to--
Speaker 2: I don't remember, remember but, but anyway, they was interested and, and--but anyway, I just--I don't know, I just--somehow or another, I just wanted more, I wanted to do more and, and I couldn't help--also, I would like to help people.  As you know, later on, I--it's just that I couldn't--I can't help myself, I can't help others but, you know, I gotta help myself first, then I can, you know, achieve with other people.
Speaker 1: All right.  Was--how, how different was Morehouse's campus then from the way that it is right now?  Was it--were the buildings--did they have less buildings or more buildings?
Speaker 2: Well, they got more buildings now--yes, by all means.  In fact, they had--what they had back then, they had lawn space, you know?  Where open space?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Now, they have, they have buildings where their lawns are, plus they have the Morehouse School of Medicine [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, they didn't have that then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Boy, that's, that's a big--that's school in itself, and that--those build--they have more buildings there, the School of Medicine, than they did with the, with the ademic- academic buildings, and then--and now they have a--parking lots, you know, stuff, and also doing more buildings there on--what is it--on there on West End Avenue they building more buildings there, so--and, and also, if you wanna know (laughter) something funny--it's not funny, but the people--when I was there, you know, I knew some people, you know, who was, who was going there at that time. Now, the buildings are named after those people who, who, who were the deans and so forth when I was there, so you know that, that was a change, too, so that must have been a long time ago plus, you know--
Speaker 1: Can you think of at least one building that is named after one of the persons who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah--no, no, it was the--is the field, the baseball field--the football field [B.T. Harvey Stadium, Atlanta, Georgia] named after one of the deans [sic. coach, Burwell Towns Harvey], I think, over there.  Well, one of the big--well, yeah, one of the football field.
Story_ID: 360588
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what was Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] like?  Was it more open also? Did it have a lot of lawn space (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no, it hasn't changed.  Well, it--no, it, it changed, too, they got the, they got the art gallery [Spelman College Museum of Fine Art, Atlanta, Georgia] there, they didn't have that when I was there.  You know, they have that Bill--they had Bill Cosby, he--you know, he contributed a million bucks, you know, to it back then, and so now they have the Cosby Building [Camille Olivia Hanks Cosby, Ed.D. Academic Center].  So that was changed, so a lot of, lot of little--well, not little but they are really, you know, making a lot of inroads.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was more open like you said.  At that particular time you had more lawn space than you had buildings and parking lots and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you could fraternize more, and it was, it's fun, you know?  I see students all out there sitting out there on the lawn studying, and all that kind of good stuff.  Now, you can't see that 'cause they don't have lawns. I mean that, that was the fun part, too, about, you know, people driving by down the street, and they looking over there and they see this institute of learning, and see all these young people out there, you know, sitting on the lawn and studying and all that kind of good stuff--you know, studying together and all that.  So, it, it, it--that inspired--that's a good feeling to see that.  That's why it's good to see--on, on TV you see Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] and these schools in, in California, and so forth, with all these lawns, these kids walking from class and you see all this lawn space out there?  We don't have that here, we, we, we jamming things up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how did the students dress at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Spelman, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You mean then, and not now?
Speaker 1: Then--how did they dress then?
Speaker 2: They're very conservative, you know, very conservative.  Girls had long dresses. I didn't like those days (laughter).  But anyway, that's neither here or there.  Now, one time, I remember it was Easter or sometime, or whatever.  I had a, a yellow or orange shirt on, and the rest of 'em had--they all had white shirts on.  I said, "Dang," you know?  (Laughter) "Jesus."  I, I was very upgraded to--compared to them, you know?  So I always been that way.
Speaker 1: All right.  Did any of the students have cars at that time, or not?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, very rare, see, and especially not in high school.  They didn't, they didn't have any, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At Morehouse, at Morehouse.
Speaker 2: No, no, I'm talking 'bout--I'm, I'm going back, I'm just saying they didn't have any cars in, in high school or in college either--no, no, no, no.  And another thing--a lot of people, lot of the students lived here, too, and so--and even if they had--even if they were outta state, they, they still--very few cars, too.
Story_ID: 360589
Speaker 1: After Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], you joined the [U.S.] Army, and where were you stationed?
Speaker 2: Fort Jackson, South Carolina [Fort Jackson, Columbia, South Carolina]. Fort Jackson and that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And where was--
Speaker 2: That's--huh?
Speaker 1: Okay, go on.
Speaker 2: Fort Jackson, South Carolina. It was, it was interesting.  But, but what happened is--the interesting thing was when I applied for it.  You know, they have what they call these recruiters, and when I, when I went there, I--well, reason why I went there--or what I can say of the job market, but I knew they were going to draft me anyway, you know. I had to go anyway, so I, so I, so I volunteered and went.  And so when I got there, the recruiters--they were asking me some questions, you know.  I was gonna show 'em my portfolio to--you know, I was thinking that if I show 'em my portfolio that they would be kind of compassionate or sympathetic, know what I was interested in or give 'em my bio, and all that kind of stuff.  Boy, what you know.  They asked me, "Are you--," you know, they saw that--they wondered why I was a, a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and all that kind of thing, they wondering am I a troublemaker, you know, and it, it kind of shocked me and, and, in fact, they, they didn't want to--you know, didn't want me to--they, they was ready to turn me down, you know?  And then they, they had a little huddle together--the two, two, two recruiters, and then they, you know, let me go, you know--let me--okayed me.  They were gonna turn me down because of my, my portfolio like I had.  They thought that--you know, back then, they would--they, they'd, they'd do that.  And I, I didn't--I was shocked, but I wanted--really wanted to go so I, I had my chance then to, to not go to service (laughter).  God, and I didn't, didn't do it, I could of, I could of stayed out, and they would have--and then they would ask me why, and they said, "Well, I'm, I'm, I'm part--I'm a member of the NAACP," so, so that's what happened (laughter).  Now, seriously that's what happened--
Story_ID: 333017
Speaker 1: Now tell us more--a, a little bit more about why you left Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and decided to volunteer for the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: Well, what happened there was that I was interested in commercial art.  Like I say, I had gotten--I had gone on that tour and I saw what, what the kids were doing at the High school of art [Atlanta College of Art and High Museum of Art, Atlanta, Georgia], and I wanted to participate and do that type style of art, which is similar to cartooning and line drawings, and we didn't have that type of venue at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morehouse, so I, I--and also I wanted to go into commercial art. I wanted to do something that--you know, that, that, that would be a business type of art that--not necessarily paintings and, and all that, for exhibitions.  I wanted to do things for companies--do drawings for people whom I could get, you know, monetary value from.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who took you on this tour?
Speaker 2: Miss Walden [Jenelsie Walden Holloway].
Speaker 1: And she was (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was the professor there at, at the school--at, at Spelman.  See, I went to Morehouse but they had classes at Spelman--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --and she took me on that--
Speaker 1: On that tour.
Story_ID: 333018
Speaker 1: When you went to the [U.S.] Army recruiting office, you said that the recruiters looked at your work and thought that you were one of the troublemakers.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  What happened is that they saw--I saw--I gave 'em a resume, you know.  I say, "Oh, boy, I'm gonna be up front here, I'm gonna--I wanna find out--," you know, let 'em know who they was getting, so I show 'em, you know, like I was part of, you know, like any, any--you know--the organizations I was part of, and I can't even remember who they were now, but anyway--and they saw my portfolio, I--you know, I had laid it out for 'em, and they say, "Boy, are you a troublemaker?  You, you, you with, with them NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] people?"  And all that kind of things and, and, and that--and, "Are you with 'em?"  You know, and, "Are you a troublemaker boy?"  And, and, and I said, "No, sir" (laughter), "I ain't no troublemaker, no sir."  Hey, even though I wanted to join the Army I'm a, I'm a, I'm a peaceable man (laughter), you know, I'm not a, I'm not a troublemaker.  Anyway, they--like I said, they got into like a huddle and, and when they did that, they came to the conclusion, they say, "Okay, you know, we'll let you go this time, boy."  And then what happened was that--and then, then I said to 'em, I say, "Hey, you know, I'd like to get into the art department," and they said, "Yeah, sure, we'll, we'll put you in the art department."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And guess what?  (Laughter)  When I got there--when the basic training, I--what happened was that--it's not funny, but they, they put me in drivers training school and, and, and because my reflexes was--you know, I had, had--the reflexes was good so, so that's that they did, they, they--you know, that's the position they put me in, so I didn't get into art--I didn't get in the art department.
Speaker 1: All right. Well you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I, and I--what I did, I got mad so I said, "Now, they gonna put me in this darn drivers training school."  So I took that jeep and I went out and I (laughter), and I tried to tear that jeep up.  I went down and I tripped the gear, you know, you have to have--you have to take it and, and, and when you driving a vehicle with a, you know, gear shift, you, you, you, you know, you have to use it the right way.  And so I was mad. I didn't wanna be in there, so I was--took and instead of going, you know, like first gear or second gear or third gear, I was going into first--third gear and, and I, I messed up about four or five jeeps (laughter), and they still didn't, and the other guys in there they was mad, too. They would turn those jeeps over and all that stuff, and so we just threw--and, and it was a, it was a mess.  So, anyway, what happened was that finally (laughter), I was determined to, you know, be acknowledged as a artist since I was in that drivers training school, and I went home on, on, on, on leave, you know, a week or so, I trucked in, you know, some of my artwork and brought it back to the post, and I asked the post librarian, "Hey," you know, "Miss"--whatever her name was, "Could I have a show?"  You know.  And 'course she, you know, "Oh, yeah," you know, give me a dry, "Yes."  "Yeah, okay."  So, I took my, my, my, you know, ten or twelve pieces and, and put 'em in a makeshift exhibition, you know, leaned 'em against the books in, in the library and, you know, and they publicized that I was having a show there, you know--post--it was a--post library number one [Library Branch No. 1], and anyway--in Fort Jackson [Columbia, South Carolina].  So--and then they invited some dignitaries--some a the people from the art--you know, people from--officials from the local area in, in South Carolina, and so they had the--Craft, Mr. Crass [ph.], the museum director of the museum of art, and I, I was--I should of been impressed but I don't know why I wasn't.  I, I--anyway, he and a couple other professionals, and they looked over my work and they thought it was great.  So, after they did that the, the lady that--the wife of the commander-in-general of the Fort Jackson saw my work and said, "Give that boy--put that boy in Special Services."  So, you know, two, three days later, I was in Special Services (laughter), and I was in charge of, of creating layouts and, and illustrations and, and murals for the service clubs, you know, on post, and also I did background--I mean I did illustrated--had paintings in the theaters--the post theaters, and also I had--I was in charge of doing publicity for the, for this--you know, for those service club shows and things, and so I was, you know, like, you know, well-rounded.  I had a, you know, a real good job to do. I mean it was interesting, so it was fun, and it was in my field and it, it worked out well there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and so I, I--in fact, I could print out the posters, I could do--you know, I, I was pretty well on my own.
Story_ID: 333019
Speaker 1: You said that if you had not volunteered for the [U.S.] Army, you would've gotten drafted anyway--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and what war did we say was going on?  What were the conditions of the United States at that particular time?
Speaker 2: What war was going on was the Korean War and so, and so people were being drafted, you know, not necessarily--it was kind of like a quiet type a thing, but everybody was on a listing.  If you're a certain age, unmarried, you know, you had--there was some requisites that, that you could be exempt or delayed or deferred if you were married or married with one child, two children, et cetera, et cetera.  But if you were single like me, you know, and energetic and, and, and unmarried and all that kind of stuff, I mean they, they, they, they--you had to register--that's what it was, you--it was a register--not necessary drafting, but a registration.  And then when they--when the time came, if they wanted to, you know, bring you in, they just, they just rope you in 'cause they already have your name.  You know, you have to, you have to register, see.  I'm sorry, maybe I should have said that.  And then they just--and, you know, whenever they wanted to they brought you, so that, that happened there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what was the atmosphere like at the base--on the base--Fort Jackson [Columbia, South Carolina]?  Because the war was going (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was two things that happened to me there.  They, they change--right over--after I got in there, after basic training too--they, they changed the law, and the law was the integrated services, that's right after I got in there for a while, you know, 'bout the next year or something--another few months, whatever.  Anyway, President Truman [President Harry S. Truman] he, he said, "No, we can't have black and white," you know, "separated."  So, when he integrated this--the, the system, the, the, the soldiers still--when they went to the mess hall, they all sat on one side of the room--the whites--and the, and the, and the blacks sat on the other side of the room. They continued to do that, you know, right after it was enacted, you know--that law [Executive Order 9981] was enacted.  So, me, I wanted to make a difference and I said, "Hell," I, I wanna say, "Heck on this crap, I'm going wherever there's a vacant seat, or wherever I wanna do it."  So I went in--when I went in, you know, after, you know, a couple a weeks, I saw that, that, you know, soldiers was still, you know, segregating themselves, so I went--and now it's one room--one side was black and one side was white. I went to the white side and sat down, you know, one day, you know, and they, you know, stared at me, you know, naturally that's what happened, but after a while, other people start--other, other troops started doing the same thing, going, you know from--you know, they start to integrating so it, it, it, it worked out.
Speaker 1: Now, after you--
Speaker 2: And also, it was the same thing in, in theaters, too.  The theaters--in, in the theaters and service clubs, they was still sitting either--you know, on, on each side of the room or one sat in front and one sat in back, you know--some groups sat in the back.  So, it was not only in the mess hall, you know, it was the whole, whole post was doing--they was still doing the same thing.
Story_ID: 333020
Speaker 1: Now, after you got your exhibit set up in the library [Library Branch No. 1, Fort Jackson, Columbia, South Carolina] and you, your works were exposed to the officials in the city, from the museum and all, and you got some clout with the--you know, at the army base, what happened next?
Speaker 2: What happened there was that I just--we--that inspired me to open up a gallery and, and, and, and do other things in, you know, in the same way, so I, you know, somehow or another, become a part of the arts and crafts--the, the craft shop we had there, and what I did, I, I become the NCO [non-commissioned officer] of the, of the craft shop, and also the--it was a gallery, so we had a combination of, of the gallery and, and, and activity shop there, and so when I set that up, we started having shows there, and inviting the public from, from Columbia, South Carolina come in and, and we had like a gallery art show, and then we had, you know, like the art--if, if soldiers could sing, they would have music, you know, have them to be a vocalist, and we have food, so we had a well-rounded association there and we, like I said, invited people from in town, and it worked out good.  What happened was that also, one of the soldiers that, that exhibited with me at that time on the post in Fort Jackson [Fort Jackson, Columbia, South Carolina], was (pause) (laughter)--Jasper Johns.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: And Jasper Johns, you know, he--I talked to him and I was kidding him about one of his drawings that he had a--and he was kind of a--well, it was semi-abstract, and it was--had a little boy urinating, and I said to him, I said, "Hey, man, why you got this painting of this little boy urinating?"  And he said to me, "Why not?"  (Laughter) And then next thing I know, he was in New York [New York], I don't know--someplace, he went--you know, when he left--I, I never did communicate with him that much, that's the only thing I communicated with him on was why.  Anyway, so when he left [U.S. military] service, he went to New York, New York and no, we didn't--I mean, and sorry I didn't.  But we had a thriving gallery there, though, like I say, and it worked out good.
Speaker 1: Now, you also visited--'cause Fort Jackson is close to, or is located in Columbia, is that correct?  South Carolina (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes--well, no, no, no.  This gallery--no, no, this gallery just in--the one I--it's on Fort Jackson--the gallery.
Speaker 1: Okay, but where is Fort Jackson?
Speaker 2: Fort Jackson is in Columbia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's, it's right there, Columbia is right--you know, it's in the city right there next to Fort Jackson (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Next to Fort Jackson, okay.  Now, you also did--when you did your integrating the service clubs and the cafeterias--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I did all--
Speaker 1: --you also did--did you do some integrating in the City of Columbia itself?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't do anything, I just--I did put some a my work on exhibition there, you know, to, you know, small shows there, but I didn't, I didn't do any, any projects in the city.  But I did talk to students, now, I'm glad you brought that up--that, that motivates the students in class and classrooms and stuff like that.  I, I talked to them about what their aspirations were, and try to motivate them, not necessary to be a artist but just to be good people and, and, and, and go forward and do the best they can, so that, that was a motivational thing I did.
Story_ID: 333021
Speaker 1: In 1951, at Fort Jackson [Columbia, South Carolina], did some kind of turmoil break out at the base, or what actually happened there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, what it was is that--no, I--what I--well, the soldiers is always, you know, complaining and all that, and they were, you know, always having these--some minor fisticuffs and, and, and so it was--it--like--it's always something of the MPA [Military Police Academy]--the, the so-called military police are always busy during that time, so what I wanted to do was--that was part of the reason why I created this art gallery, 'cause I wanted to make sure that the soldiers had something recreational to do, rather than bickering and all that kind of stuff.  When you have a recreational building, a pool hall, and all that kind of good stuff--I just happened to have a art gallery, and I had a place also where they can develop film, which was--see, back then--I mean now, they got it set up where you can have--you can, you know, take pictures and so forth, you don't have to worry about development and all that kind of stuff.  Back then, everything was old fashion, you know?  They had mostly black and white film, too.  Anyway, so I--that was one of the things I did, I wanted to do something to, you know, to keep, keep the soldiers busy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you able to increase your financial status at, you know, any point while you were at Fort Jackson?  Did you make money (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They finance--no, no, no, no, no. That wasn't any--that wasn't too much of a turnover there as far as money. I mean you think--I mean making, making money far as, as--you mean outside of the jurisdiction of the, of the post, or you mean making money for the post or what?
Speaker 1: Selling you--selling your artwork that you were displaying.  Did you sell any of it?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't, I wasn't, I wasn't--you know, commercially-minded then--back then.
Speaker 1: All right.  But you did get recognition by exhibiting your works?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the more recognition.
Story_ID: 333022
Speaker 1: Who else saw some of the works that you exhibited that were outside of Fort Jackson [Columbia, South Carolina]?  Other than the people in the art museum, et cetera, were any other, other people in the community there that, you know, saw the work (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no, what it was is, also the people who were in charge at USO [United Service Organizations] and all that, they was interested 'cause they was part of the [U.S.] Army facade, but mainly that was it, they was--you know, and of course there was, there was business people like people who were like the newspaper people. I mean people who were in other businesses, they came to, you know, to promote and to, you know, talk about what we're doing there and all that stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.  One day, you stated that--I think you stated that one of the women in the community, she was a southern belle and she saw your works in the dining hall.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Well, what happened there was that--just like the lady who was the wife of the general who stated--told her husband to, you know, put me in the--in Special Services, well there's another southern belle lady, she saw my work and say, "Hey, why don't"--you know, she knew--she saw a need, she saw a, a place where she could use some a this artwork, so she got me involved in doing some special service for--at Myrtle Beach--Myrtle Beach, South Carolina?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so what happened, I went there and, you know, and it was a program where I would have to, you know, paint the murals in the mess hall--in the dining room, whatever you want to call it there.  So--but what happened with that, Myrtle Beach was segregated, and you can't--there's only--you know--other, other people could go there, we couldn't go there--not, not for recreation, that is, we could work there but not work--recreation.  So, so when I got there, I had to go there, you know, in the morning and, and do my murals and work, work, you know, on that during the day.  But in the evening I had to go back to the barracks, go back, you know, and not, not fraternize 'cause I wasn't allowed to, and--but one day, I decided that--one day I was--I had my lunch out there and--on the steps, and I said, "The heck on this stuff."  So, I threw my lunch aside, you know, in the bag, and I went on into the lunchroom, you know, following the other troops, and got in line and I, you know, got my tray, and when I went down the line the, the fellow who serving food, you know, he hesitated naturally, and then he, you know, picked up a spoon full a food and then he, you know, slammed it down on my plate.  But I didn't care, I mean I, I, I, I had made my mark and I was only--I was sticking out like a sore thumb there, you know, you know, where I was, and I got the food and I went over and sat down in, in a sea of, of faces, and I sat there and I, I ate my food.  And so I felt that I, you know, did what I had to do there.
Story_ID: 333023
Speaker 1: Were there any other obstacles that you had to, to face at Fort Jackson [Columbia, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'll tell you what.  There, there were several things that happened to me in Fort Jackson.  Well, it was on, on the post and off the post.  I--whenever I go, go into town, I couldn't go to town in a taxi because they, they didn't want to allow us to ride the taxi to town from Fort Jackson to Columbia [South Carolina].  And then when you get to town, they had the segregated clubs, so one day I decided the heck on it, I would go to one a the segregated clubs just like I--just like, just like the, the mess hall situation, here I go again (laughter).  I went to this service club--not service club--I mean this, this--it's so-called juke joints, you know, that was downtown in Columbia, and I just went there, and I, I listened to Hank Snow [Clarence Eugene "Hank" Snow] and Johnny Cash and Hank Williams, you know, records, you know, with the rest of (laughter), rest of the sea of faces there, and drank my orange pop--slowly--took my time, and then I got up and left.  So, what I, what I was doing is, is just--like I said, what I'm--I don't believe in--you know, somebody had to do it so I, I was doing these things like that.  It, it was--but on post also I, I found a interesting thing, too, that--it was same in some ways on the post.  I had to go and I was--they recommend me for a promotion, and what happened was that I found out through the custodian who worked at the office, you know, he--the guy who sweeps up?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That my paper, voucher for a promotion, had been tossed in the trash can, and he said that, that it been coming through for--he said this is not the first time it happened, he said it happened a couple a times and he, he--now he's telling me about it.  Anyway, what happened is, after he told me that it was tossed in the trash basket--and also he told me that the guy--you know, the sergeant there, had said that he didn't, he didn't think that I was--that he didn't want--if, if I got promotion that, you know, he would--that I would be overshadowing him more-or-less.  So anyway, what I did after I got another recommendation, you know, for, for a promotion, I took it by hand--I took it myself and took it to the proper authorities, and I finally got my, my--it went through.  So I had to do all that to make a inroad.
Story_ID: 333024
Speaker 1: How did the job market look for you with all of the credentials that you had, you know, from the assignments that you had at Fort Jackson [Columbia, South Carolina]?  Did you--
Speaker 2: You mean, you mean as far as--you mean when I left Fort Jackson?  I mean when, when--
Speaker 1: While you were at Fort Jackson and when you were looking to leave Fort Jackson, did you feel like you were building up a good portfolio for the future?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I, I thought that, that, that, that--that was one of the main reasons why I went there in the first place to try to build up some credentials where that I could, you know, face the market out here.  And, and I did learn some things, I learned about silk screening, artwork and, and I learned, you know, some, some things of, you know, working with people and also being in charge, too, which, which is good.  So, it, it, it was a thing where that I, I did do--I did make some inroads and, and, and, and being able to--also, I learned some things about making mistakes, see?  Now, that--see, now--which, which is--I learned from that, too, whereby that--but I was, I was ready for--you know, I, I, I--it, it was well-rounded, I, I did quite a bit a things, you know, so I--it--and I learned a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you spend all of your time at Fort Jackson, or did you go to other bases while in the [U.S.] military?
Speaker 2: Well, now I went to Alaska [Territory of Alaska; Alaska].  But see, when I went to Alaska, it was a, a--it wasn't the United States (laughter), it, it was--no, no, now that, that really dates me, you know?  It was a--I don't know what they want to call it but it, it wasn't, it wasn't America, it wasn't one of the states, and so when I went there, I--it, it was--I learned--it, it was--how should I say that?  It was fun because I learned how things were in, in, in Alaska like the, the northern lights. It was interesting.  I, I--it was fun, and I could--also, I found out that the seasons like during the summertime?  All night, the sun shines--let me see, on the, the first day of summer on--let's see--yeah, first day of summer the longest day, it has--the, the sun shines all night--that one day.  But the other days, the sun, the sun shines--like at three o'clock in the morning, the sun is shining during the summertime--four o'clock it's shining, and all that.  In other words, the--but during the wintertime, its darkness--it, it's a complete opposite.  And so that was, that was the interesting thing there about Alaska.
Story_ID: 333025
Speaker 1: Now, where you stationed in Alaska [Territory of Alaska; Alaska]?
Speaker 2: At Fort Richardson [Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson, Alaska], it was down the southern part of Alaska, but it was still just as cold (laughter), it was just as cold, I tell you--and rainy.  I was there, I remember, it was two weeks there, and it rained for two weeks straight--no kidding, it rained two weeks, you know--on and on and on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Non-stop.
Speaker 2: But see, that's close to Washington, you know, like when you--Washington State, that's, that's a rainy--that's the rainiest state in the, in the union, and so--but I didn't, I didn't complain, though.
Speaker 1: All right.  And the reason you--your title at that particular time was--
Speaker 2: My, my title at that particular time was chief army illustrator, and that's why I, I had re-upped for another six years--and don't laugh (laughter).  No, what it was, I thought maybe that I was--you know, I'll have it made and that, that job market was bad out there, and so I was doing well, you know, in the [U.S.] Army and, like I say, I got that promotion as chief illu- chief--I can't even pronounce it--chief army illustrator--me.  You know?  And so that, that's what happens.
Speaker 1: Well, now, after you left Fort Richardson, Alaska, where did you go next?
Speaker 2: Well, then I went to Fort Bragg [North Carolina].  Fort Bragg was a interesting place, too.  They had the 101 [101st Airborne Division], you know--how should I say it, can't even, can't even think--can't even pronounce it now--the paratroopers--and they thought they was the elitist group, you know?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And they always contest us, you know, these, these--they called us, straight-legs, you know, that's the term they always use 'cause they always--they had their boots in the--they had the trousers inside the boots--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and anyway, Fort Bragg was--is, is noted for the 101, but I was with the--what you call a propaganda group [Psychological Operations (PSYOP)]--I was communications, and we did--even though the leaflets--we did leaflets but they were--you know, they was just--how should I say it--they just done for when they had the use for them when there was, you know, some kind of emergency, so, we was there--we just doing what you call creative stuff, you know, stuff that would kill the morale of the enemy.  I had the right stuff (laughter) that, that, that--you know, that would undermine their fighting productivity like, "What you doing here anyway?"  Or, "Who's your"--"Where's your, what your wife doing now?"  (Laughter) And all that kind of stuff.  So we had to do all that kind of stuff (laughter).  Also, I met some other writers of, of--publishers, which I wish I had kept the names--some of the big Doubleday [Doubleday and Company, Inc.] guys who, who work for these big publishing companies?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I didn't even know, you know. I didn't, I didn't pay any attention 'cause I--even though I did some writing and drawing that time, I never realized that I was going to have to, you know, think about doing--you know, using their expertise or using their--you know, getting back in touch with them but I didn't, and that's one a those things that--I just want it known I was with some notables at that time, too.
Story_ID: 333026
Speaker 1: Now, you also wrote.  Some of your writings were in The Fayetteville Observer newspaper?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  What happened there was that it wasn't--it was--okay, this, this is a--this, this is unique.  There were some robberies in the Fayetteville [North Carolina] area and it was, you know, a rash of robberies, you know, maybe ten or twelve, and they knew it was some young soldier, you know, and they figured it was a soldier from, from Fort Bragg [North Carolina], so they had the military police to try to check it out, so when, when the military police checked it out--no, the port--when they gonna check it out, they need some, you know, some input, so what they did, they had some a the witnesses talk to, talk to me to have me to do a sketch of the--you know, what they thought the person looked like and--no, what they, they--they gave me the, the, the information rather, and so I had to draw, you know, what they--their impression, what they thought the guy looked like, and when they did it, they took the, the picture and gave it to the military police, and they captured the guy.  And, and so he was--so that--and--but when that happened, though, the military police told me that I should get a, you know, commendation or some kind of, you know, thank you, but I never did get it, and that was back in 1956 I think, and so that was one thing that happened there at the Fort Bragg, I remember.
Story_ID: 333027
Speaker 1: After you left Fort Bragg [North Carolina], what was your next tour or assignment?
Speaker 2: I went to Germany, I went to Germany and I, I worked with the G2, G3 and also with the propaganda leaflet place [Psychological Operations (PSYOP)], too, again there.  And--but I ran into another same kind of contradictory that I did in Fort Jackson [Columbia, South Carolina], I got a--you know, they gave me a request for promotion--they, you know, sent a request for promotion.  Lo and behold, I had to do the same thing again (laughter). I had to take--hand-carry it to make sure it got to the right authorities again before I got my, my promotion, and--
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was that promotion to (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's another, another stripe--another.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And then I went to, to Fort Benning, Georgia and I worked in the communications there. I did some technical manuals, and it, it--even though I was, you know, qualified, I was new--you know, knew the job and all that kind of good stuff, somehow or another the, the commander-in-chief they don't--they didn't know what was going on, so the department I was working in they had some civilians from--working, you know, who, who, who--from--you know, from the city they come in and work on a post?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And they work right beside us.  And then they, they, they took charge, these, these guys, you know--white guys?  And so they took charge and they wouldn't--they would take--I would do a drawing, and they would take and crumple it up and throw it in the waste basket and, you know, not when I was looking, they would do it, you know--now I knew they did it.  And then they write, write it down--write on there, "No (unclear) drawings," you know, on the, on the, on the paper before they crumble up and throw it away.  So I, I, I got a lot of that--some a that, you know, type a thing--action from them, and like I say, I'm thinking that that could have been done better, but--
Speaker 1: And you were the only person of color in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was the only--I was the only one in the office at that time, and I--and also, the point is see, I'm, I'm--what I'm doing I'm breaking the color barrier in all these places I'm working 'cause there's not--very few artists see, in my field.  Very few artists period.  So everywhere I go, I'm the only one and, and I, I--I'm in it--look, I'm in it (laughter) (unclear) being a, a, a crusader, and I don't plan to be, I don't want to be, and so that's the way it worked, you know?
Story_ID: 333028
Speaker 1: So let's back up a second though.  So, when you first entered Fort Jackson [Columbia, South Carolina], you became the Jackson Journal newspaper cartoonist, is that correct?
Speaker 2: No, I was, I was--no, no, when I went there I was--that was--no, no, no, I did that on the side. I was still a, a illustrator for the--I was still--did my other regular job, but that was something you do, you know, you, you exercise in your leisure.  That--I'm sorry, that was a outside thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And also, when you were first there, you won the All Army Art Contest.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  That was just something where you have--where you, you could get a regular job, but you could just take your paintings and, and, and, you know, and, and enter 'em in a contest, that's, that's not a job, that's just a--something on the side, just like those cartoons.
Speaker 1: All right, but that was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm talking about for the Journal--like for the Jackson Journal.
Speaker 1: Okay, but that USAEUR [U.S. Army Europe], the contest that you entered (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That, that, that, that's a tour. That's a touring show that when, when we was--when your work was judged and it was accepted, then the show--that's the term they use, you know, United States Army Europe, and that--and those paintings were judged and you won prizes, and they was exhibited in Washington, D.C., and also the--either they went there first, or they went on a world tour and came back to D.C. or vice-versa, I can't remember which--
Speaker 1: Okay, and this was at the Pentagon in D.C. where they were displayed (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, in the Pentagon, right. Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: You got it, you got it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 333029
Speaker 1: Now, also when you were traveling to Alaska [Territory of Alaska; Alaska] and on one of the ships, you wrote your retrospects?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what I did, I, I wrote some poems, you know, that kind of give me the kind of relief there because of the slow-moving boat, and I just wrote, you now, here and there--poetry, that's what I call it, and I wrote about, you know, life and love and, and what I liked to do and all that kind of good stuff and, you know, just, just in general, it wasn't anything that--any, any, any specific subjects--I mean any particular--you know, it was all, it was all good and it was--what I mean is things that, that--you know, like you put in your diary or something, and I--it's just like I--like one time I just--one, one of the things was that I say, "This boat is slow but I--there I got to go," you know, and, "Blah, blah, blah"--whatever, and that--you know, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Well, did you say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I was saying that I was dedicated to the [U.S.] Army and I, I was enlisted, so I want to--though I didn't mind doing what I had to do, you know, 'cause I'm a dedicated soldier, so it was in the book.
Speaker 1: Was this some of the first of your writings and, and poetries that started at that particular time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's what it was.
Speaker 1: And I think that was around 1953 or so.
Speaker 2: Right, the first, first collection.
Story_ID: 333030
Speaker 1: Now, when you were abroad--when you were in Germany, before you came back to the states to Fort Benning, Georgia--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --something happened to your sibling--your, your brother [Ralph Malone, Jr.], and could you tell us what happened then, and what year that was in?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that was--what is that, '59 [1959]?  I'm not sure. I think it was around '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: Fifty-eight [1958]--was it around '58 [1958], 'cause you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty-eight [1958]?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Anyway, what happened there, my brother was in a scuffle and he got stabbed and, and his, his, his friends picked him up, you know, after he got stabbed and, and, and picked him up and took him to the doctor--local doctor there in Austell, Georgia and, and the local doctor said he, he wouldn't do anything for him, you know, because he, he, he wasn't--'cause he was--he was the wrong color.  So, so the guys took, took my brother down the railroad tracks to the--you know, had to hand-carry him to the railroad tracks down to the hospital, and he was--he died before he got there, so--before, before, before the guys, you know, got him in to the hospital.  So, like I say he was, he was discriminated against, so he died before he--you know, the doctor would not handle him--would not, would not try to stop the bleeding, he just told 'em to send him to the doctor.
Speaker 1: So he was about thirty years?  How, how old was your brother when he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 'bout that, I think.
Speaker 1: Around thirty something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a young guy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And right after that, your mother [Sarah Echols Malone]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, she had a stroke because she couldn't get over--no, what it was, it--the clothes that my brother was wearing, you know, they brought back to her, and I don't know why they want to do that, and she saw the blood and so she got--you know, it upset her so she, she got--had a stroke, and then when she had a stroke, she was in a coma for about a year, and then she died and--anyway that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was this--and this was while you were overseas.
Speaker 2: Yes, while I was overseas.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what effect did this have on you when you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wanted to get out the [U.S. military] service (laughter), that what it was. I wanted to get out.
Speaker 1: So, did you have a chance to come back for a few days to visit for your brother (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I had to come back to the funeral, and so that's what kind of inspired me to get out, too. I wanted to, you know, be outta there, so that--yeah, I did come back to the funeral, and yeah--anyway, that was--that happened there and--but when I came back to the funeral, something else happened, and I was leaving the bus station, you know, some drunken Caucasian wanted to start a fight, and I didn't want to do that 'cause I had things on my mind, you know, mother's funeral and all that kind of stuff--that comes back to Atlanta [Georgia], that is.  So I did not--so that's, you know, one a the incidents that happened that--you know, during those times, too, you bump into somebody accidentally, fight, you know--that's what happened there, you bumped into 'em accidently, they don't want to start a--you know, so that wasn't good (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you in army uniforms at the time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in a army uniform, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I, I, I--well, that kind of, you know, made me want to get out, too.  So, even though I think I have done some good jobs in the [U.S.] Army, you know, after I integrated a lot of things there, so it, it, it--you know, I had done my work as far as that concern.
Speaker 1: But coming home and experiencing what you had to experience--
Speaker 2: I think, well, I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) especially for the occasion that you were coming home for that sparked--did, did, did you and the guy fight, or did--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, I just thought not to, not to do it.  Well, now, it--you know what?  It take a man to step away from a fight and, and, and see, the way it works is this--I had my--I was thinking about--you know, my, my, my mother just died, and all that kind of good stuff, and then too, you know, a dead hero is no good either, so--and also I end up probably in--getting the--even though I had the uniform on, I probably end up going to jail, you know, for a few days.  You know, that's the way it was back then, so I--it, it wasn't worth it, you know?  So you--sometime it's better just to step away and, you know, and just let it go, so that's what happened, I didn't--you know, no fisticuffs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your father [Ralph Malone, Sr.], where was he at this particular time?
Speaker 2: No, he was at home, he was at--you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Your mother and father were still together.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, he was, he was there, and--but anyway, it was trying times and I--that what made me want to, you know, go forward and do other things--
Speaker 1: All right, so--
Speaker 2: --here, so--and I left, you know--
Story_ID: 333031
Speaker 1: (Cough) Right after that you left the [U.S.] Army, or did you--
Speaker 2: No, I left in--well, around '62 [1962].  No, no, I mean '59 [1959], rather--yeah, same year.  And then, what I did, when I left there I went to--later, I tried to go to High school of art [Atlanta College of Art and High Museum of Art] here in Atlanta [Georgia], and that didn't work out.  I mean I had--I was thinking about it earlier, and I knew it was a segregation, but when I came back, you know, when I--like say, before I left service and before I went to service, I was thinking about it and I would like to go, but I knew it wasn't, you know--how should I say it?  It wasn't the thing to do because I wouldn't be able to do it, but then when I come back from service, I was gonna try it again, so that's what I did when I got outta service, I tried to go and apply and what they told me was that, you know, I still wasn't--there still wasn't any--I couldn't--still couldn't do it.  So, they gave me a, a--how should I say it?  You know--do you know what they--you know what they call vouchers?
Speaker 1: Um-hm. A--
Speaker 2: What they call vouchers would be a voucher where that they, they would take and have you to--they'll say, "If you were to apply to a certain institution, we will fund you the money," and that after they fund you the money--they wouldn't--they would fund the institution the money.  Now, for instance, I wanted to go someplace, they wouldn't give me the money right in hand, they would send the money to the school, so that's what a voucher is.  And, and then they also didn't want it--if they did that, they wanted me to come back down to the--Atlanta and, and, and, and, and exercise what I had learned.  If I, you know, be a art teacher or something, I had to come back to the city and do it.  But anyway, I did go up there to, you know, to Detroit [Michigan], and what happened was that the paperwork was not there, and somehow or another I still--sometime, I don't know--I wonder about myself.  I didn't question it. I, I had something--a ace in the hole--I had the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], which is money that I could use, so I used the G.I. Bill to go, to go to school, and I, and I should have questioned that--what happened to that paperwork and I, and I di- I don't know.  You know, we, we let things go like that and--
Speaker 1: So, you went to the arts school--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I--they call it Center for Creative--well, Center for Creative Studies [sic.], they call it now, but it used to be Arts and Crafts [Detroit Society of Arts and Crafts; College for Creative Studies, Detroit, Michigan], that what they used to call the name.  And when I went there, I had great expectations. I--they--you know, I don't know (laughter), it, it sounds incredible here.  Some students were sent out for jobs, but us folks, we were not, you know, we were not that--they wasn't that--they didn't honor us that well, even though it was up north, it was in Detroit.  And I found out that when I applied--when--did go out for, you know, interviews and all that kind of good stuff, the employers would always say, "I think you'd feel--be--feel better if you were working at a studio," or, or, or they say, "Well, I think you'll feel better if you work down yonder," or something like that.  So I got all these things about, "I think you'd feel better if you did this or did that," and, and not--they didn't honor--you know it was not--you know, it, it, it was a trying thing.
Story_ID: 333032
Speaker 1: You got an associate's degree from the, the center for the arts [Detroit Society of Arts and Crafts; College for Creative Studies, Detroit, Michigan], and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Now, there, too, what--I got a associate's because I found out--see, I'm, I'm, I'm a mover, and maybe you can see it in later life with my bio here.  When things--you waste, you waste, you waste a lot of time, you know, on things that you could--so what you do, you go forward.  So what I did, just like at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and I did the same thing at this school, I found out the curriculum wasn't strong enough for what I wanted. I wanted some newspaper layout--same thing I wanted to do early in life. I wanted to do some things that, that I could use and they would just--they was giving me things--projects that didn't have strong enough influence on the, on the business market, so I decided not to bother with 'em.  So I, I mean when I got to a certain plateau, I just took off, you know.  After a couple years, I said, "Heck on it." So--and so I just went and applied for--I still, you know, kept applying for jobs, and I got a, a job at a, a small art agency, the Better Brochures and Catalogs [Better Brochures and Catalogs, Inc., Detroit, Michigan].  And, and it, it was good because I was one-man team. I did writing, I did the artwork, and I learned a lot and I made a lot of mistakes, which is good, see? When you try something and you make mistakes, like I said, you, you, you learn from it, so that's what it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were also the production manager at Brochures--Better Brochures and Catalogs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so, you know, it was one-man team, so I did everything.
Speaker 1: You did everything?
Speaker 2: Yeah, everything.
Story_ID: 333033
Speaker 1: And after you left Better Brochures and Catalogs [Better Brochures and Catalogs, Inc., Detroit, Michigan], the agency for advertising, where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went to Federal Department Stores [Detroit, Michigan], and it was good, too. I, I, I worked there and, and--but what happened is before I got the job, though, I had to go through this interviewer, and golly gee, he was something else (laughter).  It was, it was cold that day, and it was a January, or whatever, and I went there and, you know, and I was--well--impoverished, I'll put it like that.  So (laughter), it's funny--not funny. I can laugh about it now.  And my nose was running and (laughter)--I mean I was at the interview that day, so I had to--so anyway, I went there anyway to make a long story short, I got turned down, naturally, you know, the first out the door.  So, I found out it was another person who working there who--of color, and that they was, they was interested in my welfare, and so I went back there, and to make a long story short there, I got the job.  So, that's--that what happened there at the Federal Department Store.  By the way, they're not in business anymore, they're, they're, they are, you know, they got--went bankrupt.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I, I went down bankruptcy (laughter) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you said that there was a--the hiring manager wouldn't hire you but there was another person there who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, she was, she was assistant--how should I say it-official of the, the executive, she's one of the second vice president, or something like that?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so she was interested. She knew me, or something, and she wondered how--what happened there, so I told her and she said, "Well, go back."  And I don't know if she had talked to the lady or not.  I mean the lady should have--I mean I shouldn't have been ushered outta there in the first place.  What happened is the, the--she just, you know--I don't know, that was just, you know, the way it works, I guess.
Speaker 1: And what position did you get?  What position did you get for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh, layout artist--layout, layout--layout artist.  In other words, what you do, you do drawings for--visual draw--you know, visual art for newspapers and all that kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 333034
Speaker 1: Now, you were in Detroit [Michigan] at the times of the Detroit's riots.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, don't I know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Could you tell us something about that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I lived 1751 Lee Street [sic. Lee Place]. It was a apartment house right on the corner of 12th Street.  12th Street now is Rosa Parks Boulevard, they changed the name later, after I left there.  But anyway, I--when I worked there--when I lived there rather--yeah, I was, I was working--speaking of work, I was at Federal Department Store [Detroit, Michigan] when I was in, in Lee--at that, at that address also.  Anyway, I remember the day it started that riot, and I remember that, you know, I was there in the, in the apartment. I was that close to it.  I was maybe--oh, I don't know, next block up, and it was near Joy Road and 12th Street, and I lived on Lee and 12th Street.  Anyway, the--I heard--you know, I heard some noise out there and, you know, some hollering, you know, all that kind of stuff.  Anyway, the--when, you know, glass breaking and, and, and then, you know, shouting, and then later some smoke, you know. I, I smelled smoke coming up.  Any--the--well, what happened is that, that, that it affected my, you know, my apartment and, you know, I knew that--I saw, you know, things like--even my window got broken.  So, I started to go downstairs and, and, you know, check it out, but then I came back up and I, you know, went back to bed for a while, and then it, it, it continued, you know, like several days, but while it was going on, I went out myself and, and tried to talk to people 'cause people was all running all out in the street and all that.  I told 'em--well, whatever phrase I used there, that--about the--being calm--I mean it, it--our day will come, you know, be--you know, relax, we will get our--we'll get what we, you know, what we need and what we got--what we gonna have to do.  So that's--so that's what I did. I went out there and I tried to talk to people to, to be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you also--but you also wrote articles and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well, that came automatically too, on the side.  What I did, I did--not only wrote articles, but I drew paintings of the riots, you know, the fires and all that kind of stuff?  And, and, and the cartoons--I did a cartoon that was printed in the Detroit Free Press. It was in a special section of the magazine section?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And it won a award [Pulitzer Prize]--the section did.  It was just about the--about the riots, and--yeah, I, I, you know, did a--and I had a impact, so I, I covered it several different ways--
Story_ID: 360590
Speaker 1: The riots [Detroit riots, 1967] and the work that you did with the riots--you had several jobs in Detroit [Michigan], so what were some of the other activities you were involved in?
Speaker 2: The other activities, I was working with Dr., Dr. Wright [Charles H. Wright] and he, he wanted to assimilate--wanted--not assimilate, he wanted to create a Afro American museum [International Afro-American Museum; Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History, Detroit, Michigan] and, and, and we, we raised funds.  We--they--we did--how should I say--auctions and things, and we got money for that.  And--but after that, I worked with the Windshift [ph.] community area, and I promoted that area by putting up signs around the, the district to, you know, encourage people that we have the best neighborhood in the world.  And then, when--later, I become the contemporary art studios group, we had a art group on John C. Lodge [Freeway], and we had a group a artist there, and we participated in, in, in art shows and things, so that was a, a good organization to have.
Speaker 1: All right, so is this the--you were president of the Black Arts Incorporated [ph.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Are these some of the artists that were with--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, they were with the contemporary art group studio.
Speaker 1: All right, so that was after--
Speaker 2: No, no, that's separate, that's separate.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's after the Black Arts that you were president of--
Speaker 2: Right, that's after, after the fact, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then after being president of Black Arts Incorporated, you became one of the founders and creators of the African American Museum.
Speaker 2: The, the--no, no, what I did I, I become--yeah, I was one of the creators, yeah, yeah, you could put it like that.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But Dr. Wright, he was the producer.
Speaker 1: And founder.
Speaker 2: And I just--you know, we did fundraising for him--I did. I donated my artwork and so forth to, to his organization and it did--he did finally built that, that museum.  And then that museum was successful, but lo and behold they, they eliminated that, that museum and, and replaced it with a larger-size one, Afro American Museum in Detroit, in other words they, they replaced it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, who were some of the artists in residence at the contemporary art studios that were located (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Henry King, Carla Weems [ph.] and Arthur Graves [ph.] and, and Charles McGee and, and that's just some of 'em--
Story_ID: 360591
Speaker 1: And after working with the contemporary art studios [contemporary art studios group], what did you do next?
Speaker 2: Well, I--well, what happened is I, I did a lot of other jobs. I did--with the Chatham supermarket and, and the Northgate [Northgate Art Agency, Detroit, Michigan], and Yankees department stores [Yankee Stores] and Farmer Jacks, and so forth. I did it for several different places.  And then I worked for Wards--Montgomery's, you know, department store--I mean Wards department store [Montgomery Ward].  So it, it--I worked with, you know, several institutions, some of 'em don't, don't exist anymore but--that's what happened.
Speaker 1: All right, and what position did you hold at the department stores that you worked with?
Speaker 2: Well, what I did, I was, I was a graphic, graphic designer--advertising layout and graphic designer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And it was also around this time that you got married.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Well, that's (laughter), that's--yeah I, I got married and--yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: All right.  And you--were you a father at this time?  Had you become a father around 1973?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, Andrew [Andrew Malone], yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had to think about that one 'cause it been so long ago (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, so you and your wife had how many children?
Speaker 2: We had two.
Speaker 1: Okay, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Matthew [Matthew Malone] was another child.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  After working with Montgomery Wards, where did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, by the way, the--my wife's name was Mary Lou Liebaert [Mary Liebaert Malone], and my--the oldest son was Andrew Ralph, and my younger son was Matthew Martin Malone.  So, that would give me the names there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is Liebaert (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--oh, go ahead, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: What is Liebaert?  What, what nationality?
Speaker 2: That's French.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was French, she's French?
Speaker 2: Well, not French (laughter) but that--the, the name, the name was--it's not, it's not--it's just--it's a French name but she is not, it's, it's from the--how should I--from the Old World, but she's not that.
Speaker 1: She's not French? Okay. All--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: After leaving Montgomery Ward department stores, where did you go next?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to several places. I, I went--well, the main place I went to was the Kmart [Kmart Corporation] international headquarters in Troy, Michigan and, like I say, I was the only token person there again and, and--but anyway, I stayed there about a year, a little longer, and then my divorce--I got a div- that's when I had got--I had--during that time--just before that time rather, I had gotten my divorce, so what I decided to do was to pull up from Detroit [Michigan] and go to--come back down to Atlanta [Georgia], and that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were working with Wards department stores and--
Speaker 2: Then Wards department store went outta business.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Their, their, their department went outta business, and so they, they--I transferred to Kmart, Incorporated.
Speaker 1: Okay, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and I stayed there for a while--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --and then I--like I say, I wanted to come back down to Atlanta, you know, with my--my dad [Ralph Malone, Sr.] was here, so that was it.
Story_ID: 360592
Speaker 1: All right, and when decided to move to Atlanta [Georgia], who did you start working with?
Speaker 2: Well, when I came here--that's interesting.  When I came here, there were several--I came, I came and started working with the Atlanta Journal-Constitution and anyway, I was the--what you call graphic designer layout artist and, and I worked with them for a few years and--until 1990, but when I was working with them, I created a cartoon called, 'Malone's Atlanta,' and, and also I did other things in the company, you know.  I promoted the--I got the, the employees interested--my associates interested in Martin Luther King Day [Martin Luther King, Jr. Day], so I had them--I orchestrated them to do a march, you know, during his--during January, and come out and they did that.  And also I was interested in, in literacy, so I created a literacy program where that I would show people how to read.  And also, and my main milestone was that I noticed that there was not, you know, a cartoon that's about Atlanta, so I created 'Malone's Atlanta' cartoon for the newspaper.  And also, I donated my time to the Empty Stockings association [Empty Stocking Fund], you know--volunteer, plus I, I talked to kids--motivated kids on a--at a kind of community outreach program.  Talked to kids about being the best they can be.  And, and so during that time--I mean after I--you know, working with the paper and doing all these activities I, I had--my book was published called 'No-Job Dad' [James Hiram Malone].  And so when I, when I--when that book was published, I went out and talked to kids about that, too.  And anyway, that's--was another project I worked on (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what inspired you to write the book, I mean, 'No-Job Dad'?
Speaker 2: Well, what it was, it wasn't--it was just the idea itself. I thought it was interesting that, that they always have these career programs, and that, you know, I said to myself, "What would happen if the dad didn't have a job?  What would the kids do, or how could he ask his dad to work if he didn't have a job?"  So that's what that--that's what--the whole premise of the book was that the kid had a dilemma, how to approach his dad about coming to a career day.
Speaker 1: Oh, and, and what audience did--I mean how did the book do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the book was--well, it was--it was for, you know, general audience but it was--kids was black, but it was, you know, for all--anybody who was interested, you know.  It's--it, it, it was a, you know, teaching type of book that, that relate to something that could happen.  I didn't want to do any science fiction or fantasy, or anything like that, I wanted to do something, real-life problem that a child would have in life, you know, if--you know, a real family problem, you know.
Speaker 1: And-
Speaker 2: If they want to call it a problem.
Speaker 1: But was this book published by the constitutional (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but--no, published by Victory Press in, in Monterey, California and it, it, it done well.  And I went out there to talk to the kids, too, you know, when I promoted the book at a goodwill tour.  And one, one a the kids asked me at, at one a the tours--book tour--was what was a slave, and when that kid asked me that I, you know, threw it back at 'em and said that, "What you think is a slave?"  And so the, the classroom that I was in, the teacher, you know, related to what I was talking about.  So, what she did, she had the kids to--I asked the kids, you know, to do that--to, to tell me what they thought, you know, what a slave was, so she--like I say, the teacher chimed in and she thought it was a good idea.  So, when I came back to Atlanta from California--that's where I was in California and talking to the kids about it--and they sent me some, you know, what they thought--their, their--how should I say it--their thoughts on it--what they thought it was--their essays, and it's pretty interesting, and they talking about a slave is a person who can't--who get beat, and all that kind of stuff, it's interesting.
Speaker 1: But you turned that--those pages that they wrote to you into an exhibit?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did. I turned it into a exhibit and, and, and, and put it downstairs in the main library [Central Library; Central Library and Library System Headquarters, Atlanta, Georgia] in the lower level in Atlanta, in a Fulton County's [Fulton County, Georgia] main library and, and what happened, it was--you know, it was something for the kids to relate to and, it was interesting.
Story_ID: 360593
Speaker 1: Also I've written a few--two or three songs, even though I co- I, I'm not a, you know, musician as far as writing. I--I'm a poet, you know.  If I write lyrics and I get somebody who's a musician, so I've written, you know, songs like 'Homeless Hope,' [ph.] and, and 'Willie Lives in the Streets,' [ph.] and all that kind of stuff, and so I'm, I'm, I'm kind of like a activist, too. I go all different directions. I like to, you know, promote things that try to aid situations and--
Speaker 2: Have the songs been put to vocals or to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it has, it has been, and I have a demonstration record. I have a--it's on a--it's on--it has been recorded.  I mean I--it has been--yeah, on a disk.
Speaker 2: Now, you've written some other books also, earlier in your career.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I wrote 'Brother,' [James Hiram Malone] and 'Malone's Atlanta,' [James Hiram Malone] that was a group of cartoons in there, and several--I wrote the book, 'Aunt'--what is it?  The--Sarah's--'Sarah Lena's Closet' [sic. 'Grandma Sarah's Closet,' James Hiram Malone]--I mean, no, wait a minute.  Gee, I can't even remember that.  But anyway, what--I, I've written several.
Speaker 2: And, and 'Brother' was written in the 1970s, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, that was back--my, my--one of my first.
Speaker 2: Yeah, while you were in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Yeah, back then.
Story_ID: 360594
Speaker 1: So, how long did you stay with the Atlanta Journal-Constitution?
Speaker 2: From '83 [1983] to '90 [1990].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But while I was there, though, I did some other things with--even though I worked for the paper.  In '87 [1987] I did--I, I, I marched with Hosea Williams to desegregate Forsyth County [Georgia], and that was two hundred thousand people strong and I, I--that was something I, I thought that was very useful, and it got the headlines.
Speaker 1: And what city is Forsyth?
Speaker 2: Forsyth County in Cumming, Georgia here, you know, it was a, a march to desegregate that area.
Speaker 1: Because at that time, what were the conditions like in Cumming?
Speaker 2: Well, apparently, it was some--you know, what it was is that--you know, like jobs or, or just, just segregation period. I mean they were doing things that's discriminating, see.  Discri- segregation is all over, but what I mean is they just--maybe it's just blatant things like--you know, like jobs and things, like I said, and it's something that Hosea wanted to do, so we just followed suit, and if Hosea say it, we do it, so that what happened.
Speaker 1: All right, and--okay, after the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, what did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, after the Journal-Constitution, I just did some--I did some writing for the Atlanta News Leader. I did about three hundred articles on about general--you know, what people thought, and I saw people on the street, they called it the 'Bankhead Beat' [sic. 'Street Beat']--that was the first one, and then the next one was--what was it?  'Bankhead Beat' and--what the hay?  Anyway, it was two articles I, I wrote and, and that they had--they was--you know, that I used to, to get the point over what people were talking about.  So--and, and see what happened, I also--I--like I say, in 1990--back to--going back to that, when I left, left Journal-Constitution, about 250 people were laid off.  The, the airlines, you know, stopped giving 'em--giving the Constitution, you know, display ads, and they were losing money so they decided to lay off people.  But after 2005, I'm busier than ever.  I've gotten about, you know, several--few things that I've done since, since I've been laid off.  Number one, I'm a full-time community activist.  Every--twice or--twice a month, I go down to the City Hall [Atlanta City Hall, Atlanta, Georgia] and I--in a open-mic comments from the public, I talk to the full council?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And, and, and when I talk to the full council I, I tell 'em about what people think, and what they need, and what they want.  And so I'm making a impact there.  So, really I have talked to them twice a month for the last ten years so, so you have to add up how many times I've been down there.  So I find myself as a artist, writer, and a community activist. I didn't plan it that way, but that's the way it worked out.
Story_ID: 360595
Speaker 1: In the '90s [1990s], you also did visual artwork for the Million Man March, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've done a lot of that.  I've done a little--you name it, everything. I've don't that, and also I've, I've marched for to try to keep Paschal's Restaurant [Paschal's Motor Hotel and Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia] open, and I was a lone marcher there. I put a sign on and I had a sign says, "Open," and it--you know, it worked out well as far as I'm concerned 'cause I did what I could.  And then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, tell us just what, what--about--a little bit about Paschal's Restaurant.
Speaker 2: No--well, Paschal's just--it was just--it's, it's a restaurant been open for, for years, and it's run by four brothers, they started a, a small restaurant across the street, and then they, they elevated and, and they built another one, you know, a bigger building, and they had a, they had a hotel and everything else in there.  And so it, it thrive, and they had business people come in, you know, in the morning, and talk about business, and when they ate their breakfast and all that kind of stuff, so it was a, a interesting place, and it was right down Martin Luther King [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive].  Now, they got one over there on Northside Drive.  But I was still pushing for the one to stay open on Martin Luther King.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, only one location is left now?
Speaker 2: No, they open--they--no, they, they close that one down on, on Martin Luther King, the one on North Avenue--Northside Drive now.
Speaker 1: Is the only one that's actually open (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  And, and also I've been lobbying, too.  You know, they have what we call--okay, they have the mayors of, of Atlanta [Georgia]--they have a lot of 'em. They have been, you know, here and there they've had mayors that--black mayors, lately, you know, like with Maynard Jackson and [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young and Bill Campbell [William Campbell], and so forth?  And now they got Franklin [Shirley Franklin]--okay.  But what I have done would--been lobbying for them to do statues for statues.  I was thinking--I wanted them to, to put up a statue on the City Hall [Atlanta City Hall, Atlanta, Georgia] lawn to honor the, the mayors, you know, whom they--who are living or dead, it doesn't matter, but they, they--so far not.  And so what I've done, I did a--I was lobbying when--especially lobbying when Maynard Jackson--he died, and everybody was talking 'bout name the airport [William B. Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] after him?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I went the other direction. I say, "Okay, name the airport after him, but also let's put a statue out there in, in the--on the lawn--on City Hall lawn, you know, too--a full--a figure--figurative statue, you know, realistic, six foot tall, however tall he is, you know, however round he is, and put it out there and let's, let's put that--that'll be something we should do."  Because across the street at the Georgia State lawn [Georgia State Capitol, Atlanta, Georgia], they got it peripherated with governors--all the white governors and so forth-Talmadge [Eugene Talmadge]--every senator from back year 1900, whatever.  So they got all those governors on the, on the state lawn and no--nobody on the city, city lawn, so I been, been advocating for that and so--also, I'm with the--I been working with the REPOhistory group. We did something back in '95 [1995] about the Buttermilk Bottom [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia].  We did--put up some historic signs that would, you know, that would memorize [sic. memorialize]--that will kind of open people eyes that, that Buttermilk Bottom was a viable area, you know, the one to reckon with, so--even though it was bulldozed in 1960.  So, I wanted to--so we put up some kind of historic signs for those things.
Speaker 1: Now, you designed the sign also--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for--in memory of your mother [Sarah Echols Malone].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did that because that was--I'm gonna--wanna put a face on it.  They was doing some signs, and they had the signs a--you know, like nondescript signs about--you know, just with letters and stuff and, and, you know--whatever.  So I wanted to put something--I wanted to put a face on this, on this, on these historic monuments, so, so that's why I selected my mom.  So, if somebody else wanted to do that for their mom it's okay, too. I just, I just happened to have that, you know.  That was the first thought I had, and they just thought it was a good idea.
Story_ID: 360596
Speaker 1: And then, and then I worked with The Atlanta Project, too, you know, during that time and, and I was--worked with the cluster--the, the two clusters, the West Fulton [West Fulton Cluster] and, and the, the Douglass Cluster.  Anyway, I, I was with the (unclear) committee and the beautification committee there, and I, you know, gave them a boost, and then I was working (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, when you did--with The Atlanta Project, did you do any visual arts for the, for the project--for the beautification?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I did, I did a art show for the office and it was--it came out good, too.  It was--I--it was about seventeen paintings and, and they--it, it really dressed up the place, so it was ran about a couple a weeks and, and it--you know, I liked it.
Speaker 2: Now, when you stated that you had proposed for the statues of the mayors--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --past mayors of Atlanta [Georgia] to be outside of City Hall [Atlanta City Hall, Atlanta, Georgia], you did a, a work with--I think it was Mrs. Jackson [HistoryMaker Valerie Richardson Jackson]--the second Mrs. Jackson, behind a drawing of Maynard [Maynard Jackson] and his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, well, that was, that was a symbol to show that--what I've done--what I did, I did a drawing. I mean I did a, a, a, a cutout of cardboard, and I just wanted to--that was just to promote my, my lobbying for a statue, and that's what a statue would look like, and I had a, a person to pose in--behind his, behind his gravestone over there in, in the cemetery?  Jackson--so to let, let people know that I am really dedicated to having his statue, or somebody's statue, you know, made.  I know it's gonna cost some money, but we'll do it though.
Speaker 2: All right.  And that wasn't Mrs. Jackson, that was a person that you chose to just stand behind the statue?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, that wasn't Mrs. Jackson, no, no. That was just another person, no.  That was June Monday [ph.], a, a, a friend of mine. She stood behind the statue.  We just--she's just another community activist--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --that she's been around for a long time, and she's been doing things.
Story_ID: 360597
Speaker 1: And I just want to back up one quick second.  In 1986, your father [Ralph Malone, Sr.] passed, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now, in '86 [1986], were you--who--were you with the Atlanta Journal-Constitution?  You had--you had made it back home and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I was. I was, yes, I was there, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in, in this area.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And he had remarried, is that correct?  And you had a stepmother?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had remarried, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And who--what was his--your stepmother's name?
Speaker 2: Essie Pearl, Essie Pearl Maddox [ph.].  That was her maiden name, Maddox, but Essie Pearl was her name.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That was my stepmother.
Story_ID: 360598
Speaker 1: Now, we can just move back forward again with some of the works that you are involved with now, after you have become a retired---
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --artist.
Speaker 2: Well, really, I had about a listing--it's a, a yard long.  I was with the--I'll put it like that--I worked with Nexus [Atlanta Contemporary Art Center, Atlanta, Georgia], the art group and a contemporary group, you know, in Atlanta [Georgia] here, and with Third World Writers Group [sic. First World Writers, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia], and naturally I was with Hosea's [Hosea William] Feed the Hungry [Hosea Feed the Hungry, Atlanta, Georgia]. I been working with them--I been working with Hosea's Feed the Hungry even before I--well, some years ago--back in 1984 and, and so--and then I worked with the--2004, I was a Keep Atlanta Beautiful board member and, and the--1994--I'm going a little back-and-forth, but it's okay, you know.  Past president of International Black Writers Association, and then I'm a member of the Southern Poverty Law Center of Alabama [Montgomery, Alabama], and we--they did a--what--it was a--campaign to put people's names on, on what they call the Wall of, Wall of Tolerance?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so my name would be on that Wall of Tolerance and, and, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this will be in Alabama?
Speaker 2: In Alabama, Southern Poverty--
Speaker 1: What part?
Speaker 2: --Law Center in Alabama.
Speaker 1: What city in Alabama?
Speaker 2: Either Birmingham [Alabama] or, or, or Montgomery [Alabama], I'm not sure.  You know, whatever (laughter), it seem like everything is either Birmingham or Montgomery (laugher) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or Selma [Alabama].  Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know which one.  I'm sorry--
Speaker 1: All righty.
Speaker 2: --but--and I, I'm writing something--writing a--I've just finished one book, but it's not been published yet, you know, on--it's a novel, about four hundred pages long, and I'm writing another book--a juvenile book.  I'm just giving you a line list here--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of things that I'm working on since I've been retired.
Speaker 1: Now, are the novels or--and the books, are they non-fiction, or is it fiction (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's, it's a novel--it's fiction, it's fiction.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And is it about art?  Is it about life as an artist, or a writer (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, it's about work, it's about work, it's about a group of, of southerners--southern black guys, you know, how their, their lifestyle and how they try to get a job, how they working on one job.  They started off in the fields, and then they, they work them ways up to the city and then, you know, it's just different--the different traumas of, of just surviving--going from job-to-job, that's what it's about.  I'm still back in this job bit.  I mean all my, my work seem to be on work (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And, and then--but my, my main milestone claim to fame right now is I did a--and, and this year, from June the 3rd to July 17th, I did a homecoming show.  I, I reached out and got twenty-two, you know, known artist here in Atlanta, and got them together to form a show, and it--they call it homecoming show at City Gallery East [Ponce City Market, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So I'm trying to keep all the eyes together, and so I'm trying to do like they do at the--what is it?  Like the Renaissance [Harlem Renaissance] in New York [New York]?  So I want to call this the Atlanta Renaissance.
Story_ID: 333044
Speaker 1: Tell us some more of the projects that you have been involved in since leaving the Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
Speaker 2: Well, what happens, I have done, when I left there, there was so many things to do, but I was interested in doing something locally here in District 3 [Atlanta, Georgia] in my neighborhood, and so one day I was mowing my lawn out here, and I said, "Well, sheesh, you know, I get tired a mowing this lawn," so I, I started--looked at the trees and I said, "Hm, you know, those trees, we could do something with those."  So what I did, I timidly, embarrassingly, or whatever you wanna call it, put some paint on the trees, you know, just touched it up a little bit.  And, and then I, I decided to do some more on it. I said, "Well, I wanna put these trees to work--I wanna decorate these trees."  So, I, I painted the trees, and then after I did that, I said, "Well, what I'm gonna call the trees?"  So I called 'em laughing trees.  And I did this in 1997. Now, I have what we call a Laughing Trees Incorporation [Laughing Trees, Inc.]. I am the CEO, it's a non-profit organization, mission of preserving open spaces and creating indoor/outdoor art projects.  It was created and governed and, you know, staffed by completely volunteered people, and I'm gonna--later gonna plan classes and so forth for the local people here, and especially low-income individuals in the area, and I just wanna give them--this is my greeting card to everybody who drive by, walk by, or whatever, bike by, to see and to, you know, give them a greeting card--constant greeting card.  And then I--since this been on the Internet, I received some invitations from other people, they wanted--they was interested in this project, so nationally I received word, and also internationally, people have asked me about this, and they want to do the same thing, so that's been gratifying, that's been. That's, that's great.
Speaker 1: Now, some of your artworks have been used in backdrops for movies and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, my, my work is on the Internet and the, and the, a company, the Winterdance Corporation [sic.] in Vancouver [Canada], saw my, my--saw the artwork, and they was sort of interesting because they wanted to do the backdrop, or the background for, for movie houses, and so they, they selected two of my paintings and I sent them the images, and they used them in the movie called 'Snow Dogs,' which came out in 2002.  It was, it was--it, it starred Cuba Gooding [Cuba Gooding, Jr.], he was the star in the movie, and it was, the, the, the, the paintings was called 'Down Yonder,' [ph.] and 'Faith Moves Mountains' [ph.]. And it, it worked out good, too.  They, they used the images, but I kept the original paintings.
Story_ID: 333045
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you'd like to add? Something that I didn't get a chance to ask.
Speaker 2: Well, I just want to inspire people and keep them motivated and, and that's mainly my, my thing I wanted to add--to, to let them know that, that there is--if they have a goal, go for it, and that--and don't take things for granted, too, and to try to do their best.  And, and also, people have, I wanna remind everybody, even the ones who are successful, that people have died to try to read books, or try to go into libraries and so forth, so I want people to take advantage of everything they, they can to exceed in life and, and I just want to--if they have any more questions about what I--how I feel and my philosophy, feel free to, to, you know, email me the information because I'm public, and so you can find me on the website, [HistoryMaker] James Hiram Malone.  And, you know, give me a, a buzz.  Thank you.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you feel about the way you have lived your life, and what is important to you?
Speaker 2: Well, I could have done better and I, and I look back over it and, and I'm not like a lot of people, if I could have done it, I mean I would have done it the same way, you know.  I wouldn't--I'm not gonna say that I would have, you know, I would have been--how should I say that?  I would have been better if I had known better.  I, I tried my best, and even though it--sometime it didn't work out, I did what I could and at, at that time, however it worked out I, I, I tried, and so that's the way it worked.
Story_ID: 333046
Speaker 1: Now, for those who are going into the graphic artist, cartoonist, and the field that you are involved in as a writer and a poet, what suggestions do you have to them?
Speaker 2: I suggest to, to get involved with other people who are doing positive things and to try to gravitate towards the good things, and visit your libraries.  Be, be, so associate with people who are active and who are, who are, like I said, doing things that, that you are interested in that will project you, and that you can--people whom you can talk to and, and, and you can motivate and be motivated, and motivate them, too, even people who know--who are, who are successfully--successful people need people too, around them whom they can talk to, too.  So, try to link up with somebody whom you can be positive and, and go, go forward with.
Story_ID: 333047
Speaker 1: What are your hopes or concerns for African--for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I hope for people to, to know--like I said before, that people have fought and died for the rights to, to do things and I, I--and I wish that they would take advantage of, of the free things out here.  Like sometimes we have free community workshops on computers, and we have free libraries, we have a lot of things that are free, free, free, and I think us folks, especially the third world [sic. first world], should just take advantage of all the items that we have that are available to us that, that we don't have to donate money to. In order to, you know, get ahead--just to utilize all, all our facilities that we--that available to us.  And if they don't know how to do that, like I said, contact me, I'll tell 'em again (laughter).
Story_ID: 333048
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  In other words, what do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: You mean what do I want on my tombstone (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Well (laughter)--
Speaker 2: "What you have done to the least of these, my brother, you have done unto me," [Matthew 25:40].  I, I want people to do that. I want them to, you know, to honor people and respect people, and be--try to do the best they can and, and, and, and, you know, pull people up, you know, and don't wait for them to come to you, you, you reach down for them, you know.  So, like I was saying a, a few seconds ago, I was saying gravitate toward people who are knowledgeable people, but I also--(laughter) (unclear) I want knowledgeable people to gravitate towards the people--the, the less fortunate, and I think that's, that's what we have to do, we have to go both ways, and that's, that's the essence of life, you know?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I mean it's, it's good.  And I think this program here [The HistoryMakers] is, is, is, is another avenue for us to reach out and to gravitate either way, and that's what I'm all about.  And, and I, and I appreciate this, and I'm grateful, and I'm thankful that you have reached down and--for the least of me (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, we're grateful to have you to talk to us.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you want (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Also to bring this out of me, see, that's the point.
Story_ID: 333049
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I tried (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, I'd like to thank you, and thanks for being so gracious with your time, thanks for the life that you have led, and now we will move on to recording the photos.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I thank you.  I appreciate your indulgence with me and, and I thank you and hopefully, you know, that we can see each other.
Speaker 1: That's, okay. Well, thank you. All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Take care.
Story_ID: 333050
Speaker 1: Tell us about this picture. This is of your mother.  Just tell us something about your mother (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, this is my mom.  Her name is Sarah Lena Echols Malone [Sarah Echols Malone], and she was born September the 4th, 1908, and she died in 1959.  She was--she had about five brothers and sisters and, and she was born near Athens, Georgia in the Winterville [Georgia] area in Clarke County.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what year do you think this one was made--done?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: What year do you think this was--
Speaker 2: This year--that was taken 1949, the photograph was taken.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know if it was done at a studio?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was in a studio here in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, we're ready.  This picture?
Speaker 2: This is Ralph Malone, Sr., my dad?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He was also born right below--near Athens, Georgia, back in 1903.  His birthday was January 18th, and he died in, in 1986.  He had about eleven brothers and sisters. They all were more-or-less people from here in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay, and about what year was this picture taken, you think?  What year was this one taken?
Speaker 2: This picture was taken in 1945.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it taken here in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: It was taken here in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Same time my mom's picture was taken.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: We're ready.
Speaker 2: This one is me and my brother, and this, this, this photograph was taken in a studio here in Atlanta.  I was eight years old and my brother was ten years old, and this was in 1938 when it was taken.
Speaker 1: Now, you're on the left, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm on the left and my brother, Ralph, Jr. [Ralph Malone, Jr.], is on the right.
Speaker 1: All right, now this-- is this during the time that you all were in Buttermilk Bottom [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia], or is this before--or after?
Speaker 2: Just a little bit in-between. It was right after we left Buttermilk Bottom.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This one was--this was taken in 1944.  I was fourteen years old, and I was just having--these, these young ladies was just some friends of mine, they was classmates.  I'm sorry I can't remember their names, but anyway they're probably as old as I am now (laughter).  Anyway, this was taken in front of Washington High School [Booker T. Washington High School] in Atlanta in 1944.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Do you remember what occasion it was for, or were you all just taking (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was a--like--the photographer just took pictures of campus scenes and, and--to use in his yearbook, you know, the--in the campus newspaper and the yearbook.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Now, starting from left to right, would you tell us who's in this photo?
Speaker 1: These are--this was at the AU [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] exhibition, and from left to right, that's Mr. Skidmore [L.P. Skidmore], who was the--one of the professors at the High school of art [Atlanta College of Art and High Museum of Art] in Atlanta here, and also there was Professor Clemmons [ph.], he was part a the AU System [Atlanta University System, Atlanta, Georgia], and then there was Miss Stafford--Miss Beatrice Stafford, my art teacher at Booker T. Washington High School?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then next is me. I was eighteen years old, and I just had won the--an award--an art award at this exhibition in Atlanta.  And this was, this was in 1948.
Speaker 2: And AU is Atlanta University?
Speaker 1: Yeah, AU is Atlanta University.
Speaker 2: All right, now this is--is this the, the art competition where you got worldwide recognition at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah, this is a national award.  It was a--yes, a national.  And as a juried contest, too.
Speaker 2: It was a what contest?
Speaker 1: It was juried contest. It was a--you know, you had to win--because you had to be the best.
Speaker 2: And this one?
Speaker 1: This one--this is right after I finished high school.  The--I had done some artwork for the Junior Red Cross [American Red Cross], and they was impressed with my work, so they gave me a, a, a, a poster to do because they wanted to carry on my work and, you know, give me a chance to expose myself and be, you know, part--in other words, do some work with them, so this is one a the posters they, they had me to create after I finished high school.
Speaker 2: So this was what year, 'bout 1949 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was a volunteer poster for, for the Atlanta Junior Red Cross.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And that was about 1949, the year?
Speaker 1: This was 1949 in Atlanta.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This one--when I went to--I was in--when I first went into Fort Jackson [Columbia, South Carolina], when I got inducted into the service--[U.S.] Army--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --they was--I wanted to show them what I could do, so I brought some a my artwork from Atlanta and put it on display at one a the libraries [Library Branch No. 1, Fort Jackson, Columbia, South Carolina]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and some of the, the dignitaries from the community came by to look at my work and give me, give me their opinion, so the fellow at left--on the far left, is Professor Hans Pawley, and the, the lady in the middle is Miss Erma Ziebeck [ph.], and the third person on the right is Mr. Crass [ph.], he's the museum director for, for the museum of South Carolina--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and so they gave me a good grade for, for what I was doing, and that was my first one-person show.  This was in 1951, and I was twenty-one years old.
Speaker 1: Is she the lady who had you commissioned to do the dining hall?
Speaker 2: No, this is another lady.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Another lady that, that had me to do that.
Story_ID: 333051
Speaker 1: Here, this is--this painting is--was on display at the headquarters of Fort Jackson [Columbia, South Carolina], and they had recognized me as a bona fide, certified artist, and so they, they classified me as a, you know, certified artist, and so this was in 1953, and I was just showing the painting off to one a the officers in the headquarters building.
Speaker 2: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this is in Fort Jackson.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This one?  We're ready?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes.
Speaker 2: Mr. Malone [HistoryMaker James Hiram Malone]?
Speaker 1: When I got outta [U.S. military] service in 1959, I had my first civilian art show, and it was at Washington Park Library [Washington Park Branch Library] on MLK [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive] here in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And this was in 1959, and so this was just showing off what I could do, you know, after I--my debut in civilian life.  I was twenty-nine at the time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Do you remember the names of the paintings?
Speaker 1: 'Necessities' [ph.] on the left, and 'Farm Worker' on the right--'A Cotton-Picker' [ph.] rather, on the right.
Speaker 2: Now, what year was this one taken?  What year was this one taken?
Speaker 1: Oh, this one was taken in 1968. I was thirty-eight years old, and this is in Detroit, Michigan.  We, we had what we called the Wall of Pride, and I was doing a portrait of Bill Cosby, from a photograph, and I was doing--it was about maybe six foot tall painting of his head on the wall, and so I had to use some reference there.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Was this also close to the time of the Detroit riots when you were in Detroit?
Speaker 1: This happened little before the riots, this was in 1968.  The riots came around--yeah, around '67 [1967]--yeah, this was the year after the riots in, in Detroit, so we wanted to kind of keep a peaceful atmosphere, so that's why we did the, the mural.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, you did that all on your own, or did you have some help?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was--it's a group of us from a contemporary studio. It was maybe ten--ten artists, we got together, and I did a, a--some parts of it. I did what--whom I wanted to do.  I wanted to do Bill Cosby, somebody else did Muhammad Ali, and somebody else did other well-known figures.
Speaker 2: Okay, and this one?
Speaker 1: And here--after I become domesticated, let's put it like that.  In, in '72 [1972], I was settled there, and I was living in Detroit because I had to--when I went to school there, I got a job, so when--after I got a job, I got married [to Mary Liebaert Malone], and then along come Andrew [Andrew Malone], and here he is at six months old on the back a the bike that I had, you know, set up for him and this was 1972.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, who were you working with at that time, 'cause in Detroit you worked with the Federated stores [sic. Federal Department Stores, Detroit, Michigan] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, I worked with about four or five different--well, about, at least four stores--the Federation stores and the Montgomery Ward, and Kmart [Kmart Corporation] and, and a couple other agency--art agencies--while I was there in Detroit.  I didn't plan to stay there.  What happened, I went there to go to school [Detroit Society of Arts and Crafts; College for Creative Studies, Detroit, Michigan], and then after I finished school, I got a job, and then I, you know, since I was there for a while, I got married, and then--and this, and this photograph shows the--what comes after that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Were you with Montgomery Ward at this particular time, or--
Speaker 1: Yes, I was with Montgomery Ward at this--when this photograph was taken.
Speaker 2: And what were you--
Speaker 1: I was a illustrator, I was a layout artist, I was doing ads in the advertising department for, for Montgomery Ward.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, you can go on and tell us about this one, Mr. Malone--for this one.
Speaker 1: You ready?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Oh.  This is my pride and joy. I had--I was able to get my--I had a idea for a book, a children's book, called 'No-Job Dad' [James Hiram Malone], and so when this book was accepted by the publisher [Victory Press, Monterey, California], they need some photographs--they need some--rather some artwork to go along with the, with the, with the, with the text that I had created, so what I did after I got the okay, I just went ahead and did the drawings, and here I am doing the drawings, and this is in 1991, and the book is called 'No-Job Dad,' and the book was well-received.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, whenever you get--and this one?
Speaker 2: And this one is--after the book was published, I had--I did a tour. I went different places and different states all over United States promoting the book, and also talking to young people about being the best they can be, and also introduced the book that I had written, which called 'No-Job Dad.'  Here, I'm talking to some young kids in California, and they were very receptive and, and well-mannered young people, and I was telling them about--when they--asking them what they gonna do when they grow up, and it was just mainly--I went there to promote the book, but also I wanted just to, to ask the kids, you know, to be the best they can be, and it worked out good.  This was in 1994.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a picture of your mother [Sarah Echols Malone] and this--well, tell us what this one is about.
Speaker 2: Well, what happens is they--there was--some people come in from, from New York [New York] called REPOhistory association?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And when they came here, they was looking for different communities that have been so-called bulldozed and, and, and, you know, destroyed, so they did some research and found out that the neighborhood that I used to live in, which called Buttermilk Bottom [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia], had been destroyed and they--in other words, ever since 1996--I mean--no, no, 1960 rather--the neighborhood was--been demolished and that they had built buildings--they had built the Civic Center [Boisfeuillet Jones Atlanta Civic Center, Atlanta, Georgia] on top of what used to be Buttermilk Bottom, so to bring it back into surface, they asked the people who lived there if they was living to, to bring up the artifacts about what, what they would--some things that, that happened back then, so I just happened to have a photograph of my mom that was taken back in 1930, and so they just made a, a poster about it and they put it up on some post--I mean out on the street, and so we publicized Buttermilk Bottom for a whole year, and that was, that was celebration to, you know, resurrect that area and let people know there used to be a, a viable area that--where, where people, you know, lived in, in harmony in the community long time ago.
Speaker 1: And what is REPOhistory?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You said it was outta New York.  What is that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, REPOhistory is a group a people who believe in bringing, bringing back--how should I say it--districts and, and communities that have been destroyed, which we call--what you call urban renewal. I mean a, a area where that when they want to build up a shopping center or, or do things in the area, they will tear down houses, and when they tear down houses, they tear, they tear down neighborhoods, so when they came and tore down our house and, and Buttermilk Bottom, this was just--gave REPOhistory some--an idea to, you know, try to come to our defense and bring it back to life.  So that's what they do.
Speaker 1: Now, REPOhistory does this all over the United States, or just for his area?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Do they do this all over the United States, or just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, they did this in, in, in--fact, I think they finally did it in Dallas [Texas], I think.  So, they go from city-to-city and try to talk to people and ask them, you know, what they--what has happened in the last, you know, like eighty or ninety years and, and then they try to make a--document those, those communities, and let people know what happened.
Story_ID: 333052
Speaker 1: This one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Here is what the community--I started off--well, when I moved into the area of Grove Park [Atlanta, Georgia] some years ago, about 1983, I wanted to--how should I say it--dress up the neighborhood. I wanted to put the neighborhood on the map, so I started off with the--at my house.  What happened, all the houses on my street were painted white, and so what I did I, I had painted my house--next year, I painted my house yellow, and then the person next door to me painted their house green, and then the person next door to that house painted their house blue.  So they had a kind of like a rainbow of colors up and down the street on the houses.  So, then--later, I wanted to take it further. I was, you know, looking at my trees and I said, "What can I do here?"  To make a long story short, I said, "Well, I wanna experiment," so start to dabbing with some paint on my trees to enhance the neighborhood, and it worked out, then I--the person across the street wanted me to do theirs, so I did that one, and then there was one a few blocks away, I did that, that, that tree too.  So this just a celebration of bringing--how should I say it--decorating the, the neighborhood and making it more of a festival place to live.  In other words, do something where I wanted to have a, a, a place where it'll be a fun place, like a Disney World [Walt Disney World, Orlando, Florida], for people to live, and I'm, and I'm trying to promote it not just in Atlanta [Georgia], I'm trying to promote it all over and, and it has gotten--caught on because I got a email from Mississippi yesterday, this person said that they're going to do some there because they have a lot of trees and they wanna try it out.  And then I--also in--up in Canada they gotten interested, they, they sent me a email some time ago, and sent down photographers to do some--did a, a background on my--what I'm doing as far as the decorating of, of the premises.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it's really catching on. I'm proud of it.  I did this in 1997 and now it's, you know, has mushroomed.
Speaker 1: This one?
Speaker 2: In, in, in Atlanta, we have what you call Paschal's Restaurant [Paschal's Motor Hotel and Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia]. They started off about twenty or thirty years ago across the street, in one little narrow storefront, and so they, they did--they was so successful they pooled their resources and moved across the street and opened up a bigger restaurant in a hotel, and so they have been a mainstay and, and a landmark place for Atlanta for years there on MLK [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive], and so what has happened though, in the recent years and about three years ago, they become on hard times and, and, and they had to consider closing down or selling out the place.  So everybody come to their defense and say, "No, we don't want Paschal's, the center, to close."  So, everybody and their brother came there--politicians--everybody, and start to frequent the place the last few days, and tried to keep it open.  And I was one of the long picket sign person parading in front of the place to try to keep it open.  And then C.T. Vivian [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. C.T. Vivian] here, in this photograph on, on the right--on my left but on, on the right. I'm the one holding the sign.  He came and he was supporting what we're doing.  C.T. Vivian is a historian and a, a person who worked with Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and so forth, and he's--he lives here in, in Atlanta, too.  And, and, and that picture--this picture was taken the last day of the place being open, and that was in 2003, about a couple a years ago, so they closed down.  That open sign isn't open anymore. It's not red it's, it's, it's, it's closed up--I mean it's not--the place is shut down.
Speaker 1: Because like you said, it's only one left now.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You said it's only one Paschal's left now, in the City of Atlanta?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Only one Paschal left--restaurant left.
Speaker 2: Oh.  What the other--no, the other, other one is--well, it doesn't have the same impact. It, it's over there on Northside Drive, and it, it, it--this, this one here was the mainstay.  People used to come here, and they have these meetings, they--the politicians would meet there every week and have breakfast and, and, and, and plan their strategy of what they're gonna do in the city, whereby the other place is--it's just a, a--I don't know what--it's--it doesn't have the impact that this one does. It's not--it's just another place to go to.
Speaker 1: This one was taken in 2004.  On the left is Matthew Martin Malone [Matthew Malone], my son, and in the, in the middle is my ex-wife--we're divorced now--Mary Louise, and Liebaert [Mary Liebaert Malone], and then on the right is, is, is, is, is my pride and joy, Andrew Ralph Malone [Andrew Malone].  And so these, these young men, they are--one is a--let's see--twenty-eight, and the other one is thirty--no, one is twenty-nine and the other one thirty-three, and so--I mean they, they, they're, they're living in Detroit [Michigan] now, and they're doing well.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  It's a homecoming show for the 20th century Afro American masters, it was at City Hall East [sic. City Gallery East; Ponce City Market, Atlanta, Georgia], right there on Ponce de Leon [Avenue].  It was--it's from June the 3rd to July 17th of this year, and I curated this show. I got twenty-two artists together and--to promote them.  What I wanted to do was have a kind of like a Harlem Renaissance type of situation where that we have a group of black artist that would come--you know, that, that would be--how should I say it--out here to promote their art, and I'm thinking that, you know we have--when we say a Harlem Renaissance, always talking about 1930s, but now it's 2005, so it was 'bout time for us--we haven't had any, any really landmark shows where we can project black artists, so it's a crying shame we had to wait from 2000--I mean 1930s to 2005 to have a real so-called out coming promotion of the black artist, so that's what I wanted to do 'cause I get tired of hearing about the 1930s Harlem Renaissance. I wanna hear about the 2005 homecoming.
